The Project Gutenberg eBook, On Sameness and Identity, by George Stuart
Fullerton


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: On Sameness and Identity
       A Psychological Study: Being a Contribution to the Foundations of a Theory of Knowledge


Author: George Stuart Fullerton



Release Date: October 1, 2018  [eBook #57998]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON SAMENESS AND IDENTITY***


E-text prepared by the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made available by
Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/onsameness00fulluoft


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Small capitals have been transcribed as ALL CAPITALS.

      The Table of Contents can be found after the main text.

      A list of other corrections can be found at the end of
      the document.





ON SAMENESS AND IDENTITY.


      *      *      *      *      *      *

     PHILOSOPHICAL SERIES.

     NUMBERS IN PREPARATION.


     NO. II. STUDIES FROM THE LABORATORY OF EXPERIMENTAL
     PSYCHOLOGY.

     Researches are in progress on: Memory and the Least
     Noticeable Difference in Sensation; Measurement in the
     Diagnosis of Diseases of the Nervous System; The Rate at
     which the Nervous Impulse Travels; The Personal Difference in
     the Time of Mental Processes; The Rate, Extent, and Force of
     Movement; Accuracy of Perception as a Function of the Time
     of Stimulation; The Correlation of Mental Time, Intensity,
     and Extensity; The Relative Value to Science of Experiment,
     Observation, and Memory; The Building of Complex Perceptions;
     etc.

     NO. III. DESCARTES' "MEDITATIONS," with Latin and English
     Texts, and Philosophical Analysis. By George Stuart Fullerton
     and William Romaine Newbold.

      *      *      *      *      *      *


Publications of the University of Pennsylvania

PHILOSOPHICAL SERIES.

Edited by

George Stuart Fullerton
Professor of Philosophy
and
James McKeen Cattell
Professor of Psychology.


No. 1.      April, 1890.

ON SAMENESS AND IDENTITY.

A Psychological Study: Being a Contribution to the Foundations
of a Theory of Knowledge.

by

GEORGE STUART FULLERTON.






Philadelphia
University of Pennsylvania Press
Publishers





On Sameness and Identity.




PART I.

THE KINDS OF SAMENESS.

     And some require everything accurately stated; whereas, this
     accuracy annoys others, either because of their inability
     to follow a train of reasoning through, or because of its
     hair-splitting character; for accuracy does involve some
     hair-splitting.

                    Aristotle, Metaph. Book I, The Less, c. 3.


SECTION 1. There are few words the ambiguity of which has led to
more confusion and profitless dispute than that of the word _same_.
Men constantly use this word as though it had but one meaning, and
that meaning were always clear, whereas it really gives expression
to a number of widely different experiences, some of which are quite
difficult of analysis. It is highly desirable that these experiences
should not be confounded with each other, but kept clearly separate,
as the consequences of such misconception are very far-reaching. How
far-reaching, I shall in the pages to follow try to indicate.

It is my purpose to point out the differences in connotation of the
several senses of this highly ambiguous word, to show the element
which they have in common, and to trace some of the difficulties and
absurdities which have sprung from using the word loosely and without
proper discrimination. I shall have to plead guilty to something very
like hair-splitting, but I may put forward in excuse the undeniable
fact that "accuracy does involve some hair-splitting." If anyone
prefers the self-contradictions and preposterous conclusions to which
loose and unanalytic thought has so often led the unwary, he is welcome
to them. I shall hold a few of these up to inspection after a while.
For my part, I prefer a little quibbling at the outset of a discussion
to a systematic incoherence all through it, with the chances of finding
myself in a _cul-de-sac_ at the end. Whether I am successful in
dissipating to some degree the fog which has hung about samenesses and
obliterated important distinctions, each one must judge for himself.

The kinds of sameness I find to be as follows:


SEC. 2. I. We speak of any sensation, feeling, or idea, or complex of
sensations, feelings, or ideas, as being the same with itself at any
one instant. The pain in my finger is what it is at this moment. The
finger itself (the immediate object of knowledge, a complex from sense
and imagination) is, at each moment, what it is. It is to this sense
of the word that the logical laws of Identity and Contradiction have
ultimate reference.


SEC. 3. II. A sensation, feeling, or idea, or complex of sensations,
feelings, or ideas, considered in itself and without reference to
the world of material things, is called the same with one previously
existent when the two are alike. I say, for example, that I feel to-day
the same pain I felt yesterday, or that I have dreamt the same dream
three times. This is evidently not sameness of the kind first mentioned.


SEC. 4. III. We speak of seeing the same material thing at different
times. Suppose a man passing along a country road to look across a
field at a distant tree. What he actually sees is a small bluish patch
of color, which, interpreting in terms furnished by his previous
experience, he supplements with material drawn from memory and
imagination. On the following day he looks at the tree again from a
nearer point and sees a larger green patch of color with distinct
differences of shading and with a clear outline. This he interprets in
a similar manner.

Now, without being a philosopher at all, and without conscious
reference to anything beyond what he has experienced or can experience,
he affirms that he has on two successive days seen the same tree. I
ask, just what is the significance of the word same as used in this
connection? What peculiar experience has it been employed to mark? What
is perceived on the one occasion is not the same as what is perceived
on the other in the sense of the word first given (by "perceived"
I mean existing in consciousness as a complex of mental elements.
With the supposed external correlates of our percepts I am not now
concerned). And it is equally clear that two such percepts need not be
the same in the second sense of the word, for they may be quite unlike.
In this case they are unlike, so far at least as what is actually in
sensation is concerned.

What peculiar experience then does the word mark when the observer
declares that he has seen the same tree twice?

We are now in the sphere of material objects (_i. e._, as experienced;
I refer to the mental content and nothing more), and are not concerned
with our experiences as isolated elements, but as grouped and arranged
in series. Our total possible experience of any one object is a
collection of partly simultaneous and partly successive actual and
possible sensations which condition each other, and which we regard as
a unit. The Idealist believes that this is all there is of the object,
and all we mean when we commonly employ the word. The Realist assumes
that there is something beyond and corresponding to this experience,
and which is to be regarded as the real thing. He, however, must admit
that all we can know of any object, in whatever sense we choose to
employ that word, all our evidence for maintaining its existence and
determining its qualities, must be drawn from this group of sensations.
It is this that we immediately know, and anything inferred must be
inferred from this.

From this it follows that when any one, whether Realist, or Idealist,
or unreflective man, feels justified in asserting that what he
perceives to-day is the same object he perceived yesterday, he is
led to make this assertion on the strength of some distinction in his
immediate experience, and he refers only secondarily, if at all, to
anything beyond and external to this. The distinction which he marks
by the word is this: He has reason to believe that the two percepts
in question belong to the one series,--to the one life history,
so to speak. He believes that had he cared to do so he could have
filled up the gap between them by a continuous series of percepts,
each conditioned by the preceding, and forming the one chain. Each
represents to him the one object, in that each stands for the whole
series, and his thought is much more taken up with the series as
a whole than with the individuals composing it. He knows that the
percepts in such a series can only be successive, never simultaneous.
Had he reason to suspect that the two percepts we are discussing belong
to different series of this kind, and that there is nothing in the
nature of the case to prevent their being simultaneous, he would decide
for two trees.

But each percept contains more than one mental element, and just as we
may regard each percept as representing the whole series, so we may
regard each element as representing the whole complex which may be
experienced at one time, and through this the whole series of percepts.
I say that the orange I smell is the same with the one I see; that
I can reveal by striking a light the chair I fell over in the dark;
that I hear rattling down the street the coach I stepped out of a few
moments ago. It is not worth while to distinguish this use from the
use of the word same just mentioned, for they agree in making a single
experience stand for a whole group or series, which is assumed to
be at least potentially present with each one. When we have had two
experiences thus representing the one group, we say that we have in two
ways, or on two occasions, experienced the same object. In this sense
has the man in our illustration seen yesterday and to-day the same
tree. In this sense could he at the one time see and touch the same
tree.

It is in this sense also that we use the word when we say that the
object seen with the naked eye and the object seen through a telescope
or under a microscope are the same. If I look at a distant object
with the naked eye and then look at it through a telescope, what I
actually see (or what is actually in the sense) is in the two cases
very different. But just as seeing an object from a distance with the
naked eye, I may walk towards it and substitute for the dim and vague
percept which I first had a series of percepts increasing in clearness
and ending in one which I regard as altogether satisfactory, so I may
substitute at once this clear percept for the dim one, by the use of
the telescope, and may know that it properly belongs to the series
which, taken as a whole, constitutes my notion of the object. This
I may know from the relations which this percept bears to the other
percepts of the series, and which allow me to pass in my inferences
from it to them as I can from any one of them to another. If, seeing
a dim object upon the horizon, I raise a telescope and through it
perceive the figure of a man, I know that I could have had a similar
percept without any telescope by simply approaching the object.
Conversely, on perceiving a man near at hand, I know I could have a
similar percept from a distance by looking through a telescope. I call
the man seen through the telescope the same as the man seen with the
naked eye, for the same reason as I call the man seen by the eye at a
distance the same with the man seen near at hand.

And the apparently non-extended speck which I see with the naked eye
looks very different from the curious insect I see when I place a
microscope over this speck, but I call them the same for the reason
just given. If the insect as seen under the glass be divided, so is
the speck as seen by the eye; if the insect is taken away, the speck
disappears too. The series of percepts made possible through the
microscope may be regarded as a continuation of the series which arises
from approaching the eye to the object. Each member in it stands in a
relation to this primary series similar to that illustrated above in
the case of the telescope, and similar to that held by the terms of the
primary series to each other. It should be kept clearly in mind that
in all these cases the object (immediately perceived) is the same only
in the sense pointed out, _i. e._, two or more percepts, which may,
in themselves considered, be quite unlike each other, are recognized
as in a certain relation to each other, as each representing the one
series to which all belong. If one thinks he has reason to believe each
percept represents not merely the series of percepts, but something
different, which he infers and is pleased to call the "real" thing, he
may be inclined to believe that in saying he sees the same object on
two occasions he is referring to this something. It must be clear to
him, however that all his evidence for the sameness of this something
lies in the experience I have described, and it is to this that he
must point in proof that it is the same. The percepts themselves are
certainly not the same in any other sense than the one given. They are
not identical, and they need not be alike. They merely stand for each
other. Should one forget this, he will fall into blunders which I will
illustrate at length when I speak of the common opinion on the subject
of the infinite divisibility of space.

John Locke, in his famous "Essay,"[1] has made a distinction between
the sameness of masses of inorganic matter and the sameness of
organisms. That of the former, he says, consists in the sameness of
their particles, while the sameness of a plant or animal does not
consist in that of the particles which compose it at this time or at
that, for they are in continual flux, but in the participation in the
one life of the organism. It does not, however, appear to me that we
have here a real difference in the kind of experience marked by the
word. The difference is merely that in the one case we connect this
experience, not with the object as a whole, but with the separate
particles which compose it, which we take as so many separate objects
each having a sameness of the kind just discussed, while in the other
case we look upon the object as a whole, as a unit, and disregard any
reference to its component parts. But whether we regard the object as
a unit or take each of its ultimate parts as separate objects, we are
thinking of the one kind of sameness. We are thinking of a certain
life-history in which any one link may represent the whole, and any
two links may be, from this point of view, regarded as equivalent.
It is not merely with reference to plants and animals that we speak
of sameness without regard to a sameness of constituent parts. We
do it in this case simply because the organism furnishes us with a
convenient unit, and one much more important as a unit than as an
aggregate. We can make similar units when we please, and consider their
sameness without thinking of their parts. We speak of the same nation
as existing through many generations, and of the same corporation
as surviving many deaths. Whether the object we are considering be
naturally indivisible, or composite and assumed a unit for convenience,
when we speak of it as the same at two different times we are referring
to the one experience. Locke does make here a distinction worth
noticing, but it does not mark two fundamentally different uses of the
word.

  [1] Essay Concerning Human Understanding, Bk. 2, Chap. 27, § 3.


SEC. 5. IV. Two objects are called the same, and two other mental
experiences occurring at the one time are called the same, from the
fact that they are recognized as alike. The botanist, finding that
two plants belong to the one class calls them the same without
any intention of confounding the two individuals. Nor does one who
places his two hands in warm water and declares that he has the same
feeling in both, confound the two streams of sensation. The fact
that only likeness is meant is here clearly recognized. It is not, I
think, as clearly recognized when similar sensations or other mental
experiences (considered singly), occurring at _different_ times, are
called the same. In that case they are sometimes spoken of as if they
were material objects having a continuous sameness after the fashion
explained above.


SEC. 6. V. The word same is used to signify the relation between any
mental experience and that which is regarded as its representative.
This representative may or may not resemble it. We speak, for example,
of calling up in memory this or that object seen at some past time. The
memory-image is certainly not the same with the original percept in
Sense I. When we say that the object of memory is the past, we cannot
mean this, for it is plainly false. Nor is it thought of as merely like
it, as in Sense II. It is thought of as a something which represents
it--stands for it in a peculiar way. Just what this implies I will not
here attempt to discover. It is enough for my purpose to point out that
when we say a man remembers an object we do not mean merely to indicate
the presence in his imagination of a resembling picture, but to include
a certain relation between this picture and an original percept.

It is not easy to describe what is present in an act of memory. When I
am thinking of another man as calling to mind something from his past
experience, I bring before my own mind two pictures, one representing
his original percept, and one his present memory-image. Holding these
before me together, I recognize them as related, but distinct. I
use the word same to denote their relation. But the person who is
exercising his memory does not have before his mind two objects, an
original and a copy, with an observed relation between them. He has
not the original, or it would not be an act of memory. When, however,
he reflects upon his experience as I have done, he represents it to
himself as I have represented it to myself. He speaks as if, in the
act of remembering, he were conscious of two objects and could compare
them. He speaks of recognizing the memory picture as a copy and
representative of the original percept. Language, as commonly used,
adapts itself to this way of regarding the matter, and I may leave a
further analysis of it to the student of the memory, merely pointing
out that, whatever is implied in the experience, a common use of the
word same is to denote this relation between any mental experience and
the memory-image which represents it.

It will be seen that this kind of sameness may be presupposed in
affirming sameness in other senses of the word. When I compare a
present sensation with one felt some days since, and affirm that they
are the same, the latter must enter into the comparison through its
representative in memory. It is not itself present at the time of the
comparison.

And when I say that I have seen the same tree yesterday and to-day,
I mean, as I have explained, that the two percepts belong to the one
series; but since my experience of yesterday cannot be itself present
in my consciousness to-day, it can take its place in the series, as
thought to-day, only by proxy. When I say that I have in my mind the
same series on two successive days, I evidently mean that it is the
same series in the sense in which any experience and its representative
in memory are the same.

Other less important instances might be given of this use of the
word same to express the relation between any experience and its
representative. We say that we see an object in a mirror, when we mean
that we see its reflected image. We speak of seeing in a picture this
man or that. When we have found for anything a satisfactory substitute
we say it is the same thing. Such uses of the word are not likely to
deceive anyone, and I will not dwell upon them. Their meaning is too
plain to be mistaken.


SEC. 7. VI. We constantly speak of two men as seeing the same
thing. In this we have a sense of the word which demands careful
analysis. For the sake of clearness, and to avoid ambiguity, I will
confine myself here, as I have done in the foregoing sections, to an
examination of what is actually experienced by the men, and will defer
all consideration of existences assumed as lying beyond a possible
experience in an extra-mental world, for discussion in sections to
follow.

The question which interests me at present is simply this: What
experience is it that leads a man to affirm that he and someone else
are perceiving the same object? The Realist (in the modern sense) would
say that this experience is only his evidence that he and another are
perceiving the same object, meaning by object what I have referred to
as believed to lie beyond his experience; while the Idealist would
say that this experience exhausts the whole matter. The Realist must,
however, admit, as I have brought out in a different connection, that
all his evidence for the existence of the object (in his sense), and
for any affirmations whatever regarding it, lying within the field of
the immediately known, any words, which have been coined to express
qualities of, or distinctions concerning, this object, would retain a
use and significance as marking distinctions within this field even
if the object were supposed non-existent. Whether any such duplicate
of what is immediately perceived exists or not is a question apart.
Since we admittedly draw all our distinctions from the field of the
immediately known and then carry them over to such objects, and not
_vice versa_, we may be sure that we would go on saying that two men
see the same object in any case. I myself give the preference to
that the existence of which is an indubitable fact, and prefer using
the word _object_ to indicate the complex in consciousness. I have,
however, no desire to assume any point in dispute by juggling with a
word, and will try to keep clearly in mind the meaning of the word thus
assumed whenever I use it.

Now, the experience which leads me to say that I and another man see
the same object is just this: I perceive a particular object, and in a
certain relation to it I perceive the body of another man. From a past
experience of my own body in relation to objects and from reasoning
by analogy, I have come to connect such a relation of another body to
the object with the thought of another consciousness of the object as
connected with that body. Just as I perceive my own body to perform
certain actions when I am conscious of perceiving the object, so
I perceive this other body with which I have connected in thought
a consciousness of the object to perform similar acts in response
to similar relations towards the object. It is wholly a matter of
observation in my own case that the perception of my own body in this
or that relation to an object is a _sine qua non_ to the perception of
the object. And it is wholly a matter of reasoning from like to like
that leads me to connect in thought sensations or percepts with any
other animal body whatever. When I say, therefore, that I and another
man are perceiving the same thing, there is in my mind a complex
consisting of a percept or idea of the thing, a percept or idea of the
man's body, and the thought of a percept connected with this body. When
I say that he is thinking of us both as seeing the same thing, I call
up in mind a similar complex and connect it in thought with his body.
Whatever I may believe as to the existence or non-existence of things
lying beyond this sphere, and supposed to cause these experiences,
these are the experiences to which I ultimately refer when I speak of
two men as seeing the same object, and these furnish the whole ground
for the existence of the phrase.

The percept of the object which I connect in thought with the other
man's body need not be wholly similar to my percept of the object.
The man who has discovered that he is color-blind, does not suppose
that men not similarly afflicted see just what he does in looking
at a cherry tree full of ripe fruit. Nevertheless, he still speaks
of himself and others as seeing the same objects. If another man's
body is not exactly like mine, I am not justified by argument from
similarity in reading into it an exactly similar experience. It is not
the similarity of the two percepts that I am thinking of chiefly when
I speak of them as percepts of the same object. I am thinking of the
relation in which I suppose them to stand to each other. I think of the
possible existence of the one under given circumstances as conditioning
the possible existence of the other.


SEC. 8. VII. When a man in an early stage of reflection upon his
experience has decided that objects immediately perceived are not the
real things but merely their mental copies or representatives, he may
think of these "real" things in several ways. He may believe in a world
of "real" things, consisting of groups of "real" qualities, external
to consciousness; he may accept such "real" things, but add to them a
substratum or substance, distinct from the qualities; or he may believe
that the "real" exists as mere substratum, substance, or noumenon,
and that all qualities, being merely its revelation to mind, exist
within the circle of consciousness alone. The first position is one not
often taken. The second is that held by Locke,[2] who believed that,
corresponding to our ideas of objects, there exist substances possessed
of certain primary qualities, and having an underlying substance or
substratum. The third represents the view of the Kantian,[3] who, to be
consistent, must deny to his noumenon any qualities whatever. How he is
to do this without having it lapse into utter nothingness is a problem
for him to solve.

  [2] Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Bk. 2, Chap. 2, § I, and
  Bk. 2, Chap. 23, § 1. _et seq._

  [3] Kritik der reinen Vernunft.--"Von dem Grunde der Unterscheidung
  aller Gegenstände überhaupt in _Phænomena_ und _Noumena_." Kant's
  Sämmtliche Werke, herausgegeben von Hartenstein. Leipzig, 1867, 3er
  Band, s. 209, _et seq._ See also, Kritik der Praktischen Vernunft;
  Vorrede; and the discussion: "Wie eine Erweiterung der reinen
  Vernunft in praktischer Absicht, ohne damit ihr Erkenntniss als
  speculativ, zugleich zu erweitern, zu denken möglich sei?" I Th. II
  B. II Hptst.; same edition, 5er Bd., s. 5, 140. I am not concerned
  here with the inner contradiction of the Kantian system. The notion
  of noumena predominantly in Kant's mind, was, I think, about as
  I have stated. He would not, of course, have denied "reality" to
  phenomena, but his misconception of Berkeley, and the satisfaction
  with which he settles down to the noumenal in the Critique of the
  Practical Reason, show that he felt toward the "blos Erscheinung"
  very much as Locke felt toward mere ideas. Cf. "Essay," Bk. 4, Chap.
  11, § 7.

The disciple of Locke has, therefore, in discussing all the uses of the
word same, to consider the sameness of:

1. Things immediately known.

2. Groups of "real" qualities in an extra-mental world, more or less
like what is immediately known.

3. Substance; the "I know not what" to which Locke clung through all
difficulties.

The man who holds the first of the three views above mentioned need
only consider the first and the second of these; and the Kantian
need only consider the first and the third, rebaptizing the latter
"noumenon" or "thing-in-itself."

Omitting for later consideration the sameness of the self or ego, I
have already discussed the uses of the word same within the field of
the immediately known. It remains to consider the sameness of what is
believed to lie beyond this, and to belong to a different kind of a
world.

When men discuss these supposed realities, in what senses of the word
same may they reasonably think of them as the same?

When a common, unreflective man, whose mind has not been, in the words
of Bishop Berkeley, "debauched by learning," looks at a tree and thinks
about it, he believes he sees a real tree, at a certain real distance
from his body, and of a given real height and figure. It does not occur
to him to make any distinction between the tree immediately perceived,
and an inferred second tree, not immediately perceived, but represented
by the former. There is the tree; he sees it; he can touch it; it seems
to him but one: and he always talks as if there were but one tree to
be discussed in the premises. That one tree, he thinks, is really
extended; is really out in space beyond his body; is, in short, what it
appears to be. To his unreflective mind this tree does not seem to be a
representative or to be seen through a representative, but to be seen
immediately and just where it really is.

But when a man has begun to battle with the difficulties of reflection,
and has learned to make a distinction between things and his ideas
of the things, he will probably fall into unforeseen perplexities
about this tree. He reflects that, when he closes his eyes, the tree
disappears; that when he approaches it it looks green, and when he
recedes from it it grows blue; that a man with a peculiar defect in
his vision does not see it colored as he does; that when he makes a
pressure on the side of one eyeball he sees two trees where before he
saw only one; that when he makes such a pressure upon both eyeballs and
moves them about a little he sees two trees moving about, although he
knows real trees can not ordinarily be made to move about so easily.
Such reflections lead him to distinguish between the tree as he sees
it, and the tree as it really is, and he defines the tree as he sees it
as the tree immediately known, and the real tree as the tree mediately
known, a cause of the existence of the former. He now thinks that he
sees directly only copies or representatives of real things, and as he
believes these copies or representatives to be in his mind, and usually
talks as if his mind were in his head, or at least in his body, he
concludes that things immediately known must in many instances be much
smaller than they seem, or perhaps lack extension altogether. How can
a tree thirty feet high be in a man's mind? It is true, that, when I
press upon my eyeballs in the manner described, I seem to see two trees
of that size moving; but must it not be a mistake? Must we not assume
that what is immediately seen only _seems_ extended, and stands for an
extended thing which is grasped through it? So our philosopher learns
to distrust the immediate object of knowledge; to regard it as in some
sense unreal as compared with what it represents; and to deny to it
those properties which it apparently possesses. It is not extended, but
it stands for extension; it is not colored, but it stands for color; it
is not real, but it stands for reality.

It is natural, however, for one who has gone thus far to go farther.
When he reflects again upon the fact that he sees the tree of a
different color at different distances; when he remembers that colors
vary with the quality of the light by which they are seen; when he and
his neighbor dispute concerning the true color of the one tree which
he sees dotted with red leaves, and which his opponent claims to see
of a uniform color; then he may well begin to ask himself what is the
true color of the "real" tree, or whether it is certain that it has
any color at all? May not, then, the "real" tree have only some of the
qualities that we ordinarily attribute to trees? Perhaps, the space
qualities?

Or, worse yet, since some of the qualities that the ordinary man
attributes to trees may be regarded as existing only in a shadowy way
in our ideas, why may not the same be true of all the other qualities?
How do we know that "real" trees are extended? How do we know that
"real" extension must be assumed as the cause of the delusive apparent
extension of our ideas, if it is true that "real" color need not thus
be assumed as a cause of our sensations of color? What if the "real"
thing exists only as an indescribable and incomprehensible somewhat,
which we must assume as a cause of the immediately known, but of
which we can know nothing more? When one has once begun this slippery
descent, it is not easy to say where he may find a peg to stay him in
his course.

Suppose, however, he is content to strip the "real" thing of what are
commonly called the secondary qualities of matter, and to leave to it
what are known as the primary. He will follow the example of the wholly
unreflective man and speak of it in such a way as to suggest that the
thing itself is something apart from its "real" qualities. A tree, he
will say, _has_ qualities. It would certainly sound odd to hear him
say it _is_ qualities. And he will very possibly go on to justify the
use of the language he employs by distinguishing between the "real"
qualities represented by his mental picture of the tree and an obscure
something which he assumes as underlying them; thus embracing the
Lockian distinction of ideas, "real" qualities, and substance. He may
conclude, it is true, that substance in this sense of the word is
chimerical, and that the belief in it arises out of a misunderstanding
of the significance of language; but if he has gone so far as to
assume duplicates of things immediately known, in the form of "real"
qualities, it is more probable that he will be inclined to complete his
classes of beings by adding the third.[4]

  [4] There is, of course, no reason why he may not add as many more
  classes as he pleases, and justify the additions as he justifies
  this. Men do not do this, as a matter of fact, but that is no reason.

Now, it does not concern me to consider whether this change of view
is to be regarded as a real progress in reflective knowledge or as a
progressive decline and fall of the unreflective man. The point which
concerns me is this: The unreflective man talks as if but one tree were
under discussion. The man who reflects uses the same forms of speech:
and even when he believes that he must distinguish between the tree
immediately known and the obscure something which he has come to look
upon as its cause, or between the tree immediately known, the bundle of
"real" qualities inferred, and the obscure something that he connects
with these, he still goes on talking as if he had only one thing to
talk about. The danger of such a proceeding is obvious. If I talk
about two or three things as though they were one, it is but natural
that I should sometimes confuse them with each other. Should proof be
forthcoming for one of these, it would be but natural for me to fall
occasionally into the error of supposing that it somehow applies to the
others. If I go on saying "the tree" when I mean one tree and something
else, two trees, or two trees and something else, it is only to be
expected that I sooner or later come to grief in my reasonings.

And it should be noted that this peculiar ambiguity in the names of
things entails a parallel ambiguity in the use of the words by which we
indicate the mind's recognition of the presence of things. We commonly
speak of a drunken man's _seeing_ two trees, where a sober man sees
one. We speak of an insane man as _hearing_ voices, when no one has
spoken. We say that we _see_ the maples are turning red, even when we
believe that color may not properly be attributed to the mediate object
of knowledge. On the other hand, those who hold to the existence of
"real" objects of the kind before mentioned, generally maintain that
in referring to things in space, their positions and mutual relations,
we are giving attention, not to the immediately known, but to its
"external" double. "I see, feel, perceive," it is "said, not the image,
and not the constituents of the image (the ideas), but the external
object by _means_ of the image."[5] If one holds that this "external"
object presupposes a substance, a something distinct from a group of
qualities, there is nothing to prevent his maintaining, should he
wish to do so, that in saying "I see a tree," primary reference is
had to this substance or "reality." Of course, if, in the sentence
"I see a tree," the word "tree" can have three meanings, it follows
that there is also a possibility of taking in three senses the word
"see." It is hardly necessary to point out that, unless one is very
careful, "seeing" in one sense may result in "believing" in another,
as "kicking" did in the famous case of Dr. Johnson and the stone. The
caution is pertinent with respect to any other word used in the same
general way as we use the word "see."

  [5] Ueberweg. See Krauth's Ed. of Berkeley's "Principles," Phila.,
  1874, p. 343.

I have said that when a man abandons his original unreflective
position and learns to distinguish between things immediately known
and other things they are supposed to represent, he goes on using the
common language, and talking as though there were but one thing under
consideration. Now, men do not do this merely in common conversation
and in writing about matters of everyday life, but they do it in the
very books that have been written to prove that each thing is thus
double or triple. John Locke, for example, begins the very chapter
in which he is about to draw the distinction between the secondary
and primary qualities of bodies (_i. e._, between the constituents
of things immediately known and the constituents of their "external"
correlates), as well as to enlighten us on our ideas of substances,
with the following words:[6]

  [6] "Essay", Bk. 2, Chap. 23, § 1.

"The mind being, as I have declared, furnished with a great number
of the simple ideas, conveyed in by the senses, as they are found in
exterior things, or by reflexion on its own operations, takes notice
also, that a certain number of these simple ideas go constantly
together; which, being presumed to belong to one thing, and words
being suited to common apprehensions, and made use of for quick
despatch, are called, so united in one subject, by one name; which,
by inadvertency, we are apt afterward to talk of, and consider
as one simple idea, which indeed is a complication of many ideas
together: because, as I have said, not imagining how these simple
ideas can subsist by themselves, we accustom ourselves to suppose some
_substratum_ wherein they do subsist, and from which they do result,
and which therefore we call _substance_."

It is clear enough from this, as it is clear enough from other passages
in the same book, that Locke talked as though the complex of simple
ideas in consciousness were the very same thing (in Sense I) as the
group of "real" qualities outside of consciousness. And no careful
reader of his book can avoid seeing that the confusion of his language
is a fair index to the confusion of his thoughts with regard to the
two.[7] It is little better in the case of "bodies" and substance. In
the passage just given, he would seem to make _substance_ an obscure
something underlying groups of ideas, and not groups of real qualities,
but in the next sentence he makes it a substratum of the qualities
which produce in us ideas. In many passages[8] he distinguishes between
_substance_ and _substances_, by which latter he means groups of "real"
qualities with the added substratum or substance; as such substances he
instances oak, elephant, iron. He emphasizes the fact that substance
is not to be confounded with substances, which are things of different
sorts.[9] In so far as the substances are bundles of qualities, they
are known to us through sensation.[10] In so far as they are also
substance, they cannot be known to us through sensation, for the idea
of substance is not known through sensation.[11] We are not then to
look upon substance as such a constituent part of "a substance" as a
quality is. The two belong to different classes. And if we offer proof
for the existence of "real" substances, which is evidently applicable
to them only as bundles of qualities--proof from sensation--then
substance is overlooked altogether. It is significant that Locke,
having thus put together under one head as "a substance" an oak viewed
as a bundle of "real" qualities and an oak viewed as substratum,
proceeded to argue as if he had but one thing to prove when he felt
called upon to defend the real existence of substances. In his chapters
on "The Extent of Human Knowledge," the "Reality of Knowledge," and
"Our Knowledge of the Existence of Other Things,"[12] he devotes
himself wholly to proving things as bundles of qualities, and pays no
more attention to substance than if it had never entered his thought.
If we take these chapters as authoritative, we must banish substance
from the sphere of knowledge altogether.

  [7] "Essay," Bk. 4, Chap. 2, § 14; Bk. 4, Chap. 4 and Chap. 11.

  [8] _Ibid._, Bk. 2, Chap. 12, § 6; Bk. 2, Chap. 23, § 1, with note
  (Phila., 1846, p. 183, _et seq._).

  [9] See note to § 1, Chap. 23, Bk. 2.

  [10] Bk. 4, Chap. 11, _et passim_.

  [11] "I confess there is another idea, which would be of general use
  for mankind to have, as it is of general talk, as if they had it; and
  that is the idea of substance, which we neither have, nor can have,
  by sensation or reflection." Bk. 1, Chap. 4, § 18 of the "Essay."

  [12] "Essay," Bk. 4, Chaps. 3, 4 and 11.

As another instance of a use of language calculated to produce
confusion, I may offer the following from Sir William Hamilton:
"Whatever we know is not known as it is, but only as it seems to us
to be,"[13]--a use of words which would certainly indicate that the
immediate and mediate objects of knowledge are one. And what would
we infer from such a sentence as this: "Thus the consciousness of
an Inscrutable Power manifested to us through all phenomena, has
been growing ever clearer; and must eventually be freed from its
imperfections. The certainty that on the one hand such a Power exists,
while on the other hand its nature transcends intuition and is beyond
imagination, is the certainty towards which intelligence has from the
first been progressing."[14] Or this: "We are obliged to regard every
phenomenon as a manifestation of some Power by which we are acted upon;
though Omnipresence is unthinkable, yet, as experience discloses no
bounds to the diffusion of phenomena, we are unable to think of limits
to the presence of this Power; while the criticisms of Science teach
us that this Power is Incomprehensible. And this consciousness of an
Incomprehensible Power, called Omnipresent from inability to assign its
limits, is just that consciousness on which Religion dwells."[15]

  [13] Lectures on Metaph., VIII, N. Y., 1880, p. 102.

  [14] Herbert Spencer, "First Principles." Part I, Chap. V, § 31,
  N. Y., 1888, p. 108.

  [15] "First Principles." Part I, Chap. V, § 27.

"After concluding that we cannot know the ultimate nature of that
which is manifested to us, there arise the questions--What is it that
we know? In what sense do we know it?"[16] Or what shall one say to
this: "Our consciousness of the unconditioned being literally the
unconditioned consciousness, or raw material of thought, to which in
thinking we give definite forms, it follows that an ever-present sense
of real existence is the very basis of our intelligence."[17]

  [16] Part II, Chap. I, § 35.

  [17] Part I, Chap. IV, § 26.

Now, if the consciousness of an "inscrutable power" is not the
"inscrutable power" itself; if the existence of such a "power" does
not mean simply its existence in consciousness; if the phenomena
in which, it is assumed, a "power" is manifested, are to be kept
separate in thought from the "power," so that we shall be in no
danger of confounding a consciousness of certain phenomena with
consciousness of an "incomprehensible power;" if our "consciousness
of the unconditioned" is to be kept in mind as signifying merely our
"unconditioned consciousness," and an "ever-present sense of real
existence" as signifying only an ever-present sense of "raw material"
in consciousness; then it is high time that these sentences and all
such as these be re-written with some regard for lucidity, accuracy
and consistency. How can a reader help confounding things when he is
thus taught by the very man whose business it is to distinguish between
them? The blind led by the blind is a cheerful spectacle compared with
this.

Nothing can be more evident than that the man who has abandoned his
original unreflective belief in the singleness of the perceived
object, and has come to believe in it as having one or more "external"
correlates, should keep distinctly in mind that an immediate and a
mediate object are, by hypothesis, two distinct things: that he has
never had any direct experience whatever save of the one; and that
all distinctions that he makes with regard to the other, the very
notions of its existence, reality, and externality, have been drawn
from the sphere of the immediate and carried over to it in thought.
And he should never allow himself to forget, that, when he says he has
passed in thought from the immediate to the mediate object, he cannot
mean literally that his thought is now occupied directly upon this
"external" thing--that it is itself present to mind. He should remember
that he can only mean that he has such an experience as the following:

He has in mind the immediate object, and a mental picture of a
duplicate of this standing in a causal relation to it and represented
by it; or, he has (if a Lockian), in addition to these two, a third
highly vague and indefinite mental image (the idea of "substance"),
which he connects with the image just described, as he has connected
that with the immediate object; or (if a Kantian), he has in mind the
immediate object, and, connected directly with that, such a vague image
as has just been described. This is what he actually has in mind so
far as _objects_ are concerned. He does not, however, merely recognize
the existence in his mind of these different images in their relations
to each other, but he looks upon this mental arrangement as somehow
justified by experience and embodying truth.

When we ask what the word "_justified_" can mean in this connection,
it is not easy to find an answer. Within the sphere of the immediately
known the meaning of the word is plain enough. When I have constructed
in my imagination a certain image or complex of images embodying a
belief as to matter of fact, I say the mental operation is justified
when I can substitute for the idea the percept which it is supposed to
represent, or can know indirectly that this might be done according
to known laws of the appearance and disappearance of percepts. Thus
I perceive the outside of a tree-trunk and form an idea of what lies
under the bark. I have reason to know that by stripping off the
bark I can substitute for the image I have formed the corresponding
percept. And if I see at a distance a similar tree growing upon an
inaccessible cliff, and form an image of what lies under its bark, I
may still regard this as justified by the possibility of referring to
cases in which a similar image, arising out of a similar experience,
has been found to be justified. It is a legitimate inference that, if
circumstances were somewhat different, the proper percept might take
the place of this image too. It is evident, however, that the word
"justified" cannot be used in this or any analogous sense in speaking
of the relation not of an image to a percept, but of an image or a
percept to a something that, by hypothesis, cannot itself enter into
experience at all. What then can the word mean? It at first interests
us to know that "some Snarks are Boojums," but our interest lapses when
we discover that we have absolutely no mark by which we may know a
Boojum from anything else.

But I must not be drawn into digressions. The points with which I am
concerned are these:--FIRST: When a man says he sees this tree or that
house, he ordinarily speaks as if there were but the one object in his
thought. If he distinguishes at all between an immediate and a mediate
object, the language that he uses would not indicate that he does so.
And even after men have entered into lengthy arguments for the purpose
of marking this distinction, and insisting that things are not single
as they seem to the unreflective, they still indulge in this peculiar
use of language, which would imply either that they have forgotten for
the time being their own distinction between the immediate and the
mediate, or that they regard the two as the same in Sense I, and to be
treated as one. Certainly, in their reasonings upon this subject, men
who hold to the two kinds of objects do confound them with one another,
and strengthen their faith in the two by this misconception, as I shall
show later. We have here, then, what we may call a kind of sameness, or
pseudo-sameness, which deserves investigation, and which one should be
careful not to confound with sameness of other kinds. Whether the word
same is commonly applied in the premises is indifferent to my purpose.
In the remainder of the present section I will consider the relation
between the mental representative and its assumed correlatives.

SECOND: If we are to accept not merely the world of objects immediately
known, but also a world or two worlds corresponding to this, and yet
distinct from it, we cannot be sure our list of samenesses is complete
unless we traverse in our search for the different kinds all the
spheres of being in which we believe, and of which we think we can
have some knowledge. In the section following this one I will try to
discover the kinds of sameness which a believer in "external" things
may reasonably attribute to them within their own sphere. In this
there is no question of the relation of something in one sphere to a
correlative something in another.

For the first point. What is in a man's mind when he is thinking of his
percept as having a "real" object corresponding to it, I have shown
to be as follows: He has in mind an immediate object and a duplicate
of this, not necessarily altogether like it, imagined as standing
in a causal relation to it and represented by it. When it occurs to
him that this imagined duplicate is itself an immediate object and
not the "real" one, he does as much for it, and provides it with a
similar duplicate. In every case, when he tries to think of an object
immediately perceived as having a "real" correlate, he simply furnishes
it with an imaginary double in this way. What else is he to do? He
is trying to think of two objects; the "real" object cannot, it is
said, be in the mind; he must then imagine it. If he is a Lockian he
will have in mind the immediate object and two imaginary ones, one
signifying the "real" object as a bundle of qualities, and the other, a
highly vague one, picturing the "substance."

Now, since this is all that can be before the man's mind, any kind of
sameness which concerns the percept and the "real" thing _must mean
to him some relation between the immediate object and the image or
images of which I have spoken_. When this is realized it is seen that
we have here not a new kind of sameness, a distinct experience, but a
kind already discussed. The relation between the immediate object and
the images described is simply that between representative and thing
represented. This I have already examined within the field of what
is recognized as immediately known. Here, too, it would seem that we
are in the field of the immediately known, since we have to do with
percepts and ideas, but though these images are in this field, they are
here, so to speak, under protest, and their framing is supposed to be
justified[18] only by something assumed to be not in this field. When
this something is thought of at all it is thought of in just the way
I have described. This is what thinking it means. Nevertheless, this
duplicate world is assumed to be a world apart, and for this reason I
have considered the sameness of percepts and their corresponding "real"
objects by itself. It gives us sameness in sense seventh.

  [18] I have already pointed out the vagueness in this word.

In writing the foregoing I have had in mind chiefly the position of
the Lockian. I need not consider at length that taken by the Kantian,
for what I have said will, with little change, apply to it also. If I
hold to a "noumenon" as corresponding to my "phenomenon," and yet deny
to it all qualities whatsoever, I must, to retain any appearance of
consistency, represent it in my mind in the very vaguest possible way.
Nevertheless, I must represent it, or I am not thinking of it at all,
and I must relate the phenomenon and this vague representation in the
way described. A true consistency would, of course, make impossible the
whole process, for it would make impossible the giving of any quality
at all to the representation, and the putting any relation between it
and the phenomenon. In so dark a night cats do not merely turn grey,
they disappear. On the other hand, if one is too liberal with this
"noumenon," it palpably ceases to be a "noumenon," and degenerates into
something very like a "phenomenon." The illusion must not be lost. Both
these conflicting tendencies may be well illustrated in Mr. Spencer's
"Unknowable." If we really refuse to allow to the consciousness of it
"any qualitative or quantitative expression whatever,"[19] our vague
image wholly disappears and there is nothing left in our consciousness
but the "phenomenon." While if we follow the "First Principles"
in coaxing it back into existence by allowing it reality,[20] and
causality,[21] and a freedom from limits,[22] and printing its name
with a capital letter,[23] as though it were even better than other
things--if we do all this there is danger of the convalescent's
becoming too robust altogether. The problem has its parallel in the
practical problem of paying wages:--one must not pay too little, or he
loses his laborer; nor too much, or he loses his money. The thing is to
find the happy mean which will keep an object of thought before a man's
mind and yet not make him lose all appearance of consistency.

  [19] First Principles. Part I, Chap. 4, § 26. N. Y., 1888, p. 91.

  [20] _Ibid._ Chap. 4, § 24; Chap. 5, §§ 31, 32, _et passim_.

  [21] _Ibid._ Chap. 5, § 31, _et passim_.

  [22] _Ibid._ Chap. 4, § 24.

  [23] _Ibid._ Chap. 5, § 32, _et passim_.

But in which ever of the ways mentioned a man thinks of "real" things,
he does what I have described. And when he implies that the immediately
known and the "real" are in some sense the same, as he does when he
talks as if there were but the one object, or asserts that we do not
know things as they are in themselves but only as they appear to us;
he really uses the word same in the fifth sense that I have given. The
fact that he is using it to indicate the relation between percepts and
a certain class of ideas which he has come to regard as duplicates of
his percepts does not make the use of the word a new one. Whatever may
be the state of affairs outside of his consciousness, this is all that
takes place within it; and the word same, used in this connection, can
mean no more to him than I have said.


SEC. 9. To avoid needless prolixity I will class together and very
briefly treat of the kinds of sameness which one may attribute
to "external" things. It is not necessary to go at length into
the discussion of these, for since the "external" world, as it is
assumed by those who have faith in it, is, to the man thinking it,
simply a more or less modified duplicate of the world of things
immediately perceived; and since all ground for attributing to it
any determinations at all must be found in that which is immediately
perceived; we may naturally look to find in it nothing that we have
not already found in this immediate world. How, indeed, could anything
else get into it? We cannot have _in_ mind what is by hypothesis _out_
of mind. The "real" world is then, in the mind of the man who thinks
it, a world of imagined objects, and the world of imagination depends
for its material upon the world of sense. A little reflection will show
that the kinds of sameness of these "realities" are only the kinds of
sameness already discussed duplicated, and assumed to belong to a new
world.

1. An "external" quality or group of qualities may be said to be the
_same_ with itself at any one instant. Here we have Sense I carried
over into the field of imagined duplicates.

2. An "external" quality existing at one time may be said to be the
_same_ with an "external" quality existing at another time, to indicate
that the two are similar. The same thing may be true of any group of
qualities. Here we have Sense II.

3. The "external" bundle of qualities, which formed for Locke the
knowable element in a thing or "body," may be regarded as being the
_same_ at two different times--as having, so to speak, a life-history.
Here one is simply calling up in thought the experience described under
Sense III.

4. Two "external" things (bundles of "real" qualities), or two
"external" qualities, existing at one time, may be called the _same_ to
mark similarity. Here we have Sense IV.

5. An "external" thing (in the sense just indicated), or an "external"
quality, may be called the _same_ with its representative. If this
representative be the immediate object of knowledge, we have the
experience described as Sense VII. If it be another "external" thing
or quality, _e. g._, an "external" picture in an "external" mirror, an
"external" statue in "external" marble, etc., we have Sense V.

6. Two men may be said to perceive the _same_ "external" thing. In
saying this one simply calls up in mind the complex described at length
under VI, but makes the duplicate, which is, to him, the thing, stand
in the complex in the place of the percept, this being now regarded as
a mere representative.

7. An "external" thing may be said to be the _same_ with its
representative in consciousness or with the substance or noumenon
assumed to underlie it. Here we have Sense VII.

It would seem scarcely necessary to mention this last, since, if
the representative in consciousness can be called the same with its
"real" correlate, it would seem self-evident that the "real" correlate
may be called the same with it. I add it, however, for the sake of
completeness. It should be noted that in this last kind of sameness
we step over the limits of any one class of being, ideas, things (as
bundles of qualities), or substance. The word is used to denote a
relation between something in one class and a corresponding thing in
another class.

In the foregoing I have been considering the sameness of "real"
or "external" things regarded as bundles of qualities. If one ask
concerning the sameness of Locke's "substance," or the "noumenon" of
other writers, I would say that our notions of this must vary with
the kind of being we allow this nebulous entity. Strict consistency
in dealing with a noumenon as sometimes defined means, of course, its
utter collapse. If, however, we keep anything in mind at all, we must
carry over to it at least the first of the kinds of sameness described.
I do not think it would be hard to show that several other kinds are
carried over in despite of consistency by men who hold to this shadowy
something under one name or another.

As, however, we do not find here any new sense of the word same, but
mere repetition in a new field (if one may call it such), it seems
unnecessary to dwell upon this part of my subject.

I have not discussed at all the sameness of things from the point of
view of an adherent of that Natural Realism which claims that we know
immediately real things and yet holds that real things are not our
perceptions themselves, but something extra-mental. This view is so
incoherent that it is not likely to be taken seriously by men who
have learned to reflect at all. I may say, however, _en passant_, that
it does not add to the kinds of sameness I have described: it merely
confounds them one with another, and falls into the inconsequences
which naturally result from so doing.


SEC. 10. When we come to the question of the sameness of the Self or
Ego we are, if possible, on more debatable ground than heretofore.
The whole subject of our knowledge of the Self lies as yet, in the
opinion of many, very much in the dark. Without undertaking the task of
defining narrowly what this elusive something is, it would seem that I
may safely make concerning it at least the following assertions:

In using the word self, we may have reference either to what is
immediately known as appearing in the circle of consciousness, the
phenomenon, or to a something supposed to lie beyond this sphere and to
be known only through its representative in consciousness.

Now this something beyond may be looked at in various ways. John
Locke, in discussing the not-self, made the three-fold division of
idea, bundle of "real" qualities, and substance. He might with equal
reason have distinguished in a similar way between the self as idea
(the immediately known), the self as a bundle of "real" qualities (not
immediately known), and the self as substance. As a matter of fact,
however, he did not put the not-self and the self upon the same plane.
He seemed to think that we know the self more immediately, and to hold
that it enters consciousness as the bundle of "real" qualities[24]
which, in the case of matter, is assumed to lie beyond. The "substance"
of the self, however, he condemns to outer darkness and the company
of material substance. To me there seems no reason, admitting the
right to pass at all beyond the immediately perceived, for making
the distinction which he does make. And as one, who has followed him
with assent in his treatment of the not-self, may, with some justice
complain of his inconsistency and refuse to follow him here, I mention
the position he might have taken as well as the position he actually
did take with respect to the self and its existences.

  [24] Compare Bk. 4, Ch. 9, § 3 of the "Essay," with Bk. 4, Ch. 11,
  §§ 1, 4, 7, 8, and 9.


SEC. 11. The word self may then be regarded as referring either:

1. To the self as phenomenon, a something immediately perceived, a part
or the whole of our conscious experience;

2. To a complex of "real" qualities beyond and represented by the self
as it appears in consciousness;

3. To the substance of self, or self as noumenon, a vague and
ill-defined something, supposed to be distinct from and to underlie
phenomena or "real" qualities; or

4. To two, or to all, of these taken together.

If the word is used in the last of these senses any inquiry concerning
sameness must split up its complex meaning and treat separately the
different elements included. It remains, then, to inquire what kinds of
sameness we may attribute to the self in the first three senses given.
I will take them in reverse order.


SEC. 12. With respect to the third sense, which makes it refer to
the "substance" of Locke or the "noumenon" of other writers: all the
difficulties which arise out of the endeavor to attribute sameness of
any kind to any substance or noumenon obtain here also. But it seems
on the surface more glaringly inconsistent in the adherent of noumena
to discriminate between different kinds as admitting of differences of
treatment than it does for him to suppose them capable of treatment
at all. Things that differ cannot be conceived as differing except
in qualities, and here there is question not of qualities but of
noumena. If one is to retain any appearance of consistency, he must
not maintain that the word same is applicable in any given sense to
certain noumena and not to others. If he does so, he openly abandons
his noumena to a phenomenal fate. And, as a matter of fact, I think it
is plain that those believers in noumena, who distinguish them from
one another, yet think of them in just the one way. If we take the
utterances of a good representative of the class, Sir William Hamilton,
we may see that although he distinguishes between the noumenal ego and
the noumenal non-ego, not only do his clearest statements make such
a distinction out of the question, but the distinction drawn is so
vague and insignificant[25] that the two noumena may be thought of and
reasoned about in the one way. Phenomena being abstracted, what was in
his mind when he spoke of the one was probably in no respect different
from what was in his mind when he spoke of the other. In so far, then,
as the noumena themselves are concerned, it would seem that any kind
of sameness which we may predicate of the noumenal not-self we may
predicate on the same ground and with equal justice of the noumenal
self, and _vice versa_. If, however, any sense of the word same marks
a relation between a noumenon and some other thing or things, and if
the two noumena differ as respects this relation, then this kind of
sameness may be attributed to the one and not to the other. It may
be claimed that we indicate just such a relation in using the word
same in Sense VI; and that, whatever one might do, one would under no
circumstances speak of two men as perceiving the same self, noumenal
or any other. I shall discuss this point when I come to discuss the
sameness of self as phenomenon.

  [25] Lectures on Metaphysics, VIII, N. Y., 1880, p. 97.

I may add here that when one obliterates the distinction between
noumena by plunging them into the darkness of the "unknowable," there
can, of course, be no question of a new sense of the word same in the
field I am discussing. On the general question of noumenal sameness,
all that it seems to me necessary to say I have said before.


SEC. 13. The second sense of the word self would make it a complex of
"real" qualities beyond, and represented by, the self as it appears
in consciousness. Now, I do not think that the fact that one would
attribute to the self, so considered, one class of qualities, and to
the not-self another class, would, when the two "real" objects are
considered in themselves, prevent one's ascribing to the former all the
kinds of sameness which one may ascribe to the latter, or would justify
the assumption of a new kind of sameness proper only to the former. In
discussing the sameness of "external" things I have not made any one
kind of it dependent upon the peculiar quality of their qualities, if I
may so speak. I considered them only as groups of qualities in general,
supposed to be external to consciousness. The idea of the "real" self
is in its general character essentially similar to that of the "real"
not-self. Provided that the two classes of qualities have enough in
common to be properly called qualities, and to be capable of being
related to each other in groups, they may differ in kind _toto cœlo_
without necessitating a difference of treatment from the point of view
with which I am at present concerned. It is very evident, however,
that those who have thought of the self as a "real" thing, distinct
from consciousness, and yet to be in some way intelligibly represented
in thought, have had a tendency to represent it very much as they
have represented material objects. There has been a general effort to
get rid of the idea of extension, but this has been shown rather in
reducing the size of the object and attributing to it inconsistent
space relations than in denying it such relations altogether. Bishop
Butler's argument for immortality from the indiscerptibility of the
uncompounded shows that he thought of the self as he thought of a
material atom,[26] and Sir William Hamilton's scholastic notion of the
ubiquity of the soul in the bodily organism--"all in the whole and all
in every part"[27]--makes it sufficiently clear that he thought of it
so, too; though, to be sure, such ubiquity would make of it a very
queer atom indeed. If, then, the man, who holds to the self in the
second sense of the word, calls up in using the word a mental complex
like that which represents to him a "real" not-self, there is all the
more reason why we should not expect to find anything in his thought
which would suggest a new kind of sameness within the sphere of the
"real" self. It remains, of course, to notice here, as in the case of
the noumenal self, that any sense of the word same which has reference
not so much to the things under discussion as to the relations of these
things to other things, may, if self and not-self differ as to these
relations, be applicable to the one and not to the other. Thus Sense
VI may be regarded as inapplicable to the "real" self. I will discuss
this point more fully in a few moments. With this one exception we
may, therefore, I think, apply the kinds of sameness enumerated under
Sec. 9 as obtaining in the sphere of "external" things to the "real"
self also, and it would seem that no new kinds are to be added. It is
unnecessary to repeat here the classification already given.

  [26] "Analogy," Part 1. Chap. I.

  [27] Lectures on Metaphysics, XXV., N. Y., 1880, p. 356. Hamilton's
  utterances concerning "reality" are incoherent, and inconsistent.
  I do him no injustice, however, if I give the above as "one of his
  views."


SEC. 14. We come finally to the self as a something immediately
perceived, the self as phenomenon or idea. I do not mean to use
these names in a question-begging way, and I will try to exhaust all
reasonable possibilities in discussing it and its samenesses.

Now, whatever the self is, it would seem that it must be, in so far
as it is a thing immediately known, either a part or the whole of
consciousness, or one or the other of these regarded in some peculiar
aspect or relation.

If it be a part of consciousness, recognized as distinct from another
part, the non-ego, we may reasonably maintain:

1. That the perceived self is at any moment what it is--is the same
with itself. The question whether it be simple and unanalyzable does
not affect the problem. This is sameness in sense I.

2. That if it be simple and unanalyzable, this simple element of
consciousness may be the same at two different times, and if complex,
two elements or two complexes of elements, belonging to different times
may be the same. This is sameness in sense II.

3. That if we regard the self as an object having a life-history, as
consisting of successive elements united in a series as sense elements
are united in the series which is for us a material object (immediately
known), we may speak of its being the same on two successive days, even
though it exhibit dissimilar qualities, primary reference being had not
to likeness of elements, but to the experience which has been described
at length in discussing sense III.

4. That we may speak of two selves, of two elements of two selves (if
selves be complex), or of two elements of one self (if one self may
contain two such elements), as at any one time the same, to indicate
that they are similar. This is sameness in sense IV. It should be
kept in mind, however, that we never look upon one consciousness as
containing two selves as it contains one self, or as it may contain
two material objects (immediately known). The second self in mind is
recognized as present only as an imagined object. Nevertheless it
would seem quite proper to use the word same to mark this relation of
similarity between the perceived self and an imagined self, just as we
use it to mark a likeness of two material objects, or of one material
object and the memory image of such an object.

5. That we may speak of the self and its representative as the same.
The memory image of a later time may stand for the self as experienced
at an earlier. Unless it be claimed that yesterday's consciousness
of self is actually to-day's consciousness, one must admit that the
self remembered is the self known through its proxy. And one may in
his reasonings about the self use as a symbol the pronoun "I," paying
little attention as he goes along to what it stands for, and yet
knowing it may serve in place of the obscure something it represents.
These are instances of sameness in sense V.

6. That we never use the word same in sense VI in speaking of the self
as we do in speaking of the not-self. We do not say two men perceive
the same self as we say they perceive the same tree or house. The
familiar distinction between the subjective and the objective marks out
the latter as in a sense, peculiar to itself, common and impersonal.

I have already shown what we have in mind when we say two men see the
same material thing. We have a picture of the thing, and of the bodies
of the two men in a certain relation to it; and we imagine a copy of
the thing as in some way connected with each of these bodies, and due
to its relation to the thing. When relations to a material object are
in question all the bodies in a consciousness are on a par. We may
directly perceive the one thing and two or more bodies holding similar
relations to it. But it is not so in the case of selves. The one self
that we find in each consciousness seems to be peculiarly related to
one body to the exclusion of others. And as we have not, in the case of
this self, the conditions which led us to mark the similar relations
of two human bodies (our representatives of the men) to one material
object, by saying two men see the same thing, we, of course, do not
say that two men see the same self. The word same, in sense VI, we may
regard, then, as inapplicable to the self as immediately known.[28]
This appears to be due, however, not to the nature of this self in
itself considered, but to its peculiar relation to the other things in
a consciousness.

  [28] Owing to the ambiguity already pointed out as existing in terms
  which stand for our objects of knowledge and our knowledge of these
  objects, it would seem almost impossible to avoid misconception
  without unendurable reiteration. In the above paragraph, by the words
  "body," "object," "self," etc., I always refer to things immediately
  known.

Moreover, since the other two selves, the self as group of "real"
qualities and the self as noumenon, are to us, as it were, shadows
cast by the self immediately known--assumed to exist only because this
is known to exist, and thought of as "present" only because this is
known to be present--since, I say, these two selves hold in our thought
this peculiar relation of dependence upon the self in consciousness,
it is to be expected that we never find any one speaking of two men
as seeing the same "real" self as one might readily speak of two men
as seeing the same "real" tree. One says he has evidence that two men
see the same "real" tree, when he has or can have in consciousness an
immediately perceived tree and two immediately perceived human bodies
in a certain relation to it. If no one had ever had this experience in
the sphere of the immediately known, we have no reason to think any one
would ever have thought of applying the phrase in question to a tree
mediately known. And as we do not have a similar experience touching
the self in consciousness, it is only natural to find that no one
applies the phrase to any self out of consciousness. When things differ
their shadows ought to differ too. Sameness in sense VI we may regard,
then, as not attributable to self in any of the three senses of the
word.

7. That, finally, there seems no more reason why one should not call
the self as immediately known the same with the self as "external"
thing, or with the self as noumenon, than the not-self as similarly
perceived the same with the not-self as similarly inferred. The
supposed relationships are in the two cases exactly alike. Here we have
sameness in sense VII.


SEC. 15. If we claim that by the self as immediately known we
understand not a part but the whole of consciousness, we should
seem, unless we in some way modify our statement, to obliterate the
distinction between self and not-self. Still, taking the words simply,
and assuming that we mean by self all that is immediately known, we do
not find that this will necessitate any important difference in the
discussion of its samenesses. Consciousness as a whole is certainly
what it is, or the same with itself, at any instant: two elements in it
belonging to different times, or two complexes of elements belonging to
different times may be the same, as being alike; it may be regarded as
having a life history, and may from this point of view be called the
same at different times without regard to similarity; two simultaneous
elements or complexes of elements in it may be called the same to mark
the fact that they resemble each other, or it, as a whole, may for the
same reason be called the same with another consciousness (imagined);
it and its representative (for example, the memory-image of its former
self), may be called the same; and we may use the word same to indicate
its relation to its supposed "real" correlate in an extra-consciousness
world, whether we make this "thing" or "noumenon."

It will be observed that in the preceding I have allowed the self,
considered as the whole of consciousness, all the kinds of sameness
upon my list except the sixth. There is, however, no objection,
except that arising from oddity of expression, against allowing it
this kind of sameness too. If we really mean by the self the whole of
consciousness, then everything immediately perceived is a part of the
self. If then, it is proper to say two men see the same tree, one
may go on to say, if one choses, that two men see a part of the one
self. Such an expression could, of course, be used only in speaking of
the objective part of this self, the part which those who distinguish
between ego and non-ego call the not-self. It is needless to say that
no one ever thinks of talking in this way. I merely mention the point
for the sake of completeness in my analysis.


SEC. 16. If by the self we do not understand a part or the whole of
consciousness taken simply, but the one or the other of these regarded
from some peculiar point of view, does it affect the question of the
kinds of sameness we may attribute to it? It may be asserted, for
example, that when we are thinking of the world of things immediately
perceived as conditioned by its relation to a particular organism (also
immediately perceived)--as duplicated by a pressure on the eyes, as
annihilated by a blow on the head--we make these things mental, and
properly include them under the head of self; whereas, when we abstract
these same things in thought from the organism, and, so to speak,
objectify them, we properly include them under the head of not-self. We
are thus to regard the one thing as an element of the self or of the
not-self, according to the light in which it is viewed. But it does not
seem to me that if we take the word self in the sense just described,
or in any analogous sense, we need alter the list of samenesses already
given. We are still considering a part or the whole of consciousness,
and the fact that we are viewing it in one light rather than another
would not apparently influence in any way its kinds of sameness.


SEC. 17. This would certainly appear to be the case if we take the
words _part_ and _whole_ of consciousness in their common acceptation,
as denoting a portion or the totality of mental elements (sensations,
feelings, volitions, ideas), in their various relations to each other.
It remains, however, to consider a position, which, it may be claimed,
is not covered by the foregoing classification of possible positions,
when the words "part" and "whole" are thus understood. Suppose that
one distinguishes in the Kantian fashion between the _form_ and the
_matter_ of what appears in consciousness, and maintains that the
formal element, the arrangement, or "unity" of consciousness is to
be attributed to mind, or, if you please, is mind, and for "mind" I
may here write "self," while the matter or content, the raw material
to be elaborated and related, is to be distinguished from this as a
thing apart. Can it be shown that the above given kinds of sameness
have significance in regard to the self so understood? Whether we
call this a _part_ of consciousness or not will depend on our use of
terms. It is not a part, as commonly understood, nor is it the whole of
consciousness.

Now, it has seemed to me that those who have laid most emphasis upon
this formal element in consciousness have been very vague in their
treatment of it. On the part of many writers there is little evidence
of even an attempt at scientific exactitude. And yet it does not
appear that the subject admits of treatment only in this loose and
unsatisfactory way. If we can discuss it at all, there seems no reason
why, with increasing knowledge, we may not expect to discuss it with
accuracy and precision.

If we consider this formal element of consciousness in a concrete
instance, it may help us to classify our ideas concerning it. Let
us imagine three points in such relations to each other that when
each is connected with the other two by straight lines we have an
equilateral triangle. The three points are, of course, what they are at
any instant. And whatever a relation may be, if the mutual relations
of these three points are capable of being considered apart from the
points, as a distinct element in consciousness, there appears no reason
why we should not assert with equal justice that these relations are
what they are at any instant. When we take note of the points we take
note of the relations, and we do not confound the one with the other.

And just as I may say that such a set of three points imagined or
observed now is the same with another and a similar set imagined or
observed at some former time, meaning by the word same to indicate
similarity, and not sameness in the strict sense mentioned just above;
so there appears no reason at all why I may not say that the mutual
relations of the one set of points are the same with the mutual
relations of the other, making here, too, the distinction between
sameness in the former, stricter, sense, and sameness in this second
sense of similarity. If what is contained in a consciousness at any one
instant, is, _ipso facto_, to be distinguished from what is contained
in it at any other instant, there seems equal reason for making this
distinction in the material element and in the formal. It is quite
true that men are not accustomed to carrying this distinction into the
region of form. The whole history of the dispute as to universals is
evidence of the way in which men have confounded the kinds of sameness;
but I fancy that even those who would clearly recognize that red
color imagined yesterday and red color imagined to-day are the same
merely in being similar, or in standing in a relation of original and
representative, would yet not think of distinguishing triangularity
noticed yesterday from triangularity noticed to-day, and marking that
they are not the same in the first and strictest sense of the word.
And yet it would be hard to show why two indistinguishably similar
color sensations, existing in consciousness at different times, are to
be kept apart in thought and recognized as two sensations, while two
occurrences of the consciousness of triangularity (I use the clumsy
phrase to avoid any question-begging word), are not to be distinguished
as separate in a similar way. To say that the formal element is not
a thing, but an activity, does not alter the position. If an activity
is enough of a thing to be talked about and distinguished from other
things, we may surely recognize an activity in consciousness yesterday
as numerically different from an activity in consciousness to-day.

Furthermore, if, instead of taking as simple an instance of form as
the relations of the three points I have been discussing, I choose to
take the sum total of the relations between the material elements (here
I use _material_ as correlative to _formal_), which go to make up the
life history of a material object, say a tree, why may I not speak of
the formal tree as being the same at two times, meaning thereby that
the group of relations co-existent at any one time may be regarded as
representative of any other group belonging to the one series or of
the whole series? To be sure, I am not justified by common usage in
thus speaking, since common usage marks only distinctions which are
practically important, and by the words "the same tree" includes both
form and matter. Nevertheless, I can see no reason why, if this element
of form does admit of being considered apart, it is not at least
possible to find in this field the kind of sameness we have in mind
when we say that we have seen on two successive days the same tree.

Again, if I can speak of two simultaneous sensations of redness in one
consciousness (_e. g._, the two halves of a red surface), as the same,
meaning to indicate simply similarity, why may I not also speak of two
simultaneous "experiences of triangularity" in one consciousness as the
same, and keep clearly in mind here, too, that I mean only to indicate
similarity? If I can speak of a sensation or a complex of sensations
in one consciousness as the same with a similar sensation or group of
sensations in another, and yet not forget that I am dealing with two
things, why may I not do as much for two similar relations or groups
of relations in two consciousnesses? If in the one case I do not
confound sameness in the sense of similarity with sameness of the kind
we mean when we say each thing is at each instant the same with itself,
why should I do so in the other case? If, I repeat, the formal element
in consciousness is enough of a thing to be distinguished from the
material element and discussed, there appears no reason why it should
not be open to distinctions of this kind.

And when I call up in memory a triangle once seen, the memory image
would seem to stand as a representative of the original in both its
elements, form and matter. In neither should the representative be
confounded with the original. If we may use the word same to indicate
this peculiar relation of representation between two things yet
recognized as two, it would seem only just to allow this distinction as
much in the case of triangularity as in the case of redness or blueness.

As to the sixth kind of sameness. May we grant this to the self, if by
self we mean the formal element of consciousness? I have said a little
way back, before taking up the distinction of formal and material,
that, if we make the word self cover all the immediately known, there
is nothing to prevent one's saying that two men see a part of the
same self, for material objects (immediately known) would have to be
regarded as such parts. And here it is evident that if we make self to
cover the whole of the formal element in a consciousness, it of course
includes the formal element in what we may call the objective side of
consciousness--the side which is, in some sense of the words, common
and impersonal. Now, we do say that two men see the same tree, and by
tree, the man who distinguishes between form and matter means a certain
complex containing both formal and material elements. These elements
he believes he can distinguish from one another, and pay attention
predominantly now to the one, and now to the other. Does it not seem
to follow that a man may as truly be said to see the formal element as
the material, and that two men who see the same tree may with justice
be said to see the same shape or arrangement of parts? In other words,
may we not apply the sixth sense of the word same to the formal element
in consciousness if this element is a thing capable of treatment at
all? And if this formal element in a tree seen by two men is a part of
the self, why may we not say that two men see a part of the same self,
even though we make self mere form? It would sound very odd to say so,
of course, but that should not weigh with a philosopher, if consistency
require it.

Finally, if I may call an immediately perceived object the same with
its supposed "external" correlate, not confounding the two, but
merely marking by the word a peculiar instance of the representative
relation, why may I not, if I believe that "external" things stand in
"real" relations to each other truly represented by our perceptions
of things and their relations--why, in this case, may I not speak of
the relations, "external" and "internal," as the same, without on that
account forgetting that I am pointing out a relation between two things
(if I may thus speak of relations), numerically different? Are they not
as different as the "matter" of consciousness and its correlate in the
"outer" world?


SEC. 18. In the foregoing I have endeavored to make my list of the
kinds of sameness complete. I can think of nothing that has been
overlooked; but as I have been trying to force a path through a thicket
few have made any sustained effort to penetrate, it is quite possible
my map of the ground may need emendation. I shall be very glad of any
criticism which will help me to improve it. And as the many divisions
made, and the many distinctions drawn, may very possibly tend to
produce in one who has followed the discussion thus far, a state of
mind akin to that of the "true-begotten" Gobbo, when he was obligingly
directed to the Jew's house by his hopeful son, a short summary of the
results obtained may serve to facilitate apprehension and intelligent
criticism.

What has been done is this:

I began by considering the kinds of sameness of things immediately
known, leaving out of consideration for the time being the sameness of
the self or ego. This resulted in the following kinds:

I. Any mental element or complex of mental elements may be said to be
the same with itself at any instant.

II. Any mental element or complex of mental elements in existence at
one time may be called the same with a mental element or complex of
mental elements existing at another time, to indicate that the two are
similar.

III. We may say that we perceive the same object (complex of mental
elements) at two different times, when we do not mean that what is
actually experienced on the two occasions is the same in either of the
preceding senses; but only that the two experiences are terms in a
certain series, the whole of which may be regarded as represented by
any part. In this sense does one see the same tree on two succeeding
days.

IV. Any two mental elements or complexes of mental elements in
consciousness at the one time may be called the same to mark the fact
that they are alike.

V. Any mental element or complex of mental elements may be called the
same with its representative, whether this representative resemble it
or not.

VI. When a man has learned from experience of his own body (as a thing
immediately known) that a consciousness of his body in a certain
peculiar relation to a given object (complex of mental elements) is a
presupposition to a consciousness of the object, and wishes to mark
the fact that he is perceiving or imagining two human bodies in this
relation to a single object, and connecting in thought with each of
them a picture of the object, he may say that he is perceiving or
imagining two men seeing the same object. This sense of the word same
obviously expresses quite a complex thought.

VII. In addition to these kinds of sameness found within the sphere of
the immediately known, we obtain one kind by stepping beyond it, which,
since we step beyond it, so to speak, with only one foot, may be here
mentioned as belonging at least partially to the world of immediate
objects. When we have come to believe that things in consciousness
have their correlates in a world outside of consciousness, we may
speak of the things in consciousness as the same with their "external"
correlates; or, at any rate, we may talk of them as if they were the
same in some sense of the word which will allow us to include the two
(or three) distinct things under one name, and treat them as one. This
is constantly done. The importance of remembering that we have really
more than one thing to consider, it would seem scarcely necessary to
emphasize. How far this is really a new kind of sameness I discussed at
some length.

After having marked these seven kinds of sameness as having to do with
the immediately known, I proceeded to consider the kinds of sameness
which may obtain in a world or worlds beyond consciousness. It was
pointed out that one may look upon the "external" in three ways. One
may believe in "external" things as merely bundles of "real" qualities,
and may stop there: or one may believe in such bundles of "real"
qualities, and in addition hold to "substance" or "substratum" as an
obscure something implied by these "real" qualities: or, lastly, one
may hold that the only correlate of the thing in consciousness is
"noumenon," a thing not distinguishable from the "substance" above
mentioned.

It was then shown that a realm of "external" things, consisting of
bundles of "real" qualities in a world beyond consciousness, would,
since it is to the man thinking it merely a duplicate of the immediate
world, admit of the existence of all the kinds of sameness above
enumerated, and would not furnish any one kind which might increase the
list. And with respect to the "external" as noumenon, it was stated
that if the noumenal be represented to the mind at all, at least the
first kind of sameness must be attributed to it, and that other kinds
will be, in proportion to the degree of clearness allowed this vague
and inconsistent entity. No new kind of sameness need, however, be
looked for in this field. If one hold to the "external" in both kinds,
he must, of course, search three distinct realms of being before he
can be sure that he has not overlooked any legitimate sense of the
word same. As a result of the foregoing analysis we may maintain
that, whatever be his belief as to ideas, things, and noumena, his
search will not result in more than the seven kinds of sameness I have
given. In the assumed new fields we find mere repetition. The pure
Idealist would reduce the list to six by dropping off the seventh kind
altogether.

Next, as to the sameness of the Self or Ego. It was pointed out that
one may take the word self to mean: (1) the self in consciousness,
or as phenomenon; (2) the self as bundle of "real" qualities out of
consciousness; (3) the self as "substance" or "noumenon;" (4) two of
these, or all of these, taken together.

It was said that as the fourth sense is sufficiently discussed in
examining the first three, it would not be separately considered. The
three remaining senses were then taken up in reverse order. The third
and the Second were found to furnish no new kind of sameness, and to
be on a par with the corresponding senses of the word "not-self,"
except as touching the sixth kind of sameness. As respects this, it
was admitted that no one would speak of two men as perceiving the same
self, whether as bundle of "real" qualities or as noumenon. It was
remarked, however, that this is due not to a difference in the self
and not-self in themselves considered, but to a difference in their
relation to other things in a consciousness.

The self in consciousness, or as immediately known, was then discussed.
It was stated that we may safely assume this to be either a part or
the whole of consciousness, or the one or the other of these in some
peculiar aspect or relation. Self, viewed as a part of consciousness,
was found to furnish no new kind of sameness, and was found to admit of
all the kinds discovered except the sixth; this one being inadmissible
from the fact that when we make the self a part of consciousness we
always make it the subjective part and not the objective. Self, viewed
as the whole of consciousness, was likewise found to furnish no new
kind of sameness, and it was found to admit of all the seven kinds
discovered--even of the sixth, though in a modified way, since this
kind can belong only to a part of the self, the objective part, which
is in some sense common and impersonal. It may, to be sure, be objected
that it would be contrary to common usage to speak of two men as seeing
the same self in any sense of that word; but in making the self the
whole of consciousness one has already abandoned the common standpoint,
and one may as well be consistent in carrying out the consequences.
Assuming the self to be not a part or the whole of consciousness
simply, but regarded in some peculiar aspect or relation, was not found
to be significant as concerns kinds of sameness.

It still remained to consider a possible position; that of the man
who distinguishes between the formal and the material element in
consciousness, and identifies self or mind with the former. The formal
element of consciousness is not a part of consciousness as the word
part is commonly used, nor is it the whole of consciousness, in the
ordinary acceptation of the word whole. And though this view might
very well have been brought under a former head by stretching a little
the meaning of the word part, yet such is its importance that I chose
rather to omit it when discussing self as a part of consciousness
(there using the word part in a limited sense), and to take it up later
by itself.

It was insisted that if the formal element in consciousness is
enough of a thing to be distinguished from something else, and to
be discussed, it is enough of a thing to admit of distinctions and
differences much as other things do. After examination it appeared, as
a matter of fact, that there is no reason why the believer in "form"
should not attribute to it all of the seven kinds of sameness before
described--even (in the modified way described a moment ago) the sixth
kind. And it also appeared that no new kind of sameness is discoverable
in this field. With this closed the search for samenesses.

It will be observed that we have passed in review the self and the
not-self as immediately known, the self and the not-self as bundles of
"real" qualities out of consciousness, and the self and the not-self as
noumenon or substance. I know of no other field in which the search may
be prosecuted, unless such be invented gratuitously by increasing the
"layers" of being in a way no one seems inclined to increase them. And
in view of the fact that the samenesses found in any "layer" below the
first seem to be only repetitions of what we find in that one, we could
have no reason to hope that any such needless increase in strata could
add a single new kind of sameness to those described.


SEC. 19. Now that we have obtained a list of the different kinds of
sameness, we may pass our eye over it with a view to discovering what
the various kinds have in common, and what is the reason that we
express such diverse experiences by the use of the one word. Such an
examination reveals the fact that the common notion which unites them
is the idea of similarity. In some cases this notion lies more in the
foreground than in others, but in all cases it is present, and forms
the bond of union. I will run through the list and point this out,
beginning, however, with the second kind, and reserving the first for
discussion after the others.

II. A mere mention of the second kind of sameness is, in this
connection, sufficient. Two mental experiences are there avowedly
called the same to mark similarity.

III. When we speak of the same object as perceived on two occasions, we
do not, as has been noticed, mean that what is actually in the sense at
the two different times is similar. Nevertheless, we find here, too,
the notion of similarity, for the two experiences are not considered
merely in themselves, but as elements in a group or series, and as
each representing the whole series. When, therefore, we have the two
experiences, we regard ourselves as having in them two experiences
of the one series; which means, to be more explicit, that we have in
mind on the two occasions two complexes which are similar, and which,
when thought of together, are related to each other as the memory
image and its original are related. Here the likeness lies in what is
represented, not in the representatives.

IV. As in the second kind of sameness, so in the fourth, the reference
to similarity is unmistakable. We call qualities or things the same
when they are of the one kind, when they are observed to resemble each
other.

V. The relation of representative and thing represented evidently
implies the notion of similarity. It is quite true that we often
recognize as in this relation things that we do not think of as
being similar at all, and yet a little reflection will show that one
thing can stand for another only _in so far_ as it resembles it. The
resemblance may lie in the qualities of the things in themselves
considered, or it may lie in external relations of which the things
are capable, or functions which they may serve. The very notion of a
proxy is a something which, for the purpose in hand, may be regarded as
capable of assuming the functions of another. In so far as it can do
this it is like the other. Things wholly different (if things could be
wholly different) could not represent each other.

VI. When a man thinks of two other men as perceiving the same object,
he must recognize, if he reflect, that he has in mind a picture of
the object, of two human bodies in a peculiar relation to it, and two
images of the object somehow connected with these bodies. He need
not think of these images as wholly resembling his picture of the
object or each other. He does, indeed, make them more or less like his
picture of the object, but what is prominent in his mind is the thought
of them as representatives, as related to and giving information
concerning the object. I say concerning the object, but this phrase is
ambiguous. If the man under discussion believes in "real" objects in an
extra-consciousness world, he will look upon the images as representing
such a "real" object; though, of course, his guarantee for this
"real" object, and all his information concerning, it must be found
in his picture of the object, and this, or its copy, will stand for
the "real" object in any mental complex he may construct. If the man
be an Idealist, accepting only what can be found in a consciousness,
he will look upon the two images as related to his picture of the
object and representative of that. In any case he must regard them
as representatives, and in this sense the same with the thing they
represent. The notion of similarity which is at the bottom of this idea
of representative and thing represented is then implied in sameness of
the sixth kind also.

VII. And since those who distinguish between the immediate and the
mediate objects of knowledge make the former representative of the
latter, we have evidently this implied notion of similarity in the
seventh kind of sameness as well as in the sixth. The mediate object
is said to be known _through_ the immediate: that is, the qualities
and relations of the one are made to stand for and serve in place of
the qualities and relations of the other. This they can do, of course,
only in so far as the two sets of qualities and relations are similar.
It is easy enough to see that this notion of similarity is present
when we think of an idea or complex of ideas as representing a "real"
thing beyond consciousness, and giving information concerning it. When,
however, we sublimate our "real" thing into a noumenon and strip it of
the determinations which, taken together, make up our idea of a thing,
we destroy, if we are consistent and thorough-going, all notion of
similarity between the two; but in doing this we destroy our noumenon
altogether. If, for instance, we refuse to allow to our notion of a
thing "any qualitative or quantitative expression whatever," we cannot
think of the thing as having reality or existence, or any mark by which
it is to be distinguished from nothing at all. In this case the idea is
no longer representative, for it has nothing to represent. If, on the
other hand, we do not wholly destroy the noumenon, but still allow it a
diluted existence of an indefinite kind, in so far as it has this, and
can be represented in mind at all, it resembles the idea, and just so
far may the idea stand as its representative.

I have already pointed out that several of those who pin their faith to
"external" realities seem to apprehend at times but dimly, if at all,
that the relation of phenomenon and noumenon, or of idea and "real"
thing, is that of representative and thing represented, and that we
have here two things and not one. Certainly they sometimes pass from
one to the other without rhyme or reason, and apparently in complete
unconsciousness of the fact that they have made any change at all.
If, for the time being, they really take the two for one, they are
not thinking of the seventh kind of sameness, but of another kind. As
this is done through mere inadvertence and looseness of reasoning, and
cannot be justified on their own assumptions, it is not worth while to
dwell upon it farther. Where one really has in mind the seventh kind of
sameness, the elements I have mentioned will be found in it.

I. Finally, we come to the perplexing case that I postponed at the
outset. What has sameness of the first kind in common with the rest?
How can we speak of similarity when strictly one thing is in question?
Not one thing in the loose sense in which we call a material object
one thing in its successive states, nor one in the sense in which
the memory image and its original are one, but one thing as a single
element of knowledge is itself at any one instant? How can the idea of
likeness hold here? Dundreary's bird flocking all by itself would seem
to have found its philosophical prototype.

It may be said that though the thing in question is strictly one, yet
we divide it from itself in thought and then affirm it of itself. We
give expression to the logical law of identity by saying that x is
x. But here the difficulty meets us that, if we are really talking
about only the one x, we have said quite all we have to say in merely
saying x; while if, to complete our thought, we must add the second
x, we have not an identical proposition, in any strict sense of the
word, but a synthetic one. It is easy enough in words to divide a
"thing" from "itself," since the words "thing" and "itself" are two,
and may readily be distinguished. In the same way it is easy in words
to affirm a thing to be and not to be at the one time. There is no
law to prevent one's stringing sounds together as he may please. But
if one is interested not in the mere symbols, but in that which they
are supposed to represent, one must see that the expression "x is x,"
to be a significant proposition, must have a subject and a predicate,
and affirm a relation between them. Here we have, by hypothesis,
strictly one thing for subject and predicate. The proposition "x is
x" must then consist of one thing and a relation between it--which
is about as significant as the statement that a door may consist of
one side and a relation between it. Between what? One side.[29] Every
form of proposition employed to give expression to the law of identity
implies this difficulty. Whether we say "x is x," or "whatever is
is," or "everything is identical with itself," our proposition, taken
literally, is either useless (since we have said all we have to say in
mentioning the subject alone), or untrue (since we add a new element in
adding the predicate).

  [29] This abnormal door has its parallel in the now discredited
  _causa sui_. Note the following from Descartes: "De même, lorsque
  nous disons que Dieu est par soi, nous pouvons aussi à la vérité
  entendre cela négativement, comme voulant dire qu'il n'a point de
  cause; mais si nous avons auparavant recherché la cause pourquoi
  il est ou pourquoi il ne cesse point d'être, et que, considérant
  l'immense et incompréhensible puissance qui est contenue dans son
  idée, nous l'ayons reconnue si pleine et si abondante qu'en effet
  elle soit la vraie cause pourquoi il est, et pourquoi il continue
  ainsi toujours d'être, et qu'il n'y en puisse avoir d'autre que
  celle-là, nous disons que Dieu est _par soi_, non plus négativement,
  mais au contraire très positivement. Car, encore qu'il n'est pas
  besoin de dire qu'il est la cause efficiente de soi-même, de peur que
  peut-être on n'entre en dispute du mot; néanmoins, parce que nous<
  voyons que ce qui fait qu'il est par soi, ou qu'il n'a point de cause
  différente de soi-même, ne procède pas du néant, mais de la réelle et
  véritable immensité de sa puissance, il nous est tout a fait loisible
  de penser qu'il fait en quelque façon la même chose a l'égard de
  soi-même que la cause efficiente à l'égard de son effet, et partant
  qu'il est par soi positivement."--Réponses aux Premières Objections.

It is then sufficiently evident that the forms used to express the
logical law of identity do not, taken strictly, express at all the kind
of sameness with which we are now concerned, but, on the contrary,
something very different. We are considering a sameness in which there
is no duality whatever, but our expressions would seem to have no
meaning except as indicating a relation between two. They are then
significant, not as _expressing_ sameness of the first kind, but as
_suggesting_ it, and this they certainly serve to do. The reason for
this I shall try to give in a moment.

It has been said that in the other kinds of sameness we always find
the notion of similarity. When, however, we distinguish two things
as two and yet recognize them as similar, we must have what I may
call a mixed experience of likeness and unlikeness. In any two things
compared, the degrees of likeness and unlikeness may vary, and we
may fix attention upon similarities or differences. In proportion to
the attention given to dissimilar elements will the two objects be
clearly distinguished from each other and discriminated as two. If the
purpose in hand does not require a careful attention to differences,
and if what is prominent in mind is the likeness of the two objects,
the sense of duality may fall into the background, and the man pass
readily from one object to the other with little consciousness that
he has made a change. As I now look at the two ink-stands on my desk,
I clearly recognize them as two and yet as of the one kind. Here I
am as distinctly aware that they are two as I am that they are in
some respects the same. But in some of the kinds of sameness I have
described this sense of duality falls more into the shade. When I
speak of seeing the same ink-stand twice, or when I call up in memory
an ink-stand once seen, I am likely, unless I take particular pains
to reflect upon my mental operation, to have but a dim realization of
the fact that I have two distinct things to deal with. How those who
distinguish between the immediate and the mediate objects of knowledge
have a tendency to forget their distinction, and to pass unconsciously
from one to the other, I have dwelt upon sufficiently.

Suppose, now, that from two objects which we recognize as similar
and yet distinct, we abstract one by one the elements which differ.
So long as there is any difference left, we still have "identity in
diversity"--similarity in the ordinary sense of the term, which implies
a recognition of two things as two. When, however, the last difference
disappears, all sense of duality must disappear with it, for any
division or distinction within what remains is inadmissible. Things
which are distinguished are distinguished through some difference.
A sense of duality implies a discrimination between two, and where
it is impossible to discriminate duality vanishes. Similarity, as we
commonly use the word, must then disappear with the disappearance of
all dissimilarity between two objects. I say "between two objects" in
default of a better expression, for, of course, we have at this point
no longer two objects. My meaning is, however, sufficiently plain.
A sense of duality implies difference, and similarity, as commonly
understood, implies duality. The similarity will then take itself off
with the last difference.

It may be objected that _a consciousness of duality_ and _a
consciousness of similarity_ are only possible on the ground that
I mention, but that duality and similarity themselves may really
obtain when no difference between two is perceptible. But a moment's
reflection will make it plain that one who speaks thus is simply
supplying in himself the elements that he is supposing absent in the
case of another. If he uses the words "duality" and "similarity," and
they really mean anything to him, they imply all that I have said. He
cannot represent to himself two things at all without distinguishing
them from each other, and he can not distinguish them from each other
unless they differ in some way. If, then, he speak of two things as
being two and yet completely indistinguishable, he is, taken literally,
talking nonsense. He may, of course, mean the misleading phrase to be
understood as indicating something not actually expressed by the words.
He may mean to point out that, under certain circumstances, in which he
has an experience which he calls a recognition of two objects as two
and as similar, he has reason to think another mind has an experience
partly like and partly unlike his own--like in as much as it contains
what corresponds to that which is _common_ to the two objects he has
in mind; unlike in as much as it contains nothing which corresponds to
the elements which make it possible for him to recognize two objects.
It is this that is in his mind when he speaks of thinking of two
objects as really two and yet indistinguishable to this man or that.
If, however, the expression "two things may be indistinguishable" is
used to indicate this experience, it should be carefully borne in mind
that the proposition must not be taken literally, for the good reason
that the subject and predicate are not in the one consciousness. The
"two objects" are in the mind of Smith, and the "indistinguishable"
element in the mind of Jones. When we speak of two men as seeing the
same thing, I have shown that we are using the word same in a looser
sense which should never be confounded with the stricter sense.
Strictly speaking, then, the "two things" are never indistinguishable,
but that which corresponds to the two things in a consciousness from
which all recognition of duality is absent. That one man may have a
consciousness of duality while another man has not, and that these two
experiences may be related as the experiences of different minds are
related when we say they are experiencing the same thing, no one would
care to dispute. Should a man say that he can think of himself as
unable to distinguish two things which are nevertheless two, the case,
would not be materially different. The man cannot, of course, think of
_the two things_ as indistinguishable, but he may think of two things
and connect with this thought the thought of himself as having an
experience in which there is no consciousness of duality.

But, it may be insisted, we are still only talking about consciousness;
let us come to "real" things. Suppose no one able to distinguish
between them, abstract all consciousness of difference, would not
two "real" things remain two, however we might confound them? Can a
thing in one place be a thing in another place, however closely it may
resemble it, or however ignorant we may be?

To this I answer that when one speaks of _two_ "real" things the words
only mean something to him because he has present in mind what I have
said must be present if one is to have a consciousness of duality. A
"thing in one place" and a "thing in another place" are to him two
simply because he thinks them as differing--in place. When one has come
to the conclusion that he must duplicate his experience, distinguish
between the world of immediate and the world of mediate objects, and
place the latter in a region "outside," there is nothing to prevent him
from thinking of two "real" things as two, although all distinctions
within the field of immediate objects have been obliterated. Still,
in thinking these "real" things as two, he does just what he does in
thinking two immediate objects as two--he recognizes difference. The
twoness depends upon difference as much in the one case as in the
other, and to speak of two objects in a "real" world as two and yet
having no differing element would be to use words without meaning. In
talking about a "real" world, if we are really to talk and not merely
to utter a series of sounds, our words must be significant. To say
"this or that may be in a 'real' world, though we may not be able to
conceive it," would, if "this" or "that" implies a contradiction, be
to say nothing. The fact is that this "external" world, as we think
it, implies the notions of before and after, in this place and that,
all the distinctions and differences which make it to us a world of
distinct objects. Of course it follows that things in the "external"
world are thought as distinct from each other, but this does not affect
my statement that distinction is impossible without difference.

We may, then, have a series of experiences, beginning with one in
which two objects are recognized as similar and yet are very clearly
distinguished as two objects, continued in others in which the sense
of duality falls more and more into the background, and ending in
one in which there is no consciousness of duality at all. The last
of these experiences is not wholly different from the others. There
is in it no experience of similarity in so far as this word is used
to express identity in difference, or a relation between two. There
can be no such relation unless there are two, and here there are not
two. But it should be marked that this experience differs from the
others, not in the element which has led us to declare two objects
similar--the element which they have in common--but in that which has
led us to declare them two and different. It is by adding to this last
experience, so to speak, that we get the others. They contain it and
more. Usage will not allow us to apply the term similarity in speaking
of an experience in which two things are not distinguished, and this is
proper enough; but it should never be forgotten that this experience is
at the bottom of all our experiences of similarity--is, so to speak,
their common core. When, therefore, I said some pages back that all
the kinds of sameness under discussion contain the idea of similarity,
I was using the word in a certain broad sense to indicate that which
is the ground of all our experiences of similarity, and is also found
in the first kind of sameness on the list. I preferred to use there
the word similarity, because it was easy to show that this notion is
really contained in six of the seven uses of the word same, and it was
convenient afterward to show the connection between the first kind of
sameness and the notion of similarity.

And now it is not difficult to guess why we employ such expressions as
we do to indicate strict identity. If I habitually use the proposition
"x is y" to indicate a relation between two things having similar
elements and yet regarded as distinct, and look upon the proposition
as justified by the similar elements, observing that, these remaining
unchanged, the dissimilar elements may be very variable without
affecting the truth of the proposition, what more natural than that I
should go on using the propositional form when the dissimilar elements
have diminished to zero--when the proposition has become "x is x"? To
be sure, no one can take such a proposition literally, any more than
one can soberly believe that one divided by zero results in infinity.
Such expressions have their use and value, but they must be properly
understood. If one uses the expression "x is x" to emphasize the fact
that one is not to pass from x to any y or z--that one is to rule out
all distinction or sense of difference, the use cannot be harmful.
And the use of the propositional form has this great convenience: it
puts a period, so to speak, to one's thinking, and prevents one from
casting about for a completion of the thought. If one merely say to me
"x," I shall probably take it as a subject and busy myself to find a
predicate. If he say "x is x," he says really no more than x, but he
makes me fix my thoughts upon x alone.


SEC. 20. In the foregoing search for the element that the kinds of
sameness have in common, I have had in mind chiefly the samenesses of
things immediately known. It is not necessary to repeat the search in
the field of the "external." We have but the seven kinds of sameness,
and whatever may be the things that are the same in these several ways,
the elements I have indicated must be present if our words are to be
significant. But one thing remains for me to do in this part of my
monograph, and that will not detain me long. I must distinguish between
sameness and identity, or rather point out to what kinds of sameness
this latter word is commonly applied.

The word is often used quite loosely, but where the attempt is made
to distinguish between identity and sameness in a looser sense, and
to use terms with some precision, the former word serves to indicate
sameness in which there is no consciousness of duality, or in which
the consciousness of duality has fallen into the background and may
easily be overlooked. Sameness of the first kind, for example, is
spoken of as identity. This is the only kind of sameness in which there
is no element of duality at all. The use of the word identity is not,
however, restricted to this. Locke's inquiry concerning the identity of
masses of inorganic matter, of vegetables, of animals, and of persons,
has to do with sameness of the third kind on the list. In this kind
of sameness there is no clear consciousness that one is dealing with
more than one thing, and Locke's discussion is conducted throughout as
though one were not.

It may be objected that in certain other kinds there is often no clear
consciousness of duality, and yet one does not think of using the
term identity. This is quite true. The two kinds mentioned have been
thought worthy of special discussion by logician and philosopher, and
have been given a technical name. The others have not. Still, although
the word is not commonly used in such cases, it would, I fancy, seem
natural to use it in a direct ratio to the degree in which the sense
of duality falls into the background. Dr. Johnson would probably have
been willing to say that the stone he saw himself kick was identical
with the one the existence of which he wanted to prove. Bishop Berkeley
could have felt only disgust at such a use of the term. Scarcely
anyone, I suppose, would regard himself as speaking strictly if he
called the fourth kind of sameness identity. The co-existence of the
two things compared would prevent their being confounded. Without,
then, attempting to assign any very exact limits to the application of
a somewhat loosely used word, I may repeat my former statement that men
use the word identity to mark certain kinds of sameness in which there
is little or no consciousness of duality, and they are not inclined to
use it to mark samenesses in which things are recognized as similar but
clearly distinct.

With this I end the first part of my discussion, and I confess I draw
a long breath in doing so. When I sat down to write it was with the
impression that I could say all that was necessary about the kinds of
sameness in a much smaller number of pages; but finding it impossible
to avoid misunderstandings without being more explicit and detailed,
I have had to change my plan. Now, that I am through, I must confess
to myself that most persons will find this hair-splitting anything but
entertaining--which would be held by the inconsiderate to furnish a
presumption against the truth it contains, if ancient adages go for
anything. It should be remembered, however, that the old saw which puts
truth in a well does not indicate that the well may not be a dry one.
With this consolatory reflection I turn to the second part of my task.




