IV

THE SORDID DIVORCE


I mentioned in passing that marriage was an institution that should
not be ended, but should be mended. In the first place, let us inquire
whether the marriage ceremony is a sacrament, whether parenthood is
a sacrament, and why marriage should be binding. The Catholic Church
refuses divorce altogether on the ground that the blessing of the
Church makes the contract binding till death. Parents with children are
generally prepared to endure each other for the sake of their family.
While women are economically dependent it would be pure folly for
them to advocate marriage for a short term. Very few women succeed in
retaining their attraction for men for any considerable length of time.
Ten years of attractiveness is not to be thought of in the majority of
cases. While a man holds the purse-strings he can always find someone
to marry. A woman can offer nothing but her power of enchantment, and
most of them have to rely on the universal enchantment of innocence
which can only be offered once.

But conditions are very variable even now. Women hold the
purse-strings when they are heiresses. They are as free as men when
they are childless. Ninon de l’Enclos was irresistible until she was
eighty, apparently because she was amusing as well as fascinating.
Under such circumstances as these it is sometimes wise to seek divorce.
In England this cannot be done without outraging every feeling of
dignity and delicacy.

Unless one of the married pair is faithless, impotent, cruel, or rich
enough to leave the neighbourhood, the other cannot get a divorce. This
involves discussing the secrets of the alcove with solicitors, and a
final exposure of your domestic concerns in the law courts, for the
press and the public to take or leave as they are more or less painful
to you and amusing to them.

A very frequent method of obtaining a divorce now is for a wife, who
would not touch her husband with a besom if she could help it, to sue
publicly for restitution of conjugal rights. To a woman of any delicacy
such a demand would be degrading, even if it were made in private.
To be obliged to make it publicly as a matter of form is, to say the
least, unpleasant to such a woman. The next proceeding is taken when a
certain time has elapsed and the husband has not noticed the wife who
has to pretend to be pining for his forced caresses.

I confess it is hard to realize the state of a woman who actually can
desire the society of a man who is weary of her. I have not imagination
for that, I am afraid. The law was made by men, and men are said to
know women better than they know each other; also, we have all heard
of the charms of a captured or unwilling bride, so perhaps it is an
instance in which men have done for women what they would wish to have
done for themselves.

Whatever the reason is, the law is there, and when the husband has been
faithless and refused his wife’s embraces, he has done sufficient to
justify the court in calling him guilty of desertion and adultery, and
a decree _nisi_ is pronounced. Then, if no evidence of collusion is
forthcoming, and the court can make believe that one of the parties at
least does _not_ want to be divorced, the decree is made absolute in
six months. Can anyone realize that the present divorce law is in such
a hopelessly stupid state? There seems no possibility of using common
sense in a law court. To get a divorce you must _not_ agree together
that it is a desirable step. To get a divorce the innocent person must
speak in public of subjects no innocent person would care to mention
in private. To get a divorce from a woman you respect at all, you must
refuse to live with her, and must openly commit adultery, at the same
time making no arrangement with her as to how she is to get rid of
you. The old complaint of the inequality of the divorce laws for the
sexes is perhaps of importance, but to me it seems a small thing in
comparison to the general sordidness of the whole proceeding.

Surely the one cause of causes for a divorce is that both the parties
want it. Some simple form of procedure, such as separation on the first
application, to be followed by divorce in six months if the parties had
not made up their differences in the meantime, should be devised.

The difficulties would arise in cases in which the parties were not
agreed, and I am afraid in those instances the question of money would
nearly always be discovered to be the root of the trouble. Ladies would
be found to be unaccountably attached to their husband’s cheque-books;
and gentlemen unable to separate themselves from a share in their
wives’ dividends. But when the question of fortune or wealth enters
into the marriage bargain, why not let it be fought out on that ground?

Divorce is always brought about because of the weariness and boredom
one human being causes another. Cruelty, adultery, temporary desertion,
every kind of outrage can be borne if excitement and interest
counterbalance suffering. But the devotion of the whipped dog would
soon be exhausted if the dog could find something in the world which
interested him more than his master. Curiosity once fully satisfied,
tenderness balances on the edge of the precipice of boredom, and may
topple over at any moment.

Of course the insult of being considered a bore would be harder to
bear in most instances than the accusation of wickedness, so on the
whole it would seem advisable to keep to the good old formula of
“incompatibility of temper,” and fight out the money questions on their
own merits.

Now the merits of the money question in marriage have never been
properly arranged. In France the wife has her own _dot_, as a matter
of course; but the French have so carefully adjusted their population
to their pockets that we can only bow in silent admiration of their
unparalleled foresight.

In England a girl very often marries without any fortune of her own,
on the understanding either that she is beautiful and that the husband
is prepared to endow her with all his worldly goods, or that she is so
useful that she will really save him a good deal of money. If she is
very beautiful, her relations can generally get a settlement made on
her; if she is only useful, she is lucky if she can induce her husband
to insure his life in her favour. The merely useful wife has very
little hold on ready money. One week she may get a good sum of money,
another week nothing, for her household expenses. If she is clever and
managing, she will probably gain her husband’s confidence, and if he is
honest and has a regular income they may be very comfortable together;
but under other conditions the affairs of the household go from bad to
worse, and the wife is only a very inefficient servant, who may get her
keep, but who will certainly not get her wages.

I can only suggest that the position of wife and mother ought to
legally entitle a woman to a fixed proportion of her husband’s income,
and the position of housekeeper to a further proportion. If, as is
often the case in upper and middle-class modern marriage, the husband
and wife do not live in the connubial state, the legal allowance as
wife and mother would not be made, but the allowance as hostess and
housekeeper could be enforced as long as they remained under the same
roof. In the case of the poorer classes, where the wife does the whole
work of keeping up the home and increasing the family, the proportion
should be very much greater, so great, indeed, as to make both partners
think twice before recklessly bringing children into the world. Among
this class I think that the birth of a child might legalise the union
of the parents. This appears to be an old custom in many parts of the
world.

The working man is the greatest enemy of women’s equal value, I am
afraid. Among the mining population, where his wages are high enough
to make him independent, the woman he has married holds a very
low position--very much what middle-class women held early in the
nineteenth century. The working man of prudence and forethought is of
course limiting his family with as much care as the rest of the world.
But the others, who drive away drab intelligence by a Saturday orgy,
forget prudence, and the result is that their wives are always in the
pangs of childbirth or miscarriage. The usual self-sacrifice of women
comes dangerously near suicide in this matter. To save her husband from
a few moments of self-control she goes through months of drugging,
loses her beauty, undermines her health in the endeavour to exercise
prudence and to avoid bringing children into the world for whom she has
no hope of making provision.

A romance of the mining world, in September, 1909, is instructive
reading. One Friday night, at 10 o’clock, the husband came home with
two former lodgers, two old friends, and one stranger. They brought
plenty of beer with them. The wife was upstairs in bed, but she called
over the banisters to them to make themselves at home, and returned
to her sleep. Later on, when the men were nearly all dead drunk, one
of the former lodgers heard screams upstairs. He found the stranger
undressed and making an assault on the wife of his host. The lodger
flung him downstairs, and to his horror found that he had killed him.
He was terrified, and he and the woman left the house, calling to
the others to fetch a doctor at once. Whatever the woman and he said
to each other it was tragic, for she hurried to a pond and drowned
herself, while he went to his sister’s house and waited arrest. The
husband was severely reprimanded for his “negligence.” A woman counts
for very little in the mining districts, she takes the German position
of a kind of upper servant, in whose emotions, if she has any, none
take any interest. In the manufacturing districts the working man’s
wife is generally a breadwinner herself, and she only needs a little
enterprise to make her position much more favourable than it is at
present.

Nearly all the police court cases turn on the question of the wife’s
housekeeping allowance. It is an endless source of dispute, and if it
could be regulated, irrespective of caprice, most of the miseries of
married poverty would cease. The poor are simple, and in this truth
about them we see the truth about ourselves. We all want a regular
income, and very few of us gain from being dependent on the affection
of our family. Divorce, then, is sordid with regard to sentiment and
with regard to money, and in these ways is greatly in need of change.




