V

THE GREEN HOUSES OF JAPAN


This chapter deals with the subject of prostitution from the point of
view of public health, so that the nervous reader had better skip it.

Edmond de Goncourt has written some charming chapters in his book about
Outamaro, the Japanese artist, on the courtesans who live within the
walls of Yoshiwara. He describes the quarter as containing fifty green
houses within the walls and a hundred without the walls. They were
established by the Emperor of Japan in the eighth century for the use
of foreign princes, ambassadors, and wealthy merchants. The present
walls were built in the seventeenth century. The girls, from all parts,
are brought up like princesses, and taught writing, the arts, music,
and the archaic language spoken by the court in the seventh and eighth
centuries, which is now the language of the poets. The formalities of
the suitors are three visits of ceremony, each with its ritual of good
manners. A green house contains twenty first-class beauties and sixty
second-class beauties. They sing, play, and write verses. These are a
few translations which give some idea of their feelings:--


     “It is only when both of us are looking at it that the moon is
     beautiful; when I am alone it makes me feel too sad.”

     “This evening who will share the sweetness of life, this floating
     body in the passing world?”

     “Oh, that the moonlight might shine brightly in the waters of this
     life [the courtesan’s], but the autumn moon on the other side of
     the clouds makes me long for it” [wifehood].

     “Although I am nothing here, the moon lights up my heart with a
     ray of consolation.”

     “How often do I part from one whose shadow I shall never see again
     under the moon of dawn!”


These little moon-women are not the only members of the sisterhood in
Tokio. There are the geishas who dance and sing, and there are the old
and abandoned; but the horrible sordidness of the red blinds and the
draggled torn lace curtains one sees in the streets Charles Booth has
coloured red in his maps of London, is absent.

This question is not a mere matter of sentiment, it is one in urgent
need of immediate attention. The pitiless contempt of married women for
prostitution is bringing a terrible punishment, which is ruining the
physique of nearly every civilized race. It is now certain that the
diseases called contagious can be cured with the greatest certainty
if they are taken in hand in the earliest stages, but if they are
neglected they bring in their train every scourge that the flesh is
capable of enduring. It cannot be repeated too often that if women
do not wish to contract diseases themselves in the intercourse of
ordinary life, they must bring themselves to protect those who in the
intercourse of passional life are ignorantly or malignantly spreading
the diseases. There might be a trade union for women on the streets.
In the cause of public health, which is, in this matter, the cause of
future generations, family cannot separate itself from family, innocent
from guilty, moral from immoral. We can no longer say: Let those who
practise promiscuity suffer for their incontinence, let them encounter
the dangers they choose to face, “let their sin find them out.” We know
now that from this particular scourge of contagious disease the pure
suffer far more severely than the impure; and the races who have never
known the disease are the first to die when, by accident, they finally
come in contact with it.

So the clean, healthy youth from some remote country place is in
greater danger than the sophisticated townsman. And mothers do not
realize the dangers they and their young children run every day when,
in their ignorance of danger, they entrust their households to the
care of women servants who may be carrying contagion without even
knowing it.

The contempt that is shown towards prostitutes makes it impossible
for them to insist upon proper sanitation in the quarters where they
congregate. They are hunted from street to street, and, as they get
poorer and poorer, their condition becomes more and more of a danger to
the rest of the town.

I cannot make any suggestions as to the methods that should be used to
make the danger less terribly imminent than it is at present, but I do
suggest that the women who are uppermost should face the fact that they
themselves are in danger because the lower prostitutes have no civil
rights, no trade union, no means of redressing the wrongs they suffer
from.

M. Brieux has written a play called _Les Avariés_, dealing with this
important subject in all its aspects. One incident is that of a young
girl on the streets who is infected by a man. She is furious and in
despair, but before she goes into hospital she, in her turn, revenges
herself on as many men as she can, for the wrong done to her by one.

Can we wonder that a woman who is treated as street walkers are treated
should feel this wild anti-social rage against the society that has
first made use of her and then treated her as an outcast?

It is becoming more and more difficult to say anything definite about
the moral standards of women. Thirty years ago the chorus-girl drank
champagne and “went to the bad,” now she drinks milk and marries a
peer. Girls with beauty are finding out that prudence pays exceedingly
well. On the other hand, we have girls with brains deliberately
resolving that they will not marry. They refuse to run the risk of
living with a man whose love has become a mere habit. They boldly say
that they do not care enough for love to perform its rites, unless they
are animated with the ardour of love. Passion served up with cold sauce
as in the Shaw-Barker school of sex revolts them. Enthusiastic love is
the only excuse in their eyes for going through the rather ungraceful
gestures of love.

Bloch has asked the question if we can ever do away with the menace
to public health which promiscuity entails? He seems to think from
the evidence of history and psychiatry that men certainly, and women
probably, are not naturally unitarian in their affections; therefore
the sooner we seriously wrestle with the realities and leave off hoping
for the “something to change nature,” the better. Above all, it is most
important for women to realize at once that the most innocent contact
with the unmentioned diseases--the contact, say, of a cut finger or a
chapped lip--is enough to endanger the health, unless it is attended to
at once.

As for the aspect of the prostitution question entailed in taking
money, the sale of virginity and so forth, it comes under the general
consideration whether it is right for any woman to become the property
of a man in exchange for money. A woman who loves does naturally become
the property of the man she loves for the time being. The wiser she
is, the less she will let him know it. The money bargain I cannot
help regarding as a device invented by unattractive men whom no woman
would voluntarily look at. Again, as to women whose love affairs are
numerous, I do not think they would care to practise promiscuity unless
they were intoxicated. On the other hand, I think most women are
capable of several love affairs. I said before that their love ebbed
and flowed with the sweep of a tide, while men’s love glittered and
dulled like the shaken silver of the waves; still, there are more tides
than one in many women’s experience. We cannot read the autobiographies
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries without observing that.

That love becomes very stale in time is a regrettable fact. Many women
distract their thoughts with work or amusements. But the greatest
amusement of all is flirtation. It is an amusement peculiarly fitted
to the English. In the Latin countries flirtation is admittedly not
only an amusement, but a vital part of women’s lives. It cannot be
denied that, after a time, a childless wife, or a wife who is not
absorbed in her children, begins to feel like a withered rose tree,
and a flirtation comes to her like springtime after winter. I do not
think it is often her sensual nature, but her emotional nature, that
makes a woman unfaithful to a husband of whom she has really been
passionately fond. Unfortunately there is a charm about the first
steps of a love affair, in the half-admissions and the uncertainties,
which it is almost impossible to feel after a year of married life.
The truth is that to feel a charm we must be in a state of emotional
exultation which is above the average exultations of daily life. The
great question for the race is what this feeling of charm means, and
whether it is of value to the race, and to be encouraged? Or even then
whether the destruction of our present fixed social arrangements is
too great a sacrifice to make for the vital improvement of mankind? In
the meantime, until this question of changing charm versus habitual
love can be settled, and the value of emotion as a factor in race
improvement be proved by careful inquiry into the experiences of the
parents of conspicuous children, I reiterate what I have said. Marrying
women owe it to themselves and to their children to do all they can to
make the conditions of prostitutes sanitary. Above all, they should
remember the green houses of Japan, and recognize that if women are
degraded it is generally because they have been treated with contempt,
and not because they are essentially any more contemptible than the
rest of us.




