VIII

THE IMAGINATIVE WOMAN


Now women can look at love from a great many points of view. If it were
not so, Byron would hardly have been justified when he said:


     “Love is from men’s lives a thing apart,
     ’Tis woman’s whole existence.”


Women can look upon love as a physical act which enables them to
become mothers. They can look upon it as a sanctification or a means
of enjoyment. They can look upon it as a subject of scientific
curiosity, in which mood they logically compare facts and come
to sage conclusions. They can consider their own temperaments
and peculiarities, and take into account their personal bias and
characters, philosophically. Or they can use their imaginations
to alter all the conditions which life has imposed upon them, to
transcend all the limitations of incarnation, and, having passed beyond
philosophy, science, emotion, and experience, bathe in the love between
the fixed stars and comets rushing from the spaces beyond. They can
take dim legends and embroider them with rich details. In a word, the
imaginative woman from her childhood has known dreams of such rare
beauty that nothing life shows her is good enough. She passes from
disappointment to disappointment. She never finds in one place or one
person the wonder that description had made her see in her mind’s eye.

Thousands of less imaginative women long for the impossible. They
are fed on romantic stories and live in the more or less commonplace
imagination of the novelists or playwrights they patronize. Thousands
of tired men have this same love of vicarious sensation--anything
that lifts them out of the drab of their surroundings into a merry or
sentimental atmosphere is a relief.

Life seems hopeless to the middle-aged. Most of them once thought they
could put it right in a week if they had a free hand. They try, they
fail, they marry and spend the evening of their lives trying to destroy
the illusions of their children as quickly as possible, so that they
also may “settle down” to hard facts. To excuse himself a thinker will
say, “I know the dangers of cultivating the imagination; I know that
unless it is nipped in the bud this wild flower of the mind will twine
its tendrils round me, cover me with its shadows, intoxicate me with
its fragrance, and destroy reason and physical health.” In answer,
I admit there are dangers, but on the other hand if the possibly
evil weed is cultivated by wise gardeners, it may show itself at last
as the most splendid flower of the soul. The cultivator of flowers
that sterilizes the bud and diverts the life-force into creations of
elaborate beauty has found the physical side of the religious mystery
called the Coronation of the Virgin. The imaginative power that has
reached this point transmutes human nature, whether philosophic,
scientific, sensual, or physical, and it is then that the soul may
be said to have attained the regenerate state which makes for the
unnatural beauty we call perfection of culture.

The imaginative woman may reach the degree of joyous saintly beauty,
or she may stop short at the next stage in which she is enough of a
philosopher to recognize the great variety of temperaments to be met
with among her fellow-creatures, and to greet them all alike with
sympathy and interest. She may not reach the philosophic or really
sympathetic stage, she may remain in a third stage, where her mind
can coldly classify her fellow-creatures with critical discretion,
and laugh at them all cynically. Or she may not be able to perceive
clearly, but may be carried away perpetually by her own feelings and
sensations, in the fourth degree of unawakened ignorance. Lastly, she
may abandon the four regions of beautiful image making, sympathy,
perception, and sensation, and deliberately devote herself with
common-sense prudence to the patient task of getting her daily bread
and reproducing her species until she dies of it. On the other hand,
she may go mad, she may become silly, she may drown her disgust with
life in alcohol or drugs, or she may irritate her feeble dream-power
with novelettes. These states of degenerate imaginations are the worst
curses of the woman’s sphere as it is at present understood. Good hard
work, rewarded by a decent income, varied by motherhood and love, is
the best cure for these vapourings.

The men who have a good deal of womanhood in their natures suffer and
enjoy through their imaginations in the same way, and it is interesting
to observe that a really virile man has no trace of imaginative power
in his composition. He cares for nothing but tangible reality. When men
of imagination talk to him he has not the smallest conception of what
they mean. I think it was Goethe who said that he felt the universe in
his arms when he embraced a woman. What I am obliged to call a virile
man feels nothing of the kind, he is merely amusing himself like Don
Juan, or any cat or dog. However, Don Juan is a rarity.

It is very difficult to classify temperaments without alluding to
Weiningen’s _Sex and Character_. That book has been followed by other
classics on the subject by Forel and Bloch, but I only want to remind
my readers that in Weiningen’s book they will find, set out at length,
the ingenious theory that virile men and feminine women are the rarest
creatures on earth, and that the great majority of us are made up of
various proportions of the two sexes. He further suggests that happy
unions are those in which the proportions of sex in the two lovers
together make up one virile man and one feminine woman. For instance, a
man who was one-eighth feminine should marry a woman who was one-eighth
masculine.

I am told that Mr. Austen Chamberlain repeatedly made the very careless
statement that “men are men, and women are women,” in a speech
delivered in 1909. He evidently has not acquainted himself with the
elementary science of sex. Is it not time that the books alluded to
above should be made generally accessible? Then our younger statesmen,
at least, might come to the platform with some less absurd refrain than
that obsolete inaccuracy. Let me assure Mr. Chamberlain that German
science and research have proved that the contrary statement would be
rather more exact.




