V

THE GREEN HOUSES OF JAPAN

 Edmond de Goncourt’s account of courtesans in Tokio--Urgent
 danger of delay in reform--Fear of the
 spread of contagious disease--A trades union for
 prostitutes--The good of Public Health in this
 matter the good of future generations--Clean bill
 of health gives special susceptibility--_Les
 Avariés_--Anti-social rage--The various moral standards
 of women--Dangers of promiscuity not so great
 as the dangers of a cut finger or chapped lip--The
 sale of virginity--Intoxication leads to
 promiscuity, but it is not natural to the average
 woman--The ardour of a fresh lover her greatest
 temptation--Is charm of value as a racial factor?
 The attitude of marrying women                               53


VI

BEAUTY AND MOTHERHOOD

 The terror of motherhood--Women will specialize--Lovers
 of men and lovers of children--A woman
 has an instinct for the right father for her child;
 but often chooses a bad lifelong companion for
 herself--Useless old ethical codes--Practical suggestion
 for race betterment--Sterilization of the
 unfit--Education in the laws of sexual health--Motherly
 women with no chance of children--Unmotherly
 women attractive to men and very
 good helpmates--Surgical aid for the tuberculosis
 child-producer--Prejudices--Intellectual education           63


VII

THE NEW PSYCHOLOGY

 Life Consciousness--The Man, the Insect, the Tree
 are representatives of Intellect, Instinct, and
 Torpid Consciousness--Henri Bergson and William
 James--The interplay of the three kinds of
 consciousness--Motherhood and the vegetative
 consciousness--Choosing the mate and the instinctive
 consciousness--The Matriarchal civilization--The
 surprises instinct prepares for intellect in dreams
 and inventions                                               70


VIII

THE IMAGINATIVE WOMAN

 Physical love, reproduction--Emotional love, a
 satisfaction or enjoyment--Scientific curiosity
 about love--Philosophic and sympathetic understanding
 of all sorts of love--Imaginative love
 makes the consciousness elemental--The glory
 and danger of imagination--Vicarious imagination
 in reading--The middle-aged suppress imagination
 in the young--Saintly beauty--Philosophy,
 Criticism, Sensuousness, and commonplace life--Madness,
 Folly, Drink, Drugging--The imaginative
 man is womanly in these respects--Weiningen’s
 _Sex and Character_--Forel, Bloch--Mr.
 Austen Chamberlain                                           78


IX

EXPERIMENTS

 Solitude and family--The home--The gay societies
 of the past--Solemn experiments in love--Civilization
 a protection from, or concealment of, the
 animal necessities--Eating in public--Privacy--When
 truth is goodness--Useful conventions--Saint
 Teresa and her men friends--Lead the way
 if you want to make an experiment; if you want
 to follow anyone, it is a sign you should follow the
 herd                                                         84


X

THE SAVAGE, THE BARBARIAN, THE CIVILIZED

 The Spaniard, the Russian, the Parisian--Intellect,
 art, morals, religion, and women--Conspicuousness--The
 fight against the patriarchal goat--The
 passing love--The necessity of many friends--The
 real play of the life to come                                91




PREFACE


There is a great difficulty in writing of the women of the first ten
years of the twentieth century. This is to be the Woman’s Century. In
it she is to awake from her long sleep and come into her kingdom; but
when I look about me I find myself surrounded by the most terribly
contradictory facts. We know there is to be a revaluation of all
values--we know that old rubbish is to be burnt up, that the social
world is to be melted down and remoulded “nearer to the heart’s
desire”; but at the same time we have to recognize that in spite of the
enthusiasm of the alchemists and the transmuters of base metal into
gold, the main body of society is as yet hardly aware of the fire that
is to burn it.

In writing of this change I have to explain to one set of women, who
will think me outrageously advanced, my opinions of another set of
women, who will think me absurdly conventional.

I think I had better own up at once that as an artist I am prejudiced
against the exhibition of the necessities of nature. I am like Mr.
Galsworthy’s little toy terrier, who disliked the strong odours of real
life. Yet at the same time I have a passion for the discussion of life;
the salt of wit makes me enjoy the strongest flavours. So I present
myself and my limitations to my readers, hoping that my fervid faith in
the delight of the communion of thoughts, emotions, and sympathies will
make up for my lack of conviction in some other directions.

Before we proceed any further I think I ought to point out that the
degradation of women in the past originated in the region of the
country round Mount Ararat. The lowering of their status occurred
when the white races adopted the Assyrian Semite’s Scriptures. The
Christian religion brought us that curse cowering behind its gospel of
glad tidings; and it is most remarkable to trace the way in which the
Jews’ religion crept into Europe under the cloak of Christianity. In
heaven, the Gospel says, there is love, but neither marriage or giving
in marriage. Are we to wait for heaven or the millennium before the
present system of marrying and selling in marriage shall be abolished?
Everyone who has read a modern encyclopædia is familiar with the
fact that the first chapters of Genesis are made up of two different
narratives. One, called the Priestly narrative, from the beginning to
the first part of the fourth verse of the second chapter of Genesis,
and continued in the first five verses of the fifth chapter. There is
nothing derogatory to women in this narrative. The unpleasant details
about Adam and Eve are in the Prophetic narrative, which is given
from the second part of the fourth verse of the second chapter to the
twenty-sixth verse of the fourth chapter. The Jews have taken advantage
of the confusion of these two contradictory stories to fix the blame
of all social evils on Eve, just as the Hesiod, influenced by Eastern
legend, fixed it on Pandora. These myths come from the same region, a
region in which women were kept entirely for the amusement and service
of men, and were humbled by every kind of insult that the Semite mind
could invent. Women have a very long score to settle with the Jews and
the Mahommedans. Even Hindoo women were comparatively respected and
free until the Mahommedans brought their ideas into Hindostan. And I
am told that in nearly every city of ill-fame in the world the profits
arising from the procuring of girls are collected by the Chosen Nation.
The Semites founded their opinion of women on fabulous legends and
false science. They assert that man gives the spirit and woman the
matter to the child. Embryology has now taught us that the parents
make exactly equal contributions of chromatin, or the active element,
to the original cell from which a child develops. It has taught us
that, originally, cells are capable of self-reproduction; that sex is
not always a vital necessity, but often a device for securing variety.
It has taught us by experiment that boys come from their mother’s
right side, and girls from her left side, and in a healthy mother the
rhythm of sex is regular. The symbolism of the Fall might indeed
apply to the history of the cell which at first contains its own force
of reproduction, but in the case of a female ovum deliberately parts
with some of its original power in order that it may be replaced by
the vital power of a male. The male cell also rends itself apart, and
becomes quite unfit for reproductive purposes until it can find another
cell with which to join. In the simple facts which have been observed
through microscopes there is no place for the overweening pride of the
Semite race in the virtue of maleness; and I can only hope that it was
ignorance and not malice that led the Jews and the Arabs to spread
false doctrine on the subject of sex. It is unfortunate that the first
patriarchs, from whom they proudly count their descent, had much in
common with the primitive goat worshippers, who were responsible for
the one-sided arrangements for sexual contentment common in harems and
the other patriarchal institutions I have mentioned.

In the great mediæval revival, the real age of chivalry and
troubadours, the knights carried their ladies’ colours to victory in
vain. The old lies are in our blood--we still believe in Eve and her
shame. White men have fought in the past, and it remains for white
women to fight now, and at last rid their sex all over the world of the
ignominy of this false doctrine.




Modern Woman:

Her Intentions




