III

THE VARIATIONS OF LOVE


We cannot trust ourselves to make a real love-knot unless money or
custom forces us to “bear and forbear.” There is always the lurking
fear that we shall not be able to keep faith unless we swear upon the
Book. This is, of course, not true of young lovers. Every first love
is born free of tradition; indeed, not only is first love innocent and
valiant, but it sweeps aside all the wise laws it has been taught,
and burns away experience in its own light. The revelation is so
extraordinary, so unlike anything told by the poets, so absorbing, that
it is impossible to believe that the feeling can die out. Sometimes one
feels a great pity for the lovers in England, because young English
girls are very apt to mistake a feeling of gratified vanity and the
emotion of a new sensation for love of some special man who happens
to make love to them at the propitious moment. Many faithful women
go through life enduring the love of a man whom they care for very
moderately, who, on his side, congratulates himself on having found a
virtuous wife. It is lucky for these people that probably the wife, in
her limited circle of acquaintances, will never meet the man who ought
to have been her mate.

I have often talked to the apparently contented mother of a family,
when some little word reveals to me that it is possible to be the
mother of a man’s children merely by putting up with his caresses while
one thinks about some other subject. Is it any wonder that the race
becomes more and more anæmic and bored with existence as generation
follows generation?

Other wives have loved their husbands with passion, and perhaps for two
years their devotion has steadily increased, but the husband meanwhile
has known many ecstasies and wearinesses. His love is like the waves,
which follow each other as periods of dullness follow moments of
rapture. Hers has been like the tide, increasing in devotion and
tenderness; but the tide turns at last, and the dancing of the waves
can do very little to stay its ebbing. I think men are justified who
say that women either love too much for their taste or not at all.

Some women say they could love their husbands better if they did not
see so much of the unromantic side of their lives. The holes in a man’s
socks are not the most endearing remembrances in the world.

The only permanent relations are founded on mutual contempt. Brothers
and sisters have no illusions about each other, and if they feel any
affection at all it is a steadfast one. Alas! the close knowledge
of weaknesses very seldom permits the affection to show through the
contempt. Married lovers have to pass from the state of love, which
is so apt to be a state of delusion, to the state of clear-sighted
affection. The ordeal is one which very few survive.

Another tragedy of love is jealousy. A man or woman is very often
jealous of the partner’s brothers and sisters, or other relations.
Those who love wish to be all in all to each other, those who quarrel
dislike to have others taking sides in their quarrels. This fundamental
jealousy of relations is ever apt to break into a flame, besides
jealousy of the more usual kind.

Mr. Harold Gorst has written a book on _The Philosophy of Love_, in
which he points out that it is unwise of a bridegroom to take instant
possession of his bride. He maintains that the usual programme, in
which a wife shows all her modesty and a husband all his love on the
wedding-night, is an absurd waste of the honeymoon, which ought to be
spent in a gradual approach to the supreme surrender. Again, wives are
too apt to give up the charming resistances which are necessary to the
satisfaction of a man’s emotional nature. Mr. Gorst cannot imagine
that a husband would tire of his wife if she kept her right over her
own body with a firm hand, and required wooing every time she yielded
to the wedding of her husband. So much for the man of the world’s point
of view.

The marriage tie is a way of keeping people together while they undergo
the various disillusions and jealousies that are inevitable, unless one
of them is prepared to give way in everything. Is there any better way?
In most cases, no.

The marriage tie will always exist, because it is the natural impulse
of the majority of young people to wish to love each other alone, and
to remain with each other for ever. The honeymoon having elapsed, they
very likely find they are about to become parents, and they spend
the intervening months in making happy preparations. Then the baby
is born, and has to be brought up until it is old enough to go to
school. If there are three children, they have to be looked after for
about fourteen years. The wife is now thirty-four, and the husband
thirty-eight. The children are placed in various schools away from
home. Is there any alternative to the rather boring life that has to be
lived out until death parts the parents? None. They are not rich enough
to travel and amuse themselves, so the wife goes on housekeeping and
calling on neighbours, and changing her servants, and the husband goes
to the City, plays golf, and reads trashy novels. The marriage tie must
always persist while these people exist.

But what are the six million bachelors and the seven million spinsters
to do? Some of them are very young; thousands of them do not wish to
marry, their sexual nature is hardly developed more than a child’s;
others are invalids, openly or secretly; and a good number are leading
illegally arranged lives because the present marriage laws do not
suit their constitutions. Among the grown-up population about half
the number are married, and the other half unmarried. Many of these
marriages are unhappy, and it is to be presumed that at least six
million of each sex do not wish to marry enough to overcome the terrors
of saying what they want for ever, and getting it.

Now, having regard to the natural variations of love, I must suggest
that the stigma might be removed from those who are not capable of
lifelong fidelity. There seems good proof that a few millions of men
and women are bringing misery upon the rest because they are treated
as unworthy of social consideration. Medical men are saying that the
disease which is undermining the health of the nation is dangerous only
because it is shameful. It could be easily cured in its early stages if
it could be treated openly and without ruining the reputation of those
whom it attacks. Even when health is retained, reputations are lost and
careers are ruined in order to prop up the tottering institution of
marriage by making it the only refuge for the respectable.

But until it is acknowledged that it is not respectable to live
together when the temperaments are incompatible, there will be no
real virtue in the married state. Never to want the same thing at the
same time is a more far-reaching cause of emotional degradation than
one violent outbreak of temper under extreme provocation. It is more
degrading to the finer feelings than a temporary alienation of marital
love. One would imagine that the men who refuse to alter the divorce
laws really do believe in the sacrament of the marriage ceremony,
instead of in the sacrament of the true love, which abides when there
is a real compatibility of temperament.




