II

WOMEN’S INCOMES


Let us say that certain _prime donne_ can earn £25,000 a year for a few
years, that the most successful London actress may receive a salary of
£5000 a year, that a successful novelist may get a few thousands a year
by her books, that a lady doctor or dressmaker may make £1000 a year,
and you have admitted all that can be said in favour of the present
means women have of making a large income on the same lines as men. I
suppose the average successful singer is delighted with £1000 a year,
the average successful actress with £10 a week or £500 a year, the
average novelist with £300 a year, and the average lady doctor with the
same. In an institution which gives £1000 a year to its male principal,
we find the lady superintendent receiving £200 a year, and the male
secretary £350. Women find it hard to get any professional income out
of the Government offices, the Church, or the law courts. In the Post
Office and in all educational work the disparities between the salaries
of men and women is well known. And I think we may take it for granted
that the average business income of an everyday sort of woman, working
hard, is less than £100 a year. The income of a charwoman in London,
we know, is 2s. 6d. a day, or a possible 15s. a week--that is, 3d. an
hour, exactly half a man’s minimum wage.

These are a few well-known facts. The reason is that women are said to
have “other means” of earning a livelihood. First among these comes the
comfortable possibility of inheriting money from relations. Many great
heiresses and little heiresses are to be found among the conservative
forces of the land, for these women have nothing to gain and everything
to lose by changing the present state of things. They and the insurance
offices alike prosper on the present foundations of English family life.

Next comes the probably miserable alternative of marrying a rich
husband. It is a very curious thing that it is harder for a rich man
to be naturally attractive to women than it is for the camel to pass
through the needle’s eye, and the consequence is that women generally
have a more or less unhappy domestic life when they definitely marry
for a livelihood.

Then we have the adventuress, who succeeds in making a handsome income
by the unscrupulous use of her intelligence and charm. After that come
the various types of women who hire themselves or are hired out for
the relief of excitable gentlemen. And lastly the crowd of desolate
diseased refuse who pick up a living any way they can, in ways too
horrible to think of, by the practice of vulgar indecency.

All these incomes which are earned by women, either by their
tenderness and charm or by their bestiality, are, together with the
family inheritances, the real reasons why women as a sex are not made
economically independent on the same lines as men. The father of a
family longs to save his daughters from the temptations of poverty,
and if they do what he bids them he insures his life in their favour.
The husband prefers to keep his wife dancing to the tune he pays for,
so he makes her allowance dependent on his own mood of the moment. The
infatuated boy considers he is seeing life when he spends his money
recklessly on an adventuress. All these women can undersell other
women in the labour market, because they have incomes which make them
independent of what they may earn there. They are, in a kind of way,
what the strike organizers would call “blacklegs”: they make life more
difficult for the women who must work to live or starve.

Again, the magic of love is destroyed by the thought of money. And love
is very apt to evaporate when such thoughts flame up in the mind.

The hope I see for the ennobling of sex relations is that women should,
by some means never yet thought of, become independent of the caprice
of individual man.

The average middle-class Englishman, I believe, looks upon his married
life as a kind of business partnership, in which he pays money in order
that he may not be worried about the care of his clothes or his food
or his affectional needs. These things once settled and put under the
care of a sensible woman, he can devote his thoughts to business, to
betting, to cards, to golf, or any other amusement he may select to
ensure that he may not become a “dull man.” The average working man, of
course, not only marries a housekeeper, a cook, a maid-of-all-work, but
the mother and nurse of his continuous flow of offspring, and the butt
of his temper when the world has used him ill.

If any hope of eventual economic freedom is to come for the whole sex,
I stand aghast to think of all the antagonistic interests that will
have to be reconciled. It will be worse than the Budget. The wives will
have to stand out for fixed allowances. The mothers will have to make
their bargain either with their husbands or the State, whichever wants
their children most. The housekeepers will have to take their wages
like the other servants.

The women of the adventuress class are a hopeless problem. They are
worth a hundred a week at one moment, and nothing at all a few weeks
later perhaps. Their trade is so dangerous. But we can cheer ourselves
up with the statistics which tell us they are in England and Wales
numbered by thousands only, whereas we are dealing at present with the
problem of seventeen millions of women.

We have, then, four classes of women--the heiresses, the portionless
wives, the courtesans, and the prostitutes--who stand in the way of the
economic independence of women because they appear to be better off
under the present state of disorganization. The labour market for women
is of course permeated by their influence. The rich women who work for
nothing, the wives who “get round” their husbands, the courtesans who
command the “flesh market,” the prostitutes, who are ignored by the
rest of their sex, but revenge themselves on the ignorant by spreading
disease and sorrow among the happy and healthy.

The record of the overwhelming advantages of the economic independence
of women can hardly be compressed into the compass of this chapter. It
would make love marriages possible. It is almost certain that a love
marriage on the woman’s side is one of the most important elements for
good in the production of a fine race. If a girl were free to choose
according to her inclination, there is practically no doubt that she
would choose the right father for her child, however badly she might
choose a lifelong companion for herself.

This is, of course, true about both the sexes to a certain extent,
although average men are much less dainty about these matters than the
average woman. If we could remove the economic considerations from
parenthood it would help towards the invigoration of the race.

The sad part of this question is that according to all the great racial
ideals women ought to be economically independent, but, according to
all little social ideals, it seems inevitable that her independence
will be resisted to the last.




