VII

THE NEW PSYCHOLOGY


Intellect, then, is only a part of the life-consciousness. Henri
Bergson and William James have both agreed that the other parts deserve
our respect, and demand the attention of all practical people. They are
Instinctive Consciousness and Torpid Consciousness. Bergson, so well
known on the Continent, gives in _L’Evolution Créatrice_ a brilliant
outline of the relations of the intellectual, instinctive, and torpid
states. Briefly, he pictures vital consciousness as the centre from
which the three diverge in different radiations. The intellect which
covers an enormous field and can grapple successfully with the
superficial appearances we call facts, finds its present culmination
in mankind. The instinct which dawns in the consciousness as vision,
and deals only with one or two things, but knows them perfectly
through and through to their deepest causes, finds its culmination in
insects, especially in the elaborate societies of ants and bees. The
torpid state which, without external motion, like deep sleep, is most
creatively powerful, most enduring, and most in touch with the first
beginnings of organic life, finds its culmination in the vegetable
kingdom. The psychologists’ idea, then, for the practical future of
our race is that it should turn its attention to the cultivation of
these two modes of consciousness which have hitherto been lamentably
neglected in all schemes of education.

Bergson says that there are many questions the intellect can ask but
can never answer, which the instinct could answer, but, unprompted by
the intellect, would never ask.

The practical turn psychology has taken lately has a very deep
significance for women. For the adolescent girl and the woman
with child are the very types of the power of mysterious torpid
consciousness which is so little understood by the most learned men.
The ancients have believed that a mother’s impressions stamp themselves
on the child and determine its type. I mean, for instance, that a woman
surrounded by Burne-Jones’s pictures would be likely to have children
resembling that type. The whole matter is one of the deepest interest,
and one guiding principle stands out from all our uncertainties on
the subject, which is, that a woman with child should not use up her
vitality in other directions, that she should for the time being live
the life of a fruit tree, and nourish herself, and sun herself without
care and without intellectual distractions.

It is said that in deep sleep the creations of our imagination are
conceived; and that the state of impending motherhood should be one of
rest, and the quiet enjoyment of beauty and peace if it is to have a
good result.

I am not saying all women should be mothers, nor am I saying that
mothers should not have intellectual pleasures, but I do agree that
they should not have intellectual tasks, and above all that they should
be protected from worry, anxiety, and irritation. If the care of
mothers became a national question, I believe the saving in the care of
lunatics and unemployables and criminals would be incalculable.

The torpid consciousness is one which women who are to be mothers
should respect. I believe it is a state cultivated to a high degree by
the Eastern mystics, who have given us glimpses of the psychic powers
to which it can give birth. It is intimately connected with a control
over the emotional storms which affect most people and govern their
conduct. The Eastern sage does not starve his emotional nature, but
learns to direct it, while he is in a state of apparent torpor. So I
believe the wise mother might, if she gave herself the opportunity,
direct the future character of her child in the best sense of the word.

At present the torpid consciousness is hardly understood at all, but
the instinctive consciousness has been studied, although it is talked
of with a contempt it is far from deserving. I admit that to some
extent instinct is the enemy of civilization, but at the same time
civilization is the enemy of instinct.

The old matriarchal village community seems to be the ideal state of
an instinctive race of people. I do not say it is possible now, but it
certainly seems a good way of conducting affairs on a dignified basis
without the family unit.

Temperance with an occasional orgy is a prescription ordered for a
patient by a modern doctor, and that exactly describes the life of the
old matriarchal village. In the first place, it was situated near the
equator, and everyone could do without clothes. The village children
grew up together under the care of the elder men and women, with no
curiosity about the unseen. They worked in the fields and perhaps
hunted a little, but they all lived like brothers and sisters. They
had a central grove of sacred trees in their village, with a dancing
ground; the huts were round the grove, and then the belt of cultivated
land was called the “guardian serpent.” Beyond that was the jungle,
with paths leading to other villages. In the spring the Saturnalia was
celebrated, and the young men left their homes and visited the other
villages, scattered in the neighbourhood beyond the jungle-paths, to
celebrate the festival with song, wine, and dance. The orgy lasted a
few weeks, during the blossom time, when there was no work required at
home. It ended in a good deal of love-making, after which the young
men returned to their homes sobered, and ready to work in their own
villages for another year. Nine months later, when the weather made
it well to remain indoors, the children were born, and were called
the children of the sacred grove or the tree, and no one talked of
fathers. The men of the tribe cheerfully undertook the education of
the children, and maintained them on communal principles. It sounds
almost as socially elaborate as a hive, and the whole business appears
to have been carried out on purely instinctual lines. Perhaps I ought
to add that all can read for themselves about these matriarchal customs
in a book called _The Ruling Races of Prehistoric Times_, by J. F.
Hewitt, and in Tiele’s _Outline of the History of Ancient Religions_,
also in Risley’s _Tribes and Castes of Bengal_. The life was perhaps
too austerely virtuous for the majority of mankind, but it had its
advantages.

Instinct is an animal faculty cultivated by an outdoor life, which we
to a great extent have swamped in our all-pervading intellects. It
is a power of the consciousness which appears to act without effort,
and to increase its power as we decrease our mental struggles. Very
often when after fussing over a lost object or forgotten name we cease
to trouble ourselves, and employ our clamorous minds in some other
direction, the consciousness of the name or place appears like the sky
from which the clouds have cleared away. It is in the interplay between
intellect and instinct that the practical value of the new school of
psychology will be found. Our instincts need to be stimulated by the
curiosity of our intellects. We have an extraordinary and inexhaustible
power of inventing surprises for our intellect, both in our dreams
and in inventive states of meditation. Some people call these things
manifestations of the subconsciousness. I prefer to think of them as
manifestations of the long-neglected powers of the instinct. We know
that many insects who have never met their parents in their lives, yet
carry out their destinies as if they had received the most careful
personal instruction. The truth about instinct appears to be that it
is a race-consciousness--a kind of wireless telegraphy which can be
set in motion between sympathetic centres without passing through the
mental machinery at all. It almost seems as if our brains, our nervous
plexuses, and our glands[1] each had a manifest consciousness of their
own, and it is not until we can set in motion an interplay of the three
that we shall gain all we can, either from the intellect, the instinct,
or the torpid creative consciousness.

When women come in for their share of control in affairs, there is no
doubt we shall make further use of these more feminine aspects of vital
consciousness.

FOOTNOTE:

[1] As to the study of the functions of the glands, many interesting
discoveries have been mentioned in the medical journals during the last
few years.




