I

THE VOTE


It is my conviction that all great changes come from a force that after
many years of silence blazes with emotional, passionate enthusiasm.
That long period of torpid latent life, once it is liberated from
prison, gives driving power. Without silence and darkness no new
creature can be brought forth. Without resistance no great desire can
be felt. It is the same with the woman’s movement.

When the vote was refused, the first artillery for the woman’s army was
forged. That little request for the vote might have been granted three
years ago without making any more difference than the borough council
vote here, or the parliamentary vote in New Zealand, Australia, Norway,
Finland, and so forth, has made already. That little request, that
might have passed almost unnoticed had it been granted, has raised up
a powerful body of feeling on both sides, that will end in one of the
greatest social revolutions of the time.

Whether women are militant or anti-militant, whether they ask for the
vote in order to fight the working man or to join hands with him,
whether they content themselves with words of approval and donations,
or whether they lose their tempers in denunciation of the unfeminine
behaviour of certain brave enthusiasts--yet all the women of many
opinions are alike rousing themselves from their former deadly attitude
of quiescent acceptance.

The most violent anti-suffragette is obliged to try to understand the
questions of social reform in order to protest against them. The most
downtrodden wife is hearing rumours that even now there are laws which
might protect her from domestic tyranny. The county ladies who never
read anything but _The Queen_, _The Spectator_, or _Punch_, protest
against the struggle, but admit that it is time that women of property
had a vote now that their butlers and coachmen have obtained that
privilege. The “too old at thirty” brigade is carrying the campaign
into the ballroom and skating-rink. All this is familiar to everyone
that moves in English society to-day, and one word of terror used by
men who oppose the vote is heard on all sides. They say the vote is
“the thin end of the wedge,” and I reply gladly from my side--not only
as a suffragist, but as an onlooker at the loves and hatreds of the
sexes--I reply that the wedge is being driven every day. Every day of
delay in giving women the vote gives them a power far more deadly, a
hope more dangerous, an accomplishment far more vital. It gives them
the power of standing up for themselves, freed from the belief in the
protection of men. It gives them hope in each other. It teaches them
to speak for themselves, and discover the force of their eloquence and
the ingenuity of their resources. It is impossible to go to a meeting
of the militant party without feeling amazement at the dexterity of all
concerned. With wit, with banter, with beauty, with dignity, awkward
questions are answered, coarse jokes are frustrated, and swift as
light the laugh is turned against the interrupter.

The odd contrast between the scenes we personally witness and the same
scenes served up for breakfast by the daily press, is having some
effect in breaking up the touching faith of our foremothers in the
accuracy of newspaper reports. Women are awake to public affairs for
the first time since the matriarchal period. They are weighing the
evidence of the press, they are considering political facts. They are
said to be losing the chivalrous adoration of men. But in contrast to
the politeness of men to well-dressed, good-looking women, I would call
attention to the attitude of a respectable hospital official towards
a poor woman who, in November, 1909, brought her little boy as an
out-patient.

She arrived very early in order to be able to go to her work with as
little delay as possible, and secured a seat before the men, who came
in later. When the attendant entered, she was made to go back to the
last seat of all and wait for her son to take his turn until all the
elder males had been interviewed. “Men come first, your place is at
the back,” was all the answer she got to her protests. So much for
chivalry when a woman is poor and worn with labour. It is pathetic to
see the working woman, apologetic for her poverty, apologetic for her
womanhood, apologetic for her ill-health or any temporary need of help.
And I say that the working woman’s heroic patience has been attained
by centuries of ill-usage and _lack_ of chivalry. Most women would not
understand the idea of chivalry if it were explained to them, so little
does it come within their range of experience. We have no conception
of the size of the mass we are dealing with. In England and Wales
there are about 17 million females. Of these females, 13 million are
past childhood, roughly speaking 6 million of these are unmarried, 7
million are married or widows. About 9 million married and unmarried
women are unoccupied, or have retired from business; about 4 million
are engaged in occupations, and trying to make their own living. Of
the 16 million males, about 2 million are unoccupied or retired, 10
million are occupied, and the rest are children. Now we find from the
last census that about 7 million women are in charge of a family,
and 3 million of these are occupied in business; 6 million women are
unmarried, about 1 million of these are occupied in business, and
nearly ½ million have independent means. Making allowance for the very
young, we have about 2½ million grown women in a dependent position
without a husband or an occupation in England and Wales alone.

If one spends an afternoon studying the census returns, one sees in
all occupations the well-paid businesses are for men, and the ill-paid
for women. In general and local government, defence of the country,
and professional occupations, 326 thousand women only have subordinate
posts, but there are nearly 2 million in domestic service. Textile
manufactures, 663 thousand; dress, 710 thousand; food and lodging, 300
thousand, but in commerce and finance only 60 thousand.

Men can no longer support their daughters, and daughters cannot
command good positions in lucrative professions. There are only 7
million families, and at least 4 million grown-up women, unmarried
and superfluous as mothers. The working man tells these women to “go
home and do the washing.” “Well,” a virgin replies, “one million of us
are working at laundry and other work, under half a million of us are
amusing ourselves on independent incomes, and the rest of us have to
while away life somehow without money or occupation, so we are making a
revolution.”

The struggle for the vote is putting heart into the superfluous woman,
and it is putting the hope of reorganizing the market value of women’s
labour into her heart. We not only want work, but we want good wages.
If we have children we want to be sure they will be cared for and fed.
If we keep house we want our wages. The 12 million females that have
no independent income cry out to the ½ million that has an independent
income, in their almost hopeless struggle to win fair wages. It is
interesting to think that out of the total population of about 32½
million in England and Wales, a very little over ½ million are living
on independent incomes, and we find that there are less than 100,000
heirs, and more than 400,000 heiresses in this country. The rest, that
is 32 million, have to work or starve so as to save enough for their
old age. Each person that lives at ease is surrounded by sixty-five
people that have to struggle. Each woman that has a husband knows
that a widow or spinster stands portionless beside her. Figures are
abstractions, but behind these figures are facts and problems that are
driving us before them with such resistless cruelty that at last we are
determined to cry halt and make a fight--vote or no vote!




