X

THE SAVAGE, THE BARBARIAN, THE CIVILIZED


The stately Spaniard, graceful as a tree swaying in its dance with the
wind, savage and noble.

The Nihilist Russian, watching in her lair, instinctive and ready to
kill. Her hatred of government marking her as the free barbarian.

The Parisian, knowing the correct convention of a funeral or an
adultery, civilized and logical to her glove-tips.

Of the three women the two first are simple, but civilization is
complex, and it may mean to be cultivated with regard to intellect like
the Jesuits, art like the Greeks, morals like the Irish, or religion
like the Arab.

In which way will the women of the future develop? Will she strive
like the frequenters of the _salon_ of Madame de Rambouillet to excel
in intellect, or like Saint Teresa of Spain as a religious mystic? We
have seen both these types, and I have no doubt that we shall see many
shining examples of morality, but at the moment I cannot think of any
conspicuous woman of whom no one has whispered scandal. For in these
days if people do not trip in one direction, it is said it is because
they prefer to trip in another; and soon it will be taken as a sign
of evil life that one should live in a desert on bread and water. I
mention in passing that our late Queen is usually admitted to have been
conspicuously moral. In the arts we have seen, and hope to see again,
great women novelists and actresses. In history we have an array of
splendid uncivilized women immortalized from all time--Medea, Electra,
the Roman empresses, Queen Maive of Connaught, the Russian heroines.
Whether they excelled most as noble savages or as gloriously barbaric
haters of ordered life, I cannot stay to consider.

For I want the women who read this book not to dwell upon the past, but
to look forward to the great century that is waiting for their alchemy,
to transmute its life by giving it a more intent purpose. Are we going
to be like the very badly dressed lady of title, whom we heard the
other day imploring us to behave ourselves like other people, just as
we dressed like other people, in order not to be conspicuous! Or are we
really going to make something out of this brilliant opportunity given
us by the “refusal of the vote,” and the quickly spreading passion of
enthusiasm which is moving the women of all nations to make a fight
against the patriarchal faith of the goat-worshippers.

Mr. Gorst says that the object of life is making (moral) love. I think
the object of our life is to make experiments, as gardeners make
experiments in floriculture. I quarrel with absorption in the family
because family jealousy is a bar to that kind of social intercourse
which is the only education worth having, and the only experience which
can lead to any result worth having. They say in France, “Love is a
play in which the acts last five minutes, and the _entr’actes_ for any
time you like.” If it filled the whole of life it would only mean that
life would be as short as that of the ephemeral winged creatures of
the insect world. Family love cannot absorb us if we wish to survive.
We are complicated, and our possibilities of social and political
intercourse are a subject of endless interest and inquiry. Let us then
start again on our voyages of discovery, this time with a little more
purpose in our method and delight in our hearts.

Women want the vote, it is true, but what they want more, and what they
are getting, is strength to hammer through the prisons which have kept
them for many centuries packed away conveniently for use on occasion.
They are all coming out into the daylight for the first time within our
memory, and now the real movement of life begins.

We want to change public opinion about divorce, contagious diseases,
and forethought with regard to breeding. We want married women to
recognize the various proportions of sexuality in each sex, to make
allowance for the passionate, and to admit that we are greatly indebted
for our culture to individuals who do not desire to be parents.

In conclusion, all I can say is, “Talk! talk! talk!” We are more moved
by one conversation than by many eloquent discourses. After all, what
is so permanently delightful as communion of ideas? So once again I
say, “Go on talking until the savage, the barbarian, and the civilized
women have found out all they can learn from each other. Plenty of men
will be glad to help them in their discoveries.”




BOOKS by FLORENCE FARR


+THE DANCING FAUN.+ A Novel. Cheap Re-issue with cover design by AUBREY
BEARDSLEY.

“Full of bright parodox, and parodox which is no mere topsy-turvy play
upon words, but the product of serious thinking upon life.”--_Star._

“The writing reveals in almost every sentence the cultured artist whose
every stroke adds strength and beauty to the picture.”--_Liverpool
Mercury._

“We welcome the light and merry pen of Miss Farr as one of the deftest
that has been wielded in the style of to-day. She has written the
cleverest and the most cynical sensation story of the season.”--_Daily
Post._


_Paper, +6+d. +net+._

+THE MYSTERY OF TIME.+ A Masque.


BOOKS FOR WOMEN


+THE BURDEN OF WOMEN.+ Compiled by FRANK MOND. 230 pp. Wrapper, 1_s._
6_d._ net. Cloth, 2_s._ 6_d._ net.

“Contains things which ought to be said.... The real burden of woman
is found to be the relation of the sexes in marriage, particularly in
regard to congenital and other diseases.”--_The Morning Leader._

“The scope of the book is wide, and it discusses not a few very
delicate topics fearlessly, but always with discretion and force,
whilst its general tone is unexceptional.”--_Aberdeen Free Press._


+WOMAN’S WORST ENEMY, WOMAN.+ By BEATRICE TINA. Stiff Wrapper, 1_s._
net.

“Miss Tina has attempted to deal with the problem of marriage and
maternity, and has succeeded in so far as she has given us something
to think about. She has realised how imperative it is for the future
of society that a sane outlook upon sexual ethics, fundamental as they
are, should be arrived at. One cannot but admire Miss Tina’s courage
in dragging various questions into the light of open day which have
hitherto been either tacitly ignored or deliberately swept into the
limbo of hypocrisy.”--_The Woman Worker._

“It is intentionally provocative, but there will be many shrinking
women grateful to so fearless an asserter of their inmost thoughts.
They will be a minority, but they should be heard.”--_Leicester
Pioneer._


 FRANK PALMER, PUBLISHER, 14 RED LION COURT,
 FLEET STREET, LONDON.      ::      Catalogues Free.


+THE COMMON-SENSE OF THE WOMAN QUESTION.+ By MILLICENT MURBY.
Wrapper, 6_d._ net. Quarter canvas, gilt, 1_s._ net.

“This book ought certainly to make Mr. Belfort Bax readjust his views
as to women’s lack of power to form ‘an objective and disinterested
judgment,’ for a clearer, more moderate and more precise presentation
of the woman’s point of view than this of Miss Murby it would be
difficult to find. To those even who differ from her conclusions will
come many plain statements of fact which will bear thinking over.”--_T.
P.’s Weekly._

“We have read many books on the woman suffragist side, but have not
met one which is so forcibly and sensibly written. Miss Murby has the
acuteness to see that the voting is a mere surface question, and she
examines the roots of the problem, that is the fundamental relation of
women to society. We recommend the book for its reasonableness and good
temper.”

_The Leicester Pioneer._


+THE LEGAL SUBJECTION OF MEN.+ An Answer to the Suffragettes. By E.
BELFORT BAX and Another. Wrapper, 6_d._ net. Quarter canvas, gilt,
1_s._ net.

_The Author in the Preface says_:--

“The women’s rights agitator has succeeded in inducing a credulous
public to believe that the female sex is groaning under the weight of
the tyranny of man. The facts show these individuals to be right in
one point, namely, that sex-injustice and sex-inequality exist; for
the facts show the said injustice and inequality to exist _wholly_ and
_solely_ in favour of women as against men.”

“The ‘oppressed’ woman does not appear so very ‘oppressed’ in these
pages. All interested in the woman’s suffrage movement should make a
point of studying this excellent book.”

_Dundee Advertiser._


+SEXUAL ETHICS.+ By Professor AUGUST FOREL, M.D., PH.D., LL.D. With
Introduction by Dr. C. W. Saleeby, F.R.S. (Edin.). _2nd edition._ Demy
8vo. Stiff wrapper, 1_s._ net. Cloth gilt, 2_s._ net.

The present work consists of an analysis of sexual morals as they
exist to-day, together with a variety of constructive proposals for
the future. It is a book which must be read by every social reformer
who realises that the first step on the road to progress is the
reconstruction of human morals.

“The author discusses frankly, but scientifically, and without
pruriency, the rights and wrongs of matters sexual.”

_The Huddersfield Worker._


 FRANK PALMER, PUBLISHER, 14 RED LION COURT,
 FLEET STREET, LONDON.      ::      Catalogues Free.

