CHAPTER II

OUR KNOWLEDGE OF EXTERNAL OBJECTS IS ONLY SENSATIONS


Of late years numerous studies have been published on the conception
of matter, especially by physicists, chemists, and mathematicians.
Among these recent contributions to science I will quote the articles
of Duhem on the Evolution of Mechanics published in 1903 in the _Revue
generale des Sciences_, and other articles by the same author, in
1904, in the _Revue de Philosophie_. Duhem's views have attracted much
attention, and have dealt a serious blow at the whole theory of the
mechanics of matter. Let me also quote that excellent work of Dastre,
_La Vie et la Mort_, wherein the author makes so interesting an
application to biology of the new theories on energetics; the
discussion between Ostwald and Brillouin on matter, in which two rival
conceptions find themselves engaged in a veritable hand-to-hand
struggle (_Revue generale des Sciences_, Nov. and Dec. 1895); the
curious work of Dantec on _les Lois Naturelles_, in which the author
ingeniously points out the different sensorial districts into which
science is divided, although, through a defect in logic, he accepts
mechanics as the final explanation of things. And last, it is
impossible to pass over, in silence, the rare works of Lord Kelvin, so
full, for French readers, of unexpected suggestions, for they show us
the entirely practical and empirical value which the English attach to
mechanical models.

My object is not to go through these great studies in detail. It is
the part of mathematical and physical philosophers to develop their
ideas on the inmost nature of matter, while seeking to establish
theories capable of giving a satisfactory explanation of physical
phenomena. This is the point of view they take up by preference, and
no doubt they are right in so doing. The proper role of the natural
sciences is to look at phenomena taken by themselves and apart from
the observer.

My own intention, in setting forth these same theories on matter, is
to give prominence to a totally different point of view. Instead of
considering physical phenomena in themselves, we shall seek to know
what idea one ought to form of their nature when one takes into
account that they are observed phenomena. While the physicist
withdraws from consideration the part of the observer in the
verification of physical phenomena, our role is to renounce this
abstraction, to re-establish things in their original complexity, and
to ascertain in what the conception of matter consists when it is
borne in mind that all material phenomena are known only in their
relation to ourselves, to our bodies, our nerves, and our
intelligence.

This at once leads us to follow, in the exposition of the facts, an
order which the physicist abandons. Since we seek to know what is the
physical phenomenon we perceive, we must first enunciate this
proposition, which will govern the whole of our discussion: to wit--

_Of the outer world we know nothing except our sensations._

Before demonstrating this proposition, let us develop it by an example
which will at least give us some idea of its import. Let us take as
example one of those investigations in which, with the least possible
recourse to reasoning, the most perfected processes of observation are
employed, and in which one imagines that one is penetrating almost
into the very heart of nature. We are, let us suppose, dissecting an
animal. After killing it, we lay bare its viscera, examine their
colour, form, dimensions, and connections; then we dissect the organs
in order to ascertain their internal nature, their texture, structure,
and function; then, not content with ocular anatomy, we have recourse
to the perfected processes of histology: we take a fragment of the
tissues weighing a few milligrammes, we fix it, we mount it, we make
it into strips of no more than a thousandth of a millimetre thick, we
colour it and place it under the microscope, we examine it with the
most powerful lenses, we sketch it, and we explain it. All this work
of complicated and refined observation, sometimes lasting months and
years, results in a monograph containing minute descriptions of
organs, of cells, and of intra-cellular structures, the whole
represented and defined in words and pictures. Now, these descriptions
and drawings are the display of the various sensations which the
zoologist has experienced in the course of his labours; to those
sensations are added the very numerous interpretations derived from
the memory, reasoning, and often, also, from the imagination on the
part of the scholar, the last a source at once of errors and of
discoveries. But everything properly experimental in the work of the
zoologist proceeds from the sensations he has felt or might have felt,
and in the particular case treated of, these sensations are almost
solely visual.

This observation might be repeated with regard to all objects of the
outer world which enter into relation with us. Whether the knowledge
of them be of the common-place or of a scientific order matters
little. Sensation is its limit, and all objects are known to us by
the sensations they produce in us, and are known to us solely in this
manner. A landscape is nothing but a cluster of sensations. The
outward form of a body is simply sensation; and the innermost and most
delicate material structure, the last visible elements of a cell, for
example, are all, in so far as we observe them with the microscope,
nothing but sensation.

This being understood, the question is, why we have just
admitted--with the majority of authors--that we cannot really know a
single object as it is in itself, and in its own nature, otherwise
than by the intermediary of the sensations it provokes in us? This
comes back to saying that we here require explanations on the two
following points: why do we admit that we do not really perceive the
objects, but only something intermediate between them and us; and why
do we call this something intermediate a sensation? On this second
point I will offer, for the time being, one simple remark: we use the
term sensation for lack of any other to express the intermediate
character of our perception of objects; and this use does not, on our
part, imply any hypothesis. Especially do we leave completely in
suspense the question whether sensation is a material phenomenon or a
state of being of the mind. These are questions we will deal with
later. For the present it must be understood that the word sensation
is simply a term for the something intermediate between the object and
our faculty of cognition.[3] We have, therefore, simply to state why
we have admitted that the external perception of objects is produced
mediately or by procuration.

There are a few philosophers, and those not of the lowest rank, who have
thought that this intermediate character of all perception was so
evident that there was no need to insist further upon it. John Stuart
Mill, who was certainly and perhaps more than anything a careful
logician, commences an exposition of the idealist thesis to which he was
so much attached, by carelessly saying: "It goes without saying that
objects are known to us through the intermediary of our senses.... The
senses are equivalent to our sensations;"[4] and on those propositions
he rears his whole system, "It goes without saying ..." is a trifle
thoughtless. I certainly think he was wrong in not testing more
carefully the solidity of his starting point.

In the first place, this limit set to our knowledge of the objects
which stimulate our sensations is only accepted without difficulty by
well-informed persons; it much astonishes the uninstructed when first
explained to them. And this astonishment, although it may seem so, is
not a point that can be neglected, for it proves that, in the first
and simple state of our knowledge, we believe we directly perceive
objects as they are. Now, if we, the cultured class, have, for the
most part,[5] abandoned this primitive belief, we have only done so on
certain implicit conditions, of which we must take cognisance. This is
what I shall now demonstrate as clearly as I can.

Take the case of an unlearned person. To prove to him that he knows
sensations alone and not the bodies which excite them, a very striking
argument may be employed which requires no subtle reasoning and which
appeals to his observation. This is to inform him, supposing he is not
aware of the fact, that, every time he has the perception of an
exterior object, there is something interposed between the object and
himself, and that that something is his nervous system.

If we were not acquainted with the existence of our nervous system, we
should unhesitatingly admit that our perception of objects consisted
in some sort of motion towards the places in which they were fixed.
Now, a number of experiments prove to us that objects are known to us
as excitants of our nervous system which only act on this system by
entering into communication, or coming into contact with, its terminal
extremities. They then produce, in the interior of this system, a
peculiar modification which we are not yet able to define. It is this
modification which follows the course of the nerves and is carried to
the central parts of the system. The speed of the propagation of this
nerve modification has been measured by certain precise experiments in
psychometry; the journey is made slowly, at the rate of 20 to 30
metres per second, and it is of interest that this rate of speed lets
us know at what moment and, consequently, by what organic excitement,
the phenomenon of consciousness is produced. This happens when the
cerebral centres are affected; the phenomenon of consciousness is
therefore posterior to the fact of the physical excitement.

I believe it has required a long series of accepted observations for
us to have arrived at this idea, now so natural in appearance, that
the modifications produced within our nervous system are the only
states of which we can have a direct consciousness; and as
experimental demonstration is always limited, there can be no absolute
certainty that things never happen otherwise, that we never go outside
ourselves, and that neither our consciousness nor our nervous influx
can exteriorise itself, shoot beyond our material organs, and travel
afar in pursuit of objects in order to know or to modify them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Before going further, we must make our terminology more precise. We
have just seen the necessity of drawing a distinction between the
sensations of which we are conscious and the unknown cause which
produces these sensations by acting on our nervous systems. This
exciting cause I have several times termed, in order to be understood,
the external object. But under the name of external object are
currently designated groups of sensations, such as those which make up
for us a chair, a tree, an animal, or any kind of body. I see a dog
pass in the street. I call this dog an external object; but, as this
dog is formed, for me who am looking at it, of my sensations, and as
these sensations are states of my nervous centres, it happens that the
term external object has two meanings. Sometimes it designates our
sensations; at another, the exciting cause of our sensations. To avoid
all confusion we will call this exciting cause, which is unknown to
us, the _X_ of matter.

It is, however, not entirely unknown, for we at least know two facts
with regard to it. We know, first, that this _X_ exists, and in the
second place, that its image must not be sought in the sensations it
excites in us. How can we doubt, we say, that it exists? The same
external observation proves to us at once that there exists an object
distinct from our nerves, and that our nerves separate us from it. I
insist on this point, for the reason that some authors, after having
unreservedly admitted that our knowledge is confined to sensations,
have subsequently been hard put to it to demonstrate the reality of
the excitant distinct from the sensations.[6] Of this we need no
demonstration, and the testimony of our senses suffices. We have seen
the excitant, and it is like a friend who should pass before us in
disguise so well costumed and made up that we can attribute to his
real self nothing of what we see of him, but yet we know that it is
he.

And, in fact, let us remember what it is that we have argued
upon--viz. on an observation. I look at my hand, and I see an object
approaching it which gives me a sensation of feeling. I at first say
that this object is an excitant. It is pointed out to me that I am in
error. This object, which appears to me outside my nervous system, is
composed, I am told, of sensations. Be it so, I have the right to
answer; but if all that I perceive is sensation, my nervous system
itself is a sensation; if it is only that, it is no longer an
intermediary between the excitant and myself, and it is the fact that
we perceive things as they are. For it to be possible to prove that I
perceive, not the object, but that _tertium quid_ which is sensation,
it has to be admitted that the nervous system is a reality external to
sensation and that objects which assume, in relation to it, the role
of excitants and of which we perceive the existence, are likewise
realities external to sensation.

This is what is demonstrated by abstract reasoning, and this reasoning
is further supported by a common-sense argument. The outer world
cannot be summarised in a few nervous systems suspended like spiders
in empty space. The existence of a nervous system implies that of a
body in which it is lodged. This body must have complicated organs;
its limbs presuppose the soil on which the animal rests, its lungs the
existence of oxygen vivifying its blood, its digestive tube, aliments
which it digests and assimilates to its substance, and so on. We may
indeed admit that this outer world is not, in itself, exactly as we
perceive it; but we are compelled to recognise that it exists by the
same right as the nervous system, in order to put it in its proper
place.

The second fact of observation is that the sensations we feel do not
give us the true image of the material _X_ which produces them. The
modification made in our substance by this force _X_ does not
necessarily resemble in its nature the nature of that force. This is
an assertion opposed to our natural opinions, and must consequently be
demonstrated. It is generally proved by the experiments which reveal
what is called "the law of the specific energy of the nerves." This is
an important law in physiology discovered by Mueller two centuries ago,
and consequences of a philosophical order are attached to it. The
facts on which this law is based are these. It is observed that, if
the sensory nerves are agitated by an excitant which remains constant,
the sensations received by the patient differ according to the nerve
affected. Thus, the terminals of an electric current applied to the
ball of the eye give the sensation of a small luminous spark; to the
auditory apparatus, the current causes a crackling sound; to the hand,
the sensation of a shock; to the tongue, a metallic flavour.
Conversely, excitants wholly different, but affecting the same nerve,
give similar sensations; whether a ray of light is projected into the
eye, or the eyeball be excited by the pressure of a finger; whether an
electric current is directed into the eye, or, by a surgical
operation, the optic nerve is severed by a bistoury, the effect is
always the same, in the sense that the patient always receives a
sensation of light. To sum up, in addition to the natural excitant of
our sensory nerves, there are two which can produce the same sensory
effects, that is to say, the mechanical and the electrical excitants.
Whence it has been concluded that the peculiar nature of the sensation
felt depends much less on the nature of the excitant producing it than
on that of the sensory organ which collects it, the nerve which
propagates it, or the centre which receives it. It would perhaps be
going a little too far to affirm that the external object has no kind
of resemblance to the sensations it gives us. It is safer to say that
we are ignorant of the degree in which the two resemble or differ from
each other.

On thinking it over, it will be found that this contains a very great
mystery, for this power of distinction (_specificite_) of our nerves
is not connected with any detail observable in their structure. It is
very probably the receiving centres which are specific. It is owing to
them and to their mechanism that we ought to feel, from the same
excitant, a sensation of sound or one of colour, that is to say,
impressions which appear, when compared, as the most different in the
world. Now, so far as we can make out, the histological structure of
our auditory centre is the same as that of our visual centre. Both are
a collection of cells diverse in form, multipolar, and maintained by
a conjunctive pellicule (_stroma_). The structure of the fibres and
cells varies slightly in the motor and sensory regions, but no means
have yet been discovered of perceiving a settled difference between
the nerve-cells of the optic centre and those of the auditory centre.
There should be a difference, as our mind demands it; but our eye
fails to note it.

Let us suppose, however, that to-morrow, or several centuries hence,
an improved _technique_ should show us a material difference between
the visual and the auditory neurone. There is no absurdity in this
supposition; it is a possible discovery, since it is of the order of
material facts. Such a discovery, however, would lead us very far, for
what terribly complicates this problem is that we cannot directly know
the structure of our nervous system. Though close to us, though, so to
speak, inside us, it is not known to us otherwise than is the object
we hold in our hands, the ground we tread, or the landscape which
forms our horizon.

For us it is but a sensation, a real sensation when we observe it in
the dissection of an animal, or the autopsy of one of our own kind; an
imaginary and transposed sensation, when we are studying anatomy by
means of an anatomical chart; but still a sensation. It is by the
intermediary of our nervous system that we have to perceive and
imagine what a nervous system is like; consequently we are ignorant as
to the modification impressed on our perceptions and imaginations by
this intermediary, the nature of which we are unable to grasp.

Therefore, when we attempt to understand the inmost nature of the
outer world, we stand before it as before absolute darkness. There
probably exists in nature, outside of ourselves, neither colour,
odour, force, resistance, space, nor anything that we know as
sensation. Light is produced by the excitement of the optic nerve, and
it shines only in our brain; as to the excitement itself, there is
nothing to prove that it is luminous; outside of us is profound
darkness, or even worse, since darkness is the correlation of light.
In the same way, all the sonorous excitements which assail us, the
creakings of machines, the sounds of nature, the words and cries of
our fellows are produced by excitements of our acoustic nerve; it is
in our brain that noise is produced, outside there reigns a dead
silence. The same may be said of all our other senses.

Not one of our senses, absolutely none, is the revealer of external
reality. From this point of view there is no higher and no lower
sense. The sensations of sight, apparently so objective and so
searching, no more take us out of ourselves than do the sensations of
taste which are localised in the tongue.

In short, our nervous system, which enables us to communicate with
objects, prevents us, on the other hand, from knowing their nature. It
is an organ of relation with the outer world; it is also, for us, a
cause of isolation. We never go outside ourselves. We are walled in.
And all we can say of matter and of the outer world is, that it is
revealed to us solely by the sensations it affords us, that it is the
unknown cause of our sensations, the inaccessible excitant of our
organs of the senses, and that the ideas we are able to form as to the
nature and the properties of that excitant, are necessarily derived
from our sensations, and are subjective to the same degree as those
sensations themselves.

But we must make haste to add that this point of view is the one which
is reached when we regard the relations of sensation with its unknown
cause the great _X_ of matter.[7] Positive science and practical life
do not take for an objective this relation of sensation with the
Unknowable; they leave this to metaphysics. They distribute themselves
over the study of sensation and examine the reciprocal relations of
sensations with sensations. Those last, condemned as misleading
appearances when we seek in them the expression of the Unknowable,
lose this illusory character when we consider them in their reciprocal
relations. Then they constitute for us reality, the whole of reality
and the only object of human knowledge. The world is but an assembly
of present, past, and possible sensations; the affair of science is to
analyse and co-ordinate them by separating their accidental from their
constant relations.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 3: _Connaissance._--The word cognition is used throughout as
the English equivalent of this, except in places where the context
shows that it means acquaintance merely.--ED.]

[Footnote 4: J. S. MILL, _An Examination of Sir Wm. Hamilton's
Philosophy_, pp. 5 and 6. London. 1865.]

[Footnote 5: A few subtle philosophers have returned to it, as I shall
show later in chapter iv.]

[Footnote 6: Thus, the perplexity in which John Stuart Mill finds
himself is very curious. Having admitted unreservedly that our
knowledge is confined to sensations, he is powerless to set up a
reality outside this, and acknowledges that the principle of causality
cannot legitimately be used to prove that our sensations have a cause
which is not a sensation, because this principle cannot be applied
outside the world of phenomena.]

[Footnote 7: See p. 18, _sup_.--ED.]




