CHAPTER IV

ANSWERS TO SOME OBJECTIONS, AND SUMMARY


I have set forth the foregoing ideas by taking the road which to me
seemed the best. On reflection it has occurred to me that my manner of
exposition and demonstration may be criticised much more than my
conclusion. Now, as it is the conclusion alone which here is of
importance, it is expedient not to make it responsible for the
arguments by which I have supported it.

These arguments resolve themselves into the attestation that between
objects and our consciousness there exists an intermediary, our
nervous system. We have even established that the existence of this
intermediary is directly proved by observation, and from this I have
concluded that we do not directly perceive the object itself but a
_tertium quid_, which is our sensations.

Several objections to this might be made. Let us enumerate them.

1. It is not inconceivable that objects may act directly on our
consciousness without taking the intermediary of our nervous system.
Some authors, the spiritualists notably, believe in the possibility
of disembodied souls, and they admit by implication that these souls
remain in communication with the terrestrial world, witness our
actions, and hear our speech. Since they no longer have organs of
sense, we must suppose that these wandering souls, if they exist, can
directly perceive material objects. It is evident that such hypotheses
have, up till now, nothing scientific in them, and that the
demonstrations of them which are given raise a feeling of scepticism
more than anything else. Nevertheless, we have not the right to
exclude, by _a priori_ argument, the possibility of this category of
phenomena.

2. Several German authors have maintained in recent years, that if the
nervous system intervenes in the perception of external objects, it is
a faithful intermediary which should not work any change on those
physical actions which it gathers from outside to transmit to our
consciousness. From this, point of view colour would exist as colour,
outside our eyes, sound would exist as sound, and in a general way
there would not be, in matter, any mysterious property left, since we
should perceive matter as it is. This is a very unexpected
interpretation, by which men of science have come to acknowledge the
correctness of the common belief: they rehabilitate an opinion which
philosophers have till now turned to ridicule, under the name of
naive realism. All which proves that the naivete of some may be the
excessive refinement of others.

To establish scientifically this opinion they batter down the theory
of the specific energy of the nerves. I have recalled in a previous
page[10] of what this theory consists. I have shown that if, by
mechanical or electrical means, our different sensory nerves are
excited, notwithstanding the identity of the excitant, a different
sensation is provoked in each case--light when the optic nerve is
stimulated, sound when the acoustic, and so on. It is now answered to
this argument based on fact that the nature of these excitants must be
complex. It is not impossible, it is thought, that the electric force
contains within itself both luminous and sonorous actions; it is not
impossible that a mechanical excitement should change the electric
state of the nerve affected, and that, consequently, these subsidiary
effects explain how one and the same agent may, according to the
nerves employed, produce different effects.

3. After the spiritualists and the experimentalists, let us take the
metaphysicians. Among them one has always met with the most varying
specimens of opinions and with arguments for and against all possible
theories.

Thus it is, for example, with the external perception. Some have
supposed it indirect, others, on the contrary, that it acts directly
on the object. Those who uphold the direct theory are inspired by
Berkeley, who asserts that the sensitive qualities of the body have no
existence but in our own minds, and consist really in representative
ideas. This doctrine is expressly based on this argument--that thought
differs too much in nature from matter for one to be able to suppose
any link between these two substances. In this particular, some
authors often make an assertion without endeavouring to prove it. They
are satisfied with attesting, or even with supposing, that mind can
have no consciousness of anything but its own states. Other
philosophers, as I have said, maintain that "things which have a real
existence are the very things we perceive." It is Thomas Reid who has
upheld, in some passages of his writings at all events, the theory of
instantaneous perception, or intuition. It has also been defended by
Hamilton in a more explicit manner.[11] It has been taken up again in
recent years, by a profound and subtle philosopher, M. Bergson, who,
unable to admit that the nervous system is a _substratum of knowledge_
and serves us as a percipient, takes it to be solely a motor organ,
and urges that the sensory parts of the system--that is to say, the
centripetal, optic, acoustic, &c, nerves--do not call forth, when
excited, any kind of sensation, their sole purpose being to convey
disturbances from periphery to periphery, or, say, from external
objects to the muscles of the body. This hypothesis, surely a little
difficult to comprehend, places, if I mistake not, the mind, as a
power of perception and representation, within the interval comprised
between the external object and the body, so that the mind is in
direct contact with external objects and knows them as they are.

It will be noticed that these three interpretations, the
spiritualistic, the experimental, and the metaphysical, are in formal
opposition with that which I have set forth earlier in these pages.
They deny the supposition that the nervous system serves us as an
intermediary with nature, and that it transforms nature before
bringing it to our consciousness. And it might seem that by
contradicting my fundamental proposition, those three new hypotheses
must lead to a totally different conclusion.

Now, this is not so at all. The conclusion I have enunciated remains
entirely sound, notwithstanding this change in the starting point, and
for the following reason. It is easy to see that we cannot represent
to ourselves the inner structure of matter by using all our sensations
without distinction, because it is impossible to bring all these
sensations within one single and identical synthetic construction: for
this they are too dissimilar. Thus, we should try in vain to unite in
any kind of scheme a movement of molecules and an odour; these
elements are so heterogeneous that there is no way of joining them
together and combining them.

The physicists have more or less consciously perceived this, and, not
being able to overcome by a frontal attack the difficulty created by
the heterogeneity of our sensations, they have turned its flank. The
ingenious artifice they have devised consists in retaining only some
of these sensations, and in rejecting the remainder; the first being
considered as really representing the essence of matter, and the
latter as the effects of the former on our organs of sense; the first
being reputed to be true, we may say, and the second being reputed
false--that is subjective, that is not representing the _X_ of
matter.[12] I have refuted this argument by showing that all our
sensations without exception are subjective and equally false in
regard to the _X_ of matter, and that no one of them, consequently,
has any claim to explain the others.

Now, by a new interpretation; we are taught that all sensations are
equally true, and that all faithfully represent the great _X._ If they
be all equally true, it is absolutely the same as if they were all
false; no one sensation can have any privilege over the others, none
can be truer than the others, none can be capable of explaining the
others, none can usurp to itself the sole right of representing the
essence of matter; and we thus find ourselves, in this case, as in the
preceding, in presence of the insurmountable difficulty of creating a
synthesis with heterogeneous elements.

All that has been said above is summed up in the following points:--

1. Of the external world, we only know our sensations. All the
physical properties of matter resolve themselves for us into
sensations, present, past, or possible. We may not say that it is by
the intermediary, by the means of sensation, that we know these
properties, for that would mean that the properties are distinct from
the sensations. Objects are to us in reality only aggregates of
sensations.

2. The sensations belong to the different organs of the senses--sight,
hearing, touch, the muscular sense, &c. Whatever be the sense
affected, one sensation has the same rights as the others, from the
point of view of the cognition of external objects. It is impossible
to distinguish them into subjective and objective, by giving to this
distinction the meaning that certain sensations represent objects as
they are, while certain others simply represent our manner of feeling.
This is an illegitimate distinction, since all sensations have the
same physiological condition, the excitement of a sensory nerve, and
result from the properties of this nerve when stimulated.

3. Consequently, it is impossible for us to form a conception of
matter in terms of movement, and to explain by the modalities of
movement the properties of bodies; for this theory amounts to giving
to certain sensations, especially those of the muscular sense, the
hegemony over the others. We cannot explain, we have not the right to
explain, one sensation by another, and the mechanical theory of matter
has simply the value of a symbol.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 10: See p. 22, _sup._--ED.]

[Footnote 11: See J. S. MILL'S _Examination of Sir Wm. Hamilton's
Philosophy_, chap. x. p. 176, _et. seq._]

[Footnote 12: See p. 18, _sup._--ED.]




