BOOK II

THE DEFINITION OF MIND




CHAPTER I

THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN COGNITION[13] AND ITS OBJECT


After having thus studied matter and reduced it to sensations, we
shall apply the same method of analysis to mind, and inquire whether
mind possesses any characteristic which allows it to be distinguished
from matter.

Before going any further, let me clear up an ambiguity. All the first
part of this work has been devoted to the study of what is known to us
in and by sensation; and I have taken upon myself, without advancing
any kind of justifying reason, to call that which is known to us, by
this method, by the name of matter, thus losing sight of the fact that
matter only exists by contra-distinction and opposition to mind, and
that if mind did not exist, neither would matter. I have thus appeared
to prejudge the question to be resolved.

The whole of this terminology must now be considered as having simply
a conventional value, and must be set aside for the present. These
are the precise terms in which this question presents itself to my
mind. A part of the knowable consists in sensations. We must,
therefore, without troubling to style this aggregate of sensations
_matter_ rather than _mind_, make an analysis of the phenomena known
by the name of mind, and see whether they differ from the preceding
ones. Let us, therefore, make an inventory of mind. By the process of
enumeration, we find quoted as psychological phenomena, the
sensations, the perceptions, the ideas, the recollections, the
reasonings, the emotions, the desires, the imaginations, and the acts
of attention and of will. These appear to be, at the first glance, the
elements of mind; but, on reflection, one perceives that these
elements belong to two distinct categories, of which it is easy to
recognise the duality, although, in fact and in reality, these two
elements are constantly combined. The first of these elements may
receive the generic name of objects of cognition, or objects known,
and the second that of acts of cognition.

Here are a few examples of concrete facts, which only require a rapid
analysis to make their double nature plain. In a sensation which we
feel are two things: a particular state, or an object which one knows,
and the act of knowing it, of feeling it, of taking cognisance of it;
in other words, every sensation comprises an impression and a
cognition. In a recollection there is, in like manner, a certain image
of the past and the fact consisting in the taking cognisance of this
image. It is, in other terms, the distinction between the intelligence
and the object. Similarly, all reasoning has an object; there must be
matter on which to reason, whether this matter be supplied by the
facts or the ideas. Again, a desire, a volition, an act of reflection,
has need of a point of application. One does not will in the air, one
wills something; one does not reflect in the void, one reflects over a
fact or over some difficulty.

We may then provisionally distinguish in an inventory of the mind a
something which is perceived, understood, desired, or willed, and,
beyond that, the fact of perceiving, of understanding, or desiring, or
of willing.

To illustrate this distinction by an example, I shall say that an
analogous separation can be effected in an act of vision, by showing
that the act of vision, which is a concrete operation, comprises two
distinct elements: the object seen and the eye which sees. But this
is, of course, only a rough comparison, of which we shall soon see the
imperfections when we are further advanced in the study of the
question.

To this activity which exists and manifests itself in the facts of
feeling, perceiving, &c., we can give a name in order to identify and
recognise it: we will call it the consciousness[14] (_la conscience_),
and we will call object everything which is not the act of
consciousness.

After this preliminary distinction, to which we shall often refer, we
will go over the principal manifestations of the mind, and we will
first study the objects of cognition, reserving for another chapter
the study of the acts of cognition--that is to say, of consciousness.
We will thus examine successively sensation, idea, emotion, and will.

It has been often maintained that the peculiar property of mind is to
perceive sensations. It has also been said that thought--that is, the
property of representing to one's self that which does not
exist--distinguishes mind from matter. Lastly, it has not failed to be
affirmed that one thing which the mind brings into the material world
is its power of emotion; and moralists, choosing somewhat arbitrarily
among certain emotions, have said that the mind is the creator of
goodness. We will endeavour to analyse these different affirmations.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 13: See [Note 3], _sup._ on p. 15.--ED.]

[Footnote 14: The word "_conscience_" is one of those which has been
used in the greatest number of different meanings. Let it be, at
least, understood that _I_ use it here in an intellectual and not a
moral sense. I do not attach to the conscience the idea of a moral
approbation or disapprobation, of a duty, of a remorse. The best
example to illustrate conscience has, perhaps, been formed by LADD. It
is the contrast between a person awake and sleeping a dreamless sleep.
The first has consciousness of a number of things; the latter has
consciousness of nothing. Let me now add that we distinguish from
consciousness that multitude of things of which one has consciousness
of. Of these we make the object of consciousness. [_Conscience_ has
throughout been rendered "consciousness."--ED.]]




