CHAPTER III

THE MECHANICAL THEORIES OF MATTER ARE ONLY SYMBOLS


If we keep firmly in mind the preceding conclusion--a conclusion which
is neither exclusively my own, nor very new--we shall find a certain
satisfaction in watching the discussions of physicists on the essence
of matter, on the nature of force and of energy, and on the relations
of ponderable and imponderable matter. We all know how hot is the
fight raging on this question. At the present time it is increasing in
intensity, in consequence of the disturbance imported into existing
theories by the new discoveries of radio-activity.[8] We psychologists
can look on very calmly at these discussions, with that selfish
pleasure we unavowedly feel when we see people fighting while
ourselves safe from knocks. We have, in fact, the feeling that, come
what may from the discussions on the essence of matter, there can be
no going beyond the truth that matter is an excitant of our nervous
system, and is only known in connection with, the perception we have
of this last.

If we open a work on physics or physiology we shall note with
astonishment how the above considerations are misunderstood. Observers
of nature who seek, and rightly, to give the maximum of exactness to
their observations, show that they are obsessed by one constant
prejudice: they mistrust sensation.

A great part of their efforts consists, by what they say, in reducing
the role of sensation to its fitting part in science; and the
invention of mechanical aids to observation is constantly held up as a
means of remedying the imperfection of our senses. In physics the
thermometer replaces the sensation of heat that our skin--our hand,
for example--experiences by the measurable elevation of a column of
mercury, and the scale-pan of a precise balance takes the place of the
vague sensation of trifling weights; in physiology a registering
apparatus replaces the sensation of the pulse which the doctor feels
with the end of his forefinger by a line on paper traced with
indelible ink, of which the duration and the intensity, as well as the
varied combinations of these two elements, can be measured line by
line.

Learned men who pride themselves on their philosophical attainments
vaunt in very eloquent words the superiority of the physical
instrument over mere sensation. Evidently, however, the earnestness of
this eulogy leads them astray. The most perfect registering apparatus
must, in the long-run, after its most scientific operations, address
itself to our senses and produce in us some small sensation. The
reading of the height reached by the column of mercury in a
thermometer when heated is accomplished by a visual sensation, and it
is by the sight that the movements of the balance are controlled; and
that the traces of the sphygmograph are analysed. We may readily admit
to physicists and physiologists all the advantages of these apparatus.
This is not the question. It simply proves that there are sensations
and sensations, and that certain of these are better and more precise
than others. The visual sensation of relation in space seems to be
_par excellence_ the scientific sensation which it is sought to
substitute for all the rest. But, after all, it is but a sensation.

Let us recognise that there is, in all this contempt on the part of
physicists for sensation, only differences in language, and that a
paraphrase would suffice to correct them without leaving any trace. Be
it so. But something graver remains. When one is convinced that our
knowledge of the outer world is limited to sensations, we can no
longer understand how it is possible to give oneself up, as physicists
do, to speculations upon the constitution of matter.

Up to the present there have been three principal ways of explaining
the physical phenomena of the universe. The first, the most abstract,
and the furthest from reality, is above all verbal. It consists in the
use of formulas in which the quality of the phenomena is replaced by
their magnitude, in which this magnitude, ascertained by the most
precise processes of measurement, becomes the object of abstract
reasoning which allows its modifications to be foreseen under given
experimental conditions. This is pure mathematics, a formal science
depending upon logic. Another conception, less restricted than the
above, and of fairly recent date, consists in treating all
manifestations of nature as forms of energy. This term "energy" has a
very vague content. At the most it expresses but two things: first, it
is based on a faint recollection of muscular force, and it reminds one
dimly of the sensation experienced when clenching the fists; and,
secondly, it betrays a kind of very natural respect for the forces of
nature which, in all the images man has made of them, constantly
appear superior to his own. We may say "the energy of nature;" but we
should never say, what would be experimentally correct; "the weakness
of nature." The word "weakness" we reserve for ourselves. Apart from
these undecided suggestions, the term energy is quite the proper term
to designate phenomena, the intimate nature of which we do not seek to
penetrate, but of which we only wish to ascertain the laws and measure
the degrees.

A third conception, more imaginative and bolder than the others, is
the mechanical or kinetic theory. This last absolutely desires that we
should represent to ourselves, that we should imagine, how phenomena
really take place; and in seeking for the property of nature the most
clearly perceived, the easiest to define and analyse, and the most apt
to lend itself to measurement and calculation, it has chosen motion.
Consequently all the properties of matter have been reduced to this
one, and in spite of the apparent contradiction of our senses, it has
been supposed that the most varied phenomena are produced, in the last
resort, by the displacement of material particles. Thus, sound, light,
heat, electricity, and even the nervous influx would be due to
vibratory movements, varying only by their direction and their
periods, and all nature is thus explained as a problem of animated
geometry. This last theory, which has proved very fertile in
explanations of the most delicate phenomena of sound and light, has so
strongly impressed many minds that it has led them to declare that
the explanation of phenomena by the laws of mechanics alone has the
character of a scientific explanation. Even recently, it seemed heresy
to combat these ideas.

Still more recently, however, a revulsion of opinion has taken place.
Against the physicists, the mathematicians in particular have risen
up, and taking their stand on science, have demonstrated that all the
mechanisms invented have crowds of defects. First, in each particular
case, there is such a complication that that which is defined is much
more simple than the definition; then there is such a want of unity
that quite special mechanisms adapted to each phenomenal detail have
to be imagined; and, lastly--most serious argument of all--so much
comprehensiveness and suppleness is employed, that no experimental law
is found which cannot be understood mechanically, and no fact of
observation which shows an error in the mechanical explanation--a sure
proof that this mode of explanation has no meaning.

My way of combating the mechanical theory starts from a totally
different point of view. Psychology has every right to say a few words
here, as upon the value of every kind of scientific theory; for it is
acquainted with the nature of the mental needs of which these theories
are the expression and which these theories seek to satisfy. It has
not yet been sufficiently noticed that psychology does not allow
itself to be confined, like physics or sociology, within the logical
table of human knowledge, for it has, by a unique privilege, a right
of supervision over the other sciences. We shall see that the
psychological discussion of mechanics has a wider range than that of
the mathematicians.

Since our cognition cannot go beyond sensation, shall we first recall
what meaning can be given to an explanation of the inmost nature of
matter? It can only be an artifice, a symbol, or a process convenient
for classification in order to combine the very different qualities of
things in one unifying synthesis--a process having nearly the same
theoretical value as a _memoria technica_, which, by substituting
letters for figures, helps us to retain the latter in our minds. This
does not mean that figures are, in fact, letters, but it is a
conventional substitution which has a practical advantage. What
_memoria technica_ is to the ordinary memory, the theory of mechanics
should be for our needed unification.

Unfortunately, this is not so. The excuse we are trying to make for
the mechanicians is illusory. There is no mistaking their ambition,
Notwithstanding the prudence of some and the equivocations in which
others have rejoiced, they have drawn their definition in the absolute
and not in the relative. To take their conceptions literally, they
have thought the movement of matter to be something existing outside
our eye, our hands, and our sense; in a word, something _noumenal_, as
Kant would have said. The proof that this is their real idea, is that
movement is presented to us as the true outer and explanatory cause of
our sensations, the external excitement to our nerves. The most
elementary works on physics are impregnated with this disconcerting
conception. If we open a description of acoustics, we read that sound
and noise are subjective states which have no reality outside our
auditory apparatus; that they are sensations produced by an external
cause, which is the vibratory movement of sonorous bodies--whence the
conclusion that this vibratory movement is not itself a sensation. Or,
shall we take another proof, still more convincing. This is the
vibratory and silent movement which is invoked by physicists to
explain the peculiarities of subjective sensation; so that the
interferences, the pulsations of sound, and, in fine, the whole
physiology of the ear, is treated as a problem in kinematics, and is
explained by the composition of movements.

What kind of reality do physicists then allow to the displacements of
matter? Where do they place them, since they recognise otherwise that
the essence of matter is unknown to us? Are we to suppose that,
outside the world of _noumena_, outside the world of phenomena and
sensations, there exists a third world, an intermediary between the
two former, the world of atoms and that of mechanics?

A short examination will, moreover, suffice to show of what this
mechanical model is formed which is presented to us as constituting
the essence of matter. This can be nothing else than the sensations,
since we are incapable of perceiving or imagining anything else. It is
the sensations of sight, of touch, and even of the muscular sense.
Motion is a fact seen by the eye, felt by the hand; it enters into us
by the perception we have of the solid masses visible to the naked eye
which exist in our field of observation, of their movements and their
equilibrium and the displacement we ourselves effect with our bodies.
Here is the sensory origin, very humble and very gross, of all the
mechanics of the atoms. Here is the stuff of which our lofty
conception is formed. Our mind can, it is true, by a work of
purification, strip movement of most of its concrete qualities,
separate it even from the perception of the object in motion, and make
of it a something or other ideal and diagrammatic; but there will
still remain a residuum of visual, tactile, and muscular sensations,
and consequently it is still nothing else than a subjective state,
bound to the structure of our organs. We are, for the rest, so
wrapped up in sensations that none of our boldest conceptions can
break through the circle.

But it is not the notion of movement alone which proceeds from
sensation. There is also that of exteriority, of space, of position,
and, by opposition, that of external or psychological events. Without
declaring it to be certain, I will remind you that it is infinitely
probable that these notions are derived from our muscular experience.
Free motion, arrested motion, the effort, the speed, and the direction
of motion, such are the sensorial elements, which, in all probability,
constitute the foundation of our ideas on space and its properties.
And those are so many subjective notions which we have no right to
treat as objects belonging to the outer world.

What is more remarkable, also, is that even the ideas of object, of
body, and of matter, are derived from visual and tactile sensations
which have been illegitimately set up as entities. We have come, in
fact, to consider matter as a being separate from sensations, superior
to our sensations, distinct from the properties which enable us to
know it, and binding together these properties, as it were, in a
sheaf. Here again is a conception at the base of visualisation and
muscularisation; it consists in referring to the visual and other
sensations, raised for the occasion to the dignity of external and
permanent causes, the other sensations which are considered as the
effects of the first named upon our organs of sense.

It demands a great effort to clear our minds of these familiar
conceptions which, it is plain are nothing but naive realism. Yes! the
mechanical conception of the universe is nothing but naive realism.

To recapitulate our idea, and, to make it more plain by an
illustration, here is a tuning-fork on the table before me. With a
vigorous stroke of the bow I set it vibrating. The two prongs
separate, oscillate rapidly, and a sound of a certain tone is heard. I
connect this tuning-fork, by means of electric wires, with a Deprez
recording apparatus which records the vibrations on the blackened
surface of a revolving cylinder; and we can thus, by an examination of
the trace made under our eyes, ascertain all the details of the
movement which animates it. We see, parallel to each other, two
different orders of phenomena; the visual phenomena which show us that
the tuning-fork is vibrating, and the auditory phenomena which convey
to us the fact that it is making a sound.

The physicist, asked for an explanation of all this, will answer: "It
is the vibration of the tuning-fork which, transmitted by the air, is
carried to our auditory apparatus, causes a vibration in the
tympanum, the movements of which are communicated to the small bones
of the middle ear, thence (abridging details) to the terminations of
the auditory nerve, and so produces in us the subjective sensation of
sound." Well, in so saying, the physicist commits an error of
interpretation; outside our ears there exists something we do not know
which excites them; this something cannot be the vibratory movement of
the tuning-fork, for this vibratory movement which we can see is
likewise a subjective sensation; it no more exists outside our sight
than sound exists outside our ears. In any case, it is as absurd to
explain a sensation of sound by one of sight, as a sensation of sight
by one of sound.

One would be neither further from nor nearer to the truth if we
answered that physicist as follows: "You give the preponderance to
your eye; I myself give it to my ear. This tuning-fork appears to you
to vibrate. Wrong! This is how the thing occurs. This tuning-fork
produces a sound which, by exciting our retina, gives us a sense of
movement. This visual sensation of vibration is a purely subjective
one, the external cause of the phenomenon is the sound. The outer
world is a concert of sounds which rises in the immensity of space.
Matter is noise and nothingness is silence."

This theory of the above experiment is not absurd; but, as a matter
of fact, it is probable that no one would or could accept it, except
verbally for amusement, as a challenge, or for the pleasure of talking
metaphysics. The reason is that all our evolution, for causes which
would take too long to detail, has established the hegemony of certain
of our senses over the others. We have, above all, become visual and
manual beings. It is the eye and the hand which give us the
perceptions of the outer world of which we almost exclusively make use
in our sciences; and we are now almost incapable of representing to
ourselves the foundation of phenomena otherwise than by means of these
organs. Thus all the preceding experiment from the stroke of the bow
to the final noise presents itself to us in visual terms, and further,
these terms are not confined to a series of detached sensations.

Visual sensation combines with the tactile and muscular sensations,
and forms sensorial constructions which succeed each, other, continue,
and arrange themselves logically: in lieu of sensations, there are
objects and relations of space between these objects, and the actions
which connect them, and the phenomena which pass from one to the
other. All that is only sensation, if you will; but merely as the
agglutinated molecules of cement and of stone are a palace.

Thus the whole series of visual events which compose our experiment
with the tuning-fork can be coherently explained. One understands that
It is the movement of my hand equipped with the bow which is
communicated to the tuning-fork. One understands that this movement
passing into the fork has changed its form and rhythm, that the waves
produced by the fork transmit themselves, by the oscillations of the
air-molecules, to our tympanum, and so on. There is in all this series
of experiments an admirable continuity which fully satisfies our
minds. However much we might be convinced by the theoretical reasons
given above, that we have quite as much right to represent the same
series of events in an auditory form, we should be incapable of
realising that form to ourselves.

What would be the structure of the ear to any one who only knew it
through the sense of hearing? What would become of the tympanum, the
small bones, the cochlea, and the terminations of the acoustic nerve,
if it were only permitted to represent them in the language of sound?
It is very difficult to imagine.

Since, however, we are theorising, let us not be stopped by a few
difficulties of comprehension. Perhaps a little training might enable
us to overcome them. Perhaps musicians, who discern as much reality in
what one hears as in what one sees, would be more apt than other folk
to understand the necessary transposition. Some of them, in their
autobiographies, have made, by the way, very suggestive remarks on the
importance they attribute to sound: and, moreover, the musical world,
with its notes, its intervals, and its orchestration, lives and
develops in a manner totally independent of vibration.

Perhaps we can here quote one or two examples which may give us a
lead. To measure the length of a body instead of applying to it a
yard-wand, one might listen to its sound; for the pitch of the sound
given by two cords allows us to deduce their difference of length, and
even the absolute length of each. The chemical composition of a body
might be noted by its electric resistance and the latter verified by
the telephone; that is to say, by the ear. Or, to take a more subtle
example. We might make calculations with sounds of which we have
studied the harmonic relations as we do nowadays with figures. A sum
in rule of three might even be solved sonorously; for, given three
sounds, the ear can find a fourth which should have the same relation
to the third as the second to the first. Every musical ear performs
this operation easily; now, this fourth sound, what else is it but the
fourth term in a rule of three? And by taking into consideration the
number of its vibrations a numerical solution would be found to the
problem. This novel form of calculating machine might serve to fix
the price of woollen stuffs, to calculate brokerages and percentages,
and the solution would be obtained without the aid of figures, without
calculation, without visualisation, and by the ear alone.

By following up this idea, also, we might go a little further. We
might arrive at the conviction that our present science is human,
petty, and contingent; that it is closely linked with the structure of
our sensory organs; that this structure results from the evolution
which fashioned these organs; that this evolution has been an accident
of history; that in the future it may be different; and that,
consequently, by the side or in the stead of our modern science, the
work of our eyes and hands--and also of our words--there might have
been constituted, there may still be constituted, sciences entirely
and extraordinarily new--auditory, olfactory, and gustatory sciences,
and even others derived from other kinds of sensations which we can
neither foresee nor conceive because they are not, for the moment,
differentiated in us. Outside the matter we know, a very special
matter fashioned of vision and touch, there may exist other matter
with totally different properties.

But let us bring our dream to an end. The interest of our discussion
does not lie in the hypothetical substitution of hearing or any other
sense for sight. It lies in the complete suppression of all
explanation of the noumenal object in terms borrowed from the language
of sensation. And that is our last word. We must, by setting aside the
mechanical theory, free ourselves from a too narrow conception of the
constitution of matter. And this liberation will be to us a great
advantage which we shall soon reap. We shall avoid the error of
believing that mechanics is the only real thing and that all that
cannot be explained by mechanics must be incomprehensible. We shall
then gain more liberty of mind for understanding what the union of the
soul with the body[9] may be.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 8: I would draw attention to a recent volume by GUSTAVE LE
BON, on _Evolution de la Matiere_, a work full of original and bold
ideas.]

[Footnote 9: See [Note 1] on p. 3.--ED.]




