CHAPTER X

OF THE GRADUAL PERFECTING OF BOOKS

While assiduously seeking out the wisdom of the men of old, according
to the counsel of the Wise Man (Eccles. xxxix.):  The wise man, he
says, will seek out the wisdom of all the ancients, we have not thought
fit to be misled into the opinion that the first founders of the arts
have purged away all crudeness, knowing that the discoveries of each of
the faithful, when weighed in a faithful balance, makes a tiny portion
of science, but that by the anxious investigations of a multitude of
scholars, each as it were contributing his share, the mighty bodies of
the sciences have grown by successive augmentations to the immense bulk
that we now behold.  For the disciples, continually melting down the
doctrines of their masters, and passing them again through the furnace,
drove off the dross that had been previously overlooked, until there
came out refined gold tried in a furnace of earth, purified seven times
to perfection, and stained by no admixture of error or doubt.

For not even Aristotle, although a man of gigantic intellect, in whom
it pleased Nature to try how much of reason she could bestow upon
mortality, and whom the Most High made only a little lower than the
angels, sucked from his own fingers those wonderful volumes which the
whole world can hardly contain.  But, on the contrary, with lynx-eyed
penetration he had seen through the sacred books of the Hebrews, the
Babylonians, the Egyptians, the Chaldaeans, the Persians and the Medes,
all of which learned Greece had transferred into her treasuries.  Whose
true sayings he received, but smoothed away their crudities, pruned
their superfluities, supplied their deficiencies, and removed their
errors.  And he held that we should give thanks not only to those who
teach rightly, but even to those who err, as affording the way of more
easily investigating truth, as he plainly declares in the second book
of his Metaphysics.  Thus many learned lawyers contributed to the
Pandects, many physicians to the Tegni, and it was by this means that
Avicenna edited his Canon, and Pliny his great work on Natural History,
and Ptolemy the Almagest.

For as in the writers of annals it is not difficult to see that the
later writer always presupposes the earlier, without whom he could by
no means relate the former times, so too we are to think of the authors
of the sciences.  For no man by himself has brought forth any science,
since between the earliest students and those of the latter time we
find intermediaries, ancient if they be compared with our own age, but
modern if we think of the foundations of learning, and these men we
consider the most learned.  What would Virgil, the chief poet among the
Latins, have achieved, if he had not despoiled Theocritus, Lucretius,
and Homer, and had not ploughed with their heifer?  What, unless again
and again he had read somewhat of Parthenius and Pindar, whose
eloquence he could by no means imitate?  What could Sallust, Tully,
Boethius, Macrobius, Lactantius, Martianus, and in short the whole
troop of Latin writers have done, if they had not seen the productions
of Athens or the volumes of the Greeks?  Certes, little would Jerome,
master of three languages, Ambrosius, Augustine, though he confesses
that he hated Greek, or even Gregory, who is said to have been wholly
ignorant of it, have contributed to the doctrine of the Church, if more
learned Greece had not furnished them from its stores.  As Rome,
watered by the streams of Greece, had earlier brought forth
philosophers in the image of the Greeks, in like fashion afterwards it
produced doctors of the orthodox faith.  The creeds we chant are the
sweat of Grecian brows, promulgated by their Councils, and established
by the martyrdom of many.

Yet their natural slowness, as it happens, turns to the glory of the
Latins, since as they were less learned in their studies, so they were
less perverse in their errors.  In truth, the Arian heresy had all but
eclipsed the whole Church; the Nestorian wickedness presumed to rave
with blasphemous rage against the Virgin, for it would have robbed the
Queen of Heaven, not in open fight but in disputation, of her name and
character as Mother of God, unless the invincible champion Cyril, ready
to do single battle, with the help of the Council of Ephesus, had in
vehemence of spirit utterly extinguished it.  Innumerable are the forms
as well as the authors of Greek heresies; for as they were the original
cultivators of our holy faith, so too they were the first sowers of
tares, as is shown by veracious history.  And thus they went on from
bad to worse, because in endeavouring to part the seamless vesture of
the Lord, they totally destroyed primitive simplicity of doctrine, and
blinded by the darkness of novelty would fall into the bottomless pit,
unless He provide for them in His inscrutable prerogative, whose wisdom
is past reckoning.

Let this suffice; for here we reach the limit of our power of judgment.
One thing, however, we conclude from the premises, that the ignorance
of the Greek tongue is now a great hindrance to the study of the Latin
writers, since without it the doctrines of the ancient authors, whether
Christian or Gentile, cannot be understood.  And we must come to a like
judgment as to Arabic in numerous astronomical treatises, and as to
Hebrew as regards the text of the Holy Bible, which deficiencies,
indeed, Clement V.  provides for, if only the bishops would faithfully
observe what they so lightly decree.  Wherefore we have taken care to
provide a Greek as well as a Hebrew grammar for our scholars, with
certain other aids, by the help of which studious readers may greatly
inform themselves in the writing, reading, and understanding of the
said tongues, although only the hearing of them can teach correctness
of idiom.



CHAPTER XI

WHY WE HAVE PREFERRED BOOKS OF LIBERAL LEARNING TO BOOKS OF LAW

That lucrative practice of positive law, designed for the dispensation
of earthly things, the more useful it is found by the children of this
world, so much the less does it aid the children of light in
comprehending the mysteries of holy writ and the secret sacraments of
the faith, seeing that it disposes us peculiarly to the friendship of
the world, by which man, as S.  James testifies, is made the enemy of
God.  Law indeed encourages rather than extinguishes the contentions of
mankind, which are the result of unbounded greed, by complicated laws,
which can be turned either way; though we know that it was created by
jurisconsults and pious princes for the purpose of assuaging these
contentions.  But in truth, as the same science deals with contraries,
and the power of reason can be used to opposite ends, and at the same
the human mind is more inclined to evil, it happens with the practisers
of this science that they usually devote themselves to promoting
contention rather than peace, and instead of quoting laws according to
the intent of the legislator, violently strain the language thereof to
effect their own purposes.

Wherefore, although the over-mastering love of books has possessed our
mind from boyhood, and to rejoice in their delights has been our only
pleasure, yet the appetite for the books of the civil law took less
hold of our affections, and we have spent but little labour and expense
in acquiring volumes of this kind.  For they are useful only as the
scorpion in treacle, as Aristotle, the sun of science, has said of
logic in his book De Pomo.  We have noticed a certain manifest
difference of nature between law and science, in that every science is
delighted and desires to open its inward parts and display the very
heart of its principles, and to show forth the roots from which it buds
and flourishes, and that the emanation of its springs may be seen of
all men; for thus from the cognate and harmonious light of the truth of
conclusion  to principles, the whole body of science will be full of
light, having no part dark.  But laws, on the contrary, since they are
only human enactments for the regulation of social life, or the yokes
of princes thrown over the necks of their subjects, refuse to be
brought to the standard of synteresis, the origin of equity, because
they feel that they possess more of arbitrary will than rational
judgment.  Wherefore the judgment of the wise for the most part is that
the causes of laws are not a fit subject of discussion.  In truth, many
laws acquire force by mere custom, not by syllogistic necessity, like
the arts: as Aristotle, the Phoebus of the Schools, urges in the second
book of the Politics, where he confutes the policy of Hippodamus, which
holds out rewards to the inventors of new laws, because to abrogate old
laws and establish new ones is to weaken the force of those which
exist.  For whatever receives its stability from use alone must
necessarily be brought to nought by disuse.

From which it is seen clearly enough, that as laws are neither arts nor
sciences, so books of law cannot properly be called books of art or
science.  Nor is this faculty which we may call by a special term
geologia, or the earthly science, to be properly numbered among the
sciences.  Now the books of the liberal arts are so useful to the
divine writings, that without their aid the intellect would vainly
aspire to understand them.



