CHAPTER II

THE DEGREE OF AFFECTION THAT IS PROPERLY DUE TO BOOKS

Since the degree of affection a thing deserves depends upon the degree
of its value, and the previous chapter shows that the value of books is
unspeakable, it is quite clear to the reader what is the probable
conclusion from this.  I say probable, for in moral science we do not
insist upon demonstration, remembering that the educated man seeks such
degree of certainty as he perceives the subject-matter will bear, as
Aristotle testifies in the first book of his Ethics.  For Tully does
not appeal to Euclid, nor does Euclid rely upon Tully.  This at all
events we endeavour to prove, whether by logic or rhetoric, that all
riches and all delights whatsoever yield place to books in the
spiritual mind, wherein the Spirit which is charity ordereth charity.
Now in the first place, because wisdom is contained in books more than
all mortals understand, and wisdom thinks lightly of riches, as the
foregoing chapter declares.  Furthermore, Aristotle, in his Problems,
determines the question, why the ancients proposed prizes to the
stronger in gymnastic and corporeal contests, but never awarded any
prize for wisdom.  This question he solves as follows:  In gymnastic
exercises the prize is better and more desirable than that for which it
is bestowed; but it is certain that nothing is better than wisdom:
wherefore no prize could be assigned for wisdom.  And therefore neither
riches nor delights are more excellent than wisdom.  Again, only the
fool will deny that friendship is to be preferred to riches, since the
wisest of men testifies this; but the chief of philosophers honours
truth before friendship, and the truthful Zorobabel prefers it to all
things.  Riches, then, are less than truth.  Now truth is chiefly
maintained and contained in holy books--nay, they are written truth
itself, since by books we do not now mean the materials of which they
are made.  Wherefore riches are less than books, especially as the most
precious of all riches are friends, as Boethius testifies in the second
book of his Consolation; to whom the truth of books according to
Aristotle is to be preferred.  Moreover, since we know that riches
first and chiefly appertain to the support of the body only, while the
virtue of books is the perfection of reason, which is properly speaking
the happiness of man, it appears that books to the man who uses his
reason are dearer than riches.  Furthermore, that by which the faith is
more easily defended, more widely spread, more clearly preached, ought
to be more desirable to the faithful.  But this is the truth written in
books, which our Saviour plainly showed, when he was about to contend
stoutly against the Tempter, girding himself with the shield of truth
and indeed of written truth, declaring "it is written" of what he was
about to utter with his voice.

And, again, no one doubts that happiness is to be preferred to riches.
But happiness consists in the operation of the noblest and diviner of
the faculties that we possess--when the whole mind is occupied in
contemplating the truth of wisdom, which is the most delectable of all
our virtuous activities, as the prince of philosophers declares in the
tenth book of the Ethics, on which account it is that philosophy is
held to have wondrous pleasures in respect of purity and solidity, as
he goes on to say.  But the contemplation of truth is never more
perfect than in books, where the act of imagination perpetuated by
books does not suffer the operation of the intellect upon the truths
that it has seen to suffer interruption.  Wherefore books appear to be
the most immediate instruments of speculative delight, and therefore
Aristotle, the sun of philosophic truth, in considering the principles
of choice, teaches that in itself to philosophize is more desirable
than to be rich, although in certain cases, as where for instance one
is in need of necessaries, it may be more desirable to be rich than to
philosophize.

Moreover, since books are the aptest teachers, as the previous chapter
assumes, it is fitting to bestow on them the honour and the affection
that we owe to our teachers.  In fine, since all men naturally desire
to know, and since by means of books we can attain the knowledge of the
ancients, which is to be desired beyond all riches, what man living
according to nature would not feel the desire of books?  And although
we know that swine trample pearls under foot, the wise man will not
therefore be deterred from gathering the pearls that lie before him.  A
library of wisdom, then, is more precious than all wealth, and all
things that are desirable cannot be compared to it.  Whoever therefore
claims to be zealous of truth, of happiness, of wisdom or knowledge,
aye, even of the faith, must needs become a lover of books.



CHAPTER III

WHAT WE ARE TO THINK OF THE PRICE IN THE BUYING OF BOOKS

From what has been said we draw this corollary welcome to us, but (as
we believe) acceptable to few: namely, that no dearness of price ought
to hinder a man from the buying of books, if he has the money that is
demanded for them, unless it be to withstand the malice of the seller
or to await a more favourable opportunity of buying.  For if it is
wisdom only that makes the price of books, which is an infinite
treasure to mankind, and if the value of books is unspeakable, as the
premises show, how shall the bargain be shown to be dear where an
infinite good is being bought? Wherefore, that books are to be gladly
bought and unwillingly sold, Solomon, the sun of men, exhorts us in the
Proverbs: Buy the truth, he says, and sell not wisdom.  But what we are
trying to show by rhetoric or logic, let us prove by examples from
history.  The arch-philosopher Aristotle, whom Averroes regards as the
law of Nature, bought a few books of Speusippus straightway after his
death for 72,000 sesterces.  Plato, before him in time, but after him
in learning, bought the book of Philolaus the Pythagorean, from which
he is said to have taken the Timaeus, for 10,000 denaries, as Aulus
Gellius relates in the Noctes Atticae. Now Aulus Gellius relates this
that the foolish may consider how wise men despise money in comparison
with books.  And on the other hand, that we may know that folly and
pride go together, let us here relate the folly of Tarquin the Proud in
despising books, as also related by Aulus Gellius.  An old woman,
utterly unknown, is said to have come to Tarquin the Proud, the seventh
king of Rome, offering to sell nine books, in which (as she declared)
sacred oracles were contained, but she asked an immense sum for them,
insomuch that the king said she was mad.  In anger she flung three
books into the fire, and still asked the same sum for the rest.  When
the king refused it, again she flung three others into the fire and
still asked the same price for the three that were left.  At last,
astonished beyond measure, Tarquin was glad to pay for three books the
same price for which he might have bought nine.  The old woman
straightway disappeared, and was never seen before or after.  These
were the Sibylline books, which the Romans consulted as a divine oracle
by some one of the Quindecemvirs, and this is believed to have been the
origin of the Quindecemvirate.  What did this Sibyl teach the proud
king by this bold deed, except that the vessels of wisdom, holy books,
exceed all human estimation; and, as Gregory says of the kingdom of
Heaven:  They are worth all that thou hast?



