The Project Gutenberg eBook of Morals and the Evolution of Man
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Morals and the Evolution of Man

Author: Max Simon Nordau

Translator: Marie Adèle Lewenz


        
Release date: November 12, 2011 [eBook #37998]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/37998

Credits: Produced by Adrian Mastronardi and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive/American Libraries.)






Produced by Adrian Mastronardi and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)








  MORALS AND THE EVOLUTION
  OF MAN



  MORALS AND THE
  EVOLUTION OF MAN

  BY
  MAX NORDAU

  A Translation of
  "BIOLOGIE DER ETHIK"

  By
  MARIE A. LEWENZ, M.A.
  Fellow of University College, London

  CASSELL AND COMPANY, LTD
  London, New York, Toronto and Melbourne
  1922



  TO MY DEAR WIFE ANNA (née DONS),

  the sunshine of my life in happy days, my brave
  comrade in the storms of the world-catastrophe, with
  love and gratitude I dedicate this book which helped
  both her and me to endure the dark years when we
  were homeless wanderers.

  MADRID, _September 26th, 1916_



CONTENTS

  CHAPTER                                               PAGE
  1. THE PHENOMENON OF MORALITY                            1
  2. THE IMMANENCE OF THE CONCEPT OF MORALITY             46
  3. THE BIOLOGICAL ASPECT OF MORALITY                    84
  4. MORALITY AND LAW                                    115
  5. INDIVIDUAL MORALITY AND COLLECTIVE IMMORALITY       144
  6. FREEDOM AND RESPONSIBILITY                          185
  7. MORALITY AND PROGRESS                               215
  8. THE SANCTIONS OF MORALITY                           247




MORALS AND THE

EVOLUTION OF MAN




CHAPTER I

THE PHENOMENON OF MORALITY


A very well-known experiment in animal psychology was once made by
Möbius. An aquarium was divided into two compartments by means of a pane
of glass; in one of these a pike was put and in the other a tench.
Hardly had the former caught sight of his prey, when he rushed to the
attack without noticing the transparent partition. He crashed with
extreme violence again the obstacle and was hurled back stunned, with a
badly battered nose. No sooner had he recovered from the blow than he
again made an onslaught upon his neighbour--with the same result. He
repeated his efforts a few times more, but succeeded only in badly
hurting his head and mouth. At last a dim idea dawned upon his dull mind
that some unknown and invisible power was protecting the tench, and that
any attempt to devour it would be in vain; consequently from that moment
he ceased from all further endeavours to molest his prey. Thereupon the
pane of glass was removed from the tank, and pike and tench swam around
together; the former took no notice whatever of his defenceless
neighbour, who had become sacred to him. In the first instance the pike
had not perceived the glass partition against which he had dashed his
head; now he did not see that it had been taken away. All he knew was
this: he must not attack this tench, otherwise he would fare badly. The
pane of glass, though no longer actually there, surrounded the tench as
with a coat of mail which effectually warded off the murderous attacks
of the pike.

The fact so often observed, that man in many cases does that which he
passionately desires to leave undone, and refrains from doing that which
all his instincts urge him to do--this phenomenon of Morality is a
generalization upon a huge scale of the above experiment on animals with
the pane of glass in a tank.

Jean Jacques Rousseau thought out a theoretical human being who was by
nature good. Such a human being does not exist and has never existed.
From sheer annoyance at the provoking obliquity of vision which led the
enthusiast of Geneva to develop such a theory, one is sorely tempted to
go to the opposite extreme and declare that man is by nature
fundamentally bad; but such an assertion is just as naïve as Rousseau's
contention. Good and bad are values which we can only learn to
appreciate when we have felt the effect of the phenomenon of Morality.
The concepts of good and evil are of much later origin than mankind, and
can therefore no more constitute a fundamental characteristic of man's
original nature than, for instance, the cut and colour of his clothes;
though it is open to wiseacres to maintain that man's nature to some
extent actually finds expression in the cut and colour of his
clothes--that is, in his choice of them. Anyone contemplating primitive
man, man as he emerges from the hands of Nature, stripped of all the
additions which he has acquired in the course of his historical
development, is bound to admit that man is neither good nor bad; he is a
living being acting according to the instincts implanted in his nature;
just like the pike. But in most contingencies he does not obey these
instincts, and if he reflects upon himself and his actions, he is
astounded at realizing this, and asks: "Why do I refrain from revelling
in the gratification of my desires?"

Innumerable times every day of his life he would like to break many or
all of the Ten Commandments; but he abstains from so doing, and, what is
more, mostly without effort, without having painfully to suppress his
desire. What prevents him from yielding to his impulses? An invisible
power which lays its commands upon him: "Thou shalt not!" "Thou shalt!"
Often his aims and inclinations come into violent collision with this
order, or this prohibition, and are hurled back by the painful impact.
Man hears the threatening, imperious voice, but cannot see whence it
comes. Accustomed to reason by analogy, he concludes that it is, like
thunder, a voice of Nature. When the pike has sufficiently injured his
nose against the pane of glass, he assumes as an actual fact that an
insuperable barrier separates him from the tench, and, moreover, that it
is both useless and painful to come into contact with this. He does not
try to discover the nature of the obstacle, and gives up any further
attempt upon his mysteriously protected prey. Man, with a more highly
developed intelligence than the pike, does not accept the phenomenon of
Morality with dull resignation. Since he has become conscious of a
mysterious barrier erected between his volitions and his actions, he has
not ceased to reflect upon this barrier, to investigate it with a timid
yet irresistible desire for knowledge, and to try and discover its
nature.

It redounds to man's credit that he has devoted so much time and energy
to investigating the character and essence of Morality. But the result
of these investigations does not redound to his credit. With the
exception of theology, there is no subject upon which so much has been
written as upon ethics. Yet whosoever plunges into this boundless sea of
literature will emerge with feelings bordering upon horror and despair.
Here a free rein is given to all man's errors, to his habit of drawing
false conclusions, to his faulty modes of thought. Incapacity to
interpret facts, association of ideas, elusive as a will-o'-the-wisp and
uncurbed by any criticism, intemperate mysticism, arrogant dogmatism,
shallow self-sufficiency--all these vie with one another in the
presentment of theories which either are patently foolish, arbitrary or
ill-founded, or else prove to be so when impartially examined.

It is hard for the few reasonable thinkers who have taken part in this
great investigation to make their voices heard amid the uproar raised by
the solemn, unctuous, dictatorial or pedantic tomfools. And even the
former are not entirely satisfactory, because they do not distinguish
clearly enough between the form and the substance, the externals and the
essence of Morality, and because they do not discriminate with
sufficient care between questions as to its nature, origin and aim, and
its powers or sanctions--questions which must on no account be
confounded.

What is Morality? Obviously it is necessary to attempt a clear answer to
this question before any useful purpose can be served by inquiring into
the group of problems to which it gives rise: its aim, its laws, its
origin, its method, its assumptions. The Stoics answer this question as
follows: "Morality is living according to Nature." Furthermore, it is
quite in accordance with the doctrine of the Stoics that Cicero says:
"Virtue, however, is nothing but Nature developed to the highest
possible degree of perfection" ("_ad summum perducta_"). Moral therefore
means natural; Morality and Nature are equivalent; they are one. Really
a simpler or more childlike explanation is hardly possible. The most
superficial glance at human life and at our own soul teaches us that
Morality is contrary to Nature, that it must struggle against Nature to
assert itself, that it means a victory over Nature, in so far as we
understand by Nature in this special sense the most primitive reaction
of man to simple and more complicated stimuli, the first tendency of
impulse, the immediate, instinctive urge to act. Further, the definition
of the Stoics ignores the aggregation of concepts which the synthetic
conception, Morality, involves; as if this were self-evident and
required no definition. The Stoics tacitly assume that Morality and
Good are synonymous. Cicero makes this assumption clearer by using the
word Virtue (_virtus_) instead of Morality. But in all languages this
word implies approbation and praise. It is an appreciation of worth
(_Werturteil_), to use the expression so appropriately coined by Lotze.

But the very fact that we recognize Morality as being valuable is by no
means a matter of course and it demands an explanation.

Certain actions could only be judged to be good if they were
distinguished from others which did not suggest the same judgment, which
were felt to be not good, to be bad or indifferent. We come to the
question, What is Good, what is Bad? The Stoics reply, "That which is
good is natural." It is easy to call facts which please us natural, and
such as displease us unnatural. In reality both series of facts are
equally natural; because everything that happens is natural; because by
definition Nature is the synthesis of all phenomena; because nothing
exists outside of Nature, and within Nature everything is a part of her
and therefore is natural and can be nothing but natural. If we
nevertheless wish to distinguish between natural and unnatural
phenomena, if we call Good, Morality, and Virtue natural, and compare
them favourably with the unnatural, this only proves that we use the
words natural and unnatural as synonyms for good and bad, and that we
have a ready-made standard by which we measure the naturalness or
unnaturalness (that is, the goodness or badness) of actions, and that
there exists within ourselves the law by which we judge them to be good
or bad. But how do we come by this law? How, of what material, and why
do we fashion this standard? Why do we approve of one thing as good and
condemn another as bad? What qualities do the former and the latter
possess, or what qualities do we ascribe to them? That is what we want
to know when we inquire as to the significance of Morality, and the
definition of the Stoics throws no light whatever upon the matter.

According to Aristotle Morality is "the activity of Practical Reason,
which is accompanied by pleasurable emotion." It is not worth while to
dwell upon this definition. It is absolutely valueless. Practical Reason
is not a definite concept; Aristotle does not say anywhere what he
understands by "practical" when he applies this attribute to Reason; and
to call every activity of Practical Reason accompanied by pleasurable
emotion Morality is mere eccentricity.

To take only one example: if I have a house built, and accept the
architect's plans because they please me greatly, my practical reason is
most certainly active; the gratification induced by my reasonable choice
of the plans is doubtless a pleasurable emotion; but assuredly no one
will characterize as moral this activity of my practical reason which is
accompanied by pleasurable emotion. It may be that Aristotle was
contemplating not a single action, but conduct in life as a whole. In
that case he has expressed in an unfortunate, and much too loose a
manner the thought that Morality is Reason plus pleasurable emotion. We
shall frequently meet with and have to examine this idea, which omits to
explain why pleasurable emotions attend certain activities of
"Practical Reason," whatever that may be, and fail to be aroused by
others.

Judaism, as embodied in its law-givers and prophets, teaches that
Morality consists in living and acting in accordance with the divine
Will. Maimonides, who, however, was regarded by many of his
contemporaries as a heretic, does not consider Judaism a creed at all,
but a code of Morality. He maintains that anyone who repudiates the
tenets of the Jewish faith, even the most essential one, namely, the
belief in a single god, must not be excluded from the Jewish community
as long as he conforms to its moral laws. This thinker, usually so
accurate and nice in his reasoning, overlooks the fact that in this case
he is contradicting himself in a manner wellnigh comic. According to
him, too, Morality consists in the endeavour to live and act in
accordance with the divine Will. How is such an endeavour possible for a
man who does not believe in God and for whom consequently no divine Will
exists? Therefore either Morality must be something different from an
approximation to the standard set up by the divine Will, or else he who
denies God cannot be moral. But I will leave the author of the "Guide of
those who have gone astray" to his self-contradiction, and only retain
the Jewish definition of Morality as based upon the Will of God.

Without any restriction Christianity has taken over this definition from
the mother-religion. In his zeal to claim that God alone is the source
of all Morality, St. Augustine allows himself to be carried away to such
an extent that he libels mankind most hatefully. Just as for Rousseau
man is by nature good, for the Bishop of Hippo he is by nature
fundamentally bad. Left to his own devices he would always wallow in the
mire of sin and vice, and would never even feel the wish to abandon his
wickedness. It is God's mercy alone which rescues him from his depravity
and sets his feet upon the path of righteousness, leading him to virtue,
salvation and eternal bliss. Thomas Aquinas is no less definite on this
point. The scriptures of Judaism and Christianity contain the eternal
law which God has ordained for mankind. He points out the paths that man
should follow. All Morality springs from Him alone.

To this very day true believers adhere to this doctrine. Morality did
not originate on earth; the knowledge of it is a gift of grace from
heaven to mankind. It is derived from God; it is that which God has
willed; or else it does not need any special act of volition on the part
of God, but is the essence of God himself. That is the teaching of
Paley, the classical moral philosopher. Virtue consists in doing good to
mankind in obedience to the Will of God, and in order to attain eternal
salvation. Here stress is laid upon the fact that Morality is active
love for one's neighbour, and this is a concession on the part of the
conciliatory Englishman to the utilitarian ethics of his countrymen; but
for him the necessary and sufficient reason for this love of one's
neighbour is the Will of God and the desire for eternal salvation. The
German devotee, Baader, blustering like a capuchin, preaches this
twaddle: "Any Morality which is not rooted in divine law is the
intellectual impiety of our time raised to its highest power; it is the
perfection of atheism; for the idea of the absolute autonomy of man
atheistically denies the Father as law-giver; the theistic denial of the
necessity for divine aid in fulfilling the law does away with the Son or
Mediator, and finally the materialistic-pantheistic apotheosis of Matter
does away with the Holy Ghost with its sanctifying power." The Frenchman
Jouffroy, though more careful and reticent in his manner, unmistakably
expresses his conviction that "ethics, as well as the philosophy of law,
inevitably and necessarily lead to theology."

But this necessity only exists for minds whose desire for knowledge and
truth is easily satisfied by words without a meaning that can be
visualized, by fabulous statements accepted without proof, by fictions
of the imagination, and by shallow juggling with the association of
ideas. Even those who do not approve all Auguste Comte's arguments will
agree with him when he classifies the successive steps in the mental
development of mankind as the theological, transcendental, and
scientific modes of thought. When man's understanding is in its infancy
he is content with a supernatural explanation of all phenomena which
strike him as mysterious, disquiet him or rouse his curiosity. Only I
have never been able to understand why Comte discriminates between the
theological and the transcendental modes of thought, and assigns to the
latter a higher place than the former. Both are on a footing of absolute
equality; both raise arbitrary fictions of the imagination to the
position of sources of knowledge; both substitute anthropomorphic
trivialities for the observation of phenomena and research into the
conditions under which they occur and their relationship to one another.
The only difference between them lies in the fact that transcendentalism
expresses itself in choicer language than does theology, that it
presents formulæ that are more complicated and pretentious, less
transparent and honest--formulæ which the unpractised mind does not
immediately recognize as mythological dogmas in a pseudo-scientific
disguise.

The relationship of theological to transcendental thought is much the
same as that of superstition to religion. Both of them are one and the
same. Religion is shamefaced superstition, whereas superstition has not
yet learned to feel shame. Religion is superstition in a dress-coat, and
therefore fit for polite circles; superstition is religion in a cotton
smock and therefore cannot be admitted to society. Superstition is the
religion of the poor and unassuming, religion is the superstition of
fine folk who plume themselves on their formal and verbal scholarship.

Ever since man has risen above the level of the beasts, ever since the
first faint glimmerings of thought began in the thick-walled, narrow and
dark skull of a hunter of the Neanderthal or Cro Magnon, he has ascribed
everything unintelligible in life and in the world around him to divine
actions and divine sources. How did the world come into existence? A god
or gods created it. How does Nature work? In accordance with the will of
a god or gods, in obedience to divine commands, as a result of divine
activities. What is life? A divine gift of grace. What is
consciousness? An irradiation of the divinity. What is infinity, what
eternity? Attributes of the god. God is the name that from the beginning
of time to the present day men have given to their ignorance. They find
it easier to bear disguised by this pseudonym; they are even proud of
it. With cunning self-deception they have endowed the word with the
dignity pertaining to a title of the most awe-inspiring majesty, and
they no longer feel ashamed of a poverty of mind which can boast of such
a magnificent name. Morality also is one of those phenomena which are
not intelligible as a matter of course. The questions how, whence, why,
and to what end Morality exists, and what it is, cannot be solved at a
glance; its life-history is not apparent to every observer, as is that
of the domestic cat. But why cudgel one's brains? Cheap explanations are
ready to hand. This way mythology, you maid-of-all-work! Morality has
been ordained by God. A moral life is one in accordance with God's
commandments. He who will not content himself with this answer is an
infidel and does not deserve to have any notice taken of him.

Let us leave the paltry statements of theologians and note how men who
investigate questions more thoroughly have dealt with Morality.
Descartes defines Morality as the sustained endeavour to do that which
one has recognized to be right. It is difficult to discern in this
definition the father of scientific scepticism. What are the
distinguishing marks of Right? Is the decision as to what is right and
what is wrong to be left to the subjective judgment of the individual?
In that case Descartes must concede that the action of a burglar is
moral, if he has recognized that it is right for him to perpetrate his
crime between two and three o'clock in the morning, that being the most
favourable time for it, and then strives to the best of his ability to
effect an entrance into the building he has selected, at the moment
which he has recognized as the right one. Or shall all mankind, or at
least the majority, and not the individual, decide what is right? In
that case the definition would certainly approximate to the one which I
hold to be true; but for one thing it would suffer from vagueness; and,
moreover, its originator would lay himself open to the reproach of not
having shown why the individual is worthy of praise when he acts in
accordance with the convictions of the majority, though these be opposed
to his own, and in so doing allows his action to be determined by a
judgment due to a psychic mechanism other than his.

Spinoza's "Ethics" leaves the reader in great discomfort, the result of
vacillating and contradictory explanations. Obviously Descartes' great
disciple had no clear conception of the essence of Morality and held
either consecutively, or may be even simultaneously, divers views on the
subject, amongst which those of all schools of thought are either quite
clearly expressed or at least implied. "By Good," he says, "I mean that
which we know for certain to be useful to us."[1]

  [1] I quote the wording of Berthold Auerbach's translation:
      "B. de Spinoza's collected works. Translated from the Latin
      by Berthold Auerbach." Stuttgart, J. G. Cotta, 1871. Second
      edition, Vol. II.

And again: "To act absolutely virtuously is merely to act, live,
preserve one's being (these three mean the same thing) in accordance
with the dictates of Reason, because one seeks one's own interest."

According to that Morality is synonymous with egoism, and its aim is
man's individual profit or interest. Even the most pronounced
Utilitarians among ethical theorists have not ventured to go to such
lengths. True, they have contended that the aim of moral action is
happiness, but at least they define it as the happiness of the whole
community and not that of the individual, except in so far as he is a
member of the community and has his fair share of its well-being.
Spinoza foresees the objection that the pursuit of one's own happiness
cannot possibly deserve the universal esteem in which virtue is held,
and he tries to adduce reasons whereby the egoism which he characterizes
as moral may be justified and palliated:

"Everyone exists according to the supreme law of Nature, and
consequently everyone does, according to the supreme law of Nature, that
which results from the necessities of his own nature; and therefore
every man forms his judgment as to what is good and bad according to the
supreme law of Nature, pursues his own interest according to his lights,
seeks revenge, strives to preserve what he loves and to destroy what he
hates." That is possibly the most audacious and at the same time the
most ill-founded statement that has ever been written on the subject of
Morality. Morality means behaviour calculated to further one's own
interest. Morality is therefore utility. But man cannot act otherwise
than morally, since he always acts as he is compelled to do by his own
nature. There is no sense in discriminating between good and bad, moral
and immoral, since one always acts in accordance with the behests of
Nature. Man automatically executes the dictates of Nature which is alone
responsible for his deeds.

For the Stoics, too, Morality is action in accordance with the law of
Nature, but Spinoza goes further than the Stoics, in that he does away
with any universally applicable standard of moral conduct, and sets up
instead of Nature pure and simple, which is the same for all, each man's
individual nature as the authority which shall lay down rules of
behaviour for him. So Morality is something individual and subjective.
Man acts according to the requirements of his interest; his own nature
shows him what his interest requires; no other person has any right or
any qualification to form a judgment upon the worth of his conduct, to
call it good or bad, for he cannot know what course of action the man's
personal nature, peculiar to himself and to no other, may prescribe to
him. This is the doctrine of anarchy and amorality put in a nutshell, a
more wordy paraphrase of the _Fais ce que vouldras_ (please yourself),
the terse inscription that Rabelais put over the entrance to his Abbey
of Thélème, as the only law governing that abode of alluring wantonness.
Spinoza certainly does half-heartedly concede to Reason the rôle which
Aristotle positively assigns to it ("To act in an absolutely virtuous
manner is merely to act according to the guidance of Reason," etc.), but
it is impossible to see how Reason can exercise guidance and control if
"everyone does according to the supreme law of Nature that which
results from the necessities of his nature." This can surely only mean
that everyone may yield to the unbridled desires of his natural
instincts, which is the very reverse of self-control by Reason. If
Nature is to rule despotically, there is obviously no place for a
constitutional limitation of her sole power by the effective counsel and
protests of Reason.

But Spinoza renounces in a much more definite way his views recognizing
the right of every individual "to form his judgment as to what is good
and bad according to the supreme law of Nature," for he calmly adds:
"Society can be founded, if it reserves to itself the right possessed by
the individual to take revenge, and to pronounce a verdict on what is
good and what is bad; thereby it acquires the power to prescribe rules
of conduct for the community, to make laws, and to enforce them, not by
means of Reason, which cannot restrict passions, but by threats....
Hence in a state of Nature, sin cannot even be imagined."

This concession to Society most emphatically contradicts his first
definition of Morality. It does away with the right claimed for the
individual "to do according to the supreme law of Nature that which
results from the necessities of his own nature," and by the same
"supreme law of Nature" to "judge what is good and what is bad." It
subjects conduct to the restraint, not of Nature, but of Society. It
bears witness to the admission that "Reason cannot restrict passions,"
although Spinoza has just required the virtuous man to "act according to
the guidance of Reason." Spinoza admits that Morality is not the
consequence of a law inherent in the individual, but of an extraneous
law forced upon him by society; that it is not an individual but a
social phenomenon. In this he agrees with the conclusions of modern
sociological thought, but his merit is much diminished by the fact that
he skims lightly over the one great difficulty which sociological ethics
is struggling to overcome. He says, society "reserves to itself the
right ... to pronounce a verdict on what is good and what is bad, and
thereby acquires the power to prescribe rules of conduct to the
community," etc.

It has the power right enough; police, judge, prison and gallows bear
witness to that; but has it the right? That is not clear without further
investigation. It requires to be proved. The amoralist can emphatically
deny this, basing his conclusion on Spinoza's own definition. He can
legitimately declare that he need submit to no dictates of society, that
he owes obedience only to his own nature and his own inner needs, and
the moral philosopher can only prove to him that he is wrong by
scornfully indicating the penal code and its stalwart minions.

Spinoza, we see, has already given a whole series of mutually
destructive and contradictory definitions of Morality: it is the law of
life and conduct which society lays down for the individual, though we
do not learn from him on what principles it is based; it is the pursuit
of one's own interest as indicated by Reason; it is obedience to
necessity--that is to say, to the demands of one's own nature. All this
does not suffice him. He discovers a new aspect of Morality.
"Recognition of Good and Evil is nothing but a pleasurable or a
disagreeable emotion in so far as we are conscious of it." And again,
"Pleasure is not actually bad (as the ascetics probably contend), but
good; pain, on the contrary, is actually bad."

In this case the ideas pleasure and pain are treated as equivalents of
good and bad, as were useful and harmful in the former case. According
to the axiom that things that are equal to the same thing must be equal
to one another, pleasurable is synonymous not only with good, but also
with beneficial, and in like manner painful with bad and harmful. Brandy
undoubtedly produces a sensation of pleasure in the drinker; is brandy,
then, good in a moral sense? Above all, is it beneficial? Many such
questions could be put to Spinoza, but this one is enough.

Thus we discover Spinoza to be at one and the same time a Utilitarian
and a Hedonist, the champion of Impulse and again of Reason, an
anarchistic individualist and a herald of the right of society to rule
the individual. Angry and disappointed, we turn from him, for instead of
finding in him the definite standard we sought we have met with the
shifting hues of the chameleon and the uncanny changes of form of
Proteus.

The views of the English thinkers are clearer and more convincing
although they, too, do not carry their investigations far enough. Hobbes
uses Justice and Injustice as synonyms for Morality and Immorality, and
he definitely recognizes what Spinoza only dimly guessed, namely, that
these ideas could only arise in man when living as a member of society
and not in a being dwelling alone. According to him, therefore, Morality
is a social and not an individual phenomenon; just as the moral
philosophers of the theological school look upon it as the Will of God,
so he considers it to be the Will of Society. But he was under the
obligation (non-existent for the theologian) to trace to its source this
social Will, to show how it is manifested, to explain why the individual
not only submits to it, but values this submission far more highly than
mere utility. Man learns the Will of God by revelation, and it is
forbidden to inquire into its basis. To the Will of Society Hobbes
cannot possibly ascribe the same incontestable sanctity. It should not
have escaped his notice that this Will is neither uniform nor of assured
stability, and that it often wavers and is sometimes self-contradictory.
Therefore, if he wants to call the Will of Society Justice, as the
theologians call the Will of God Morality, and if he wants to look upon
Justice and Morality as equivalents, then it is his duty to explain how
Society can make claims which conflict with the principles on which the
universal rules it has drawn up are based, and which, consequently, not
being just or moral, are unjust and immoral, but which, nevertheless,
must be acknowledged by the individual as being both just and moral,
simply because they are social claims.

In Kant's moral philosophy we find the extremest form of mystic
dogmatism; its success would be inexplicable did one not know how prone
mankind is to be intimidated by brusque statements. Kant's dictatorial
pronouncements have become common-places. "Act only on that maxim
whereby thou canst at the same time will that it should become a
universal law." That is very impressive. But what is "the maxim" on
which you act? This maxim is the moral law. Now we yearn to know what
this moral law is, whence it comes, and on what it is based.

But our yearnings remains unsatisfied. The moral law is a secret. It is
an incomprehensible power which rules our consciousness. Ask no
questions. Be silent, submit and obey. Even the theologian discussing
moral philosophy will listen to reason. He gives us the information,
sibylline though it be, that the moral law emanates from the Will of
God, and is shown to us in the revelations of religion. Kant does not
even give such meagre information. The moral law exists. That must
suffice. "The starry heavens above thee, the moral law within thee." You
retort that that is a metaphor which you may call poetical, if you like,
but it is no explanation. You will get the following reply: this
metaphor, rightly understood, indicates that the moral law is eternal,
that it is part and parcel of uncreated Nature like the stars, that it
is a phenomenon of the same order as all the elements that go to make up
the universe. "The moral law does not flow from antecedent ideas of Good
and Evil; on the contrary, the moral law decides what is good and what
is evil." It is not derived from human experience. The less so since
"it cannot be proved by experience that it has at any place or any time
become real." In other words, no one can testify that the "Categorical
Imperative" has ever been realized, that the moral law has "at any place
or any time" ceased to be a Kantian theory productive of sacred thrills,
that it has ever emerged from the unapproachable cell wherein it dwells
in the temple of human consciousness, to take a place and play an active
part among mortals.

The lessee of all Kant's wisdom, Hermann Cohen, with the clumsiness of
an over-zealous assistant, has expressed his master's thought in a
perfectly ludicrous form: "The moral law is to be conceived as a reality
of such kind that it must exist, that its being must be" (note the
elegance and euphony of the phrase "being must be"!) "even if no
creature existed for whom it would be valid." True, the moral law is a
maxim on which you should "act," a standard of human conduct, but it
would still exist if there were no human beings and no action. It would
come to exactly the same thing if Hermann Cohen said: the railway is to
be conceived as a reality of such kind that it must exist if there were
no human beings and consequently no travellers; even if there were no
earth on the surface of which rails and sleepers could be laid. This is
such palpable nonsense that it would be a work of supererogation to
prove its absurdity. By this grotesque exaggeration Hermann Cohen has
clearly brought to light the hollowness and weakness of Kant's Moral
philosophy which culminates in the "Categorical Imperative." In spite
of its arbitrary dogmatism, the formula of the "Categorical Imperative"
has taken a hold on the imagination of the superficially educated, and
has never ceased to be repeated with the fervour evinced by a devout man
at prayer, by several generations of those who have made it their
business to cultivate mental and moral science.

In one of his early novels, "The Island of Dr. Moreau," H. G. Wells has
described how an audacious scientist, by performing an operation on the
brains of the most savage beasts of prey, such as panthers, wolves,
etc., transformed them into creatures with the powers of thought and
speech. He succeeds in suppressing, or at least in lulling for the time
being, their bloodthirsty instincts, but he is always afraid that these
may be roused again, and forbids the animals on which he experiments to
touch blood or fresh meat. He takes good care to give no reason for this
prohibition. He merely issues it sternly and threateningly. It is "the
Law," an unknown, inexplicable, but terrible power to which one must
submit, because opposition would expose one to unimaginable, but
terrible evils. If temptation assails the beasts they flee it,
whispering fearfully and warningly to one another: "The Law! the Law!"
Wells is a trained philosopher, and often has his tongue in his cheek. I
shrewdly suspect that when he writes of the mysterious "Law" which fills
Dr. Moreau's semi-humanized beasts of prey with superstitious terror, he
is poking fun at Kant's "Categorical Imperative."

The great logical mistake in Kant's moral philosophy is that he
conceives Morality as a social or collective phenomenon, and yet
defines it as an individual one. According to Kant, the Categorical
Imperative exists within us. It is as immutable as the starry heavens
above us. It gives us the criterion by which to discriminate between
good and evil. Its realm is our consciousness wherein it lives and
rules; it is not introduced from outside, it springs from no power or
conditions outside our person. All the same, the only law which this
ultra subjective Categorical Imperative imposes on us is the most
centrifugal that can possibly be imagined: "Act only on that maxim
whereby thou canst at the same time will that it should become a
universal law." Hence our action is designed to produce an effect on the
world around us. It is "to become a universal law" can, of course, only
mean, it is to become a universal law of human society, for Kant cannot
possibly have aspired to make the Categorical Imperative impose laws
upon the stars in their courses. Our moral law, in so far as it applies
to our actions, deals with society. When we formulate it in our minds,
we associate it from its first inception with the notion of the society
to which it is to be applied. It would have been logical to say: "Your
standard of conduct is to be what society recognizes as its universal
law." But Kant puts the cart before the horse and says on the contrary:
"The maxims on which thy action is based are by thy will to become the
universal law of society."

Other philosophers have avoided this mistake. Hegel declares: "It is not
until man becomes a member of a moral community that the ideas of Duty
and Virtue attain a definite meaning and become direct representatives
of a universal spirit in subjectivity, which knows that it is actuated
in its aim by the universal and realizes that its dignity and its
particular aims are founded upon it." If we translate this horribly hazy
language of Hegel's into plain speech we find it means: "The ideas of
Duty and Virtue only acquire a meaning when they are applied to the acts
of commission and omission of the individual member of a community."
(When Hegel speaks of "moral community" his use of the word "moral" is
inadmissible, for he takes it for granted that the meaning of the word
"moral" has been determined and is clearly understood, whereas he ought
first to have defined its meaning.) The concepts of Duty and Virtue
denote that the individual in taking action thinks of the community,
that regard for its interests determines him, that his actions do not
attain dignity and worth until his aim becomes the interests of the
community, that these interests must coincide with those of the
individual if his actions in his own interests are to merit the
appellations of dutiful and virtuous. In short: to act morally is to act
so as to ensure the well-being of the community. The real Categorical
Imperative is a social conscience.

Feuerbach expresses this thought clearly and distinctly when he says:
"There can be no question of Morality in the strict sense of the word
except where the subject of discussion is the relationship of man to
man, of one person to another, of me to thee."

Recent contemporary French writers are in no way doubtful of the
meaning implied by the concept of Morality. "Morality," says Littré,
"is the whole collection of rules which determine our conduct towards
others. Moral Good is the ideal, which at any period of a civilization
forms opinions and customs with respect to this conduct; moral evil is
that which offends this ideal." This definition is very incomplete and
weak, as will be seen in the course of our remarks, but on one point it
is quite clear: it treats Morality as a social phenomenon, it
paraphrases it as the adjustment of individual action to the standard
set up by the community. The question of the origin and the aim of this
standard is left open.

L. Lévy-Brühl formulates Littré's idea more clearly. "We call by the
name of Morality the collection of such conceptions, opinions, feelings
and customs respecting the mutual rights and duties of men in their life
as members of a community, as are recognized and generally observed at a
given time in a given civilization."

Thus, according to some, Morality is subjection to an absolute law of
divine, or at any rate of unexplained and inexplicable origin, which
religion or a mysterious inner voice reveals to man; according to
others, it is the recognition that the claims of the community, or at
any rate of the majority of one's fellow men, are of binding force upon
the actions of the individual. These different answers to an inquiry as
to the origin of Morality both contain the tacit admission that it is a
law which peremptorily dictates to man what he shall do and what he
shall not do. But by means of what psychic mechanism does this law
enforce obedience in the consciousness of man? It is remarkable that all
moral philosophers, no matter to what age, nation or school they belong,
dimly feel or clearly recognize that in civilized man at any rate,
natural instincts and judgment are always at war; that the latter
opposes the former; that in the victory of judgment over impulse lies
the very essence of Morality; that consequently the essence of Morality
implies the control and repression of instinct by Reason--in a word,
that it is inhibition.

We have seen that Aristotle, in definite though unconscious opposition
to the Stoics, who consider Morality synonymous with Nature, defines it
as the activity of Reason.

Henry More was the first to express this quite clearly: "Virtue is an
intellectual force of the soul which enables it to control ... animal
instincts and sensual passions."

And Dr. Jodl sums up the character of Christian morality in the
statement: "Moral philosophy under the influence of Christian ideas
makes Morality always appear in the guise of a prohibition; at any rate
it is apt to conceive Morality as acting in an essentially restrictive
and prohibitive manner upon the natural impulses and instincts of man."

This is not quite correct. This Christian code of morals does not always
manifest itself as a prohibition. Its main precept is: "Love thy
neighbour as thyself." That is not a prohibition but a positive command.
Nevertheless, the point of departure of this command is an inhibition.
For the first instinctive movement of man is selfishness and, as its
consequence, indifference to one's neighbour; the first imperious
impulse is to sacrifice the latter's interests to one's own. But if
regard for one's neighbour, nay, love for him permeates our feelings,
thoughts and actions, that denotes a victory of Christian ideas over the
impulse of instinct, a suppression of that impulse--that is, an
inhibition which, not content with mere prevention, prolongs its
efficacy in the same direction until it changes the impulse of
selfishness and inconsiderateness into its very antithesis, that of
unselfishness and charity.

It constitutes an important advance in knowledge to recognize that
Morality, and not, as Jodl makes out, only Christian Morality, is
manifested as an inhibition, as the victory achieved by Reason over
Instinct which is contemptuously described as animal, simply because its
worth is judged by a standard already supplied by current views on
Morals. It is inadmissible to judge by this standard when one attempts
an impartial investigation into the ultimate foundations and the essence
of Morality. We have no plainly obvious right--no right which does not
require a proof--simply to scorn instinct as animal; to run it down from
the start and with a respectful bow to give Reason precedence over it;
to applaud with satisfaction the suppression of rascally Instinct by
highly respectable Reason. Instinct is no more animal than any other
manifestation of life in man; and he indulges in pleasant self-deception
if he imagines that he is other than an animal, that is, a living
organism in which all processes take place according to the same laws as
in all other living beings, from the simplest one-celled creature to
the most highly developed and complicated.

In itself Instinct has the same claim to dignity as Reason; according to
some people an even greater one, because the former is more primitive,
unpremeditated, self-assured and firmly established than the latter, and
if Reason claims to be the superior, it must substantiate that claim.

As a matter of fact, that claim has never been universally acknowledged.

Periods during which Reason rules at least in name and is treated with
the obsequious reverence which the model citizen has, or feigns to have,
for his sovereign, are followed by others in which Instinct revolts;
rebels dethrone Reason and set up Instinct in its place, or, as they
call it, passion and nature. The parties which in turn wield power in
these periodic revolutions may be briefly termed classical and romantic.
The classicists are the legitimist supporters of Reason; the
romanticists are revolutionaries, and their leaders are men like Cleon
or Jack Cade, Cromwell, Washington or Robespierre; that is to say, rude
demagogues or subtle dialecticians in favour of Instinct. Among the
legitimists in Reason as in politics, are to be found those who maintain
the divine right, who base the right of Reason to rule over Instinct
upon the Will of God, and others again, the constitutionalists, who base
their support on the Will of the people, on universal suffrage, who
force upon Instinct the law promulgated by society. I need not carry the
metaphor to extremes. Every reader can work it out in all its details.
I only wanted to show quite clearly that almost all moral philosophers
conceived Morality as a struggle between Reason and Instinct, as the
defeat of lawlessness by law. But their views diverge widely when they
try to explain the source of this law and its claim to obedience.

The theologians find no difficulty in this explanation. Just as the
essence of Morality according to their ideas is the nearest possible
approximation to divine perfection, so the moral law is one enacted by
God Himself, and it is a sin punishable with hell fire to fail to
observe it or to rebel against it. Others look upon Man as his own
law-giver, and trace his moral conduct, his willingness to combat his
own instincts, to an inner voice which teaches him what is right. They
call this inner voice by different names. They call it Nature, Reason or
Conscience, and look upon it as something innate, as a normal
constituent of man's psychic nature. That is the meaning of Fichte's
apodictic statement: "That which does not meet with the approval of
one's own conscience is necessarily sin. Therefore he who acts on anyone
else's authority acts in a conscienceless manner."

With this emphatic utterance Fichte dismisses both the devout believers,
for whom Morality is the revealed Will of God, and the Rationalists who
look upon it as the dictate of society. He considers that if man claims
to act morally, he can do so only on his own authority, i.e. on that of
his conscience. He is not aware that in so doing he frivolously abandons
all rights to pronounce an objective moral judgment on any human action.
He thereby relinquishes the power to ask any further question except:
"Did he act in accordance with his own conscience? If so, then he has
acted in a subjectively conscientious way, even if it appears to me to
be immoral or even criminal and monstrous. If he has acted contrary to
the promptings of his own conscience, then he is assuredly a sinner,
even if his action be in my eyes splendid and exemplary." Thus Fichte,
with his subjective basis of Morality, is led to a conclusion which is a
ludicrous reversal of generally accepted ideas. According to him, a man
would be acting conscientiously if, despising what all others hold good,
right and sacred, he wallows in the satisfaction of his selfish
instincts, as long as his conscience approves or even bids him do so; on
the other hand, he is a sinner if, in opposition to his inner voice, but
according to moral law, that is in obedience to extraneous authority, he
practices all the virtues.

All these subjective moral philosophers tacitly assume with Rousseau
that man is by nature good. They take no account of the empirically
established fact that there are men whose Fichtean conscience, or whose
Kantian categorical imperative, urges them to a course of action which
according to the general opinion is bad, wicked and revolting. This
criticism applies to Beneke, according to whom Morality is "a
development of human nature which exists as such within us, and which we
need only continue or promote"; it applies equally to Reid and Dugald
Stewart, who describe it as an inclination, which has become a habit or
a principle, to act according to the dictates of conscience. But
conscience must be explained. It is by no means self-evident that each
individual conscience will have the same standard of good and evil. The
moral philosopher must not shirk the duty of showing how the conscience
acquires its concepts of moral values, with what weapons it provides
Reason to combat Instinct, which demands satisfaction without paying any
attention to the warnings of conscience.

The great majority of moral philosophers do not endorse the view of Kant
and Fichte, that conscience is a piece of human nature, a sense inborn
in man, an inner voice that is independent of, and unmoved by, external
influences; on the contrary, they are convinced that conscience
originates outside the individual, that, in his consciousness, it is the
advocate retained by society, commissioned to plead the cause of the
community before the reason of the individual even, nay, especially,
when the interests of the community run counter to those of the
individual.

Bacon calls the presence in our consciousness of a defender of the
interests of society our innate social affection, and treats it
unreservedly as the source of Morality. Long before his time the
Stoics had noted the existence of this social affection and called it
[Greek: oikeiôsis]; Hugo Grotius, with the intellectual perspicuity
peculiar to himself, says that "Right and Morality flow from the same
source, and this source is a strong social instinct natural to man, it
is solicitude for the community, a solicitude guided by Reason." The
English philosophers are practically unanimous in ascribing both
conscience and Morality in general to a social source. The welfare of
the community, says Richard Cumberland, is the highest moral law;
Hutcheson remarks that, in the struggle between egoism and universal
benevolence, the decisive factor in favour of the latter is the
accompanying feeling, the reflective emotion of approval.

In modern parlance we call "universal benevolence," altruism, and the
"reflective emotion of approval" is a paraphrase of conscience which
contains an indication of its mode of action. For the idea that our
action will meet with the approval of the community and the pleasurable
emotion of satisfaction are in fact the reasons why we mostly submit to
the dictates of conscience voicing the commands of the community. Only
Hutcheson is too venturesome and goes too far, when he maintains
unreservedly that the reflective emotion of approval in the struggle
between egoism and universal benevolence is the decisive factor which
turns the scales in favour of the latter. This is by no means always the
case. When it does occur we call the action moral, but we characterize
it as immoral when, in spite of the "reflective emotion of approval"
"universal benevolence" is worsted by egoism.

It is unnecessary to quote the opinions of other moral philosophers.
It is enough to observe that most of them describe the moral law as a
social agreement and make conscience its accredited representative.
L. Lévy-Brühl repeats a doctrine current since the days of Pythagoras
when he says: "The sense of duty and that of responsibility, horror of
crime, love of what is good and reverence for justice--all these, which
a conscience sensitive to Morality thinks it derives from itself and
from itself alone, have nevertheless a social origin"; and Feuerbach
expresses the same view in an entertainingly melodramatic fashion when
he calls the voice of conscience "An echo of the cry of revenge uttered
by the injured party." This cry of revenge would never wake an echo in
us if we did not possess a sounding board which cries of distress and
lamentation cause to vibrate. Schopenhauer, digging deeper than his
predecessor, clearly recognizes this sounding board, and describes its
characteristics when he says that the foundation of ethics is pity,
which in its passive form warns us: "_Neminem laede!_ Do harm to no
one!" And in its active form gives the order: "_Imo omnes quantum potes
juva!_ Assist everyone with all your might!"

The assumption, that sympathy with his neighbour must be present in
man's consciousness before he is capable of moral action, is one that
need not be made by subjective moral philosophers, who hold with Kant
and his school that the moral law is an inborn categorical imperative,
which proclaims its commands without reference to any extraneous object,
or to the world, or mankind.

In the same way the theologians have no need of it, for they consider
that what is morally good is the Will of God.

But he who holds with the moral philosophers of sociological tendencies
that Morality is regard for one's fellow men, and the recognition that
the claims of the real or supposed interest of the community are
superior to those of the comfort of the individual, must admit that
sympathy is a necessary preliminary to moral action; i.e. that the
individual must have the ability to picture the sufferings of others so
vividly that he feels their sorrows as his own, and with all his might
and all his will strives to prevent, alleviate and heal them. The lack
of this ability, psychic anæsthesia, is a symptom of disease. It renders
the person affected incapable of moral action. It is a characteristic of
the born criminal, and is the essential symptom of that state of mind
which alienists term moral insanity. Even in this condition, if reason
and the power of judgment are not affected, great offences against
current moral law can be avoided. But this results from the fear of the
painful and ruinous results which a collision with public opinion
entails, even if the offender is not actually haled into court. It is
not due to any inner necessity, nor to the prompting of one's own
feelings.

Only the Rationalists have any cause or reason to inquire into the aims
of Morality, whether they look upon the moral law as dictated by society
or are of the opinion that it is the sum total of the rules by which
Reason, of its own initiative, successfully combats the urging of
Instinct. If the moral law is a creation of society, and is obeyed by
the individual out of sympathy with his fellow-men or consideration for
society, the logical conclusion is that society has set up the moral law
to satisfy some real or imagined need. Its aim in this case can only be
the real or supposed welfare of the community. This is the most widely
accepted view.

"Morality and universal welfare," says Macchiavelli, "are conceptions
which coincide." In his calm assurance this apodictic writer, who
doubtlessly slept well and had an excellent digestion, is never troubled
by a doubt as to whether there is such a thing as an absolutely reliable
measure of universal welfare, and therefore whether Morality, which is
termed its equivalent, can provide us with a perfectly unimpeachable
standard. He whose ethical conscience is more tender and timid will
inevitably anxiously ask himself: Who decides what universal welfare
demands and what is conducive to it? Is it to be the masses? Is the mob,
incapable of thought, ignorant, swayed by momentary and shifting
impulses, to make moral laws for the select few who are its natural
guides? What tragedies would necessarily result from this definition!
How often a strong personality, trained to come to independent
conclusions, refuses to obey the voice of the mob! Is the sheep who
trots bleating along with the herd to be taken as the type of a moral
being? Must we necessarily condemn as immoral those who swim against the
stream, enlightened tyrants who force upon their people hateful
innovations calculated to ensure their welfare,--such men as Peter the
Great, the Emperor Joseph II, the reformer who comes into violent
conflict with the majority who are creatures of habit? "The aim of
Morality is the welfare of society; this is indeed the essence of
Morality." A sufficiently safe and most soothing formula this seems; but
really the security it gives is most deceptive, and it leaves unsolved
the most important problems relating to the phenomenon of Morality.

A numerous group of moral philosophers seeks the aim of moral conduct
in the individual himself, not outside him. In spite of Schopenhauer's
sympathy, they doubt that consideration for the well-being of the
community would act forcibly enough upon the individual to induce him to
wage unceasing war on his impulses and struggle to overcome them. Rather
they hold that the individual must find in his inner consciousness not
only the spur to moral action, but also the reward for the same, and
they characterize this driving force as pleasurable emotions in every
sense of the words. According to them man acts morally because, and in
so far as, he anticipates pleasurable results from so doing. Epicurus
considers the aim of Morality always to be Pleasure. He makes only the
one reservation, that a reasonable man will renounce an immediate
pleasure for the sake of a greater one in the future, and that he may
delight in the anticipation of pleasurable emotions which defeat and
dull present pains. Thus the martyr may be a true Epicurean, even if by
his actions he exposes himself to most cruel torture and the most
painful death, for he is convinced that the everlasting joys of paradise
will more than indemnify him for his temporary sufferings.

I have already shown that Aristotle considers Morality the activity of
practical Reason, which is accompanied by pleasurable emotions. He makes
these pleasurable emotions an essential part of Morality, and Spinoza
shares this view, for he says: "Knowledge of good and evil is nothing
but a pleasurable or a disagreeable emotion in so far as we are
conscious of it."

No less roundly, one might almost say brutally, Leibnitz declares: "We
term good that which gives us pleasure; evil that which gives us pain,"
while Feuerbach expresses himself rather more carefully and indefinitely
thus: "The instinct for happiness is the most potent of all instincts.
Where existence always occurs together with volition, volition and the
will to be happy are inseparable; they are, indeed, essentially one. 'I
will,' means 'I have the will not to suffer, not to be hindered and
destroyed, but, on the contrary, to be assisted and preserved; that is,
I have the will to be happy.'" This is a wordy paraphrase of Spinoza's:
"All existence is self-assertion, and Morality is only the highest and
purest form of this fundamental instinct in a reasonable being."

Among those moral philosophers who see in pleasurable emotions the aim
of Morality, its reward and its incentive, we must distinguish two
groups: those who understand by pleasurable emotions such as appeal to
the senses--the Hedonists; and those who spiritualize the meaning of the
word and expect of Morality not an immediate bodily gratification, a
pleasure, or an insipid satisfaction of the sense, but lasting
happiness--the Eudæmonists. At the first glance the Eudæmonists seem to
have a higher and more worthy conception of the subjective reaction of
moral conduct than have the Hedonists; for the satisfaction the former
expect and promise does not apply to the lower spheres of our organic
life, but to the loftiest functions of our mind, from which alone a
feeling of happiness can emanate.

But if we look into the matter more closely we find that to draw a sharp
distinction between the Hedonists and Eudæmonists is more than a little
arbitrary. For Pleasure and Happiness differ hardly at all in
essentials, but chiefly in degree; and this would at once be obvious if
one only took the trouble to define the two ideas, which, however, is
mostly not done. And with good reason, for it is impossible to explain
Pleasure. You can use synonyms for it; you can look wise and say:
Pleasure is that which is agreeable, or that which one desires, that in
which one delights, or a certain quality of feeling which accompanies
such organic processes as strengthen or vitalize the system; but all
that this amounts to is to say in a roundabout way, Pleasure is
Pleasure. It is a fundamental fact of our inner consciousness, just as
inexplicable as life, or as its antithesis, Pain. But if we assume that
Pleasure is something given by subjective experience, then the idea of
Happiness can be defined. Happiness is a flooding of the consciousness
with sunshine; it is enjoyment of the moment, a sense of living in the
present accentuated by pleasurable emotion. If this feeling is
organically differentiated, that is, if it springs from a certain
section of the mind or mechanism of the body and can be located there,
it is ecstasy. It is only felt as Happiness when it is, so to speak,
melted, dissolved, distributed throughout the organism,
coenesthetically diffused.

If we agree to this definition we can take Eudæmonism into consideration
as an aim of moral action, but Hedonism we shall have to discard from
the start. If Morality is to be inhibition, a victory of Reason over
Instinct, then it cannot possibly arouse Pleasure, since the first and
most immediate source of Pleasure is the surrender to instinct, the
satisfaction of the organic appetites; but if one resists them,
suppresses them, then one experiences a privation which at best
occasions discomfort and may easily cause pain. By its very nature and
the mechanism by which it works, Morality can therefore give rise to no
pleasure, but only to discomfort. All the same, it can afford a feeling
of happiness.

It may be objected that I am guilty of a contradiction when I assume the
possibility of Happiness without Pleasure, as I have just described
Happiness as a particular kind of Pleasure; but in reality there is no
contradiction. For Pleasure springs from a special organic apparatus,
whereas Happiness is not a condition of any particular apparatus in our
body, but a general feeling that cannot be located; if it is roused by
moral actions it originates in the self-satisfaction of Reason, in its
pride in the victory over Instinct, in the rapture occasioned by one's
own strength of will; therefore, it can well exist without any
differentiated pleasurable emotion located in any particular organic
apparatus.

Many moral philosophers have for various reasons rejected plausible
Eudæmonism as well as Hedonism, and these reasons can all be traced back
to the recognition, or at least an inkling, of the fact that moral
action in the nature of things must exclude pleasurable emotions; at any
rate immediate ones, and such as are perceived by the senses. Perhaps
Fichte does this in the most naïve fashion, for he rejects every form of
Eudæmonism as the aim of moral action, but admits as its purpose only
bliss, that is to say, the self-satisfaction of Reason resulting from
action in accordance with its own laws. However, he struggles in vain to
deny that this "bliss" is of the nature of a pleasurable emotion, or to
interpret it as differing from Eudæmonism. He is only giving the latter
another name to make it conform in an orthodox manner with his doctrine
of the Supreme Ego. "_Baptizo te carpam!_" I baptize thee, carp! In this
way the pious man complies with the law enjoining abstinence from meat,
and with an easy conscience smacks his lips over a roast pheasant which
he has dubbed fish.

Plato is among those who most emphatically deny that Pleasure is either
the motive force, the accompaniment, the consequence, or the aim of
Morality. But a reasonable thinker can derive no profit from his
arguments in support of this point of view, for they are rambling,
fantastic, mystical and visionary. Plato thinks it a necessary
consequence of the very nature of Good that it should be absolutely
self-sufficient. For Pleasure is a perpetual growth, a ceaseless longing
for more; it can therefore not be self-sufficient, and on this account
can not be the foundation of Morality.

However, it is by no means obvious why Morality should not be in a
perpetual state of growth (just as Pleasure is, according to Plato), or
why it should not constantly desire an increase of its own activities.
On the contrary, this craving is just what one would most wish Morality
to have. True, it would not then attain self-satisfaction. But what is
the good of this self-satisfaction? It is a pleasurable emotion, and
according to Plato Morality is supposed to have nothing in common with
Pleasure. It is not to be contentment and serene satisfaction, but
rather tireless endeavour. However, Plato, of course, cannot admit this,
because for him Good and the deity are identical, and being perfect can
therefore advance no farther in perfection; and the striving after Good
is merely an effort of memory on man's part to call to mind more clearly
the deity whom he saw in his spiritual life before birth, and of whom he
retains a dim and confused memory in his earthly life. It is plainly
idle to waste reasonable criticism upon such visionary arguments.

The Stoics, too, try to sever the connexion between moral conduct and
Pleasure, and to conceive the former as a simple activity of human
nature, one, moreover, from which they expect no particular
satisfaction. They overlook the fact that every activity of the impulses
and instincts of man's own nature affords him satisfaction, and that
Pleasure is nothing but this very satisfaction of natural instincts. If,
then, Morality were, as the Stoics contend, only "Life in harmony with
Nature herself," then, like every other satisfaction of natural desires,
it should be an ever-flowing source of pleasurable emotions, and this
characteristic would be inseparable from it, though the Stoics may
vainly try to deny it.

Christianity has an easier job than Stoicism. With harsh severity,
disregarding any plea for indulgence in view of the weakness of the
flesh, it absolutely excludes the factor of pleasure from the fulfilment
of moral duties. But this severity is only apparent. The good and just
man can expect no reward for his moral conduct here on earth, but he
will find a much more ample one in the life to come. To the devout
believer who gives unlimited credit to it, the promise of the joys of
paradise has the full value of a cash disbursement. It is somewhat
childish juggling with words to deny pleasurable emotion to be the aim
of moral conduct if at the same time a most vivid foretaste of the
eternal bliss which awaits him after death be given to the virtuous man;
as if the anticipation of heavenly bliss were not a pleasurable emotion
of the highest degree!

Kant finds it due to his point of view to spurn every weak inclination
to Eudæmonism. A Categorical Imperative cannot issue commands with an
eye to profit or comfort. That is as clear as daylight. "All Morality of
action must be founded on the necessity which arises from duty and
respect for the law, and not from love or inclination for the desired
result of the action." Schopenhauer, Feuerbach, and John Stuart Mill
have recorded such irrefutable criticisms of the Kantian doctrine of the
absolute disinterestedness of moral action, that it is unnecessary to
add to their arguments.

Only some moral philosophers, and particularly Mill, are guilty of
logical inaccuracy when they reject Eudæmonism but retain Utility as the
aim of morality. Why do the Utilitarians not realize that they are
merely Eudæmonists under another name, and that he who disregards his
own immediate interests in order to further the well-being of the
community experiences a pleasurable emotion of high order in the
satisfaction he derives from the sacrifices whereby he has contributed
to the good of the community?

The useless exertions of a section of moral philosophers to eliminate
not only Hedonism but also Eudæmonism from moral action are a veritable
labour of Sisyphus. Hardly have these two with difficulty been expelled
by the door than they return by the window or the chimney. It is a mere
conjuring trick to remove them from this world to the next, as do the
theologians, or to substitute universal well-being for the feeling of
happiness. All the same, the desire to purge moral action of the least
admixture of hope of profit or pleasure is comprehensible. Common
experience, which is equally forced upon the profound thinker and upon
the plain man in the street least inclined to cudgel his brain, teaches
us that Morality consists, with very few exceptions, in acting against
our own immediate interest, in denying ourselves some coveted pleasure,
in renouncing some attainable profit, in undertaking some disagreeable
exertion because Reason bids us do so. From this practical experience
the man in the street gets the impression that duty is a bitter
necessity and that decency is attended by many and varied
inconveniences. The theorist, the philosopher, derives a principle from
his empirical facts; he observes that the moral man often acts against
his own immediate interests, and expresses this in the pretentious
axiom: "Morality from the very beginning excludes all thought of
profit."

And yet the philosophers are guilty of the same superficiality as the
man in the street. They do not go far enough into the matter to perceive
that the morality of pleasure, of interest, and of duty, Hedonism,
Utilitarianism and the Categorical Imperative, all lead in very slightly
different ways to the same goal--Eudæmonism. The fulfilment of duty
affords spiritual satisfaction, a pre-eminently pleasurable emotion
which increases in direct proportion to the effort which its fulfilment
demands. Interest also implies pleasure, for every interest ultimately
comes to this, that it is an attempt to secure a pleasure. This aim lies
at the bottom of all interests; it is the fundamental interest from
which all seemingly different interests are derived; it is the universal
goal to which all human effort tends, whether it be a question of making
money to satisfy ambition, of winning love and friendship, of material,
spiritual, personal or social values. Interest is self-assertion and the
intensifying of the zest for life. But these are always accompanied by
pleasurable emotions; thus interest is forthwith identified with
pleasurable emotion, even though one has to work hard, even though at
the moment it entails drudgery and discomfort. Hedonism makes no secret
of its nature and its tendency. It openly admits what the Categorical
Imperative denies and what Utilitarianism veils with vague phrases: that
the aim and object of moral action is Pleasure and nothing else.

In our short survey of the immense field of literature dealing with
moral philosophy we have learnt that, although the most various and
divergent views are expressed as to the essence and source of Morality,
nevertheless there is but one opinion, be it clearly or vaguely stated,
be it the result of knowledge or surmise, as to the mechanism by means
of which moral concepts determine action, and as to the conscious or
unconscious aim of moral action: Moral concepts do their work by means
of inhibition, and the aim of moral action is a feeling of happiness.




