CHAPTER XLIII
YEAR 1802


“EXPERIENCE teaches fools,” was the first moral apothegm that I wrote in
small text, when learning to write at the school, and I have ever since
thought it was a very sensible reflection.  For assuredly, as year after
year has flown away on the swift wings of time, I have found my
experience mellowing, and my discernment improving; by which I have, in
the afternoon of life, been enabled to foresee what kings and nations
would do, by the symptoms manifested within the bounds of the society
around me.  Therefore, at the beginning of the spring in this Ann. Dom.,
I had misgivings at the heart, a fluttering in my thoughts, and
altogether a strange uneasiness as to the stability of the peace and
harmony that was supposed to be founded upon a steadfast foundation
between us and the French people.  What my fears principally took their
rise from, was a sort of compliancy, on the part of those in power and
authority, to cultivate the old relations and parts between them and the
commonalty.  It did not appear to me that this proceeded from any known
or decided event, for I read the papers at this period daily; but from
some general dread and fear, that was begotten, like a vapour out of the
fermentation of all sorts of opinions; most people of any sagacity
thinking that the state of things in France being so much of an antic,
poetical, and playactor-like guise, that it would never obtain that
respect, far less that reverence from the world, which is necessary to
the maintenance of all beneficial government.  The consequence of this
was a great distrust between man and man, and an aching restlessness
among those who had their bread to bake in the world; persons possessing
the power to provide for their kindred, forcing them, as it were, down
the throats of those who were dependent on them in business, a bitter
morsel.

But the pith of these remarks chiefly applies to the manufacturing
concerns of the new town of Cayenneville; for in the clachan we lived in
the lea of the dike, and were more taken up with our own natural rural
affairs, and the markets for victual, than the craft of merchandise.  The
only man interested in business, who walked in a steady manner at his old
pace, though he sometimes was seen, being of a spunkie temper, grinding
the teeth of vexation, was Mr. Cayenne himself.

One day, however, he came to me at the manse.  “Doctor,” says he, for so
he always called me, “I want your advice.  I never choose to trouble
others with my private affairs; but there are times when the word of an
honest man may do good.  I need not tell you, that when I declared myself
a Royalist in America, it was at a considerable sacrifice.  I have,
however, nothing to complain of against government on that score; but I
think it damn’d hard that those personal connexions, whose interests I
preserved to the detriment of my own, should in my old age make such an
ungrateful return.  By the steps I took prior to quitting America, I
saved the property of a great mercantile concern in London.  In return
for that, they took a share with me, and for me, in the cotton-mill; and
being here on the spot, as manager, I have both made and saved them
money.  I have, no doubt, bettered my own fortune in the mean time.
Would you believe it, doctor, they have written a letter to me, saying
that they wish to provide for a relation, and requiring me to give up to
him a portion of my share in the concern—a pretty sort of providing this,
at another man’s expense!  But I’ll be damn’d if I do any such thing!  If
they want to provide for their friend, let them do so from themselves,
and not at my cost—What is your opinion?”

This appeared to me a very weighty concern, and, not being versed in
mercantile dealing, I did not well know what to say; but I reflected for
some time, and then I replied, “As far, Mr. Cayenne, as my observation
has gone in this world, I think that the giffs and the gaffs nearly
balance one another; and when they do not, there is a moral defect on the
failing side.  If a man long gives his labour to his employer, and is
paid for that labour, it might be said that both are equal; but I say no.
For it’s in human nature to be prompt to change; and the employer, having
always more in his power than his servant or agent, it seems to me a
clear case, that in the course of a number of years, the master of the
old servant is the obligated of the two; and therefore I say, in the
first place, in your case there is no tie or claim, by which you may, in
a moral sense, be called upon to submit to the dictates of your London
correspondents; but there is a reason, in the nature of the thing and
case, by which you may ask a favour from them—So, the advice I would give
you would be this: write an answer to their letter, and tell them that
you have no objection to the taking in of a new partner, but you think it
would be proper to revise all the copartnery, especially as you have,
considering the manner in which you have advanced the business, been of
opinion, that your share should be considerably enlarged.”

I thought Mr. Cayenne would have louped out of his skin with mirth at
this notion; and, being a prompt man, he sat down at my scrutoire, and
answered the letter which gave him so much uneasiness.  No notice was
taken of it for some time; but in the course of a month he was informed,
that it was not considered expedient at that time to make any change in
the company.  I thought the old man was gone by himself when he got this
letter.  He came over instantly in his chariot, from the cotton-mill
office to the manse, and swore an oath, by some dreadful name, that I was
a Solomon.  However, I only mention this to show how experience had
instructed me, and as a sample of that sinister provisioning of friends
that was going on in the world at this time—all owing, as I do verily
believe, to the uncertain state of governments and national affairs.

Besides these generalities, I observed another thing working to
effect—mankind read more, and the spirit of reflection and reasoning was
more awake than at any time within my remembrance.  Not only was there a
handsome bookseller’s shop in Cayenneville, with a London newspaper
daily, but magazines, and reviews, and other new publications.

Till this year, when a chaise was wanted we had to send to Irville; but
Mr. Toddy of the Cross-Keys being in at Glasgow, he bought an excellent
one at the second-hand, a portion of the effects of a broken merchant, by
which, from that period, we had one of our own, and it proved a great
convenience; for I, who never but twice in my life before hired that kind
of commodity, had it thrice during the summer, for a bit jaunt with Mrs.
Balwhidder to divers places and curiosities in the county that I had not
seen before, by which our ideas were greatly enlarged; indeed, I have
always had a partiality for travelling, as one of the best means of
opening the faculty of the mind, and giving clear and correct notions of
men and things.




