CHAPTER XXX
YEAR 1789


THIS I have always reflected upon as one of our blessed years.  It was
not remarkable for any extraordinary occurrence; but there was a
hopefulness in the minds of men, and a planning of new undertakings, of
which, whatever may be the upshot, the devising is ever rich in the
cheerful anticipations of good.

Another new line of road was planned, for a shorter cut to the
cotton-mill, from the main road to Glasgow, and a public-house was opened
in Cayenneville: the latter, however, was not an event that gave me much
satisfaction; but it was a convenience to the inhabitants, and the
carriers that brought the cotton-bags and took away the yarn twice
a-week, needed a place of refreshment.  And there was a stage-coach set
up thrice every week from Ayr, that passed through the town, by which it
was possible to travel to Glasgow between breakfast and dinner time, a
thing that could not, when I came to the parish, have been thought within
the compass of man.

This stage-coach I thought one of the greatest conveniences that had been
established among us; and it enabled Mrs. Balwhidder to send a basket of
her fresh butter into the Glasgow market, by which, in the spring and the
fall of the year, she got a great price; for the Glasgow merchants are
fond of excellent eatables, and the payment was aye ready money—Tam
Whirlit the driver paying for the one basket when he took up the other.

In this year William Malcolm, the youngest son of the widow, having been
some time a tutor in a family in the east country, came to see his
mother, as indeed he had done every year from the time he went to the
college; but this occasion was made remarkable by his preaching in my
pulpit.  His old acquaintance were curious to hear him; and I myself had
a sort of a wish likewise, being desirous to know how far he was
orthodox; so I thought fit, on the suggestion of one of the elders, to
ask him to preach one day for me, which, after some fleeching, he
consented to do.  I think, however, there was a true modesty in his
diffidence, although his reason was a weak one, being lest he might not
satisfy his mother, who had as yet never heard him.  Accordingly, on the
Sabbath after, he did preach, and the kirk was well packed, and I was not
one of the least attentive of the congregation.  His sermon assuredly was
well put together and there was nothing to object to in his doctrine; but
the elderly people thought his language rather too Englified, which I
thought likewise; for I never could abide that the plain auld Kirk of
Scotland, with her sober presbyterian simplicity, should borrow, either
in word or in deed, from the language of the prelatic hierarchy of
England.  Nevertheless, the younger part of the congregation were loud in
his praise, saying, there had not been heard before such a style of
language in our side of the country.  As for Mrs. Malcolm, his mother,
when I spoke to her anent the same, she said but little, expressing only
her hope that his example would be worthy of his precepts; so that, upon
the whole, it was a satisfaction to us all, that he was likely to prove a
stoop and upholding pillar to the Kirk of Scotland.  And his mother had
the satisfaction, before she died, to see him a placed minister, and his
name among the authors of his country; for he published at Edinburgh a
volume of Moral Essays, of which he sent me a pretty bound copy, and they
were greatly creditable to his pen, though lacking somewhat of that birr
and smeddum that is the juice and flavour of books of that sort.




CHAPTER XXXI
YEAR 1790


THE features of this Ann. Dom. partook of the character of its
predecessor.  Several new houses were added to the clachan; Cayenneville
was spreading out with weavers’ shops, and growing up fast into a town.
In some respects it got the start of ours; for one day, when I was going
to dine with Mr. Cayenne at Wheatrig House, not a little to my amazement,
did I behold a bookseller’s shop opened there, with sticks of red and
black wax, pouncet-boxes, pens, pocket-books, and new publications, in
the window, such as the like of was only to be seen in cities and borough
towns.  And it was lighted at night by a patent lamp, which shed a
wonderful beam, burning oil, and having no smoke.  The man sold likewise
perfumery, powder-puffs, trinkets, and Dublin dolls, besides penknives,
Castile soap, and walking-sticks, together with a prodigy of other
luxuries too tedious to mention.

Upon conversing with the man, for I was enchanted to go into this
phenomenon, for as no less could I regard it, he told me that he had a
correspondence with London, and could get me down any book published
there within the same month in which it came out; and he showed me divers
of the newest come out, of which I did not read even in the _Scots
Magazine_ till more than three months after, although I had till then
always considered that work as most interesting for its early
intelligence.  But what I was most surprised to hear, was, that he took
in a daily London newspaper for the spinners and weavers, who paid him a
penny a-week a-piece for the same; they being all greatly taken up with
what, at the time, was going on in France.

This bookseller in the end, however, proved a whawp in our nest, for he
was in league with some of the English reformers; and when the story took
wind three years after, concerning the plots and treasons of the
corresponding societies and democrats, he was fain to make a moonlight
flitting, leaving his wife for a time to manage his affairs.  I could
not, however, think any ill of the man notwithstanding; for he had very
correct notions of right and justice, in a political sense, and when he
came into the parish he was as orderly and well-behaved as any other
body; and conduct is a test that I have always found as good for a man’s
principles as professions.  Nor, at the time of which I am speaking, was
there any of that dread or fear of reforming the government that has
since been occasioned by the wild and wasteful hand which the French
employed in their revolution.

But, among other improvements, I should mention that a Doctor Marigold
came and settled in Cayenneville, a small, round, happy-tempered man,
whose funny stories were far better liked than his drugs.  There was a
doubt among some of the weavers if he was a skilful Esculapian; and this
doubt led to their holding out an inducement to another medical man, Dr.
Tanzey, to settle there likewise, by which it grew into a saying, that at
Cayenneville there was a doctor for health as well as sickness; for Dr.
Marigold was one of the best hands in the country at a pleasant
punch-bowl, while Dr. Tanzey had all the requisite knowledge for the
faculty for the bedside.

It was in this year that the hour-plate and hand on the kirk steeple were
renewed, as indeed, may yet be seen by the date, though it be again
greatly in want of fresh gilding; for it was by my advice that the
figures of the Ann. Dom. were placed one in each corner.  In this year,
likewise, the bridge over the Brawl burn was built—a great convenience,
in the winter time, to the parishioners that lived on the north side; for
when there happened to be a spait on the Sunday, it kept them from the
kirk; but I did not find that the bridge mended the matter, till after
the conclusion of the war against the democrats, and the beginning of
that which we are now waging with Boney, their child and champion.  It
is, indeed, wonderful to think of the occultation of grace that was
taking place about this time, throughout the whole bound of Christendom;
for I could mark a visible darkness of infidelity spreading in the corner
of the vineyard committed to my keeping, and a falling away of the vines
from their wonted props and confidence in the truths of Revelation.  But
I said nothing.  I knew that the faith could not be lost, and that it
would be found purer and purer the more it was tried; and this I have
lived to see, many now being zealous members of the church, that were
abundantly lukewarm at the period of which I am now speaking.




