CHAPTER XXIII
YEAR 1782


ALTHOUGH I have not been particular in noticing it, from time to time,
there had been an occasional going off, at fairs and on market-days, of
the lads of the parish as soldiers, and when Captain Malcolm got the
command of his ship, no less than four young men sailed with him from the
clachan; so that we were deeper and deeper interested in the proceedings
of the doleful war that was raging in the plantations.  By one post we
heard of no less than three brave fellows belonging to us being slain in
one battle, for which there was a loud and general lamentation.

Shortly after this, I got a letter from Charles Malcolm, a very pretty
letter it indeed was: he had heard of my Lord Eaglesham’s murder, and
grieved for the loss, both because his lordship was a good man, and
because he had been such a friend to him and his family.  “But,” said
Charles, “the best way I can show my gratitude for his patronage, is to
prove myself a good officer to my king and country.”  Which I thought a
brave sentiment, and was pleased thereat; for somehow Charles, from the
time he brought me the limes to make a bowl of punch, in his pocket from
Jamaica, had built a nest of affection in my heart.  But, oh! the wicked
wastry of life in war.  In less than a month after, the news came of a
victory over the French fleet, and by the same post I got a letter from
Mr. Howard, that was the midshipman who came to see us with Charles,
telling me that poor Charles had been mortally wounded in the action, and
had afterwards died of his wounds.  “He was a hero in the engagement,”
said Mr. Howard, “and he died as a good and a brave man should.”—These
tidings gave me one of the sorest hearts I ever suffered, and it was long
before I could gather fortitude to disclose the tidings to poor Charles’s
mother.  But the callants of the school had heard of the victory, and
were going shouting about, and had set the steeple bell a-ringing, by
which Mrs. Malcolm heard the news; and knowing that Charles’s ship was
with the fleet, she came over to the manse in great anxiety to hear the
particulars, somebody telling her that there had been a foreign letter to
me by the postman.

When I saw her I could not speak, but looked at her in pity, and, the
tear fleeing up into my eyes, she guessed what had happened.  After
giving a deep and sore sigh, she enquired, “How did he behave?  I hope
well, for he was aye a gallant laddie!”—and then she wept very bitterly.
However, growing calmer, I read to her the letter; and, when I had done,
she begged me to give it to her to keep, saying, “It’s all that I have
now left of my pretty boy; but it’s mair precious to me than the wealth
of the Indies;” and she begged me to return thanks to the Lord for all
the comforts and manifold mercies with which her lot had been blessed,
since the hour she put her trust in him alone; and that was when she was
left a penniless widow, with her five fatherless bairns.

It was just an edification of the spirit to see the Christian resignation
of this worthy woman.  Mrs. Balwhidder was confounded, and said, there
was more sorrow in seeing the deep grief of her fortitude than tongue
could tell.

                         [Picture: The Old Herd]

Having taken a glass of wine with her, I walked out to conduct her to her
own house; but in the way we met with a severe trial.  All the weans were
out parading with napkins and kail-blades on sticks, rejoicing and
triumphing in the glad tidings of victory.  But when they saw me and Mrs.
Malcolm coming slowly along, they guessed what had happened, and threw
away their banners of joy; and standing all up in a row, with silence and
sadness, along the kirkyard wall as we passed, showed an instinct of
compassion that penetrated to my very soul.  The poor mother burst into
fresh affliction, and some of the bairns into an audible weeping; and,
taking one another by the hand, they followed us to her door, like
mourners at a funeral.  Never was such a sight seen in any town before.
The neighbours came to look at it as we walked along, and the men turned
aside to hide their faces; while the mothers pressed their babies
fondlier to their bosoms, and watered their innocent faces with their
tears.

I prepared a suitable sermon, taking as the words of my text, “Howl, ye
ships of Tarshish, for your strength is laid waste.”  But when I saw
around me so many of my people clad in complimentary mourning for the
gallant Charles Malcolm, and that even poor daft Jenny Gaffaw, and her
daughter, had on an old black riband; and when I thought of him, the
spirited laddie, coming home from Jamaica with his parrot on his
shoulder, and his limes for me, my heart filled full, and I was obliged
to sit down in the pulpit, and drop a tear.

After a pause, and the Lord having vouchsafed to compose me, I rose up,
and gave out that anthem of triumph, the 124th psalm, the singing of
which brought the congregation round to themselves; but still I felt that
I could not preach as I had meant to do; therefore I only said a few
words of prayer, and singing another psalm, dismissed the congregation.




CHAPTER XXIV
YEAR 1783


THIS was another Sabbath year of my ministry.  It has left me nothing to
record but a silent increase of prosperity in the parish.  I myself had
now in the bank more than a thousand pounds, and every thing was thriving
around.  My two bairns, Gilbert, that is now the merchant in Glasgow, was
grown into a sturdy ramplor laddie, and Janet, that is married upon Dr.
Kittleword, the minister of Swappington, was as fine a lassie for her
years as the eyes of a parent could desire to see.

Shortly after the news of the peace, an event at which all gave
themselves up to joy, a thing happened among us that at the time caused
much talk; but although very dreadful, was yet not so serious, some how
or other, as such an awsome doing should have been.  Poor Jenny Gaffaw
happened to take a heavy cold, and soon thereafter died.  Meg went about
from house to house, begging dead-clothes, and got the body straighted in
a wonderful decent manner, with a plate of earth and salt placed upon
it—an admonitory type of mortality and eternal life that has
ill-advisedly gone out of fashion.  When I heard of this, I could not but
go to see how a creature that was not thought possessed of a grain of
understanding, could have done so much herself.  On entering the door, I
beheld Meg sitting with two or three of the neighbouring kimmers, and the
corpse laid out on a bed.  “Come awa’, sir,” said Meg; “this is an
altered house.  They’re gane that keepit it bein; but, sir, we maun a’
come to this—we maun pay the debt o’ nature—death is a grim creditor, and
a doctor but brittle bail when the hour of reckoning’s at han’!  What a
pity it is, mother, that you’re now dead, for here’s the minister come to
see you.  Oh, sir! but she would have had a proud heart to see you in her
dwelling, for she had a genteel turn, and would not let me, her only
daughter, mess or mell wi’ the lathron lasses of the clachan.  Ay, ay,
she brought me up with care, and edicated me for a lady: nae coarse wark
darkened my lily-white hands.  But I maun work now; I maun dree the
penalty of man.”

Having stopped some time, listening to the curious maunnering of Meg, I
rose to come away; but she laid her hand on my arm, saying, “No, sir, ye
maun taste before ye gang!  My mother had aye plenty in her life, nor
shall her latter day be needy.”

Accordingly, Meg, with all the due formality common on such occasions,
produced a bottle of water, and a dram-glass, which she filled and
tasted, then presented to me, at the same time offering me a bit of bread
on a slate.  It was a consternation to everybody how the daft creature
had learnt all the ceremonies, which she performed in a manner past the
power of pen to describe, making the solemnity of death, by her strange
mockery, a kind of merriment, that was more painful than sorrow; but some
spirits are gifted with a faculty of observation, that, by the strength
of a little fancy, enables them to make a wonderful and truthlike
semblance of things and events, which they never saw, and poor Meg seemed
to have this gift.

The same night, the session having provided a coffin, the body was put
in, and removed to Mr. Mutchkin’s brewhouse, where the lads and lassies
kept the late-wake.

Saving this, the year flowed in a calm, and we floated on in the stream
of time towards the great ocean of eternity, like ducks and geese in the
river’s tide, that are carried down without being sensible of the speed
of the current.  Alas! we have not wings like them, to fly back to the
place we set out from.




