CHAPTER XLI
YEAR 1800


THE same quietude and regularity that marked the progress of the last
year, continued throughout the whole of this.  We sowed and reaped in
tranquillity, though the sough of distant war came heavily from a
distance.  The cotton-mill did well for the company, and there was a
sobriety in the minds of the spinners and weavers, which showed that the
crisis of their political distemperature was over;—there was something
more of the old prudence in men’s reflections; and it was plain to see
that the elements of reconciliation were coming together throughout the
world.  The conflagration of the French Revolution was indeed not
extinguished, but it was evidently burning out; and their old reverence
for the Grand Monarque was beginning to revive among them, though they
only called him a consul.  Upon the king’s fast I preached on this
subject; and when the peace was concluded, I got great credit for my
foresight, but there was no merit in’t.  I had only lived longer than the
most of those around me, and had been all my days a close observer of the
signs of the times; so that what was lightly called prophecy and
prediction, were but a probability that experience had taught me to
discern.

In the affairs of the parish, the most remarkable generality (for we had
no particular catastrophe) was a great death of old people in the spring.
Among others, Miss Sabrina, the school mistress, paid the debt of nature,
but we could now better spare her than we did her predecessor; for at
Cayenneville there was a broken manufacturer’s wife, an excellent
teacher, and a genteel and modernised woman, who took the better order of
children; and Miss Sabrina having been long frail (for she was never
stout), a decent and discreet carlin, Mrs. M‘Caffie, the widow of a
custom-house officer, that was a native of the parish, set up another for
plainer work.  Her opposition Miss Sabrina did not mind, but she was
sorely displeased at the interloping of Mrs. Pirn at Cayenneville, and
some said it helped to kill her—of that, however, I am not so certain;
for Dr. Tanzey had told me in the winter, that he thought the sharp winds
in March would blow out her candle, as it was burnt to the snuff;
accordingly, she took her departure from this life, on the twenty-fifth
day of that month, after there had, for some days prior, been a most cold
and piercing east wind.

Miss Sabrina, who was always an oddity and aping grandeur, it was found,
had made a will, leaving her gatherings to her favourites, with all
regular formality.  To one she bequeathed a gown, to another this, and a
third that, and to me a pair of black silk stockings.  I was amazed when
I heard this; but judge what I felt, when a pair of old marrowless
stockings, darned in the heel, and not whole enough in the legs to make a
pair of mittens to Mrs. Balwhidder, were delivered to me by her executor,
Mr. Caption, the lawyer.  Saving, however, this kind of flummery, Miss
Sabrina was a harmless creature, and could quote poetry in discourse more
glibly than texts of Scripture—her father having spared no pains on her
mind: as for her body, it could not be mended; but that was not her
fault.

After her death, the session held a consultation, and we agreed to give
the same salary that Miss Sabrina enjoyed to Mrs. M‘Caffie, which angered
Mr. Cayenne, who thought it should have been given to the head mistress;
and it made him give Mrs. Pirn, out of his own pocket, double the sum.
But we considered that the parish funds were for the poor of the parish,
and therefore it was our duty to provide for the instruction of the poor
children.  Saving, therefore, those few notations, I have nothing further
to say concerning the topics and progress of this Ann. Dom.




CHAPTER XLII
YEAR 1801


IT is often to me very curious food for meditation, that as the parish
increased in population, there should have been less cause for matter to
record.  Things that in former days would have occasioned great discourse
and cogitation, are forgotten with the day in which they happen; and
there is no longer that searching into personalities which was so much in
vogue during the first epoch of my ministry, which I reckon the period
before the American war; nor has there been any such germinal changes
among us, as those which took place in the second epoch, counting
backward from the building of the cotton-mill that gave rise to the town
of Cayenneville.  But still we were not, even at this era, of which this
Ann. Dom. is the beginning, without occasional personality, or an event
that deserved to be called a germinal.

Some years before, I had noted among the callans at Mr. Lorimore’s school
a long soople laddie, who, like all bairns that grow fast and tall, had
but little smeddum.  He could not be called a dolt, for he was observant
and thoughtful, and giving to asking sagacious questions; but there was a
sleepiness about him, especially in the kirk, and he gave, as the master
said, but little application to his lessons, so that folk thought he
would turn out a sort of gaunt-at-the-door, more mindful of meat than
work.  He was, however, a good-natured lad; and, when I was taking my
solitary walks of meditation, I sometimes fell in with him sitting alone
on the brae by the water-side, and sometimes lying on the grass, with his
hands under his head, on the sunny green knolls where Mr. Cylinder, the
English engineer belonging to the cotton-work, has built the bonny house
that he calls Diryhill Cottage.  This was when Colin Mavis was a laddie
at the school, and when I spoke to him, I was surprised at the discretion
of his answers; so that gradually I began to think and say, that there
was more about Colin than the neighbours knew.  Nothing, however, for
many a day, came out to his advantage; so that his mother, who was by
this time a widow woman, did not well know what to do with him, and folk
pitied her heavy handful of such a droud.

By-and-by, however, it happened that one of the young clerks at the
cotton-mill shattered his right-hand thumb by a gun bursting; and, being
no longer able to write, was sent into the army to be an ensign, which
caused a vacancy in the office; and, through the help of Mr. Cayenne, I
got Colin Mavis into the place, where, to the surprise of everybody, he
proved a wonderful eident and active lad, and, from less to more, has
come at the head of all the clerks, and deep in the confidentials of his
employers.  But although this was a great satisfaction to me, and to the
widow woman his mother, it somehow was not so much so to the rest of the
parish, who seemed, as it were, angry that poor Colin had not proved
himself such a dolt as they had expected and foretold.

Among other ways that Colin had of spending his leisure, was that of
playing music on an instrument, in which it was said he made a wonderful
proficiency; but being long and thin, and of a delicate habit of body, he
was obligated to refrain from this recreation; so he betook himself to
books, and from reading he began to try writing; but, as this was done in
a corner, nobody jealoused what he was about, till one evening in this
year he came to the manse, and asked a word in private with me.  I
thought that perhaps he had fallen in with a lass, and was come to
consult me anent matrimony; but when we were by ourselves, in my study,
he took out of his pocket a number of the _Scots Magazine_, and said,
“Sir, you have been long pleased to notice me more than any other body,
and when I got this, I could not refrain from bringing it, to let you
see’t.  Ye maun ken, sir, that I have been long in secret given to trying
my hand at rhyme; and, wishing to ascertain what others thought of my
power in that way, I sent by the post twa three verses to the _Scots
Magazine_, and they have not only inserted them, but placed them in the
body of the book, in such a way that I kenna what to think.”  So I looked
at the Magazine, and read his verses, which were certainly very well-made
verses for one who had no regular education.  But I said to him, as the
Greenock magistrates said to John Wilson, the author of “Clyde,” when
they stipulated with him to give up the art, that poem-making was a
profane and unprofitable trade, and he would do well to turn his talent
to something of more solidity, which he promised to do; but he has since
put out a book, whereby he has angered all those that had foretold he
would be a do-nae-gude.  Thus has our parish walked sidy for sidy with
all the national improvements, having an author of its own, and getting a
literary character in the ancient and famous republic of letters.




