CHAPTER XXXV
YEAR 1794


THIS year had opened into all the leafiness of midsummer before anything
memorable happened in the parish, further than that the sad division of
my people into government-men and jacobins was perfected.  This calamity,
for I never could consider such heartburning among neighbours as any
thing less than a very heavy calamity, was assuredly occasioned by faults
on both sides; but it must be confessed that the gentry did nothing to
win the commonality from the errors of their way.  A little more
condescension on their part would not have made things worse, and might
have made them better; but pride interposed, and caused them to think
that any show of affability from them would be construed by the democrats
into a terror of their power; while the democrats were no less to blame;
for hearing how their compeers were thriving in France, and demolishing
every obstacle to their ascendency, they were crouse and really insolent,
evidencing none of that temperance in prosperity that proves the
possessors worthy of their good fortune.

As for me, my duty in these circumstances was plain and simple.  The
Christian religion was attempted to be brought into disrepute; the rising
generation were taught to gibe at its holiest ordinances; and the kirk
was more frequented as a place to while away the time on a rainy Sunday,
than for any insight of the admonitions and revelations in the sacred
book.  Knowing this, I perceived that it would be of no effect to handle
much the mysteries of the faith; but as there was at the time a bruit and
a sound about universal benevolence, philanthropy, utility, and all the
other disguises with which an infidel philosophy appropriated to itself
the charity, brotherly love, and welldoing inculcated by our holy
religion, I set myself to task upon these heads, and thought it no
robbery to use a little of the stratagem employed against Christ’s
kingdom, to promote the interests thereof in the hearts and
understandings of those whose ears would have been sealed against me, had
I attempted to expound higher things.  Accordingly, on one day it was my
practice to show what the nature of Christian charity was, comparing it
to the light and warmth of the sun, that shines impartially on the just
and the unjust—showing that man, without the sense of it as a duty, was
as the beasts that perish, and that every feeling of his nature was
intimately selfish, but then when actuated by this divine impulse, he
rose out of himself, and became as a god, zealous to abate the sufferings
of all things that live; and, on the next day, I demonstrated that the
new benevolence which had come so much into vogue, was but another
version of this Christian virtue.  In like manner, I dealt with brotherly
love, bringing it home to the business and bosoms of my hearers, that the
Christianity of it was neither enlarged nor bettered by being baptized
with the Greek name of philanthropy.  With welldoing, however, I went
more roundly to work, I told my people that I thought they had more sense
than to secede from Christianity to become Utilitarians; for that it
would be a confession of ignorance of the faith they deserved, seeing
that it was the main duty inculcated by our religion to do all in morals
and manners to which the newfangled doctrine of utility pretended.

These discourses, which I continued for sometime, had no great effect on
the men; but being prepared in a familiar household manner, they took the
fancies of the young women, which was to me an assurance that the seed I
had planted would in time shoot forth; for I reasoned with myself, that
if the gudeman of the immediate generation should continue free-thinkers,
their wives will take care that those of the next shall not lack that
spunk of grace; so I was cheered under that obscurity which fell upon
Christianity at this time, with a vista beyond, in which I saw, as it
were, the children unborn, walking on the bright green, and in the
unclouded splendour of the faith.

But what with the decay of trade, and the temptation of the king’s
bounty, and, over all, the witlessness that was in the spirit of man at
this time, the number that enlisted in the course for the year from the
parish was prodigious.  In one week no less than three weavers and two
cotton-spinners went over to Ayr, and took the bounty of the Royal
Artillery.  But I could not help remarking to myself, that the people
were grown so used to changes and extraordinary adventures, that the
single enlistment of Thomas Wilson, at the beginning of the American war,
occasioned a far greater grief and work among us, than all the swarms
that went off week after week in the months of November and December of
this year.




CHAPTER XXXVI
YEAR 1795


THE present Ann. Dom. was ushered in with an event that I had never
dreaded to see in my day, in our once sober and religious country parish.
The number of lads that had gone over to Ayr to be soldiers from among
the spinners and weavers of Cayenneville had been so great, that the
government got note of it, and sent a recruiting party to be quartered in
the town; for the term clachan was beginning by this time to wear out of
fashion: indeed, the place itself was outgrowing the fitness of that
title.  Never shall I forget the dunt that the first tap of the drum gied
to my heart, as I was sitting on Hansel Monday by myself at the parlour
fireside, Mrs. Balwhidder being throng with the lassies looking out a
washing, and my daughter at Ayr, spending a few days with her old
comrades of the boarding school.  I thought it was the enemy; and then
anon the sound of the fife came shrill to the ear, for the night was lown
and peaceful.  My wife and all the lassies came flying in upon me, crying
all in the name of heaven, what could it be? by which I was obligated to
put on my big-coat, and, with my hat and staff, go out to enquire.  The
whole town was aloof, the aged at the doors in clusters, and the bairns
following the tattoo, as it was called, and at every doubling beat of the
drum, shouting as if they had been in the face of their foemen.

Mr. Archibald Dozendale, one of my elders, was saying to several persons
around him, just as I came up, “Hech, sirs! but the battle draws near our
gates,” upon which there was a heavy sigh from all that heard him; and
then they told me of the sergeant’s business; and we had a serious
communing together anent the same.  But while we were thus standing
discoursing on the causey, Mrs. Balwhidder and the servant lassies could
thole no longer, but in a troop came in quest of me, to hear what was
doing.  In short, it was a night both of sorrow and anxiety.  Mr.
Dozendale walked back to the manse with us, and we had a sober tumbler of
toddy together; marvelling exceedingly where these fearful portents and
changes would stop, both of us being of opinion that the end of the world
was drawing nearer and nearer.

Whether it was, however, that the lads belonging to the place did not
like to show themselves with the enlistment cockades among their
acquaintance, or that there was any other reason, I cannot take it upon
me to say; but certain it is, the recruiting party came no speed, and, in
consequence, were removed about the end of March.

Another thing happened in this year, too remarkable for me to neglect to
put on record, as it strangely and strikingly marked the rapid
revolutions that were going on.  In the month of August at the time of
the fair, a gang of playactors came, and hired Thomas Thacklan’s barn for
their enactments.  They were the first of that clanjamfrey who had ever
been in the parish; and there was a wonderful excitement caused by the
rumours concerning them.  Their first performance was _Douglas Tragedy_
and the _Gentle Shepherd_: and the general opinion was, that the lad who
played Norval in the play, and Patie in the farce, was an English lord’s
son, who had run away from his parents rather than marry an old cracket
lady with a great portion.  But, whatever truth there might be in this
notion, certain it is, the whole pack was in a state of perfect beggary;
and yet, for all that, they not only in their parts, as I was told,
laughed most heartily, but made others do the same; for I was constrained
to let my daughter go to see them, with some of her acquaintance; and she
gave me such an account of what they did, that I thought I would have
liked to have gotten a keek at them myself.  At the same time, I must own
this was a sinful curiosity, and I stifled it to the best of my ability.
Among other plays that they did, was one called _Macbeth and the
Witches_, which the Miss Cayennes had seen performed in London, when they
were there in the winter time with their father, for three months, seeing
the world, after coming from the boarding-school.  But it was no more
like the true play of Shakespeare the poet, according to their account,
than a duddy betheral, set up to fright the sparrows from the peas, is
like a living gentleman.  The hungry players, instead of behaving like
guests at the royal banquet, were voracious on the needful feast of
bread, and the strong ale, that served for wine in decanters.  But the
greatest sport of all was about a kail-pot, that acted the part of a
caldron, and which should have sunk with thunder and lightning into the
earth; however, it did quite as well, for it made its exit, as Miss
Virginia said, by walking quietly off, being pulled by a string fastened
to one of its feet.  No scene of the play was so much applauded as this
one; and the actor who did the part of King Macbeth made a most polite
bow of thankfulness to the audience, for the approbation with which they
had received the performance of the pot.

We had likewise, shortly after the “Omnes exeunt” of the players, an
exhibition of a different sort in the same barn.  This was by two English
quakers, and a quaker lady, tanners of Kendal, who had been at Ayr on
some leather business, where they preached, but made no proselytes.  The
travellers were all three in a whisky, drawn by one of the best-ordered
horses, as the hostler at the Cross-Keys told me, ever seen.  They came
to the Inn to their dinner, and meaning to stay all night, sent round, to
let it be known that they would hold a meeting in Friend Thacklan’s barn;
but Thomas denied they were either kith or kin to him: this, however, was
their way of speaking.

In the evening, owing to the notice, a great congregation was assembled
in the barn, and I myself, along with Mr. Archibald Dozendale, went there
likewise, to keep the people in awe; for we feared the strangers might be
jeered and insulted.  The three were seated aloft on a high stage,
prepared on purpose, with two mares and scaffold-deals, borrowed from Mr.
Trowel the mason.  They sat long, and silent; but at last the spirit
moved the woman, and she rose, and delivered a very sensible exposition
of Christianity.  I was really surprised to hear such sound doctrine; and
Mr. Dozendale said, justly, that it was more to the purpose than some
that my younger brethren from Edinburgh endeavoured to teach.  So, that
those who went to laugh at the sincere simplicity of the pious quakers,
were rebuked by a very edifying discourse on the moral duties of a
Christian’s life.

Upon the whole, however, this, to the best of my recollection, was
another unsatisfactory year.  In this we were, doubtless, brought more
into the world; but we had a greater variety of temptation set before us,
and there was still jealousy and estrangement in the dispositions of the
gentry, and the lower orders, particularly the manufacturers.  I cannot
say, indeed, that there was any increase of corruption among the rural
portion of my people; for their vocation calling them to work apart, in
the purity of the free air of heaven, they were kept uncontaminated by
that seditious infection which fevered the minds of the sedentary
weavers, and working like flatulence in the stomachs of the
cotton-spinners, sent up into their heads a vain and diseased fume of
infidel philosophy.




