CHAPTER XLVI
YEAR 1805


FOR some time I had meditated a reformation in the parish, and this year
I carried the same into effect.  I had often noticed with concern, that,
out of a mistaken notion of paying respect to the dead, my people were
wont to go to great lengths at their burials, and dealt round short-bread
and sugar-biscuit, with wine and other confections, as if there had been
no ha’d in their hands; which straitened many a poor family, making the
dispensation of the Lord a heavier temporal calamity than it should
naturally have been.  Accordingly, on consulting with Mrs. Balwhidder,
who has a most judicious judgment, it was thought that my interference
would go a great way to lighten the evil.  I therefore advised with those
whose friends were taken from them, not to make that amplitude of
preparation which used to be the fashion, nor to continue handing about
as long as the folk would take, but only at the very most to go no more
than three times round with the service.  Objections were made to this,
as if it would be thought mean; but I put on a stern visage, and told
them, that if they did more I would rise up, and rebuke and forbid the
extravagance.  So three services became the uttermost modicum at all
burials.  This was doing much, but it was not all that I wished to do.

I considered that the best reformations are those which proceed step by
step, and stop at that point where the consent to what has been
established becomes general; and so I governed myself, and therefore
interfered no farther; but I was determined to set an example.
Accordingly, at the very next dregy, after I partook of one service, I
made a bow to the servitors and they passed on, but all before me had
partaken of the second service; some, however, of those after me did as I
did, so I foresaw that in a quiet canny way I would bring in the fashion
of being satisfied with one service.  I therefore, from that time, always
took my place as near as possible to the door, where the chief mourner
sat, and made a point of nodding away the second service, which has now
grown into a custom, to the great advantage of surviving relations.

But in this reforming business I was not altogether pleased with our
poet; for he took a pawkie view of my endeavours, and indited a ballad on
the subject, in the which he makes a clattering carlin describe what took
place, so as to turn a very solemn matter into a kind of derision.  When
he brought his verse and read it to me, I told him that I thought it was
overly natural; for I could not find another term to designate the cause
of the dissatisfaction that I had with it; but Mrs. Balwhidder said that
it might help my plan if it were made public; so upon her advice we got
some of Mr. Lorimore’s best writers to make copies of it for
distribution, which was not without fruit and influence.  But a sore
thing happened at the very next burial.  As soon as the nodding away of
the second service began, I could see that the gravity of the whole
meeting was discomposed; and some of the irreverent young chiels almost
broke out into even-down laughter, which vexed me exceedingly.  Mrs.
Balwhidder, howsoever, comforted me by saying, that custom in time would
make it familiar, and by-and-by the thing would pass as a matter of
course, until one service would be all that folk would offer; and truly
the thing is coming to that, for only two services are now handed round,
and the second is regularly nodded by.




CHAPTER XLVII
YEAR 1806


MR. CAYENNE of Wheatrig having for several years been in a declining way,
partly brought on by the consuming fire of his furious passion, and
partly by the decay of old age, sent for me on the evening of the first
Sabbath of March in this year.  I was surprised at the message, and went
to the Wheatrig House directly, where, by the lights in the windows as I
gaed up through the policy to the door, I saw something extraordinary was
going on.  Sambo, the blackamoor servant, opened the door, and, without
speaking, shook his head; for it was an affectionate creature, and as
fond of his master as if he had been his own father.  By this sign I
guessed that the old gentleman was thought to be drawing near his latter
end; so I walked softly after Sambo up the stair, and was shown into the
chamber where Mr. Cayenne, since he had been confined to the house,
usually sat.  His wife had been dead some years before.

Mr. Cayenne was sitting in his easy chair, with a white cotton nightcap
on his head, and a pillow at his shoulders to keep him straight.  But his
head had fallen down on his breast, and he breathed like a panting baby.
His legs were swelled, and his feet rested on a footstool.  His face,
which was wont to be the colour of a peony rose, was of a yellow hue,
with a patch of red on each cheek like a wafer; and his nose was shirpit
and sharp, and of an unnatural purple.  Death was evidently fighting with
nature for the possession of the body.  “Heaven have mercy on his soul!”
said I to myself, as I sat down beside him.

When I had been seated some time, the power was given him to raise his
head as it were a-jee; and he looked at me with the tail of his eye,
which I saw was glittering and glassy.  “Doctor,” for he always called me
doctor, though I am not of that degree, “I am glad to see you,” were his
words, uttered with some difficulty.

“How do you find yourself, sir?” I replied, in a sympathising manner.

“Damned bad,” said he, as if I had been the cause of his suffering.  I
was daunted to the very heart to hear him in such an unregenerate state;
but after a short pause I addressed myself to him again, saying, that “I
hoped he would soon be more at ease; and he should bear in mind that the
Lord chasteneth whom he loveth.”

“The devil take such love!” was his awful answer, which was to me as a
blow on the forehead with a mell.  However, I was resolved to do my duty
to the miserable sinner, let him say what he would.  Accordingly, I
stooped towards him with my hands on my knees, and said in a
compassionate voice, “It’s very true, sir, that you are in great agony;
but the goodness of God is without bound.”

“Curse me if I think so, doctor!” replied the dying uncircumcised
Philistine.  But he added at whiles, his breathlessness being grievous,
and often broken by a sore hiccup, “I am, however, no saint, as you know,
doctor; so I wish you to put in a word for me, doctor; for you know that
in these times, doctor, it is the duty of every good subject to die a
Christian.”

This was a poor account of the state of his soul; but it was plain I
could make no better o’t, by entering into any religious discourse or
controversy with him, he being then in the last gasp; so I knelt down and
prayed for him with great sincerity, imploring the Lord, as an awakening
sense of grace to the dying man, that it would please him to lift up,
though it were but for the season of a minute, the chastening hand which
was laid so heavily upon his aged servant; at which Mr. Cayenne, as if,
indeed, the hand had been then lifted, cried out, “None of that stuff,
doctor; you know that I cannot call myself his servant.”

                       [Picture: The Ruling Elder]

Was ever a minister in his prayer so broken in upon by a perishing
sinner!  However, I had the weight of a duty upon me, and made no reply,
but continued, “Thou hearest, O Lord, how he confesses his unworthiness!
Let not thy compassion, therefore, be withheld, but verify to him the
words that I have spoken in faith, of the boundlessness of thy goodness,
and the infinite multitude of thy tender mercies.”  I then calmly, but
sadly, sat down, and presently, as if my prayer had been heard, relief
was granted; for Mr. Cayenne raised his head, and giving me a queer look,
said, “That last clause of your petition, doctor, was well put, and I
think, too, it has been granted, for I am easier”—adding, “I have no
doubt, doctor, given much offence in the world, and oftenest when I meant
to do good; but I have wilfully injured no man; and as God is my judge,
and his goodness, you say, is so great, he may, perhaps, take my soul
into his holy keeping.”  In saying which words, Mr. Cayenne dropped his
head upon his breast, his breathing ceased, and he was wafted away out of
this world with as little trouble as a blameless baby.

This event soon led to a change among us.  In the settling of Mr.
Cayenne’s affairs in the Cotton-mill Company, it was found that he had
left such a power of money, that it was needful to the concern, in order
that they might settle with the doers under his testament, to take in
other partners.  By this Mr. Speckle came to be a resident in the parish,
he having taken up a portion of Mr. Cayenne’s share.  He likewise took a
tack of the house and policy of Wheatrig.  But although Mr. Speckle was a
far more conversible man than his predecessor, and had a wonderful
plausibility in business, the affairs of the company did not thrive in
his hands.  Some said this was owing to his having owre many irons in the
fire; others, to the circumstances of the times: in my judgment, however,
both helped; but the issue belongs to the events of another year.  In the
meanwhile, I should here note, that in the course of this current Ann.
Dom. it pleased Heaven to visit me with a severe trial; the nature of
which I will here record at length—the upshot I will make known
hereafter.

From the planting of inhabitants in the cotton-mill town of Cayenneville,
or as the country folk, not used to used to such lang-nebbit words, now
call it, Canaille, there had come in upon the parish various sectarians
among the weavers, some of whom were not satisfied with the gospel as I
preached it, and endeavoured to practise it in my walk and conversation;
and they began to speak of building a kirk for themselves, and of getting
a minster that would give them the gospel more to their own ignorant
fancies.  I was exceedingly wroth and disturbed when the thing was first
mentioned to me; and I very earnestly, from the pulpit, next Lord’s day,
lectured on the growth of newfangled doctrines; which, however, instead
of having the wonted effect of my discourses, set up the theological
weavers in a bleeze, and the very Monday following they named a
committee, to raise money by subscription to build a meeting-house.  This
was the first overt act of insubordination, collectively manifested, in
the parish; and it was conducted with all that crafty dexterity with
which the infidel and jacobin spirit of the French Revolution had
corrupted the honest simplicity of our good old hameward fashions.  In
the course of a very short time, the Canaille folk had raised a large
sum, and seduced not a few of my people into their schism, by which they
were enabled to set about building their kirk; the foundations thereof
were not, however, laid till the following year, but their proceedings
gave me a het heart, for they were like an open rebellion to my
authority, and a contemptuous disregard of that religious allegiance
which is due from the flock to the pastor.

On Christmas-day the wind broke off the main arm of our Adam and Eve
pear-tree; and I grieved for it more as a type and sign of the threatened
partition, than on account of the damage, though the fruit was the
juiciest in all the country side.




