CHAPTER XXVIII
YEAR 1787


THERE had been, as I have frequently observed, a visible improvement
going on in the parish.  From the time of the making of the toll-road,
every new house that was built in the clachan was built along that road.
Among other changes hereby caused, the Lady Macadam’s jointure-house that
was, which stood in a pleasant parterre, inclosed within a stone wall and
an iron gate, having a pillar with a pineapple head on each side, came to
be in the middle of the town.  While Mr. Cayenne inhabited the same, it
was maintained in good order; but on his flitting to his own new house on
the Wheatrigs, the parterre was soon overrun with weeds, and it began to
wear the look of a waste place.  Robert Toddy, who then kept the
change-house, and who had, from the lady’s death, rented the coach-house
for stabling, in this juncture thought of it for an inn; so he set his
own house to Thomas Treddles the weaver, whose son, William, is now the
great Glasgow manufacturer, that has cotton-mills and steam-engines, and
took, “the Place,” as it was called, and had a fine sign, THE CROSS-KEYS,
painted and put up in golden characters, by which it became one of the
most noted inns anywhere to be seen; and the civility of Mrs. Toddy was
commended by all strangers.  But although this transmutation from a
change-house to an inn was a vast amendment, in a manner, to the parish,
there was little amendment of manners thereby; for the farmer lads began
to hold dancings and other riotous proceedings there, and to bring, as it
were, the evil practices of towns into the heart of the country.  All
sort of licence was allowed as to drink and hours; and the edifying
example of Mr. Mutchkins and his pious family, was no longer held up to
the imitation of the wayfaring man.

Saving the mutation of “the Place” into an inn, nothing very remarkable
happened in this year.  We got into our new manse about the middle of
March; but it was rather damp, being new plastered, and it caused me to
have a severe attack of the rheumatics in the fall of the year.

I should not, in my notations, forget to mark a new luxury that got in
among the commonality at this time.  By the opening of new roads, and the
traffic thereon with carts and carriers, and by our young men that were
sailors going to the Clyde, and sailing to Jamaica and the West Indies,
heaps of sugar and coffee-beans were brought home, while many, among the
kail-stocks and cabbages in their yards, had planted groset and berry
bushes; which two things happening together, the fashion to make jam and
jelly, which hitherto had been only known in the kitchens and
confectionaries of the gentry, came to be introduced into the clachan.
All this, however, was not without a plausible pretext; for it was found
that jelly was an excellent medicine for a sore throat, and jam a remedy
as good as London candy for a cough, or a cold, or a shortness of breath.
I could not, however, say that this gave me so much concern as the
smuggling trade, only it occasioned a great fasherie to Mrs. Balwhidder;
for, in the berry time, there was no end to the borrowing of her
brass-pan to make jelly and jam, till Mrs. Toddy of the Cross-Keys bought
one, which, in its turn, came into request, and saved ours.

It was in the Martinmas quarter of this year that I got the first payment
of my augmentation.  Having no desire to rip up old sores, I shall say no
more anent it, the worst being anticipated in my chronicle of the last
year; but there was a thing happened in the payment that occasioned a
vexation at the time, of a very disagreeable nature.  Daft Meg Gaffaw,
who, from the tragical death of her mother, was a privileged subject,
used to come to the manse on the Saturdays for a meal of meat; and so it
fell out that as, by some neglect of mine, no steps had been taken to
regulate the disposal of the victual that constituted the means of the
augmentation, some of the heritors, in an ungracious temper, sent what
they called the tithe-ball (the Lord knows it was not the fiftieth!) to
the manse, where I had no place to put it.  This fell out on a Saturday
night, when I was busy with my sermon, thinking not of silver or gold,
but of much better; so that I was greatly molested and disturbed thereby.
Daft Meg, who sat by the kitchen chimley-lug, hearing a’, said nothing
for a time; but when she saw how Mrs. Balwhidder and me were put to, she
cried out with a loud voice, like a soul under the inspiration of
prophecy—“When the widow’s cruse had filled all the vessels in the house,
the Lord stopped the increase.  Verily, verily, I say unto you, if your
barns be filled, and your girnell-kists can hold no more, seek till ye
shall find the tume basins of the poor, and therein pour the corn, and
the oil, and the wine of your abundance; so shall ye be blessed of the
Lord.”  The which words I took for an admonition, and directing the sacks
to be brought into the dining-room and other chambers of the manse, I
sent off the heritors’ servants, that had done me this prejudice, with an
unexpected thankfulness.  But this, as I afterwards was informed, both
them and their masters attributed to the greedy grasp of avarice, with
which they considered me as misled; and having said so, nothing could
exceed their mortification on Monday, when they heard (for they were of
those who had deserted the kirk) that I had given by the precentor notice
to every widow in the parish that was in need, to come to the manse and
she would receive her portion of the partitioning of the augmentation.
Thus, without any offence on my part, saving the strictness of justice,
was a division made between me and the heritors; but the people were with
me; and my own conscience was with me; and though the fronts of the lofts
and the pews of the heritors were but thinly filled, I trusted that a
good time was coming, when the gentry would see the error of their way.
So I bent the head of resignation to the Lord, and, assisted by the
wisdom of Mr. Kibbock, adhered to the course I had adopted; but at the
close of the year my heart was sorrowful for the schism; and my prayer on
Hogmanay was one of great bitterness of soul, that such an evil had come
to pass.




CHAPTER XXIX
YEAR 1788


IT had been often remarked by ingenious men, that the Brawl burn, which
ran through the parish, though a small, was yet a rapid stream, and had a
wonderful capability for damming, and to turn mills.  From the time that
the Irville water deserted its channel this brook grew into repute, and
several mills and dams had been erected on its course.  In this year a
proposal came from Glasgow to build a cotton-mill on its banks, beneath
the Witch-linn, which being on a corner of the Wheatrig, the property of
Mr. Cayenne, he not only consented thereto, but took a part in the profit
or loss therein; and, being a man of great activity, though we thought
him, for many a day, a serpent-plague sent upon the parish, he proved
thereby one of our greatest benefactors.  The cotton-mill was built, and
a spacious fabric it was—nothing like it had been seen before in our day
and generation—and, for the people that were brought to work in it, a new
town was built in the vicinity, which Mr. Cayenne, the same being founded
on his land, called Cayenneville, the name of the plantation in Virginia
that had been taken from him by the rebellious Americans.  From that day
Fortune was lavish of her favours upon him; his property swelled, and
grew in the most extraordinary manner, and the whole country side was
stirring with a new life.  For, when the mill was set a-going, he got
weavers of muslin established in Cayenneville; and shortly after, but
that did not take place till the year following, he brought women all the
way from the neighbourhood of Manchester, in England, to teach the lassie
bairns in our old clachan tambouring.

Some of the ancient families, in their turreted houses, were not pleased
with this innovation, especially when they saw the handsome dwellings
that were built for the weavers of the mills, and the unstinted hand that
supplied the wealth required for the carrying on of the business.  It
sank their pride into insignificance, and many of them would almost
rather have wanted the rise that took place in the value of their lands,
than have seen this incoming of what they called o’er-sea speculation.
But, saving the building of the cotton-mill, and the beginning of
Cayenneville, nothing more memorable happened in this year, still it was
nevertheless a year of a great activity.  The minds of men were excited
to new enterprises; a new genius, as it were, had descended upon the
earth, and there was an erect and outlooking spirit abroad that was not
to be satisfied with the taciturn regularity of ancient affairs.  Even
Miss Sabrina Hooky, the schoolmistress, though now waned from her
meridian, was touched with the enlivening rod, and set herself to learn
and to teach tambouring, in such a manner as to supersede by precept and
example that old time-honoured functionary, as she herself called it, the
spinning-wheel, proving, as she did one night to Mr. Kibbock and me,
that, if more money could be made by a woman tambouring than by spinning,
it was better for her to tambour than to spin.

But, in the midst of all this commercing and manufacturing, I began to
discover signs of decay in the wonted simplicity of our country ways.
Among the cotton-spinners and muslin weavers of Cayenneville were several
unsatisfied and ambitious spirits, who clubbed together, and got a London
newspaper to the Cross-Keys, where they were nightly in the habit of
meeting and debating about the affairs of the French, which were then
gathering towards a head.  They were represented to me as lads by common
in capacity, but with unsettled notions of religion.  They were, however,
quiet and orderly; and some of them since, at Glasgow, Paisley, and
Manchester, even, I am told, in London, have grown into a topping way.

It seems they did not like my manner of preaching, and on that account
absented themselves from public worship; which, when I heard, I sent for
some of them, to convince them of their error with regard to the truth of
divers points of doctrine; but they confounded me with their objections,
and used my arguments, which were the old and orthodox proven opinions of
the Divinity Hall, as if they had been the light sayings of a vain man.
So that I was troubled, fearing that some change would ensue to my
people, who had hitherto lived amidst the boughs and branches of the
gospel unmolested by the fowler’s snare, and I set myself to watch
narrowly, and with a vigilant eye, what would come to pass.

There was a visible increase among us of worldly prosperity in the course
of this year; insomuch that some of the farmers, who were in the custom
of taking their vendibles to the neighbouring towns on the Tuesdays, the
Wednesdays, and Fridays, were led to open a market on the Saturdays in
our own clachan, the which proved a great convenience.  But I cannot take
it upon me to say, whether this can be said to have well begun in the
present Ann. Dom., although I know that in the summer of the ensuing year
it was grown into a settled custom; which I well recollect by the
Macadams coming with their bairns to see Mrs. Malcolm, their mother,
suddenly on a Saturday afternoon; on which occasion me and Mrs.
Balwhidder were invited to dine with them, and Mrs. Malcolm bought in the
market for the dinner that day, both mutton and fowls, such as twenty
years before could not have been got for love or money on such a pinch.
Besides, she had two bottles of red and white wine from the Cross-Keys,
luxuries which, saving in the Breadland House in its best days, could not
have been had in the whole parish, but must have been brought from a
borough town; for Eaglesham Castle is not within the bounds of
Dalmailing, and my observe does not apply to the stock and stores of that
honourable mansion, but only to the dwellings of our own heritors, who
were in general straitened in their circumstances, partly with upsetting,
and partly by the eating rust of family pride, which hurt the edge of
many a clever fellow among them, that would have done well in the way of
trade, but sunk into divors for the sake of their genteelity.




