CHAPTER IV.

THEIR PROFANENESS.


1. Another evil connected with secrecy, as maintained by the
associations the character of which is now under consideration, is the
profane use of sacred things in ceremonies, celebrations, and
processions. This evil has, perhaps, no _necessary_ connection with
secrecy, but has generally in _fact_. The "secret societies" of
antiquity dealt largely in religious ceremonies. It is the frequent
boast of Masons, Odd-fellows, and others, that their associations
correspond to those of ancient times. There is, indeed, a
correspondence between them in the use of religious rites. Those of
ancient times employed the rites of heathenish superstition; those of
modern times are, perhaps, as objectionable on account of their
prostituting the religion of Christ. The holy Bible, the word of the
living God, is used by Masons as a mere emblem, like the square and
compass. The pot of incense, the holy tabernacle, the ark of the
covenant, the holy miter, and the holy breastplate are also employed
as emblems, along with the lambskin and the sword pointing to a naked
heart. At the opening of lodges and during initiations, passages of
Scripture are read as a mere ceremony, or as a charge to the members
in regard to their duty as Masons. Thus a perverse use of holy
Scripture is made in the application of it to matters to which it has
no reference whatever. (Freemason's Monitor, pp. 92, 19-181). Even the
great Jehovah is represented in some of their ceremonies by symbols.
His all-seeing eye is represented by the image of a human eye.
(Freemason's Monitor, pp. 85, 290.) Masonry also profanes the name and
titles of God. God alone is to be worshiped; he alone should be
addressed as the _Most Worshipful Being_. But Masonry requires the use
of such language as follows: "The Most Worshipful Grand Master," and
"The Most Worshipful Grand Lodge." God alone is Almighty, but Masons
have their "Thrice Illustrious and Grand Puissant," and their "Thrice
Potent Grand Master." God alone is perfect, but Masons have a "Grand
Lodge of Perfection" and a "Grand Elect Perfect and Sublime Mason."
(Monitor, pp. 187, 219; Monitor of Free and Accepted Rite, pp. 52.)
Christ is the great High Priest, and Aaron and his successors were his
representatives, but Masons have a "High Priest," a "_Grand_ High
Priest," yea, a "_Most Excellent_ Grand High Priest." At the
installation of this so-called High Priest, various passages of
Scripture treating of the priesthood of Melchisedec and of Christ are
used. (Webb's Monitor, pp. 178-181, 187.)

We regard these high-sounding titles as ridiculous, and as well
calculated to excite derision and scorn; but we do not now treat of
them in that regard. We call attention, at present, to the emblems and
titles used by Masons as profane. God did not intend his holy Word,
and the Tabernacle, and the Ark of the Covenant, and the Breastplate,
to be used as the symbols of Masonry. These and other holy things were
intended only for holy purposes. To use them as the Masons do is to
pervert and profane them. The visible representation of the all-seeing
eye of God is certainly a species of idolatry, and is forbidden by the
second commandment. Such, also, are the triangles, declared to be "a
beautiful emblem of the eternal Jehovah." (Monitor, p. 290.) The
Israelites, of course, did not understand that the Divine Being was
really like their golden calf; they considered it a symbol of Deity.
How much better is it to assimilate God to a _triangle_ than to a
calf? The difference is just this: the latter idea is more gross than
the former. The sin of idolatry--that is, of representing God under a
visible figure--is involved in both cases. The profaneness of the
titles mentioned above must at once be evident to every reverent,
considerate mind. They are such as in the Bible are ascribed only to
God and to Christ. Indeed, Masons give more exalted titles to their
sham priest than the Scriptures employ to describe the character and
office of the great High Priest who is "made higher than the heavens."
If this is not profane, we are at a loss to know what can be profane.

2. The Odd-fellows in profanation of holy things go about as far as
the Masons. They employ "the brazen serpent," "the budded rod of
Aaron," "the Ark of the Covenant," "the breastplate for the high
priest," and other holy things as emblems of their order, along with,
"the shining sun," "the half moon," etc. They have their "Most Worthy
Grand Master," and their "Most Excellent Grand High Priest," and other
officers designated by titles which should be given to God and Christ
alone. Indeed, as it respects emblems and titles, Masonry seems to be
the example which other secret associations have followed. In regard
to the profanation of holy things, the difference between most of the
secret associations in our land is one merely of degree. This
profanation of the word, name, and titles of God is certainly sinful
in itself, and very injurious in its effects. What kind of ideas of
God, and Christ, and heaven must persons have who conceive and think
of God under the figure of three triangles; of Christ and his
priesthood as symbolized by "the Most Excellent Grand High Priest,"
officiating amid the tomfooleries of Masonry and Odd-fellowship; and
of heaven as a Grand Lodge-room. What ideas of the Divine Majesty and
Glory must they have who are accustomed to give to the officers of a
secret association, and to men who are, perhaps, destitute of faith
and holiness, and who may be Jews, Turks, or infidels, as grand titles
as the Scriptures give to the God of heaven and the Savior of the
world. Besides it is very improper and sinful to give to mere men the
titles and glory which are due to God alone. We learn that it was
precisely for this sin that the Divine displeasure was visited upon
king Herod. On a certain occasion having put on his royal apparel, he
sat on his throne and made a public oration. The people who heard him
shouted and said, "_It is the voice of a God and not of a man; and
immediately the angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God
the glory; and he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost_." (Acts
xii: 23.) It was for the same spirit of self-glorification that the
king of Babylon was punished with madness and disgrace. Nebuchadnezzar
walked in his palace, and said: "Is not this great Babylon, which I
have built for the house of my kingdom by the might of my power, and
for the honor of my majesty?" The same hour he was driven from men,
and did eat grass as oxen; and his body was wet with the dew of
heaven, till his hairs were grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails
like birds' claws. (Dan. iv: 30-33.)

2 [sic]. Another objectionable feature of many secret societies is,
that they profane the _worship_ of God. They claim (at least those
which seem to embrace the most numerous membership) to be, in some
sense, religious associations. They maintain forms of worship; their
rituals contain prayers to be used at initiations, installations,
funerals, consecrations, etc. They receive into membership, as we
shall afterward see, almost all sorts of men except atheists. Being
composed of Jews, Turks, Mohammedans, Mormons, and infidels, as well
as of believers in Christianity, they endeavor to establish such forms
as will be acceptable to their mongrel and motley membership. Hence
their prayers and other forms of worship are such as may be
consistently used by the irreligious and by infidels, and only by
them. We do not say that no Christian prayers are offered up in
Masonic lodges. No doubt some godly men, as chaplains, offer up
extempore prayers in the name of Christ; but such prayers are not
Masonic. They are not authorized by the Masonic ritual; they are
contrary to the spirit if not to the express regulations of Masonry.
Any member would have a right to object to them, and his objections
would have to be sustained. The only prayers which Masonry does
authorize, and can consistently authorize, are Christless--infidel
prayers and services. The proof of this declaration can be found in
every Masonic manual. (See Webb's Monitor, pp. 36, 80, 189, and
Carson's Monitor, of the Ancient and Accepted Rite, pp. 47, 61, 95,
99.) In all the prayers thus presented, the name of Christ is
excluded; it is excluded even from the prayers to be offered at the
installation of the "Most Excellent Grand High Priest." (Webb's Mon.,
pp. 183, 189.) The idea of human guilt is, also, almost entirely
excluded from these prayers; the idea of pardon through the atonement
of Christ is never once presented in them. In the prayer to be used at
the funeral of a "Past Master," it is declared that admission unto
God's "everlasting kingdom is the just reward of a pious and virtuous
life." Every true Christian, on reflection, must see that such prayers
are an insult to the Almighty. They are just such as infidels and all
objectors of Christ may offer.

The prayers of the society of Odd-fellows are equally objectionable.
In respect to the character of their religious services, they are to
be classed with the Masons. Odd-fellowship knows no God but the god of
the infidel; it recognizes the Creator of the Universe and the Father
of men, but not the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. The
name of Christ has no more a place in the religion of Odd-fellowship,
according to its principles and regulations, than in a heathen temple
or an infidel club-room. It is quite likely that sometimes chaplains,
officiating in the lodge-room, pray in the name of Christ; but a Turk,
according to the principles and regulations of Odd-fellowship, would
have just as much right to pray in the name of Mohammed, or a Mormon
in the name of Joe Smith. These are facts which, we presume, all
acquainted with the forms and ceremonies in use among Odd-fellows will
admit. Grosch, in his Manual, makes the following declaration: "The
descendants of Abraham, the divers followers of Jesus, the Pariahs of
the stricter sects, here gather round the same altar as one family,
manifesting no differences of creed or worship; and discord and
contention are forgotten in works of humanity and peace." (Pp. 285,
286.) This declaration has reference, of course, to _all_ the members
of the associations--believers in Christianity, Jews, Mohammedans,
Indians, Hindoos, and infidels. How do they manage to worship so
lovingly together in the lodge-room? Our author asserts that they
"leave their prejudices at the door." Of course their forms of worship
embody no "prejudices." The thing is managed in this way: Whatever is
peculiar to Judaism is excluded from the ritual and worship of
Odd-fellows; whatever is peculiar to Hindooism is excluded; whatever
is peculiar to Mohammedanism is excluded; whatever is peculiar to
Christianity is excluded; whatever is peculiar to any form of religion
is excluded. Only so much as is held in common by Jews, Hindoos,
Mohammedans, and Christians is allowed a place in the ritual and
worship of Odd-fellows. But how much is held in common by these
various classes? After every thing peculiar to each class has been
thrown overboard, how much is left? Nothing but _deism_ or
_infidelity_. The only views held in common by the Jew, Mohammedan,
Christian, and others are just those held by infidels. The religion of
Odd-fellowship is _infidelity_, and its prayers are _infidel_ prayers.

Not only such are the prayers and religion of Masonry and
Odd-fellowship, but such _must_ be the religion and prayers of all
associations organized on their principles. The only way to welcome
all of every creed, Jew, Mohammedan, Hindoo, etc., and make them feel
at home in an association, is to exclude every thing offensive to the
conscience or prejudices of any one of them. And when every thing of
that sort has been excluded, the residuum, in every case, as every one
must see, will be deism or infidelity. This is a serious matter.
Christians are not free from guilt in countenancing such prayers and
services. The tendency of such religious performances must be very
injurious. Whoever adopts the religious, or rather irreligious, spirit
and principles of Masonry, Odd-fellowship, and other similar
associations must discard Christianity and the Bible. No doubt there
are _some_, perhaps there are _many_ Christians in connection with
such associations, but they certainly do not and can not approve the
Christless prayers of the lodge-room, much less join in them. Is it
right for the disciples of Jesus, or even for believers in
Christianity, as the great majority of people in this country are, to
sustain any association which puts Christianity on a level with pagan
superstition, which treats Jesus Christ with no more regard and
veneration than it does Mohammed, Confucius, or Joe Smith, and whose
only religion is the religion of infidels?

If secret associations did not pretend to have _any_ religion or _any_
religious services, but would, like bank and railroad companies,
conduct their affairs without religious forms, it would be infinitely
better.




