CHAPTER XV.

DUTY LEARNED FROM TWO SOURCES.


In this discussion we learn our duty from two sources. Two authorities
are recognized. One is the revelation of God in his written Word. The
other is the book of nature; this includes the ethical nature of man,
his social relations, and the laws that govern material things.

The author of the Bible is the God of nature. They are but two volumes
from the same mind and hand. They must speak in harmony when both are
understood. Truth found in the inspired Word cannot be contradicted in
nature; and no facts in the works of God can be found in conflict with
the Word He has spoken. A truth found in either is always consistent
with the truths made plain in the other.

Familiarity with one prepares us to better understand the other. The
devout student of the Word has his mind aroused, and his
susceptibility so quickened that he is able to read more clearly the
lessons in the volumes of nature open before him. The student of
nature, who has searched its mysteries and taken in its beauty and
designs of infinite wisdom everywhere appearing, must be the more
ready and competent to appreciate the revealed love and grace.

The Bible is not a treatise on natural science, nor does natural
science teach revealed religion, yet they do not conflict. The special
student of either may have perfect confidence that whatever he has
found true in his chosen field will be found consistent with truth in
other fields of special study.

Chemistry, biology and all studies of nature, are found only to give a
higher conception of the God of all grace. The same wisdom and power
shine out in His works that are revealed in His Word.

Again, the laws of God, whether fixed in nature or revealed in His
Word, are for the highest interest of the physical, mental and
spiritual man. Every truth in the Word works for the welfare of man's
body and soul. The laws of nature, physical and psychological, obeyed,
promote man's bodily and mental vigor. Strict obedience to the laws of
God, as revealed in both Word and nature, produces the completest
physical and mental manhood.

God had the highest welfare of every man at heart when He prepared the
earth for his abode and gave him dominion over it. And He yearned for
his deliverance from a fallen estate when He gave him a revelation of
His infinite redeeming love. The eye of God is upon each individual of
the race, as upon every sparrow. He has in thought, in word and in
works, not the favoring of one of an hundred, while the ninety and
nine are crushed or neglected, but the happiness and highest good of
every one of the hundred.

The ethics of the Bible and the ethics of nature, as wrought out by
the earnest heathen philosophers, mainly agree. It is an astonishment
to some that there is so much agreement in the systems of heathen
morals and the revealed moral law. The moral law is written on men's
hearts, and can be read there by the diligent and careful student; but
the consciences of men, enlightened and quickened by the revealed
Word, produce the highest ethical types the world knows.

The Bible is not a work on political economy, yet there is nothing out
of harmony with the most perfect political institutions. When we find
political principles clearly revealed, we shall find the same truths
when we study the most orderly relations of men in their social
organization.

The Bible is not a work on economics, yet it advances no economic
principles that work a hardness or injustice to any. When we find
economic principles clearly stated, we shall surely find the same
truths confirmed in a careful study of the nature of things.

As the written Word forbids usury or interest, it can be presumed that
the nature of things and man's highest good also forbids it; that it
is not an arbitrary prohibition, but is given in love because it is in
its very nature a ruinous evil. As we find a positive prohibition of
taking usury or interest in the old dispensation and the confirmation
of it in the new, both by the words of the Master and the
understanding and practice of the disciples and fathers, we may
confidently expect that it will be confirmed by a correct and careful
study of ethics and of the relation of man to things.

We may learn duty from either or both sources. To some men the Bible
comes with the greatest clearness and the utmost force of authority.
Others find in nature their highest conception of the Infinite, and
their best directions for a correct life. If usury or interest is
found to be a sin from the Word, there is no need for those to enter
into the economic proof who have no taste for this character of study
or reasoning. If it is found to be "_malum per se_" from the nature of
things, even those who reject the divine revelation must array
themselves against it. If it is shown to be evil by both revelation
and economic law, then all peoples, Christian and heathen, should
combine against it.




CHAPTER XVI.

RIGHTS OF MAN OVER THINGS.


Man was the last and the crowning work of the Creator. God made man in
his own image and gave him dominion over all creatures.

"For thou hast made him a little lower than the angels, and hast
crowned him with glory and honor.

"Thou madest him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou
hast put all things under his feet:

"All the sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field;

"The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passeth
through the paths of the seas."

This high position is in entire harmony with man's innate
consciousness of his superior powers, and of his nobler spiritual
nature, and of his rightful dominion over all the other material
creations. Man is a person, a thinking intelligent being, and is
conscious of his personality, and from his lofty height he calls all
else the lower and the inferior creatures. Wherever man is found over
the whole earth, of whatever faith or grade of civilization, he claims
this universal dominion.

Man was commanded to subdue the earth and bring it into subjection as
his servant and he is conscious of his right to use all things to
promote his comfort, convenience and welfare. Anything he can make of
service to himself he has a right to appropriate.

A tree is a thing which he may prepare for his own purposes, for fuel,
for tools, or for a dwelling, as he pleases.

Isaiah ridiculed the idolater in his time, who made an idol of wood
and worshiped it, while with another part of the same tree he built a
fire and warmed himself. A part he served and a part served him. The
whole tree was subject to him; in itself it had no rights.

Rights belong to persons, and not to things, and personality cannot be
transferred to a thing. If there is no personal owner the question of
rights is never raised. The tree, or any thing whatever, has no rights
in the matter. Rights belong to the owner, the person, not to the
thing he owns.

The game in the mountain forests and the fish in the rivers are things
with no owner and whosoever will may take and use them.

Land is a thing, and any person may make it into a farm or garden and
build upon it his home. The land has no rights and makes no protest.
The whole earth is subject to man and is to be subdued by him. If no
owner appears his rights are not disputed. Our fathers found an
unowned continent, with all its rich resources of soil and forests and
mines. It was to them free, and with the labor of a few generations
they transformed it into farms and plantations and built it over with
magnificent cities.

Even that which formerly was the property of another has no rights.
The deserted hunter's hut in the mountains can be appropriated. The
abandoned farm does not resist a new tenant. A derelict vessel, still
afloat but driven before the winds, whose officers, crew and owners
are at the bottom of the sea, can be appropriated, for there is no one
to dispute the claim.

Even force or labor in the abstract is but a thing and has no rights.
The wind is unowned and any one who will may harness it to do his
work. The electric forces of nature are unowned, whoever will may
gather and direct them to do his purpose. The waterfall may be made to
do man's work and will not resist. The animals have no rights against
man. The broncho, horse, ox, mule, or animal of any kind, may be
turned to man's service. All the forces of nature were made for man.
They have no rights to be regarded, when his interests can be served.

It is man's high privilege to stand above all things, to call them to
his feet and to compel their service. It is the reversion of the order
for him to take the subordinate place and serve the inferior creation.
Things subdued, such as wealth secured, is to minister to his highest
good and to promote his noblest manhood. The order is reversed when
this wealth commands his service and sacrifice. The miser both
reverses the divine order and violates common sense by giving the love
and service of his shriveling soul to a thing.

The usurer and the borrower on usury, both, reverse the true order by
assuming that a thing can claim man's service. Both grant that a thing
has rights to be respected. The usurer takes the service as due to the
thing he owns. It is his property that is exalted, and for which he
claims the service must be rendered, and if the borrower will think
closely, he will find that in paying usury he is serving a thing.

A man reverses the divine order and degrades himself, and becomes a
gross idolater, when he serves things unowned instead of commanding
their service, "stocks and stones." He reverses the true order when he
becomes a miser and serves that which is his own, "which his own
fingers have made," instead of compelling it to serve him. He is not
less degraded when he exalts over himself a thing owned by another and
serves it. The ownership of another does not change the nature of the
thing. One can serve his neighbor's idol as truly as he can his own.

There is nothing above man but God. His fellow man is by his side, his
equal, and all other material creations are beneath his feet, and he
is not to permit his fellow man to lift up the inferior thing and
place it above him. If he does he must step down from the pinnacle on
which he was placed by his God and which his own consciousness demands
he shall occupy.

"Shall the ax boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or shall
the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the rod
should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the staff
should lift up itself, as if it were no wood." Isaiah 10:15.

If he serves the borrowed ax and saw for the claim that the ax and saw
have against him, he admits his debt to things and Isaiah's ridicule
of an idolater can be turned against him and he steps down from the
position of conscious inborn dignified lordship and becomes a servant
of the inferior things.




