CHAPTER III

THE POSITIVE CULT--_continued_

II.--_Imitative Rites and the Principle of Causality_


But the processes which we have just been describing are not the only
ones employed to assure the fecundity of the totemic species. There are
others which serve for the same end, whether they accompany the
preceding ones or replace them.


I

In the very ceremonies which we have been describing, in addition to the
oblations, whether bloody or otherwise, there are other rites which are
frequently celebrated, whose object is to complete the former ones and
to consolidate their effects. They consist in movements and cries whose
object is to imitate the different attitudes and aspects of the animal
whose reproduction is desired; therefore, we shall call them
_imitative_.

Thus the Intichiuma of the Witchetty grub among the Arunta includes more
than the rites performed upon the sacred rocks, of which we have already
spoken. When these are finished, the men set out to return to camp; but
when they still are about a mile away, they halt and all decorate
themselves ritually; after this, the march is resumed. The decorations
with which they thus adorn themselves announce that an important
ceremony is going to take place. And, in fact, while the company was
absent, one of the old men who had been left to guard the camp had built
a shelter out of branches, called _Umbana_, which represented the
chrysalis out of which the insect comes. All of those who had taken part
in the previous ceremonies assemble near the spot where this
construction has been raised; then they advance slowly, stopping from
time to time, until they reach the _Umbana_, which they enter. At once
all the men who do not belong to the phratry of the Witchetty grub
totem, and who assist at the scene, though from a distance, lie down on
the ground, with their faces against the earth; they must remain in this
position without moving until they are allowed to get up again.
Meanwhile, a chant arises from the interior of the Umbana, which
describes the different phases through which the animal passes in the
course of its development, and the myths of which the sacred rocks are
the subject. When this hymn ceases, the Alatunja glides out of the
_Umbana_, though remaining in a squatting position, and advances slowly
over the ground before him; he is followed by all his companions who
reproduce gestures whose evident object is to represent the insect as it
leaves the chrysalis. Also, a hymn which is heard at just this moment
and which is like an oral commentary on the rite, consists in a
description of the movements made by the insect at this stage of its
development.[1160]

Another Intichiuma,[1161] celebrated in connection with another kind of
grub, the _unchalka_[1162] grub, has this character still more clearly.
The actors of this rite decorate themselves with designs representing
the _unchalka_ bush upon which this grub lives at the beginning of its
existence. Then they cover a buckler with concentric circles of down,
representing another kind of bush upon which the insect lays its eggs
when it has become adult. When all these preparations are finished, they
all sit down on the ground in a semicircle facing the principal
officiant. He alternately bends his body double by leaning towards the
ground and then rises on his knees; at the same time, he shakes his
stretched-out arms, which is a way of representing the wings of the
insect. From time to time, he leans over the buckler, imitating the way
in which the butterfly flies over the trees where it lays its eggs. When
this ceremony is finished, another commences at a different spot, to
which they go in silence. This time they use two bucklers. Upon one the
tracks of the grub are represented by zigzag lines; upon the other,
concentric circles of uneven dimensions represent the eggs of the insect
and the seed of the Eremophile bush, upon which it is nourished. As in
the former ceremony, they all sit down in silence while the officiant
acts, representing the movements of the animal when leaving its
chrysalis and taking its first flight.

Spencer and Gillen also point out certain analogous facts among the
Arunta, though these are of a minor importance: in the Intichiuma of the
Emu, for example, at a certain moment the actors try to reproduce by
their attitude the air and aspect of this bird;[1163] in the Intichiuma
of water, the men of the totem utter the characteristic cry of the
plover, a cry which is naturally associated in the mind with the rainy
season.[1164] But in all, the examples of imitative rites which these
two explorers have noted are rather few in number. However, it is
certain that their relative silence on this point is due either to their
not having observed the Intichiuma sufficiently or else to their having
neglected this side of the ceremonies; Schulze, on the other hand, has
been struck by the essentially imitative nature of the Arunta rites.
"The sacred corrobbori," he says, "are generally ceremonies representing
animals": he calls them _animal tjurunga_[1165] and his testimony is now
confirmed by the documents collected by Strehlow. The examples given by
this latter author are so numerous that it is impossible to cite them
all: there are scarcely any ceremonies in which some imitating gesture
is not pointed out. According to the nature of the animals whose feast
is celebrated, they jump after the manner of kangaroos, or imitate the
movements they make in eating, the flight of winged ants, the
characteristic noise of the bat, the cry of the wild turkey, the hissing
of the snake, the croaking of the frog, etc.[1166] When the totem is a
plant, they make the gesture of plucking it,[1167] or eating it,[1168]
etc.

Among the Warramunga, the Intichiuma generally takes a special form,
which we shall describe in the next chapter and which differs from those
which we have studied up to the present. However, there is one typical
case of a purely imitative Intichiuma among this people; it is that of
the black cockatoo. The ceremony described by Spencer and Gillen
commenced at ten o'clock in the evening. All night long the chief of the
clan imitated the cry of the bird with a disheartening monotony. He
stopped only when he had come to the end of his force, and then his son
replaced him; then he commenced again as soon as he felt a little
refreshed. These exhausting exercises continued until morning without
interruption.[1169]

Living beings are not the only ones which they try to imitate. In a
large number of tribes, the Intichiuma of rain consists essentially in
imitative rites. One of the most simple of these is that celebrated
among the Arabunna. The chief of the clan is seated on the ground, all
covered with white down and holding a lance in his hands. He shakes
himself, undoubtedly in order to detach from his body the down which is
fixed there and which represents clouds when scattered about in the air.
Thus he imitates the men-clouds of the Alcheringa who, according to the
legend, had the habit of ascending to heaven and forming clouds there,
from which the rain then fell. In a word, the object of the whole rite
is to represent the formation and ascension of clouds, the bringers of
rain.[1170]

The ceremony is much more complicated among the Kaitish. We have already
spoken of one of the means employed: the officiant pours water over the
sacred stones and himself. But the action of this sort of oblation is
reinforced by other rites. The rainbow is considered to have a close
connection with rain: they say that it is its son and that it is always
urged to appear to make the rain stop. To make the rain fall, it is
therefore necessary that it should not appear; they believe that this
result can be obtained in the following manner. A design representing a
rainbow is made upon a buckler. They carry this buckler to camp, taking
care to keep it hidden from all eyes. They are convinced that by making
this image of the rainbow invisible, they keep the rainbow itself from
appearing. Meanwhile, the chief of the clan, having beside him a
_pitchi_ full of water, throws in all directions flakes of down which
represent clouds. Repeated imitations of the cry of the plover complete
this ceremony, which seems to have an especial gravity; for as long as
it lasts, all those who participate in it, either as actors or
assistants, may have no relations whatsoever with their wives; they may
not even speak to them.[1171]

The processes of figuration are different among the Dieri. Rain is not
represented by water, but by blood, which the men cause to flow from
their veins on to the assistants.[1172] At the same time they throw
handfuls of white down about, which represent clouds. A hut has been
constructed previously, in which they now place two large stones
representing piles of clouds, a sign of rain. After they have been left
there for a little while, they are carried a little distance away and
placed as high as possible in the loftiest tree to be found; this is a
way of making the clouds mount into the sky. Powdered gypsum is then
thrown into a water-hole, for when he sees this, the rain spirit soon
makes the clouds appear. Finally all the men, young and old, assemble
around the hut and with heads lowered, they charge upon it; they rush
violently through it, repeating the operation several times, until
nothing remains of the whole construction except the supporting posts.
Then they fall upon these and shake and pull at them until the whole
thing has tumbled down. The operation consisting in running through the
hut is supposed to represent clouds bursting; the tumbling down of the
construction, the fall of rain.[1173]

In the north-western tribes studied by Clement,[1174] which occupy the
district included between the Fontescue and Fitzroy rivers, certain
ceremonies are celebrated whose object is exactly the same as that of
the Intichiuma of the Arunta, and which seem to be, for the most part,
essentially imitative.

These peoples give the name _tarlow_ to certain piles of stones which
are evidently sacred, for, as we shall see, they are the object of
important rites. Every animal, every plant, and in fact, every totem or
sub-totem,[1175] is represented by a _tarlow_ which a special clan[1176]
guards. The analogy between these _tarlow_ and the sacred rocks of the
Arunta is easily seen.

When kangaroos, for example, become rare, the chief of the clan to which
the _tarlow_ of the kangaroo belongs goes to it with a certain number of
companions. Here various rites are performed, the chief of which consist
in jumping around the _tarlow_ as kangaroos jump, in drinking as they
drink and, in a word, in imitating all their most characteristic
movements. The weapons used in hunting the animal have an important part
in these rites. They brandish them, throw them against the stones, etc.
When they are concerned for emus, they go to the _tarlow_ of the emu,
and walk and run as these birds do. The skill which the natives show in
these imitations is, as it appears, really remarkable.

Other _tarlow_ are consecrated to plants, such as the cereals. In this
case, they imitate the actions of threshing and grinding the grain.
Since in ordinary life it is the women who are normally charged with
these tasks, it is also they who perform the rite, in the midst of songs
and dances.


II

All these rites belong to the same type. The principle upon which they
rest is one of those at the basis of what is commonly and incorrectly
called sympathetic[1177] magic.

These principles are ordinarily reduced to two.[1178]

The first may be stated thus: _anything touching an object also touches
everything which has any relation of proximity or unity whatsoever with
this object_. Thus, whatever affects the part also affects the whole;
any action exercised over an individual is transmitted to his
neighbours, relatives and all those to whom he is united in any way. All
these cases are simple applications of the law of contagion, which we
have already studied. A condition or a good or bad quality are
communicated contagiously from one subject to another who has some
connection with the former.

The second principle is ordinarily summed up in the formula: _like
produces like_. The representation of a being or condition produces this
being or condition. This is the maxim which brings about the rites which
we have just been describing, and it is in them that we can best observe
its characteristics. The classical example of the magic charm, which is
ordinarily given as the typical application of this same precept, is
much less significant. The charm is, to a large extent, a simple
phenomenon of transfer. The idea of the image is associated in the mind
with that of the model; consequently the effects of an action performed
upon a statue are transmitted contagiously to the person whose traits it
reproduces. The function of the image is for its original what that of a
part is for the whole: it is an agent of transmission. Therefore men
think that they can obtain the same result by burning the hair of the
person whom they wish to injure: the only difference between these two
sorts of operations is that in one, the communication is made through
similarity, while in the other it is by means of contiguity. It is
different with the rites which concern us. They suppose not only the
displacement of a given condition or quality, which passes from one
object into the other, but also the creation of something entirely new.
The mere act of representing the animal gives birth to this animal and
creates it; by imitating the sound of wind or falling water, they cause
clouds to form, rain to fall, etc. Of course resemblance plays an
important part in each case, but not at all the same one. In a charm, it
only gives a special direction to the action exercised; it directs in a
certain way an action not originating in it. In the rites of which we
have just been speaking, it acts by itself and is directly efficacious.
So, in contradiction to the usual definitions, the real difference
between the two principles of the so-called sympathetic magic and the
corresponding practices is not that it is contiguity acts in one case
and resemblance in the other, but that in the former there is a simple
contagious communication, while there is production and creation in the
latter.[1179]

The explanation of imitative rites therefore implies the explanation of
the second of these principles, and reciprocally.

We shall not tarry long to discuss the explanation proposed by the
anthropological school, and especially by Tylor and Frazer. Just as in
their attempts to account for the contagiousness of a sacred character,
they invoke the association of ideas. "Hom[oe]opathic magic," says
Frazer, who prefers this expression to imitative magic, "is founded on
the association of ideas by similarity; contagious magic is founded on
the association of ideas by contiguity. Hom[oe]opathic magic commits the
mistake of assuming that things which resemble each other are the
same."[1180] But this is a misunderstanding of the special nature of the
practices under discussion. On the one hand, the formula of Frazer may
be applied with some fitness to the case of charms;[1181] here, in fact,
two distinct things are associated with each other, owing to their
partial resemblance: these are the image and the model which it
represents more or less systematically. But in the imitative rites,
which we have just been observing, the image alone is given; as for the
model, it does not exist, for the new generation of the totemic species
is as yet only a hope and even an uncertain hope at that. So there could
be no question of association, whether correct or not; there is a real
creation, and we cannot see how the association of ideas could possibly
lead to a belief in this creation. How could the mere act of
representing the movements of an animal bring about the certitude that
this animal will be born, and born in abundance?

The general properties of human nature cannot explain such special
practices. So instead of considering the principle upon which they rest
in its general and abstract form, let us replace it in the environment
of which it is a part and where we have been observing it, and let us
connect it with the system of ideas and sentiments which the above rites
put into practice, and then we shall be better able to perceive the
causes from which it results.

The men who assemble on the occasion of these rites believe that they
are really animals or plants of the species whose name they bear. They
feel within them an animal or vegetable nature, and in their eyes, this
is what constitutes whatever is the most essential and the most
excellent in them. So when they assemble, their first movement ought to
be to show each other this quality which they attribute to themselves
and by which they are defined. The totem is their rallying sign; for
this reason, as we have seen, they design it upon their bodies; but it
is no less natural that they should seek to resemble it in their
gestures, their cries, their attitude. Since they are emus or kangaroos,
they comport themselves like the animals of the same name. By this
means, they mutually show one another that they are all members of the
same moral community and they become conscious of the kinship uniting
them. The rite does not limit itself to expressing this kinship; it
makes it or remakes it. For it exists only in so far as it is believed
in, and the effect of all these collective demonstrations is to support
the beliefs upon which they are founded. Therefore, these leaps, these
cries and these movements of every sort, though bizarre and grotesque in
appearance, really have a profound and human meaning. The Australian
seeks to resemble his totem just as the faithful in more advanced
religions seek to resemble their God. For the one as for the other, this
is a means of communicating with the sacred being, that is to say, with
the collective ideal which this latter symbolizes. This is an early form
of the [Greek: homoiôsis tô theô].

However, as this first reason is connected with the most specialized
portions of the totemic beliefs, the principle by which like produces
like should not have survived totemism, if this had been the only one in
operation. Now there is probably no religion in which rites derived from
it are not found. So another reason must co-operate with this first one.

And, in fact, the ceremonies where we have seen it applied do not merely
have the very general object which we have just mentioned, howsoever
essential this may be; they also aim at a more immediate and more
conscious end, which is the assurance of the reproduction of the totemic
species. The idea of this necessary reproduction haunts the minds of the
worshippers: upon it the forces of their attention and will are
concentrated. Now a single preoccupation cannot possess a group of men
to this point without being externalized in a material form. Since all
think of the animal or plant to whose destinies the clan is united, it
is inevitable that this common thought should not be manifested
outwardly by gestures,[1182] and those naturally designated for this
office are those which represent this animal or plant in one of its most
characteristic attitudes; there are no other movements so close to the
idea filling every mind, for these are an immediate and almost automatic
translation of it. So they make themselves imitate the animal; they cry
like it, they jump like it; they reproduce the scenes in which they make
daily use of the plant. All these ways of representation are just so
many means of ostensibly showing the end towards which all minds are
directed, of telling the thing which they wish to realize, of calling it
up and of evoking it. And this need belongs to no one time, nor does it
depend upon the beliefs of any special religion; it is essentially
human. This is why, even in religions very far removed from those we
have been studying, the worshippers, when assembled to ask their gods
for some event which they ardently desire, are forced to figure it. Of
course, the word is also a way of expressing it; but the gesture is no
less natural; it bursts out from the organism just as spontaneously; it
even precedes the word, or, in any case, accompanies it.

But if we can thus understand how the gestures acquired a place in the
ceremony, we still must explain the efficacy attributed to them. If the
Australian repeats them regularly each new season, it is because he
believes them essential to the success of the rite. Where could he have
gotten the idea that by imitating an animal, one causes it to reproduce?

So manifest an error seems hardly intelligible so long as we see in the
rite only the material end towards which it seems to aim. But we know
that in addition to the effect which it is thought to have on the
totemic species, it also exercises a profound influence over the souls
of the worshippers who take part in it. They take away with them a
feeling of well-being, whose causes they cannot clearly see, but which
is well founded. They feel that the ceremony is good for them; and, as a
matter of fact, they reforge their moral nature in it. How could this
sort of well-being fail to give them a feeling that the rite has
succeeded, that it has been what it set out to be, and that it has
attained the ends at which it was aimed? As the only end which was
consciously sought was the reproduction of the totemic species, this
seems to be assured by the means employed, the efficacy of which is thus
proven. Thus it comes about that men attribute creative virtues to their
gestures, which in themselves are vain. The moral efficacy of the rite,
which is real, leads to the belief in its physical efficacy, which is
imaginary; that of the whole, to the belief in that of each part by
itself. The truly useful effects produced by the whole ceremony are like
an experimental justification of the elementary practices out of which
it is made, though in reality, all these practices are in no way
indispensable to its success. A certain proof, moreover, that they do
not act by themselves is that they may be replaced by others, of a very
different nature, without any modification of the final result. It
appears that there are Intichiuma which include only oblations, with no
imitative rites; others are purely imitative, and include no oblations.
However, both are believed to have the same efficacy. So if a price is
attached to these various man[oe]uvres, it is not because of their
intrinsic value, but because they are a part of a complex rite, whose
utility as a whole is realized.

We are able to understand this state of mind all the easier because we
can still observe it about us. Especially among the most cultivated
peoples and environments, we frequently meet with believers who, though
having doubts as to the special efficacy attributed by dogma to each
rite considered separately, still continue to participate in the cult.
They are not sure that the details of the prescribed observances are
rationally justifiable; but they feel that it would be impossible to
free oneself of them without falling into a moral confusion before which
they recoil. The very fact that in them the faith has lost its
intellectual foundations throws into eminence the profound reasons upon
which they rest. This is why the easy criticisms to which an unduly
simple rationalism has sometimes submitted ritual prescriptions
generally leave the believer indifferent: it is because the true
justification of religious practices does not lie in the apparent ends
which they pursue, but rather in the invisible action which they
exercise over the mind and in the way in which they affect our mental
status. Likewise, when preachers undertake to convince, they devote much
less attention to establishing directly and by methodical proofs the
truth of any particular proposition or the utility of such and such an
observance, than to awakening or reawakening the sentiment of the moral
comfort attained by the regular celebration of the cult. Thus they
create a predisposition to belief, which precedes proofs, which leads
the mind to overlook the insufficiency of the logical reasons, and which
thus prepares it for the proposition whose acceptance is desired. This
favourable prejudice, this impulse towards believing, is just what
constitutes faith; and it is faith which makes the authority of the
rites, according to the believer, whoever he may be, Christian or
Australian. The only superiority of the former is that he better
accounts for the psychological process from which his faith results; he
knows that "it is faith that saves."

It is because faith has this origin that it is, in a sense, "impermeable
to experience."[1183] If the intermittent failures of the Intichiuma do
not shake the confidence of the Australian in his rite, it is because
he holds with all the strength of his soul to these practices in which
he periodically recreates himself; he could not deny their principle
without causing an upheaval of his own being, which resists. But
howsoever great this force of resistance may be, it cannot radically
distinguish religious mentality from the other forms of human mentality,
even those which are the most habitually opposed to it. In this
connection, that of a scholar differs from the preceding only in degree.
When a scientific law has the authority of numerous and varied
experiments, it is against all method to renounce it too quickly upon
the discovery of a fact which seems to contradict it. It is still
necessary to make sure that the fact does not allow of a single
interpretation, and that it is impossible to account for it, without
abandoning the proposition which it seems to invalidate. Now the
Australian does not proceed otherwise when he attributes the failure of
the Intichiuma to some sorcery, or the abundance of a premature crop to
a mystic Intichiuma celebrated in the beyond. He has all the more reason
for not doubting his rite on the belief in a contrary fact, since its
value is, or seems to be, established by a larger number of harmonizing
facts. In the first place, the moral efficacy of the ceremony is real
and is felt directly by all who participate in it; there is a constantly
renewed experience in it, whose importance no contradictory experience
can diminish. Also, the physical efficacy itself is not unable to find
an at least apparent confirmation in the data of objective observation.
As a matter of fact, the totemic species normally does reproduce
regularly; so in the great majority of cases, everything happens just as
if the ritual gestures really did produce the effects expected of them.
Failures are the exception. As the rites, and especially those which are
periodical, demand nothing more of nature than that it follow its
ordinary course, it is not surprising that it should generally have the
air of obeying them. So if the believer shows himself indocile to
certain lessons of experience, he does so because of other experiences
which seem more demonstrative. The scholar does not do otherwise; only
he introduces more method.


So magic is not, as Frazer has held,[1184] an original fact, of which
religion is only a derived form. Quite on the contrary, it was under the
influence of religious ideas that the precepts upon which the art of the
magician is based were established, and it was only through a secondary
extension that they were applied to purely lay relations. Since all the
forces of the universe have been conceived on the model of the sacred
forces, the contagiousness inherent in the second was extended to the
first, and men have believed that all the properties of a body could be
transmitted contagiously. Likewise, when the principle according to
which like produces like had been established, in order to satisfy
certain religious needs, it detached itself from its ritual origins to
become, through a sort of spontaneous generalization, a law of
nature.[1185] But in order to understand these fundamental axioms of
magic, they must be replaced in the religious atmosphere in which they
arose and which alone enables us to account for them. When we regard
them as the work of isolated individuals or solitary magicians, we ask
how they could ever have occurred to the mind of man, for nothing in
experience could either suggest or verify them; and especially we do not
explain how so deceiving an art has been able to impose itself for so
long a time in the confidence of men. But this problem disappears when
we realize that the faith inspired by magic is only a particular case of
religious faith in general, and that it is itself the product, at least
indirectly, of a collective effervescence. This is as much as to say
that the use of the expression sympathetic magic to designate the system
of rites which we have just been speaking is not very exact. There are
sympathetic rites, but they are not peculiar to magic; not only are they
to be found in religion, but it was from religion that magic received
them. So we only risk confusion when, by the name we give them, we have
the air of making them something which is specifically magic.

The results of our analysis thus attach themselves to and confirm those
attained by MM. Hubert and Mauss when they studied magic directly.[1186]
They have shown that this is nothing more nor less than crude industry
based on incomplete science. Behind the mechanisms, purely laical in
appearance, which are used by the magician, they point out a background
of religious conceptions and a whole world of forces, the idea of which
has been taken by magic from religion. We are now able to understand how
it comes that magic is so full of religious elements: it is because it
was born of religion.


III

But the principle which has just been set forth does not merely have a
function in the ritual; it is of direct interest for the theory of
knowledge. In fact, it is a concrete statement of the law of causality
and, in all probability, one of the most primitive statements of it
which has ever existed. A full conception of the causal relation is
implied in the power thus attributed to the like to produce the like;
and this conception dominates primitive thought, for it is the basis
both of the practices of the cult and the technique of the magician. So
the origins of the precept upon which the imitative rites depend are
able to clarify those of the principle of causality. The genesis of one
should aid us in understanding the genesis of the other. Now we have
shown how the former is a product of social causes: it was elaborated by
groups having collective ends in view, and it translates collective
sentiments. So we may assume that the same is true for the second.

In fact, an analysis of the principle of causality is sufficient to
assure us that the diverse elements of which it is composed really did
have this origin.

The first thing which is implied in the notion of the causal relation is
the idea of efficacy, of productive power, of active force. By cause we
ordinarily mean something capable of producing a certain change. The
cause is the force before it has shown the power which is in it; the
effect is this same power, only actualized. Men have always thought of
causality in dynamic terms. Of course certain philosophers had refused
all objective value to this conception; they see in it only an arbitrary
construction of the imagination, which corresponds to nothing in the
things themselves. But, at present, we have no need of asking whether it
is founded in reality or not; it is enough for us to state that it
exists and that it constitutes and always has constituted an element of
ordinary mentality; and this is recognized even by those who criticize
it. Our immediate purpose is to seek, not what it may be worth
logically, but how it is to be explained.

Now it depends upon social causes. Our analysis of facts has already
enabled us to see that the prototype of the idea of force was the mana,
wakan, orenda, the totemic principle or any of the various names given
to collective force objectified and projected into things.[1187] The
first power which men have thought of as such seems to have been that
exercised by humanity over its members. Thus reason confirms the results
of observation; in fact, it is even possible to show why this notion of
power, efficacy or active force could not have come from any other
source.

In the first place, it is evident and recognized by all that it could
not be furnished to us by external experience. Our senses only enable
us to perceive phenomena which coexist or which follow one another, but
nothing perceived by them could give us the idea of this determining and
compelling action which is characteristic of what we call a power or
force. They can touch only realized and known conditions, each separate
from the others; the internal process uniting these conditions escapes
them. Nothing that we learn could possibly suggest to us the idea of
what an influence or efficaciousness is. It is for this very reason that
the philosophers of empiricism have regarded these different conceptions
as so many mythological aberrations. But even supposing that they all
are hallucinations, it is still necessary to show how they originated.

If external experience counts for nothing in the origin of these ideas,
and it is equally inadmissible that they were given us ready-made, one
might suppose that they come from internal experience. In fact, the
notion of force obviously includes many spiritual elements which could
only have been taken from our psychic life.

Some have believed that the act by which our will brings a deliberation
to a close, restrains our impulses and commands our organism, might have
served as the model of this construction. In willing, it is said, we
perceive ourselves directly as a power in action. So when this idea had
once occurred to men, it seems that they only had to extend it to things
to establish the conception of force.

As long as the animist theory passed as a demonstrated truth, this
explanation was able to appear to be confirmed by history. If the forces
with which human thought primitively populated the world really had been
spirits, that is to say, personal and conscious beings more or less
similar to men, it was actually possible to believe that our individual
experience was enough to furnish us with the constituent elements of the
notion of force. But we know that the first forces which men imagined
were, on the contrary, anonymous, vague and diffused powers which
resemble cosmic forces in their impersonality, and which are therefore
most sharply contrasted with the eminently personal power, the human
will. So it is impossible that they should have been conceived in its
image.

Moreover, there is one essential characteristic of the impersonal forces
which would be inexplicable under this hypothesis: this is their
communicability. The forces of nature have always been thought of as
capable of passing from one object to another, of mixing, combining and
transforming themselves into one another. It is even this property which
gives them their value as an explanation, for it is through this that
effects can be connected with their causes without a break of
continuity. Now the self has just the opposite characteristic: it is
incommunicable. It cannot change its material substratum or spread from
one to another; it spreads out in metaphor only. So the way in which it
decides and executes its decisions could never have suggested the idea
of an energy which communicates itself and which can even confound
itself with others and, through these combinations and mixings, give
rise to new effects.

Therefore, the idea of force, as implied in the conception of the causal
relation, must present a double character. In the first place, it can
come only from our internal experience; the only forces which we can
directly learn about are necessarily moral forces. But, at the same
time, they must be impersonal, for the notion of an impersonal power was
the first to be constituted. Now the only ones which satisfy these two
conditions are those coming from life together: they are collective
forces. In fact, these are, on the one hand, entirely psychical; they
are made up exclusively of objectified ideas and sentiments. But, on the
other hand, they are impersonal by definition, for they are the product
of a co-operation. Being the work of all, they are not the possession of
anybody in particular. They are so slightly attached to the
personalities of the subjects in whom they reside that they are never
fixed there. Just as they enter them from without, they are also always
ready to leave them. Of themselves, they tend to spread further and
further and to invade ever new domains: we know that there are none more
contagious, and consequently more communicable. Of course physical
forces have the same property, but we cannot know this directly; we
cannot even become acquainted with them as such, for they are outside
us. When I throw myself against an obstacle, I have a sensation of
hindrance and trouble; but the force causing this sensation is not in
me, but in the obstacle, and is consequently outside the circle of my
perception. We perceive its effects, but we cannot reach the cause
itself. It is otherwise with social forces: they are a part of our
internal life, as we know, more than the products of their action; we
see them acting. The force isolating the sacred being and holding
profane beings at a distance is not really in this being; it lives in
the minds of the believers. So they perceive it at the very moment when
it is acting upon their wills, to inhibit certain movements or command
others. In a word, this constraining and necessitating action, which
escapes us when coming from an external object, is readily perceptible
here because everything is inside us. Of course we do not always
interpret it in an adequate manner, but at least we cannot fail to be
conscious of it.

Moreover, the idea of force bears the mark of its origin in an apparent
way. In fact, it implies the idea of power which, in its turn, does not
come without those of ascendancy, mastership and domination, and their
corollaries, dependence and subordination; now the relations expressed
by all these ideas are eminently social. It is society which classifies
beings into superiors and inferiors, into commanding masters and obeying
servants; it is society which confers upon the former the singular
property which makes the command efficacious and which makes _power_. So
everything tends to prove that the first powers of which the human mind
had any idea were those which societies have established in organizing
themselves: it is in their image that the powers of the physical world
have been conceived. Also, men have never succeeded in imagining
themselves as forces mistress over the bodies in which they reside,
except by introducing concepts taken from social life. In fact, these
must be distinguished from their physical doubles and must be attributed
a dignity superior to that of these latter; in a word, they must think
of themselves as souls. As a matter of fact, men have always given the
form of souls to the forces which they believe that they are. But we
know that the soul is quite another thing from a name given to the
abstract faculty of moving, thinking and feeling; before all, it is a
religious principle, a particular aspect of the collective force. In
fine, a man feels that he has a soul, and consequently a force, because
he is a social being. Though an animal moves its members just as we do,
and though it has the same power as we over its muscles, nothing
authorizes us to suppose that it is conscious of itself as an active and
efficacious cause. This is because it does not have, or, to speak more
exactly, does not attribute to itself a soul. But if it does not
attribute a soul to itself, it is because it does not participate in a
social life comparable to that of men. Among animals, there is nothing
resembling a civilization.[1188]

But the notion of force is not all of the principle of causality. This
consists in a judgment stating that every force develops in a definite
manner, and that the state in which it is at each particular moment of
its existence predetermines the next state. The former is called cause,
the latter, effect, and the causal judgment affirms the existence of a
necessary connection between these two moments for every force. The mind
posits this connection before having any proofs of it, under the empire
of a sort of constraint from which it cannot free itself; it postulates
it, as they say, _a priori_.

Empiricism has never succeeded in accounting for this apriorism and
necessity. Philosophers of this school have never been able to explain
how an association of ideas, reinforced by habit, could produce more
than an expectation or a stronger or weaker predisposition on the part
of ideas to appear in a determined order. But the principle of causality
has quite another character. It is not merely an imminent tendency of
our thought to take certain forms; it is an external norm, superior to
the flow of our representations, which it dominates and rules
imperatively. It is invested with an authority which binds the mind and
surpasses it, which is as much as to say that the mind is not its
artisan. In this connection, it is useless to substitute hereditary
habit for individual habit, for habit does not change its nature by
lasting longer than one man's life; it is merely stronger. An instinct
is not a rule.

The rites which we have been studying allow us to catch a glimpse of
another source of this authority, which, up to the present, has scarcely
been suspected. Let us bear in mind how the law of causality, which the
imitative rites put into practice, was born. Being filled with one
single preoccupation, the group assembles: if the species whose name it
bears does not reproduce, it is a matter of concern to the whole clan.
The common sentiment thus animating all the members is outwardly
expressed by certain gestures, which are always the same in the same
circumstances, and after the ceremony has been performed, it happens,
for the reasons set forth, that the desired result seems obtained. So an
association arises between the idea of this result and that of the
gestures preceding it; and this association does not vary from one
subject to another; it is the same for all the participators in the
rite, since it is the product of a collective experience. However, if no
other factor intervened, it would produce only a collective expectation;
after the imitative gestures had been accomplished, everybody would
await the subsequent appearance of the desired event, with more or less
confidence; an imperative rule of thought could never be established by
this. But since a social interest of the greatest importance is at
stake, society cannot allow things to follow their own course at the
whim of circumstances; it intervenes actively in such a way as to
regulate their march in conformity with its needs. So it demands that
this ceremony, which it cannot do without, be repeated every time that
it is necessary, and consequently, that the movements, a condition of
its success, be executed regularly: it imposes them as an obligation.
Now they imply a certain definite state of mind which, in return,
participates in this same obligatory character. To prescribe that one
must imitate an animal or plant to make them reproduce, is equivalent to
stating it as an axiom which is above all doubt, that like produces
like. Opinion cannot allow men to deny this principle in theory without
also allowing them to violate it in their conduct. So society imposes
it, along with the practices which are derived from it, and thus the
ritual precept is doubled by a logical precept which is only the
intellectual aspect of the former. The authority of each is derived from
the same source: society. The respect which this inspires is
communicated to the ways of thought to which it attaches a value, just
as much as to ways of action. So a man cannot set aside either the ones
or the others without hurling himself against public opinion. This is
why the former require the adherence of the intelligence before
examination, just as the latter require the submission of the will.

From this example, we can show once more how the sociological theory of
the idea of causality, and of the categories in general, sets aside the
classical doctrines on the question, while conciliating them. Together
with apriorism, it maintains the prejudicial and necessary character of
the causal relation; but it does not limit itself to affirming this; it
accounts for it, yet without making it vanish under the pretext of
explaining it, as empiricism does. On the other hand, there is no
question of denying the part due to individual experience. There can be
no doubt that by himself, the individual observes the regular succession
of phenomena and thus acquires a certain _feeling_ of regularity. But
this feeling is not the _category_ of causality. The former is
individual, subjective, incommunicable; we make it ourselves, out of our
own personal observations. The second is the work of the group, and is
given to us ready-made. It is a frame-work in which our empirical
ascertainments arrange themselves and which enables us to think of them,
that is to say, to see them from a point of view which makes it possible
for us to understand one another in regard to them. Of course, if this
frame can be applied to the contents, that shows that it is not out of
relation with the matter which it contains; but it is not to be confused
with this. It surpasses it and dominates it. This is because it is of a
different origin. It is not a mere summary of individual experiences;
before all else, it is made to fulfil the exigencies of life in common.

In fine, the error of empiricism has been to regard the causal bond as
merely an intellectual construction of speculative thought and the
product of a more or less methodical generalization. Now, by itself,
pure speculation can give birth only to provisional, hypothetical and
more or less plausible views, but ones which must always be regarded
with suspicion, for we can never be sure that some new observation in
the future will not invalidate them. An axiom which the mind accepts and
must accept, without control and without reservation, could never come
from this source. Only the necessities of action, and especially of
collective action, can and must express themselves in categorical
formulæ, which are peremptory and short, and admit of no contradiction,
for collective movements are possible only on condition of being in
concert and, therefore, regulated and definite. They do not allow of any
fumbling, the source of anarchy; by themselves, they tend towards an
organization which, when once established, imposes itself upon
individuals. And as action cannot go beyond intelligence, it frequently
happens that the latter is drawn into the same way and accepts without
discussion the theoretical postulates demanded by action. The
imperatives of thought are probably only another side of the imperatives
of action.

It is to be borne in mind, moreover, that we have never dreamed of
offering the preceding observations as a complete theory of the concept
of causality. The question is too complex to be resolved thus. The
principle of causality has been understood differently in different
times and places; in a single society, it varies with the social
environment and the kingdoms of nature to which it is applied.[1189] So
it would be impossible to determine with sufficient precision the causes
and conditions upon which it depends, after a consideration of only one
of the forms which it has presented during the course of history. The
views which we have set forth should be regarded as mere indications,
which must be controlled and completed. However, as the causal law which
we have been considering is certainly one of the most primitive which
exists, and as it has played a considerable part in the development of
human thought and industry, it is a privileged experiment, so we may
presume that the remarks of which it has been the occasion may be
generalized to a certain degree.




