CHAPTER IV

THE POSITIVE CULT--_continued_

III.--_Representative or Commemorative Rites_


The explanation which we have given of the positive rites of which we
have been speaking in the two preceding chapters attributes to them a
significance which is, above all, moral and social. The physical
efficaciousness assigned to them by the believer is the product of an
interpretation which conceals the essential reason for their existence:
it is because they serve to remake individuals and groups morally that
they are believed to have a power over things. But even if this
hypothesis has enabled us to account for the facts, we cannot say that
it has been demonstrated directly; at first view, it even seems to
conciliate itself rather badly with the nature of the ritual mechanisms
which we have analysed. Whether they consist in oblations or imitative
acts, the gestures composing them have purely material ends in view;
they have, or seem to have, the sole object of making the totemic
species reproduce. Under these circumstances, is it not surprising that
their real function should be to serve moral ends?

It is true that their physical function may have been exaggerated by
Spencer and Gillen, even in the cases where it is the most
incontestable. According to these authors, each clan celebrates its
Intichiuma for the purpose of assuring a useful food to the other clans,
and the whole cult consists in a sort of economic co-operation of the
different totemic groups; each works for the others. But according to
Strehlow, this conception of Australian totemism is wholly foreign to
the native mind. "If," he says, "the members of one totemic group set
themselves to multiplying the animals or plants of the consecrated
species, and seem to work for their companions of other totems, we must
be careful not to regard this collaboration as the fundamental principle
of Arunta or Loritja totemism. The blacks themselves have never told me
that this was the object of their ceremonies. Of course, when I
suggested and explained the idea to them, they understood it and
acquiesced. But I should not be blamed for having some distrust of
replies gained in this fashion." Strehlow also remarks that this way of
interpreting the rite is contradicted by the fact that the totemic
animals and plants are not all edible or useful; some are good for
nothing; some are even dangerous. So the ceremonies which concern them
could not have any such end in view.[1190] "When some one asks the
natives what the determining reason for these ceremonies is," concludes
our author, "they are unanimous in replying: 'It is because our
ancestors arranged things thus. This is why we do thus and not
differently.'"[1191] But in saying that the rite is observed because it
comes from the ancestors, it is admitted that its authority is
confounded with the authority of tradition, which is a social affair of
the first order. Men celebrate it to remain faithful to the past, to
keep for the group its normal physiognomy, and not because of the
physical effects which it may produce. Thus, the way in which the
believers themselves explain them show the profound reasons upon which
the rites proceed.

But there are cases when this aspect of the ceremonies is immediately
apparent.


I

These may be observed the best among the Warramunga.[1192]

Among this people, each clan is thought to be descended from a single
ancestor who, after having been born in some determined spot, passed his
terrestrial existence in travelling over the country in every direction.
It is he who, in the course of his voyages, gave to the land the form
which it now has; it is he who made the mountains and plains, the
water-holes and streams, etc. At the same time, he sowed upon his route
living germs which were disengaged from his body and, after many
successive reincarnations, became the actual members of the clan. Now
the ceremony of the Warramunga which corresponds exactly to the
Intichiuma of the Arunta, has the object of commemorating and
representing the mythical history of this ancestor. There is no
question of oblations or, except in one single case,[1193] of imitative
practices. The rite consists solely in recollecting the past and, in a
way, making it present by means of a veritable dramatic representation.
This word is the more exact because in this ceremony, the officiant is
in no way considered an incarnation of the ancestor, whom he represents;
he is an actor playing a rôle.

As an example, let us describe the Intichiuma of the Black Snake, as
Spencer and Gillen observed it.[1194]

An initial ceremony does not seem to refer to the past; at least the
description of it which is given us gives no authorization for
interpreting it in this sense. It consists in running and leaping on the
part of two officiants,[1195] who are decorated with designs
representing the black snake. When they finally fall exhausted on the
ground, the assistants gently pass their hands over the emblematic
designs with which the backs of the two actors are covered. They say
that this act pleases the black snake. It is only afterwards that the
series of commemorative ceremonies commences.

They put into action the mythical history of the ancestor Thalaualla,
from the moment he emerged from the ground up to his definite return
thither. They follow him through all his voyages. The myth says that in
each of the localities where he sojourned, he celebrated totemic
ceremonies; they now repeat them in the same order in which they are
supposed to have taken place originally. The movement which is acted the
most frequently consists in twisting the entire body about rhythmically
and violently; this is because the ancestor did the same thing to make
the germs of life which were in him come out. The actors have their
bodies covered with down, which is detached and flies away during these
movements; this is a way of representing the flight of these mystic
germs and their dispersion into space.

It will be remembered that among the Arunta, the scene of the ceremony
is determined by the ritual: it is the spot where the sacred rocks,
trees and water-holes are found, and the worshippers must go there to
celebrate the cult. Among the Warramunga, on the contrary, the
ceremonial ground is arbitrarily chosen according to convenience. It is
a conventional scene. However, the original scene of the events whose
reproduction constitutes the theme of the rite is itself represented by
means of designs. Sometimes these designs are made upon the very bodies
of the actors. For example, a small circle coloured red, painted on the
back and stomach, represents a water-hole.[1196] In other cases, the
image is traced on the soil. Upon a ground previously soaked and covered
with red ochre, they draw curved lines, made up of a series of white
points, which symbolize a stream or a mountain. This is a beginning of
decoration.

In addition to the properly religious ceremonies which the ancestor is
believed to have celebrated long ago, they also represent simple
episodes of his career, either epic or comic. Thus, at a given moment,
while three actors are on the scene, occupied in an important rite,
another one hides behind a bunch of trees situated at some distance. A
packet of down is attached about his neck which represents a _wallaby_.
As soon as the principal ceremony is finished, an old man traces a line
upon the ground which is directed towards the spot where the fourth
actor is hidden. The others march behind him, with eyes lowered and
fixed upon this line, as though following a trail. When they discover
the man, they assume a stupefied air and one of them beats him with a
club. This represents an incident in the life of the great black snake.
One day, his son went hunting, caught a _wallaby_ and ate it without
giving his father any. The latter followed his tracks, surprised him and
forced him to disgorge; it is to this that the beating at the end of the
representation alludes.[1197]

We shall not relate here all the mythical events which are represented
successively. The preceding examples are sufficient to show the
character of these ceremonies: they are dramas, but of a particular
variety; they act, or at least they are believed to act, upon the course
of nature. When the commemoration of Thalaualla is terminated, the
Warramunga are convinced that black snakes cannot fail to increase and
multiply. So these dramas are rites, and even rites which, by the nature
of their efficacy, are comparable on every point to those which
constitute the Intichiuma of the Arunta.

Therefore each is able to clarify the other. It is even more legitimate
to compare them than if there were no break of continuity between them.
Not only is the end pursued identical in each case, but the most
characteristic part of the Warramunga ritual is found in germ in the
other. In fact, the Intichiuma, as the Arunta generally perform it,
contains within it a sort of implicit commemoration. The places where it
is celebrated are necessarily those which the ancestor made illustrious.
The roads over which the worshippers pass in the course of their pious
pilgrimages are those which the heroes of the Alcheringa traversed; the
places where they stop to proceed with the rites are those where their
fathers sojourned themselves, where they vanished into the ground, etc.
So everything brings their memory to the minds of the assistants.
Moreover, to the manual rites they frequently add hymns relating the
exploits of their ancestors.[1198] If, instead of being told, these
stories are acted, and if, in this new form, they develop in such a way
as to become an essential part of the ceremony, then we have the
ceremony of the Warramunga. But even more can be said, for on one side,
the Arunta Intichiuma is already a sort of representation. The officiant
is one with the ancestor from whom he is descended and whom he
reincarnates.[1199] The gestures he makes are those which this ancestor
made in the same circumstances. Speaking exactly, of course he does not
play the part of the ancestral personage as an actor might do it; he is
this personage himself. But it is true, notwithstanding, that, in one
sense, it is the hero who occupies the scene. In order to accentuate the
representative character of the rite, it would be sufficient for the
duality of the ancestor and the officiant to become more marked; this is
just what happens among the Warramunga.[1200] Even among the Arunta, at
least one Intichiuma is mentioned in which certain persons are charged
with representing ancestors with whom they have no relationship of
mythical descent, and in which there is consequently a proper dramatic
representation: this is the Intichiuma of the Emu.[1201] It seems that
in this case, also, contrarily to the general rule among this people,
the theatre of the ceremony is artificially arranged.[1202]

It does not follow from the fact that, in spite of the differences
separating them, these two varieties of ceremony thus have an air of
kinship, as it were, that there is a definite relation of succession
between them, and that one is a transformation of the other. It may very
well be that the resemblances pointed out come from the fact that the
two sprang from the same source, that is, from the same original
ceremony, of which they are only divergent forms: we shall even see that
this hypothesis is the most probable one. But even without taking sides
on this question, what has already been said is enough to show that they
are rites of the same nature. So we may be allowed to compare them, and
to use the one to enable us to understand the other better.

Now the peculiar thing in the ceremonies of the Warramunga of which we
have been speaking, is that not a gesture is made whose object is to aid
or to provoke directly the increase of the totemic species.[1203] If we
analyse the movements made, as well as the words spoken, we generally
find nothing which betrays any intention of this sort. Everything is in
representations whose only object can be to render the mythical past of
the clan present to the mind. But the mythology of a group is the system
of beliefs common to this group. The traditions whose memory it
perpetuates express the way in which society represents man and the
world; it is a moral system and a cosmology as well as a history. So the
rite serves and can serve only to sustain the vitality of these beliefs,
to keep them from being effaced from memory and, in sum, to revivify the
most essential elements of the collective consciousness. Through it, the
group periodically renews the sentiment which it has of itself and of
its unity; at the same time, individuals are strengthened in their
social natures. The glorious souvenirs which are made to live again
before their eyes, and with which they feel that they have a kinship,
give them a feeling of strength and confidence: a man is surer of his
faith when he sees to how distant a past it goes back and what great
things it has inspired. This is the characteristic of the ceremony which
makes it instructive. Its tendency is to act entirely upon the mind and
upon it alone. So if men believe nevertheless that it acts upon things
and that it assures the prosperity of the species, this can be only as a
reaction to the moral action which it exercises and which is obviously
the only one which is real. Thus the hypothesis which we have proposed
is verified by a significant experiment, and this verification is the
more convincing because, as we have shown, there is no difference in
nature between the ritual system of the Warramunga and that of the
Arunta. The one only makes more evident what we had already conjectured
from the other.


II

But there are ceremonies in which this representative and idealistic
character is still more accentuated.

In those of which we have been speaking, the dramatic representation did
not exist for itself; it was only a means having a very material end in
view, namely, the reproduction of the totemic species. But there are
others which do not differ materially from the preceding ones, but from
which, nevertheless, all preoccupations of this sort are absent. The
past is here represented for the mere sake of representing it and fixing
it more firmly in the mind, while no determined action over nature is
expected of the rite. At least, the physical effects sometimes imputed
to it are wholly secondary and have no relation with the liturgical
importance attributed to it.

This is the case notably with the ceremonies which the Warramunga
celebrate in honour of the snake Wollunqua.[1204]

As we have already said, the Wollunqua is a totem of a very especial
sort. It is not an animal or vegetable species, but a unique being:
there is only one Wollunqua. Moreover, this being is purely mythical.
The natives represent it as a colossal snake whose length is such that
when it rises on its tail its head is lost in the clouds. It resides,
they believe, in a water-hole called Thapauerlu, which is hidden in the
bottom of a solitary valley. But if it differs in certain ways from the
ordinary totems, it has all their distinctive characteristics
nevertheless. It serves as the collective name and emblem of a whole
group of individuals who regard it as their common ancestor, while the
relations which they sustain with this mythical beast are identical with
those which the members of other totems believe that they sustain with
the founders of their respective clans. In the Alcheringa[1205] times,
the Wollunqua traversed the country in every direction. In the different
localities where it stopped, it scattered "spirit-children," the
spiritual principles which still serve as the souls of the living of
to-day. The Wollunqua is even considered as a sort of pre-eminent totem.
The Warramunga are divided into two phratries, called Uluuru and
Kingilli. Nearly all the totems of the former are snakes of different
kinds. Now they are all believed to be descended from the Wollunqua;
they say that it was their grandfather.[1206] From this, we can catch a
glimpse of how the myth of the Wollunqua probably arose. In order to
explain the presence of so many similar totems in the same phratry, they
imagined that all were derived from one and the same totem; it was
necessary to give it a gigantic form so that in its very appearance it
might conform to the considerable rôle assigned to it in the history of
the tribe.

Now the Wollunqua is the object of ceremonies not differing in nature
from those which we have already studied: they are representations in
which are portrayed the principal events of its fabulous life. They show
it coming out of the ground and passing from one locality to another;
they represent different episodes in its voyages, etc. Spencer and
Gillen assisted at fifteen ceremonies of this sort which took place
between the 27th of July and the 23rd of August, all being linked
together in a determined order, in such a way as to form a veritable
cycle.[1207] In the details of the rites constituting it, this long
celebration is therefore indistinct from the ordinary Intichiuma of the
Warramunga, as is recognized by the authors who have described it to
us.[1208] But, on the other hand, it is an Intichiuma which could not
have the object of assuring the fecundity of an animal or vegetable
species, for the Wollunqua is a species all by itself and does not
reproduce. It exists, and the natives do not seem to feel that it has
need of a cult to preserve it in its existence. These ceremonies not
only seem to lack the efficacy of the classic Intichiuma, but it even
seems as though they have no material efficacy of any sort. The
Wollunqua is not a divinity set over a special order of natural
phenomena, so they expect no definite service from him in exchange for
the cult. Of course they say that if the ritual prescriptions are badly
observed, the Wollunqua becomes angry, leaves his retreat and comes to
punish his worshippers for their negligence; and inversely, when
everything passes regularly, they are led to believe that they will be
fortunate and that some happy event will take place; but it is quite
evident that these possible sanctions are an after-thought to explain
the rite. After the ceremony had been established, it seemed natural
that it should serve for something, and that the omission of the
prescribed observances should therefore expose one to grave dangers. But
it was not established to forestall these mythical dangers or to assure
particular advantages. The natives, moreover, have only the very haziest
ideas of them. When the whole ceremony is completed, the old men
announce that if the Wollunqua is pleased, he will send rain. But it is
not to have rain that they go through with the celebration.[1209] They
celebrate it because their ancestors did, because they are attached to
it as to a highly respected tradition and because they leave it with a
feeling of moral well-being. Other considerations have only a
complimentary part; they may serve to strengthen the worshippers in the
attitude prescribed by the rite, but they are not the reason for the
existence of this attitude.

So we have here a whole group of ceremonies whose sole purpose is to
awaken certain ideas and sentiments, to attach the present to the past
or the individual to the group. Not only are they unable to serve useful
ends, but the worshippers themselves demand none. This is still another
proof that the psychical state in which the assembled group happens to
be constitutes the only solid and stable basis of what we may call the
ritual mentality. The beliefs which attribute such or such a physical
efficaciousness to the rites are wholly accessory and contingent, for
they may be lacking without causing any alteration in the essentials of
the rite. Thus the ceremonies of the Wollunqua show even better than the
preceding ones the fundamental function of the positive cult.

If we have insisted especially upon these solemnities, it is because of
their exceptional importance. But there are others with exactly the same
character. Thus, the Warramunga have a totem "of the laughing boy."
Spencer and Gillen say that the clan bearing this name has the same
organization as the other totemic groups. Like them, it has its sacred
places (_mungai_) where the founder-ancestor celebrated ceremonies in
the fabulous times, and where he left behind him spirit-children who
became the men of the clan; the rites connected with this totem are
indistinguishable from those relating to the animal or vegetable
totems.[1210] Yet it is evident that they could not have any physical
efficaciousness. They consist in a series of four ceremonies which
repeat one another more or less, but which are intended only to amuse
and to provoke laughter by laughter, in fine, to maintain the gaiety and
good-humour which the group has as its speciality.[1211]

We find more than one totem among the Arunta themselves which has no
other Intichiuma. We have seen that among this people, the
irregularities and depressions of the land, which mark the places where
some ancestor sojourned, sometimes serve as totems.[1212] Ceremonies are
attached to these totems which are manifestly incapable of physical
effects of any sort. They can consist only in representations whose
object is to commemorate the past, and they can aim at no end beyond
this commemoration.[1213]

While they enable us to understand the nature of the cult better, these
ritual representations also put into evidence an important element of
religion: this is the recreative and esthetic element.

We have already had occasion to show that they are closely akin to
dramatic representations.[1214] This kinship appears with still greater
clarity in the latter ceremonies of which we have spoken. Not only do
they employ the same processes as the real drama, but they also pursue
an end of the same sort: being foreign to all utilitarian ends, they
make men forget the real world and transport them into another where
their imagination is more at ease; they distract. They sometimes even go
so far as to have the outward appearance of a recreation: the assistants
may be seen laughing and amusing themselves openly.[1215]

Representative rites and collective recreations are even so close to one
another that men pass from one sort to the other without any break of
continuity. The characteristic feature of the properly religious
ceremonies is that they must be celebrated on a consecrated ground, from
which women and non-initiated persons are excluded.[1216] But there are
others in which this religious character is somewhat effaced, though it
has not disappeared completely. They take place outside the ceremonial
ground, which proves that they are already laicized to a certain degree;
but profane persons, women and children, are not yet admitted to them.
So they are on the boundary between the two domains. They generally deal
with legendary personages, but ones having no regular place in the
frame-work of the totemic religion. They are spirits, more generally
malevolent ones, having relations with the magicians rather than the
ordinary believers, and sorts of bugbears, in whom men do not believe
with the same degree of seriousness and firmness of conviction as in the
proper totemic beings and things.[1217] As the bonds by which the events
and personages represented are attached to the history of the tribe
relax, these take on a proportionately more unreal appearance, while the
corresponding ceremonies change in nature. Thus men enter into the
domain of pure fancy, and pass from the commemorative rite to the
ordinary corrobbori, a simple public merry-making, which has nothing
religious about it and in which all may take part indifferently. Perhaps
some of these representations, whose sole object now is to distract, are
ancient rites, whose character has been changed. In fact, the
distinction between these two sorts of ceremonies is so variable that it
is impossible to state with precision to which of the two kinds they
belong.[1218]

It is a well-known fact that games and the principal forms of art seem
to have been born of religion and that for a long time they retained a
religious character.[1219] We now see what the reasons for this are: it
is because the cult, though aimed primarily at other ends, has also been
a sort of recreation for men. Religion has not played this rôle by
hazard or owing to a happy chance, but through a necessity of its
nature. Though, as we have established, religious thought is something
very different from a system of fictions, still the realities to which
it corresponds express themselves religiously only when religion
transfigures them. Between society as it is objectively and the sacred
things which express it symbolically, the distance is considerable. It
has been necessary that the impressions really felt by men, which served
as the original matter of this construction, should be interpreted,
elaborated and transformed until they became unrecognizable. So the
world of religious things is a partially imaginary world, though only in
its outward form, and one which therefore lends itself more readily to
the free creations of the mind. Also, since the intellectual forces
which serve to make it are intense and tumultuous, the unique task of
expressing the real with the aid of appropriate symbols is not enough to
occupy them. A surplus generally remains available which seeks to employ
itself in supplementary and superfluous works of luxury, that is to say,
in works of art. There are practices as well as beliefs of this sort.
The state of effervescence in which the assembled worshippers find
themselves must be translated outwardly by exuberant movements which are
not easily subjected to too carefully defined ends. In part, they escape
aimlessly, they spread themselves for the mere pleasure of so doing, and
they take delight in all sorts of games. Besides, in so far as the
beings to whom the cult is addressed are imaginary, they are not able to
contain and regulate this exuberance; the pressure of tangible and
resisting realities is required to confine activities to exact and
economical forms. Therefore one exposes oneself to grave
misunderstandings if, in explaining rites, he believes that each gesture
has a precise object and a definite reason for its existence. There are
some which serve nothing; they merely answer the need felt by
worshippers for action, motion, gesticulation. They are to be seen
jumping, whirling, dancing, crying and singing, though it may not always
be possible to give a meaning to all this agitation.

Therefore religion would not be itself if it did not give some place to
the free combinations of thought and activity, to play, to art, to all
that recreates the spirit that has been fatigued by the too great
slavishness of daily work: the very same causes which called it into
existence make it a necessity. Art is not merely an external ornament
with which the cult has adorned itself in order to dissimulate certain
of its features which may be too austere and too rude; but rather, in
itself, the cult is something æsthetic. Owing to the well-known
connection which mythology has with poetry, some have wished to exclude
the former from religion;[1220] the truth is that there is a poetry
inherent in all religion. The representative rites which have just been
studied make this aspect of the religious life manifest; but there are
scarcely any rites which do not present it to some degree.

One would certainly commit the gravest error if he saw only this one
aspect of religion, or if he even exaggerated its importance. When a
rite serves only to distract, it is no longer a rite. The moral forces
expressed by religious symbols are real forces with which we must reckon
and with which we cannot do what we will. Even when the cult aims at
producing no physical effects, but limits itself to acting on the mind,
its action is in quite a different way from that of a pure work of art.
The representations which it seeks to awaken and maintain in our minds
are not vain images which correspond to nothing in reality, and which we
call up aimlessly for the mere satisfaction of seeing them appear and
combine before our eyes. They are as necessary for the well working of
our moral life as our food is for the maintenance of our physical life,
for it is through them that the group affirms and maintains itself, and
we know the point to which this is indispensable for the individual. So
a rite is something different from a game; it is a part of the serious
life. But if its unreal and imaginary element is not essential,
nevertheless it plays a part which is by no means negligible. It has its
share in the feeling of comfort which the worshipper draws from the rite
performed; for recreation is one of the forms of the moral remaking
which is the principal object of the positive rite. After we have
acquitted ourselves of our ritual duties, we enter into the profane life
with increased courage and ardour, not only because we come into
relations with a superior source of energy, but also because our forces
have been reinvigorated by living, for a few moments, in a life that is
less strained, and freer and easier. Hence religion acquires a charm
which is not among the slightest of its attractions.

This is why the very idea of a religious ceremony of some importance
awakens the idea of a feast. Inversely, every feast, even when it has
purely lay origins, has certain characteristics of the religious
ceremony, for in every case its effect is to bring men together, to put
the masses into movement and thus to excite a state of effervescence,
and sometimes even of delirium, which is not without a certain kinship
with the religious state. A man is carried outside himself and diverted
from his ordinary occupation and preoccupations. Thus the same
manifestations are to be observed in each case: cries, songs, music,
violent movements, dances, the search for exciteants which raise the
vital level, etc. It has frequently been remarked that popular feasts
lead to excesses, and cause men to lose sight of the distinction
separating the licit from the illicit;[1221] there are also religious
ceremonies which make it almost necessary to violate the rules which are
ordinarily the most respected.[1222] Of course this does not mean that
there is no way to distinguish these two forms of public activity. The
simple merry-making, the profane corrobbori, has no serious object,
while, as a whole, a ritual ceremony always has an important end. Still
it is to be remembered that there is perhaps no merry-making in which
the serious life does not have some echo. The difference consists rather
in the unequal proportions in which the two elements are combined.


III

A more general fact confirms the views which precede.

In their first book, Spencer and Gillen presented the Intichiuma as a
perfectly definite ritual entity: they spoke of it as though it were an
operation destined exclusively for the assurance of the reproduction of
the totemic species, and it seemed as though it ought to lose all
meaning, if this unique function were set aside. But in their _Northern
Tribes of Central Australia_, the same authors use a different language,
though perhaps without noticing it. They recognize that these same
ceremonies may take place either in the regular Intichiuma or in the
initiation rites.[1223] So they serve equally in the making of animals
or plants of the totemic species, or in conferring upon novices the
qualities necessary to make them regular members of the men's
society.[1224] From this point of view, the Intichiuma takes on a new
aspect. It is no longer a distinct ritual mechanism, resting upon
principles of its own, but a particular application of more general
ceremonies which may be utilized for very different ends. For this
reason, in their later work, before speaking of the Intichiuma and the
initiation they consecrate a special chapter to the totemic ceremonies
in general, making abstraction of the diverse forms which they may take,
according to the ends for which they are employed.[1225]

This fundamental indetermination of the totemic ceremonies was only
indicated by Spencer and Gillen, and rather indirectly at that; but it
has now been confirmed by Strehlow in more explicit terms. "When they
lead the young novices through the different feasts of the initiation,"
he says, "they perform before them a series of ceremonies which, though
reproducing, even in their most characteristic details, the rites of the
regular cult (viz. _the rites which Spencer and Gillen call the
Intichiuma_), do not have, nevertheless, the end of multiplying the
corresponding totem and causing it to prosper."[1226] It is the same
ceremony which serves in the two cases; the name alone is not the same.
When its special object is the reproduction of the species, they call it
_mbatjalkatiuma_ and it is only when it is a part of the process of
initiation that they give it the name Intichiuma.[1227]

Moreover, these two sorts of ceremonies are distinguished from one
another among the Arunta by certain secondary characteristics. Though
the structure of the rite is the same in both cases, still we know that
the effusions of blood and, more generally, the oblations characteristic
of the Arunta Intichiuma are not found in the initiation ceremonies.
Moreover, among this same people, the Intichiuma takes place at
a spot regularly fixed by tradition, to which men must make a
pilgrimage, while the scene of the initiation ceremonies is purely
conventional.[1228] But when the Intichiuma consists in a simple
dramatic representation, as is the case among the Warramunga, the lack
of distinction between the two rites is complete. In the one as in the
other, they commemorate the past, they put the myth into action, they
play--and one cannot play in two materially different ways. So,
according to the circumstances, one and the same ceremony serves two
distinct functions.[1229]

It may even lend itself to other uses. We know that as blood is a sacred
thing, women must not see it flow. Yet it happens sometimes that a
quarrel breaks out in their presence and ends in the shedding of blood.
Thus an infraction of the ritual is committed. Among the Arunta, the man
whose blood flowed first must, to atone for this fault, "celebrate a
ceremony connected with the totem either of his father or of his
mother";[1230] this ceremony has a special name, _Alua uparilima_, which
means the washing away of blood. But in itself, it does not differ from
those celebrated at the time of the initiation or in the Intichiuma: it
represents an event of ancestral history. So it may serve equally to
initiate, to act upon the totemic species or to expiate a sacrilege. We
shall see that a totemic ceremony may also take the place of a funeral
rite.[1231]

MM. Hubert and Mauss have already pointed out a functional ambiguity of
this same sort in the case of sacrifice, and more especially, in that of
Hindu sacrifice.[1232] They have shown how the sacrifice of communion,
that of expiation, that of a vow and that of a contract are only
variations of one and the same mechanism. We now see that the fact is
much more primitive, and in no way limited to the institution of
sacrifice. Perhaps no rite exists which does not present a similar
indetermination. The mass serves for marriages as for burials; it
redeems the faults of the dead and wins the favours of the deity for the
living, etc. Fasting is an expiation and a penance; but it is also a
preparation for communion; it even confers positive virtues. This
ambiguity shows that the real function of a rite does not consist in the
particular and definite effects which it seems to aim at and by which it
is ordinarily characterized, but rather in a general action which,
though always and everywhere the same, is nevertheless capable of taking
on different forms according to the circumstances. Now this is just what
is demanded by the theory which we have proposed. If the real function
of the cult is to awaken within the worshippers a certain state of soul,
composed of moral force and confidence, and if the various effects
imputed to the rites are due only to a secondary and variable
determination of this fundamental state, it is not surprising if a
single rite, while keeping the same composition and structure, seems to
produce various effects. For the mental dispositions, the excitation of
which is its permanent function, remain the same in every case; they
depend upon the fact that the group is assembled, and not upon the
special reasons for which it is assembled. But, on the other hand, they
are interpreted differently according to the circumstances to which they
are applied. Is it a physical result which they wish to obtain? The
confidence they feel convinces them that the desired result is or will
be obtained by the means employed. Has some one committed a fault for
which he wishes to atone? The same state of moral assurance will lead
him to attribute expiatory virtues to these same ritual gestures. Thus,
the apparent efficacy will seem to change while the real efficacy
remains invariable, and the rite will seem to fulfil various functions
though in fact it has only one, which is always the same.

Inversely, just as a single rite may serve many ends, so many rites may
produce the same effect and mutually replace one another. To assure the
reproduction of the totemic species, one may have recourse equally to
oblations, to imitative practices or to commemorative representations.
This aptitude of rites for substituting themselves for one another
proves once more both their plasticity and the extreme generality of the
useful action which they exercise. The essential thing is that men are
assembled, that sentiments are felt in common and expressed in common
acts; but the particular nature of these sentiments and acts is
something relatively secondary and contingent. To become conscious of
itself, the group does not need to perform certain acts in preference to
all others. The necessary thing is that it partakes of the same thought
and the same action; the visible forms in which this communion takes
place matter but little. Of course, these external forms do not come by
chance; they have their reasons; but these reasons do not touch the
essential part of the cult.

So everything leads us back to this same idea: before all, rites are
means by which the social group reaffirms itself periodically. From
this, we may be able to reconstruct hypothetically the way in which the
totemic cult should have arisen originally. Men who feel themselves
united, partially by bonds of blood, but still more by a community of
interest and tradition, assemble and become conscious of their moral
unity. For the reasons which we have set forth, they are led to
represent this unity in the form of a very special kind of
consubstantiality: they think of themselves as all participating in the
nature of some determined animal. Under these circumstances, there is
only one way for them to affirm their collective existence: this is to
affirm that they are like the animals of this species, and to do so not
only in the silence of their own thoughts, but also by material acts.
These are the acts which make up the cult, and they obviously can
consist only in movements by which the man imitates the animal with
which he identifies himself. When understood thus, the imitative rites
appear as the first form of the cult. It will be thought that this is
attributing a very considerable historical importance to practices
which, at first view, give the effect of childish games. But, as we have
shown, these naïve and awkward gestures and these crude processes of
representation translate and maintain a sentiment of pride, confidence
and veneration wholly comparable to that expressed by the worshippers in
the most idealistic religions when, being assembled, they proclaim
themselves the children of the almighty God. For in the one case as in
the other, this sentiment is made up of the same impressions of security
and respect which are awakened in individual consciousnesses by this
great moral force which dominates them and sustains them, and which is
the collective force.

The other rites which we have been studying are probably only variations
of this essential rite. When the close union of the animal and men has
once been admitted, men feel acutely the necessity of assuring the
regular reproduction of the principal object of the cult. These
imitative practices, which probably had only a moral end at first, thus
became subordinated to utilitarian and material ends, and they were
thought of as means of producing the desired result. But
proportionately as, through the development of mythology, the ancestral
hero, who was at first confused with the totemic animal, distinguished
himself more and more, and became a more personal figure, the imitation
of the ancestor was substituted for the imitation of the animal, or took
a place beside it, and then representative ceremonies replaced or
completed the imitative rites. Finally, to be surer of attaining the end
they sought, men felt the need of putting into action all the means at
their disposal. Close at hand they had reserves of living forces
accumulated in the sacred rocks, so they utilized them; since the blood
of the men was of the same nature as that of the animal, they used it
for the same purpose and shed it. Inversely, owing to this same kinship,
men used the flesh of the animal to remake their own substance. Hence
came the rites of oblation and communion. But, at bottom, all these
different practices are only variations of one and the same theme:
everywhere their basis is the same state of mind, interpreted
differently according to the situations, the moments of history and the
dispositions of the worshippers.




