CHAPTER V

PIACULAR RITES AND THE AMBIGUITY OF THE NOTION OF SACREDNESS


Howsoever much they may differ from one another in the nature of the
gestures they imply, the positive rites which we have been passing under
review have one common characteristic: they are all performed in a state
of confidence, joy and even enthusiasm. Though the expectation of a
future and contingent event is not without a certain uncertainty, still
it is normal that the rain fall when the season for it comes, and that
the animal and vegetable species reproduce regularly. Oft-repeated
experiences have shown that the rites generally do produce the effects
which are expected of them and which are the reason for their existence.
Men celebrate them with confidence, joyfully anticipating the happy
event which they prepare and announce. Whatever movements men perform
participate in this same state of mind: of course, they are marked with
the gravity which a religious solemnity always supposes, but this
gravity excludes neither animation nor joy.

These are all joyful feasts. But there are sad celebrations as well,
whose object is either to meet a calamity, or else merely to commemorate
and deplore it. These rites have a special aspect, which we are going to
attempt to characterize and explain. It is the more necessary to study
them by themselves since they are going to reveal a new aspect of the
religious life to us.

We propose to call the ceremonies of this sort piacular. The term
_piaculum_ has the advantage that while it suggests the idea of
expiation, it also has a much more extended signification. Every
misfortune, everything of evil omen, everything that inspires sentiments
of sorrow or fear necessitates a _piaculum_ and is therefore called
piacular.[1233] So this word seems to be very well adapted for
designating the rites which are celebrated by those in a state of
uneasiness or sadness.


I

Mourning offers us a first and important example of piacular rites.

However, a distinction is necessary between the different rites which go
to make up mourning. Some consist in mere abstentions: it is forbidden
to pronounce the name of the dead,[1234] or to remain near the place
where the death occurred;[1235] relatives, especially the female ones,
must abstain from all communication with strangers;[1236] the ordinary
occupations of life are suspended, just as in feast-time,[1237] etc. All
these practices belong to the negative cult and are explained like the
other rites of the same sort, so they do not concern us at present. They
are due to the fact that the dead man is a sacred being. Consequently,
everything which is or has been connected with him is, by contagion, in
a religious state excluding all contact with things from profane life.

But mourning is not made up entirely of interdicts which have to be
observed. Positive acts are also demanded, in which the relatives are
both the actors and those acted upon.

Very frequently these rites commence as soon as the death appears
imminent. Here is a scene which Spencer and Gillen witnessed among the
Warramunga. A totemic ceremony had just been celebrated and the company
of actors and spectators was leaving the consecrated ground when a
piercing cry suddenly came from the camp: a man was dying there. At
once, the whole company commenced to run as fast as they could, while
most of them commenced to howl. "Between us and the camp," say these
observers, "lay a deep creek, and on the bank of this, some of the men,
scattered about here and there, sat down, bending their heads forwards
between their knees, while they wept and moaned. Crossing the creek we
found that, as usual, the men's camp had been pulled to pieces. Some of
the women, who had come from every direction, were lying prostrate on
the body, while others were standing or kneeling around, digging the
sharp ends of yam-sticks into the crown of their heads, from which the
blood streamed down over their faces, while all the time they kept up a
loud, continuous wail. Many of the men, rushing up to the spot, threw
themselves upon the body, from which the women arose when the men
approached, until in a few minutes we could see nothing but a struggling
mass of bodies all mixed up together. To one side, three men of the
Thapungarti class, who still wore their ceremonial decorations, sat down
wailing loudly, with their backs towards the dying man, and in a minute
or two another man of the same class rushed on to the ground yelling and
brandishing a stone knife. Reaching the camp, he suddenly gashed both
thighs deeply, cutting right across the muscles, and, unable to stand,
fell down into the middle of the group, from which he was dragged out
after a time by three or four female relatives, who immediately applied
their mouths to the gaping wounds while he lay exhausted on the ground."
The man did not actually die until late in the evening. As soon as he
had given up his last breath, the same scene was re-enacted, only this
time the wailing was still louder, and men and women, seized by a
veritable frenzy, were rushing about cutting themselves with knives and
sharp-pointed sticks, the women battering one another's heads with
fighting clubs, no one attempting to ward off either cuts or blows.
Finally, after about an hour, a torchlight procession started off across
the plain, to a tree in whose branches the body was left.[1238]

Howsoever great the violence of these manifestations may be, they are
strictly regulated by etiquette. The individuals who make bloody
incisions in themselves are designated by usage: they must have certain
relations of kinship with the dead man. Thus, in the case observed by
Spencer and Gillen among the Warramunga, those who slashed their thighs
were the maternal grandfather of the deceased, his maternal uncle, and
the maternal uncle and brother of his wife.[1239] Others must cut their
whiskers and hair, and then smear their scalps with pipe-clay. Women
have particularly severe obligations. They must cut their hair and cover
the whole body with pipe-clay; in addition to this, a strict silence is
imposed upon them during the whole period of mourning, which may last as
long as two years. It is not rare among the Warramunga that, as a result
of this interdiction, all the women of a camp are condemned to the most
absolute silence. This becomes so habitual to them that even after the
expiration of the period of mourning, they voluntarily renounce all
spoken language and prefer to communicate with gestures--in which, by
the way, they acquire a remarkable ability. Spencer and Gillen knew one
old woman who had not spoken for over twenty-four years.[1240]

The ceremony which we have described opens a long series of rites which
succeed one another for weeks and even for months. During the days which
follow, they are renewed in various forms. Groups of men and women sit
on the ground, weeping and lamenting, and kissing each other at certain
moments. These ritual kissings are repeated frequently during the period
of mourning. It seems as though men felt a need of coming close together
and communicating most closely; they are to be seen holding to each
other and wound together so much as to make one single mass, from which
loud groans escape.[1241] Meanwhile, the women commence to lacerate
their heads again, and, in order to intensify the wounds they make, they
even go so far as to burn them with the points of fiery sticks.[1242]

Practices of this sort are general in all Australia. The funeral rites,
that is, the ritual cares given to the corpse, the way in which it is
buried, etc., change with different tribes,[1243] and in a single tribe
they vary with the age, sex and social importance of the
individual.[1244] But the real ceremonies of mourning repeat the same
theme everywhere; the variations are only in the details. Everywhere we
find this same silence interrupted by groans,[1245] the same obligation
of cutting the hair and beard,[1246] or of covering one's head with
pipe-clay or cinders, or perhaps even with excrements;[1247] everywhere,
finally, we find this same frenzy for beating one's self, lacerating
one's self and burning one's self. In central Victoria, "when death
visits a tribe there is great weeping and lamentation amongst the women,
the elder portion of whom lacerate their temples with their nails. The
parents of the deceased lacerate themselves fearfully, especially if it
be an only son whose loss they deplore. The father beats and cuts his
head with a tomahawk until he utters bitter groans, the mother sits by
the fire and burns her breasts and abdomen with a small fire-stick.
Sometimes the burns thus inflicted are so severe as to cause
death."[1248]

According to an account of Brough Smyth, here is what happens in one of
the southern tribes of the same state. As the body is lowered into the
grave, "the widow begins her sad ceremonies. She cuts off her hair above
her forehead, and becoming frantic, seizes fire-sticks, and burns her
breasts, arms, legs and thighs. She seems to delight in the
self-inflicted torture. It would be rash and vain to interrupt her. When
exhausted, and when she can hardly walk, she yet endeavours to kick the
embers of the fire, and to throw them about. Sitting down, she takes the
ashes into her hands, rubs them into her wounds, and then scratches her
face (the only part not touched by the fire-sticks) until the blood
mingles with the ashes, which partly hide her cruel wounds. In this
plight, scratching her face continually, she utters howls and
lamentations."[1249]

The description which Howitt gives of the rites of mourning among the
Kurnai is remarkably similar to these others. After the body has been
wrapped up in opossum skins and put in a shroud of bark, a hut is built
in which the relatives assemble. "There they lay lamenting their loss,
saying, for instance, 'Why did you leave us?' Now and then their grief
would be intensified by some one, for instance, the wife, uttering an
ear-piercing wail, 'My spouse is dead,' or another would say, 'My child
is dead.' All the others would then join in with the proper term of
relationship, and they would gash themselves with sharp stones and
tomahawks until their heads and bodies streamed with blood. This bitter
wailing and weeping continued all night."[1250]

Sadness is not the only sentiment expressed during these ceremonies; a
sort of anger is generally mixed with it. The relatives feel a need of
avenging the death in some way or other. They are to be seen throwing
themselves upon one another and trying to wound each other. Sometimes
the attack is real; sometimes it is only pretended.[1251] There are even
cases when these peculiar combats are organized. Among the Kaitish, the
hair of the deceased passes by right to his son-in-law. But he, in
return, must go, in company with some of his relatives and friends, and
provoke a quarrel with one of his tribal brothers, that is, with a man
belonging to the same matrimonial class as himself and one who might
therefore have married the daughter of the dead man. This provocation
cannot be refused and the two combatants inflict serious wounds upon
each other's shoulders and thighs. When the duel is terminated, the
challenger passes on to his adversary the hair which he had temporarily
inherited. This latter then provokes and fights with another of his
tribal brothers, to whom the precious relic is next transmitted, but
only provisionally; thus it passes from hand to hand and circulates from
group to group.[1252] Also, something of these same sentiments enters
into that sort of rage with which each relative beats himself, burns
himself or slashes himself: a sorrow which reaches such a paroxysm is
not without a certain amount of anger. One cannot fail to be struck by
the resemblances which these practices present to those of the vendetta.
Both proceed from the same principle that death demands the shedding of
blood. The only difference is that in one case the victims are the
relatives, while in the other they are strangers. We do not have to
treat especially of the vendetta, which belongs rather to the study of
juridic institutions; but it should be pointed out, nevertheless, how it
is connected with the rites of mourning, whose end it announces.[1253]

In certain societies, the mourning is terminated by a ceremony whose
effervescence reaches or surpasses that produced by the inaugural
ceremonies. Among the Arunta, this closing rite is called _Urpmilchima_.
Spencer and Gillen assisted at two of these rites. One was celebrated in
honour of a man, the other of a woman. Here is the description they give
of the latter.[1254]

They commence by making some ornaments of a special sort, called
_Chimurilia_ by the men and _Aramurilia_ by the women. With a kind of
resin, they fixed small animal bones, which had previously been gathered
and set aside, to locks of hair furnished by the relatives of the dead
woman. These are then attached to one of the head-bands which women
ordinarily wear and the feathers of black cockatoos and parrots are
added to it. When these preparations are completed, the women assemble
in their camp. They paint their bodies different colours, according to
their degree of kinship with the deceased. After being embraced by one
another for some ten minutes, while uttering uninterrupted groans, they
set out for the tomb. At a certain distance, they meet a brother by
blood of the dead woman, who is accompanied by some of his tribal
brothers. Everybody sits down on the ground, and the lamentations
recommence. A _pitchi_[1255] containing the Chimurilia is then presented
to the elder brother, who presses it against his stomach; they say that
this is a way of lessening his sorrow. They take out one of the
Chimurilia and the dead woman's mother puts it on her head for a little
while; then it is put back into the _pitchi_, which each of the other
men presses against his breast, in his turn. Finally, the brother puts
the Chimurilia on the heads of two elder sisters and they set out again
for the tomb. On the way, the mother throws herself on the ground
several times, and tries to slash her head with a pointed stick. Every
time, the other women pick her up, and seem to take care that she does
not hurt herself too much. When they arrive at the tomb, she throws
herself on the knoll and endeavours to destroy it with her hands, while
the other women literally dance upon her. The tribal mothers and aunts
(sisters of the dead woman's father) follow her example; they also throw
themselves on the ground, and mutually beat and tear each other; finally
their bodies are all streaming with blood. After a while, they are
dragged aside. The elder sisters then make a hole in the earth of the
tomb, in which they place the Chimurilia, which had previously been torn
to pieces. Once again the tribal mothers throw themselves on the ground
and slash each other's heads. At this moment, "the weeping and wailing
of the women who were standing round seemed to drive them almost
frenzied, and the blood, streaming down their bodies over the white
pipe-clay, gave them a ghastly appearance. At last only the old mother
was left crouching alone, utterly exhausted and moaning weakly on the
grave."[1256] Then the others raised her up and rubbed off the pipe-clay
with which she was covered; this was the end of the ceremony and of the
mourning.[1256]

Among the Warramunga, the final rite presents some rather particular
characteristics. There seems to be no shedding of blood here, but the
collective effervescence is translated in another manner.

Among his people, before the body is definitely interred, it is exposed
upon a platform placed in the branches of a tree; it is left there to
decompose slowly, until nothing remains but the bones. Then these are
gathered together and, with the exception of the humerus, they are
placed inside an ant-hill. The humerus is wrapped up in a bark box,
which is decorated in different manners. The box is then brought to
camp, amid the cries and groans of the women. During the following days,
they celebrate a series of totemic rites, concerning the totem of the
deceased and the mythical history of the ancestors from whom the clan is
descended. When all these ceremonies have been terminated, they proceed
to the closing rite.

A trench one foot deep and fifteen feet long is dug in the field of the
ceremony. A design representing the totem of the deceased and certain
spots where the ancestor stopped is made on the ground a little distance
from it. Near this design, a little ditch is dug in the ground. Ten
decorated men then advance, one behind another, and with their hands
crossed behind their heads and their legs wide apart they stand
astraddle the trench. At a given signal, the women run from the camp in
a profound silence; when they are near, they form in Indian file, the
last one holding in her hands the box containing the humerus. Then,
after throwing themselves on the ground, they advance on their hands and
knees, and pass all along the trench, between the legs of the men. The
scene shows a state of great sexual excitement. As soon as the last
woman has passed, they take the box from her, and take it to the ditch,
near which is an old man; he breaks the bone with a sharp blow, and
hurriedly buries it in the debris. During this time, the women have
remained at a distance, with their backs turned upon the scene, for they
must not see it. But when they hear the blow of the axe, they flee,
uttering cries and groans. The rite is accomplished; the mourning is
terminated.[1257]


II

These rites belong to a very different type from those which we have
studied hitherto. We do not mean to say that important resemblances
cannot be found between the two, which we shall have to note; but the
differences are more apparent. Instead of happy dances, songs and
dramatic representations which distract and relax the mind, they are
tears and groans and, in a word, the most varied manifestations of
agonized sorrow and a sort of mutual pity, which occupy the whole scene.
Of course the shedding of blood also takes place in the Intichiuma, but
this is an oblation made with a movement of pious enthusiasm. Even
though the motions may be the same, the sentiments expressed are
different and even opposed. Likewise, the ascetic rites certainly imply
privations, abstinences and mutilations, but ones which must be borne
with an impassive firmness and serenity. Here, on the contrary,
dejection, cries and tears are the rule. The ascetic tortures himself in
order to prove, in his own eyes and those of his fellows, that he is
above suffering. During mourning, men injure themselves to prove that
they suffer. By all these signs, the characteristic traits of the
piacular rites are to be recognized.

But how are they to be explained?

One initial fact is constant: mourning is not the spontaneous expression
of individual emotions.[1258] If the relations weep, lament, mutilate
themselves, it is not because they feel themselves personally affected
by the death of their kinsman. Of course, it may be that in certain
particular cases, the chagrin expressed is really felt.[1259] But it is
more generally the case that there is no connection between the
sentiments felt and the gestures made by the actors in the rite.[1260]
If, at the very moment when the weepers seem the most overcome by their
grief, some one speaks to them of some temporal interest, it frequently
happens that they change their features and tone at once, take on a
laughing air and converse in the gayest fashion imaginable.[1261]
Mourning is not a natural movement of private feelings wounded by a
cruel loss; it is a duty imposed by the group. One weeps, not simply
because he is sad, but because he is forced to weep. It is a ritual
attitude which he is forced to adopt out of respect for custom, but
which is, in a large measure, independent of his affective state.
Moreover, this obligation is sanctioned by mythical or social penalties.
They believe, for example, that if a relative does not mourn as is
fitting, then the soul of the departed follows upon his steps and kills
him.[1262] In other cases, society does not leave it to the religious
forces to punish the negligent; it intervenes itself, and reprimands the
ritual faults. If a son-in-law does not render to his father-in-law the
funeral attentions which are due him, and if he does not make the
prescribed incisions, then his tribal fathers-in-law take his wife away
from him and give him another.[1263] Therefore, in order to square
himself with usage, a man sometimes forces tears to flow by artificial
means.[1264]

Whence comes this obligation?

Ethnographers and sociologists are generally satisfied with the reply
which the natives themselves give to this question. They say that the
dead wish to be lamented, that by refusing them the tribute of sorrow
which is their right, men offend them, and that the only way of
preventing their anger is to conform to their will.[1265]

But this mythological interpretation merely modifies the terms of the
problem, without resolving it; it is still necessary to explain why the
dead imperatively reclaim the mourning. It may be said that it is
natural for men to wish to be mourned and regretted. But in making this
sentiment explain the complex system of rites which make up mourning, we
attribute to the Australian affective exigencies of which the civilized
man himself does not always give evidence. Let us admit--as is not
evident _a priori_--that the idea of not being forgotten too readily is
pleasing to a man who thinks of the future. It is still to be
established that it has ever had enough importance in the minds of the
living for one to attribute to the dead a state of mind proceeding
almost entirely from this preoccupation. It seems especially improbable
that such a sentiment could obsess and impassion men who are seldom
accustomed to thinking beyond the present moment. So far is it from
being a fact that the desire to survive in the memory of those who are
still alive is to be regarded as the origin of mourning, that we may
even ask ourselves whether it was not rather mourning itself which, when
once established, aroused the idea of and the taste for posthumous
regrets.

The classic interpretation appears still more unsustainable when we know
what the primitive mourning consists in. It is not made up merely of
pious regrets accorded to him who no longer is, but also of severe
abstinences and cruel sacrifices. The rite does not merely demand that
one think of the deceased in a melancholy way, but also that he beat
himself, bruise himself, lacerate himself and burn himself. We have even
seen that persons in mourning sometimes torture themselves to such a
degree that they do not survive their wounds. What reason has the dead
man for imposing such torments upon them? Such a cruelty on his part
denotes something more than a desire not to be forgotten. If he is to
find pleasure in seeing his own suffer, it is necessary that he hate
them, that he be thirsty for their blood. This ferocity would
undoubtedly appear natural to those for whom every spirit is necessarily
an evil and redoubted power. But we know that there are spirits of every
sort; how does it happen that the soul of the dead man is necessarily an
evil spirit? As long as the man is alive, he loves his relatives and
exchanges services with them. Is it not strange that as soon as it is
freed from his body, his soul should instantly lay aside its former
sentiments and become an evil and tormenting genius? It is a general
rule that the dead man retains the personality of the living, and that
he has the same character, the same hates and the same affections. So
this metamorphosis is not easily understandable by itself. It is true
that the natives admit it implicitly when they explain the rite by the
exigencies of the dead man, but the question now before us is to know
whence this conception came. Far from being capable of being regarded
as a truism, it is as obscure as the rite itself, and consequently
cannot account for it.

Finally, even if we had found the reasons for this surprising
transformation, we would still have to explain why it is only temporary.
For it does not last beyond the period of mourning; after the rites have
once been accomplished, the dead man becomes what he was when alive, an
affectionate and devoted relation. He puts the new powers which he
receives from his new condition at the service of his friends.[1266]
Thenceforth, he is regarded as a good genius, always ready to aid those
whom he was recently tormenting. Whence come these successive transfers?
If the evil sentiments attributed to the soul come solely from the fact
that it is no longer in life, they should remain invariable, and if the
mourning is due to this, it should be interminable.

These mythical explanations express the idea which the native has of the
rite, and not the rite itself. So we may set them aside and face the
reality which they translate, though disfiguring it in doing so. If
mourning differs from the other forms of the positive cult, there is one
feature in which it resembles them: it, too, is made up out of
collective ceremonies which produce a state of effervescence among those
who take part in them. The sentiments aroused are different; but the
arousal is the same. So it is presumable that the explanation of the
joyous rites is capable of being applied to the sad rites, on condition
that the terms be transposed.

When some one dies, the family group to which he belongs feels itself
lessened and, to react against this loss, it assembles. A common
misfortune has the same effects as the approach of a happy event:
collective sentiments are renewed which then lead men to seek one
another and to assemble together. We have even seen this need for
concentration affirm itself with a particular energy: they embrace one
another, put their arms round one another, and press as close as
possible to one another. But the affective state in which the group then
happens to be only reflects the circumstances through which it is
passing. Not only do the relatives, who are effected the most directly,
bring their own personal sorrow to the assembly, but the society
exercises a moral pressure over its members, to put their sentiments in
harmony with the situation. To allow them to remain indifferent to the
blow which has fallen upon it and diminished it, would be equivalent to
proclaiming that it does not hold the place in their hearts which is due
it; it would be denying itself. A family which allows one of its
members to die without being wept for shows by that very fact that it
lacks moral unity and cohesion: it abdicates; it renounces its
existence. An individual in his turn, if he is strongly attached to the
society of which he is a member, feels that he is morally held to
participating in its sorrows and joys; not to be interested in them
would be equivalent to breaking the bonds uniting him to the group; it
would be renouncing all desire for it and contradicting himself. When
the Christian, during the ceremonies commemorating the Passion, and the
Jew, on the anniversary of the fall of Jerusalem, fast and mortify
themselves, it is not in giving way to a sadness which they feel
spontaneously. Under these circumstances, the internal state of the
believer is out of all proportion to the severe abstinences to which
they submit themselves. If he is sad, it is primarily because he
consents to being sad, and he consents to it in order to affirm his
faith. The attitude of the Australian during mourning is to be explained
in the same way. If he weeps and groans, it is not merely to express an
individual chagrin; it is to fulfil a duty of which the surrounding
society does not fail to remind him.

We have seen elsewhere how human sentiments are intensified when
affirmed collectively. Sorrow, like joy, becomes exalted and amplified
when leaping from mind to mind, and therefore expresses itself outwardly
in the form of exuberant and violent movements. But these are no longer
expressive of the joyful agitation which we observed before; they are
shrieks and cries of pain. Each is carried along by the others; a
veritable panic of sorrow results. When pain reaches this degree of
intensity, it is mixed with a sort of anger and exasperation. One feels
the need of breaking something, of destroying something. He takes this
out either upon himself or others. He beats himself, burns himself,
wounds himself or else he falls upon others to beat, burn and wound
them. Thus it became the custom to give one's self up to the veritable
orgies of tortures during mourning. It seems very probable that
blood-revenge and head-hunting have their origin in this. If every death
is attributed to some magic charm, and for this reason it is believed
that the dead man ought to be avenged, it is because men must find a
victim at any price, upon whom the collective pain and anger may be
discharged. Naturally this victim is sought outside the group; a
stranger is a subject _minoris resistentiæ_; as he is not protected by
the sentiments of sympathy inspired by a relative or neighbour, there is
nothing in him which subdues and neutralizes the evil and destructive
sentiments aroused by the death. It is undoubtedly for this same reason
that women serve more frequently than men as the passive objects of the
cruellest rites of mourning; since they have a smaller social value,
they are more obviously designated as scapegoats.

We see that this explanation of mourning completely leaves aside all
ideas of souls or spirits. The only forces which are really active are
of a wholly impersonal nature: they are the emotions aroused in the
group by the death of one of its members. But the primitive does not
know the psychical mechanism from which these practices result. So when
he tries to account for them, he is obliged to forge a wholly different
explanation. All he knows is that he must painfully mortify himself. As
every obligation suggests the notion of a will which obliges, he looks
about him to see whence this constraint which he feels may come. Now,
there is one moral power, of whose reality he is assured and which seems
designated for this rôle: this is the soul which the death has
liberated. For what could have a greater interest than it in the effects
which its own death has on the living? So they imagine that if these
latter inflict an unnatural treatment upon themselves, it is to conform
to its exigencies. It was thus that the idea of the soul must have
intervened at a later date into the mythology of mourning. But also,
since it is thus endowed with inhuman exigencies, it must be supposed
that in leaving the body which it animated, the soul lays aside every
human sentiment. Hence the metamorphosis which makes a dreaded enemy out
of the relative of yesterday. This transformation is not the origin of
mourning; it is rather its consequence. It translates a change which has
come over the affective state of the group: men do not weep for the dead
because they fear them; they fear them because they weep for them.

But this change of the affective state can only be a temporary one, for
while the ceremonies of mourning result from it, they also put an end to
it. Little by little, they neutralize the very causes which have given
rise to them. The foundation of mourning is the impression of a loss
which the group feels when it loses one of its members. But this very
impression results in bringing individuals together, in putting them
into closer relations with one another, in associating them all in the
same mental state, and therefore in disengaging a sensation of comfort
which compensates the original loss.--Since they weep together, they
hold to one another and the group is not weakened, in spite of the blow
which has fallen upon it. Of course they have only sad emotions in
common, but communicating in sorrow is still communicating, and every
communion of mind, in whatever form it may be made, raises the social
vitality. The exceptional violence of the manifestations by which the
common pain is necessarily and obligatorily expressed even testifies to
the fact that at this moment, the society is more alive and active than
ever. In fact, whenever the social sentiment is painfully wounded, it
reacts with greater force than ordinarily: one never holds so closely to
his family as when it has just suffered. This surplus energy effaces the
more completely the effects of the interruption which was felt at first,
and thus dissipates the feeling of coldness which death always brings
with it. The group feels its strength gradually returning to it; it
begins to hope and to live again. Presently one stops mourning, and he
does so owing to the mourning itself. But as the idea formed of the soul
reflects the moral state of the society, this idea should change as this
state changes. When one is in the period of dejection and agony, he
represents the soul with the traits of an evil being, whose sole
occupation is to persecute men. But when he feels himself confident and
secure once more, he must admit that it has retaken its former nature
and its former sentiments of tenderness and solidarity. Thus we explain
the very different ways in which it is conceived at different moments of
its existence.[1267]

Not only do the rites of mourning determine certain of the secondary
characteristics attributed to the soul, but perhaps they are not foreign
to the idea that it survives the body. If he is to understand the
practices to which he submits on the death of a parent, a man is obliged
to believe that these are not an indifferent matter for the deceased.
The shedding of blood which is practised so freely during mourning is a
veritable sacrifice offered to the dead man.[1268] So something of the
dead man must survive, and as this is not the body, which is manifestly
immobile and decomposed, it can only be the soul. Of course it is
impossible to say with any exactness what part these considerations have
had in the origin of the idea of immortality. But it is probable that
here the influence of the cult is the same as it is elsewhere. Rites are
more easily explicable when one imagines that they are addressed to
personal beings; so men have been induced to extend the influence of
the mythical personalities in the religious life. In order to account
for mourning, they have prolonged the existence of the soul beyond the
tomb. This is one more example of the way in which rites react upon
beliefs.


III

But death is not the only event which may disturb a community. Men have
many other occasions for being sorry and lamenting, so we might foresee
that even the Australians would know and practise other piacular rites
besides mourning. However, it is a remarkable fact that only a small
number of examples are to be found in the accounts of the observers.

One rite of this sort greatly resembles those which have just been
studied. It will be remembered that among the Arunta, each local group
attributes exceptionally important virtues to its collection of
churinga: this is this collective palladium, upon whose fate the fate of
the community itself is believed to depend. So when enemies or white men
succeed in stealing one of these religious treasures, this loss is
considered a public calamity. This misfortune is the occasion of a rite
having all the characteristics of mourning: men smear their bodies with
white pipe-clay and remain in camp, weeping and lamenting, during a
period of two weeks.[1269] This is a new proof that mourning is
determined, not by the way in which the soul of the dead is conceived,
but by impersonal causes, by the moral state of the group. In fact, we
have here a rite which, in its structure, is indistinguishable from the
real mourning, but which is, nevertheless, independent of every notion
of spirits or evil-working demons.[1270]

Another circumstance which gives occasion for ceremonies of the same
nature is the distress in which the society finds itself after an
insufficient harvest. "The natives who live in the vicinity of Lake
Eyre," says Eylmann, "also seek to prevent an insufficiency of food by
means of secret ceremonies. But many of the ritual practices observed in
this region are to be distinguished from those which have been mentioned
already: it is not by symbolic dances, by imitative movements nor
dazzling decorations that they try to act upon the religious powers or
the forces of nature, but by means of the suffering which individuals
inflict upon themselves. In the northern territories, it is by means of
tortures, such as prolonged fasts, vigils, dances persisted up to the
exhaustion of the dancers, and physical pains of every sort, that they
attempt to appease the powers which are ill-disposed towards men."[1271]
The torments to which the natives submit themselves for this purpose
sometimes leave them in such a state of exhaustion that they are unable
to follow the hunt for some days to come.[1272]

These practices are employed especially for fighting against drought.
This is because a scarcity of water results in a general want. To remedy
this evil, they have recourse to violent methods. One which is
frequently used is the extraction of a tooth. Among the Kaitish, for
example, they pull out an incisor from one man, and hang it on a
tree.[1273] Among the Dieri, the idea of rain is closely associated with
that of bloody incisions made in the skin of the chest and arms.[1274]
Among this same people, whenever the drought is very great, the great
council assembles and summons the whole tribe. It is really a tribal
event. Women are sent in every direction to notify men to assemble at a
given place and time. After they have assembled, they groan and cry in a
piercing voice about the miserable state of the land, and they beg the
_Mura-mura_ (the mythical ancestors) to give them the power of making an
abundant rain fall.[1275] In the cases, which, by the way, are very
rare, when there has been an excessive rainfall, an analogous ceremony
takes place to stop it. Old men then enter into a veritable
frenzy,[1276] while the cries uttered by the crowd are really painful to
hear.[1277]

Spencer and Gillen describe, under the name of Intichiuma, a ceremony
which may well have the same object and the same origin as the preceding
ones: a physical torture is applied to make an animal species multiply.
Among the Urabunna, there is one clan whose totem is a variety of snake
called _wadnungadni_. This is how the chief of the clan proceeds, to
make sure that these snakes may never be lacking. After having been
decorated, he kneels down on the ground, holding his arms straight out.
An assistant pinches the skin of his right arm between his fingers, and
the officiant forces a pointed bone five inches long through the fold
thus formed. This self-mutilation is believed to produce the desired
result.[1278] An analogous rite is used among the Dieri to make the
wild-hens lay: the operators pierce their scrotums.[1279] In certain of
the Lake Eyre tribes, men pierce their ears to make yams
reproduce.[1280]

But these partial or total famines are not the only plagues which may
fall upon a tribe. Other events happen more or less periodically which
menace, or seem to menace, the existence of the group. This is the case,
for example, with the southern lights. The Kurnai believe that this is a
fire lighted in the heavens by the great god Mungan-ngaua; therefore,
whenever they see it, they are afraid that it may spread to the earth
and devour them, so a great effervescence results in the camp. They
shake a withered hand, to which the Kurnai attribute various virtues,
and utter such cries as "Send it away; do not let us be burned." At the
same time, the old men order an exchange of wives, which always
indicates a great excitement.[1281] The same sexual licence is mentioned
among the Wiimbaio whenever a plague appears imminent, and especially in
times of an epidemic.[1282]

Under the influence of these ideas, mutilations and the shedding of
blood are sometimes considered an efficient means of curing maladies. If
an accident happens to a child among the Dieri, his relations beat
themselves on the head with clubs or boomerangs until the blood flows
down over their faces. They believe that by this process, they relieve
the child of the suffering.[1283] Elsewhere, they imagine that they can
obtain the same end by means of a supplementary totemic ceremony.[1284]
We may connect with these the example already given of a ceremony
celebrated specially to efface the effects of a ritual fault.[1285] Of
course there are neither wounds nor blows nor physical suffering of any
sort in these two latter cases, yet the rite does not differ in nature
from the others: the end sought is always the turning aside of an evil
or the expiation of a fault by means of an extraordinary ritual
prestation.

Outside of mourning, such are the only cases of piacular rites which we
have succeeded in finding in Australia. To be sure, it is probable that
some have escaped us, while we may presume equally well that others have
remained unperceived by the observers. But if those discovered up to the
present are few in number, it is probably because they do not hold a
large place in the cult. We see how far primitive religions are from
being the daughters of agony and fear from the fact that the rites
translating these painful emotions are relatively rare. Of course this
is because the Australian, while leading a miserable existence as
compared with other more civilized peoples, demands so little of life
that he is easily contented. All that he asks is that nature follow its
normal course, that the seasons succeed one another regularly, that the
rain fall, at the ordinary time, in abundance and without excess. Now
great disturbances in the cosmic order are always exceptional; thus it
is noticeable that the majority of the regular piacular rites, examples
of which we have given above, have been observed in the tribes of the
centre, where droughts are frequent and constitute veritable disasters.
It is still surprising, it is true, that piacular rites specially
destined to expiate sins, seem to be completely lacking. However, the
Australian, like every other man, must commit ritual faults, which he
has an interest in redeeming; so we may ask if the silence of the texts
on this point may not be due to insufficient observation.

But howsoever few the facts which we have been able to gather may be,
they are, nevertheless, instructive.

When we study piacular rites in the more advanced religions, where the
religious forces are individualized, they appear to be closely bound up
with anthropomorphic conceptions. When the believer imposes privations
upon himself and submits himself to austerities, it is in order to
disarm the malevolence attributed by him to certain of the sacred beings
upon whom he thinks that he is dependent. To appease their hatred or
anger, he complies with their exigencies; he beats himself in order that
he may not be beaten by them. So it seems as though these practices
could not arise until after gods and spirits were conceived as moral
persons, capable of passions analogous to those of men. For this reason,
Robertson Smith thought it possible to assign a relatively late date to
expiatory sacrifices, just as to sacrificial oblations. According to
him, the shedding of blood which characterizes these rites was at first
a simple process of communion: men poured forth their blood upon the
altar in order to strengthen the bonds uniting them to their god. The
rite acquired a piacular and penal character only when its original
significance was forgotten and when the new idea which was formed of
sacred beings allowed men to attribute another function to it.[1286]

But as piacular rites are met with even in the Australian societies, it
is impossible to assign them so late an origin. Moreover, all that we
have observed, with one single exception,[1287] are independent of all
anthropomorphic conceptions: there is no question of either spirits or
gods. Abstinences and effusions of blood stop famines and cure
sicknesses directly and by themselves. No spiritual being introduces his
action between the rite and the effect it is believed to produce. So
mythical personalities intervened only at a late date. After the
mechanism of the ritual had once been established, they served to make
it more easily representable in the mind, but they are not conditions of
its existence. It is for other reasons that it was founded; it is to
another cause that it owes its efficacy.

It acts through the collective forces which it puts into play. Does a
misfortune which menaces the group appear imminent? Then the group
unites, as in the case of mourning, and it is naturally an impression of
uneasiness and perplexity which dominates the assembled body. Now, as
always, the pooling of these sentiments results in intensifying them. By
affirming themselves, they exalt and impassion themselves and attain a
degree of violence which is translated by the corresponding violence of
the gestures which express them. Just as at the death of a relative,
they utter terrible cries, fly into a passion and feel that they must
tear and destroy; it is to satisfy this need that they beat themselves,
wound themselves, and make their blood flow. When emotions have this
vivacity, they may well be painful, but they are not depressing; on the
contrary, they denote a state of effervescence which implies a
mobilization of all our active forces, and even a supply of external
energies. It matters little that this exaltation was provoked by a sad
event, for it is real, notwithstanding, and does not differ specifically
from what is observed in the happy feasts. Sometimes it is even made
manifest by movements of the same nature: there is the same frenzy which
seizes the worshippers and the same tendency towards sexual debauches, a
sure sign of great nervous over-excitement. Robertson Smith had already
noticed this curious influence of sad rites in the Semitic cults: "in
evil times," he says, "when men's thoughts were habitually sombre, they
betook themselves to the physical excitement of religion as men now take
refuge in wine.... And so in general when an act of Semitic worship
began with sorrow and lamentation--as in the mourning for Adonis, or the
great atoning ceremonies which became common in later times--a swift
revulsion of feeling followed, and the gloomy part of the service was
presently succeeded by a burst of hilarious revelry."[1288] In a word,
even when religious ceremonies have a disquieting or saddening event as
their point of departure, they retain their stimulating power over the
affective state of the group and individuals. By the mere fact that they
are collective, they raise the vital tone. When one feels life within
him--whether it be in the form of painful irritation or happy
enthusiasm--he does not believe in death; so he becomes reassured and
takes courage again, and subjectively, everything goes on as if the rite
had really driven off the danger which was dreaded. This is how curing
or preventive virtues come to be attributed to the movements which one
makes, to the cries uttered, to the blood shed and to the wounds
inflicted upon one's self or others; and as these different tortures
necessarily make one suffer, suffering by itself is finally regarded as
a means of conjuring evil or curing sickness.[1289] Later, when the
majority of the religious forces had taken the form of moral
personalities, the efficacy of these practices was explained by
imagining that their object was to appease an evil-working or irritated
god. But these conceptions only reflect the rite and the sentiments it
arouses; they are an interpretation of it, not its determining cause.

A negligence of the ritual acts in the same way. It, too, is a menace
for the group; it touches it in its moral existence for it touches it in
its beliefs. But if the anger which it causes is affirmed ostensibly and
energetically, it compensates the evil which it has caused. For if it is
acutely felt by all, it is because the infraction committed is an
exception and the common faith remains entire. So the moral unity of the
group is not endangered. Now the penalty inflicted as an expiation is
only a manifestation of the public anger, the material proof of its
unanimity. So it really does have the healing effect attributed to it.
At bottom, the sentiment which is at the root of the real expiatory
rites does not differ in nature from that which we have found at the
basis of the other piacular rites: it is a sort of irritated sorrow
which tends to manifest itself by acts of destruction. Sometimes it is
assuaged to the detriment of him who feels it; sometimes it is at the
expense of some foreign third party. But in either case, the psychic
mechanism is essentially the same.[1290]


IV

One of the greatest services which Robertson Smith has rendered to the
science of religions is to have pointed out the ambiguity of the notion
of sacredness.

Religious forces are of two sorts. Some are beneficent, guardians of the
physical and moral order, dispensers of life and health and all the
qualities which men esteem: this is the case with the totemic principle,
spread out in the whole species, the mythical ancestor, the
animal-protector, the civilizing heroes and the tutelar gods of every
kind and degree. It matters little whether they are conceived as
distinct personalities or as diffused energies; under either form they
fulfil the same function and affect the minds of the believers in the
same way: the respect which they inspire is mixed with love and
gratitude. The things and the persons which are normally connected with
them participate in the same sentiments and the same character: these
are holy things and persons. Such are the spots consecrated to the cult,
the objects which serve in the regular rites, the priests, the ascetics,
etc.--On the other hand, there are evil and impure powers, productive of
disorders, causes of death and sickness, instigators of sacrilege. The
only sentiments which men have for them are a fear into which horror
generally enters. Such are the forces upon which and by which the
sorcerer acts, those which arise from corpses or the menstrual blood,
those freed by every profanation of sacred things, etc. The spirits of
the dead and malign genii of every sort are their personified forms.

Between these two categories of forces and beings, the contrast is as
complete as possible and even goes into the most radical antagonism. The
good and salutary powers repel to a distance these others which deny and
contradict them. Therefore the former are forbidden to the latter: any
contact between them is considered the worst of profanations. This is
the typical form of those interdicts between sacred things of different
species, the existence of which we have already pointed out.[1291] Women
during menstruation, and especially at its beginning, are impure; so at
this moment they are rigorously sequestered; men may have no relations
with them.[1292] Bull-roarers and churinga never come near a dead
man.[1293] A sacrilegious person is excluded from the society of the
faithful; access to the cult is forbidden him. Thus the whole religious
life gravitates about two contrary poles between which there is the same
opposition as between the pure and the impure, the saint and the
sacrilegious, the divine and the diabolic.

But while these two aspects of the religious life oppose one another,
there is a close kinship between them. In the first place, both have the
same relation towards profane beings: these must abstain from all
contact with impure things just as from the most holy things. The former
are no less forbidden than the latter: they are withdrawn from
circulation alike. This shows that they too are sacred. Of course the
sentiments inspired by the two are not identical: respect is one thing,
disgust and horror another. Yet, if the gestures are to be the same in
both cases, the sentiments expressed must not differ in nature. And, in
fact, there is a horror in religious respect, especially when it is very
intense, while the fear inspired by malign powers is generally not
without a certain reverential character. The shades by which these two
attitudes are differentiated are even so slight sometimes that it is not
always easy to say which state of mind the believers actually happen to
be in. Among certain Semitic peoples, pork was forbidden, but it was not
always known exactly whether this was because it was a pure or an impure
thing[1294] and the same may be said of a very large number of
alimentary interdictions.

But there is more to be said; it very frequently happens that an impure
thing or an evil power becomes a holy thing or a guardian power, without
changing its nature, through a simple modification of external
circumstances. We have seen how the soul of a dead man, which is a
dreaded principle at first, is transformed into a protecting genius as
soon as the mourning is finished. Likewise, the corpse, which begins by
inspiring terror and aversion, is later regarded as a venerated relic:
funeral anthropophagy, which is frequently practised in the Australian
societies, is a proof of this transformation.[1295] The totemic animal
is the pre-eminently sacred being; but for him who eats its flesh
unduly, it is a cause of death. In a general way, the sacrilegious
person is merely a profane one who has been infected with a benevolent
religious force. This changes its nature in changing its habitat; it
defiles rather than sanctifies.[1296] The blood issuing from the
genital organs of a woman, though it is evidently as impure as that of
menstruation, is frequently used as a remedy against sickness.[1297] The
victim immolated in expiatory sacrifices is charged with impurities, for
they have concentrated upon it the sins which were to be expiated. Yet,
after it has been slaughtered, its flesh and blood are employed for the
most pious uses.[1298] On the contrary, though the communion is
generally a religious operation whose normal function is to consecrate,
it sometimes produces the effects of a sacrilege. In certain cases, the
persons who have communicated are forced to flee from one another as
from men infected with a plague. One would say that they have become a
source of dangerous contamination for one another: the sacred bond which
unites them also separates them. Examples of this sort of communion are
numerous in Australia. One of the most typical has been observed among
the Narrinyeri and the neighbouring tribes. When an infant arrives in
the world, its parents carefully preserve its umbilical cord, which is
believed to conceal a part of its soul. Two persons who exchange the
cords thus preserved communicate together by the very act of this
exchange, for it is as though they exchanged their souls. But, at the
same time, they are forbidden to touch or speak to or even to see one
another. It is just as though they were each an object of horror for the
other.[1299]

So the pure and the impure are not two separate classes, but two
varieties of the same class, which includes all sacred things. There are
two sorts of sacredness, the propitious and the unpropitious, and not
only is there no break of continuity between these two opposed forms,
but also one object may pass from the one to the other without changing
its nature. The pure is made out of the impure, and reciprocally. It is
in the possibility of these transmutations that the ambiguity of the
sacred consists.

But even if Robertson Smith did have an active sentiment of this
ambiguity, he never gave it an express explanation. He confined himself
to remarking that, as all religious forces are indistinctly intense and
contagious, it is wise not to approach them except with respectful
precautions, no matter what direction their action may be exercised in.
It seemed to him that he could thus account for the air of kinship which
they all present, in spite of the contrasts which oppose them
otherwise. But the question was only put off; it still remains to be
shown how it comes that the powers of evil have the same intensity and
contagiousness as the others. In other words, how does it happen that
they, too, are of a religious nature? Also, the energy and force of
expansion which they have in common do not enable us to understand how,
in spite of the conflict which divides them, they may be transformed
into one another or substituted for each other in their respective
functions, and how the pure may contaminate while the impure sometimes
serves to sanctify.[1300]

The explanation of piacular rites which we have proposed enables us to
reply to this double question.

We have seen, in fact, that the evil powers are the product of these
rites and symbolize them. When a society is going through circumstances
which sadden, perplex or irritate it, it exercises a pressure over its
members, to make them bear witness, by significant acts, to their
sorrow, perplexity or anger. It imposes upon them the duty of weeping,
groaning or inflicting wounds upon themselves or others, for these
collective manifestations, and the moral communion which they show and
strengthen, restore to the group the energy which circumstances threaten
to take away from it, and thus they enable it to become settled. This is
the experience which men interpret when they imagine that outside them
there are evil beings whose hostility, whether constitutional or
temporary, can be appeased only by human suffering. These beings are
nothing other than collective states objectified; they are society
itself seen under one of its aspects. But we also know that the
benevolent powers are constituted in the same way; they, too, result
from the collective life and express it; they, too, represent the
society, but seen from a very different attitude, to wit, at the moment
when it confidently affirms itself and ardently presses on towards the
realization of the ends which it pursues. Since these two sorts of
forces have a common origin, it is not at all surprising that, though
facing in opposite directions, they should have the same nature, that
they are equally intense and contagious and consequently forbidden and
sacred.

From this we are able to understand how they change into one another.
Since they reflect the abjective state in which the group happens to be,
it is enough that this state change for their character to change. After
the mourning is over, the domestic group is re-calmed by the mourning
itself; it regains confidence; the painful pressure which they felt
exercised over them is relieved; they feel more at their ease. So it
seems to them as though the spirit of the deceased had laid aside its
hostile sentiments and become a benevolent protector. The other
transmutations, examples of which we have cited, are to be explained in
the same way. As we have already shown, the sanctity of a thing is due
to the collective sentiment of which it is the object. If, in violation
of the interdicts which isolate it, it comes in contact with a profane
person, then this same sentiment will spread contagiously to this latter
and imprint a special character upon him. But in spreading, it comes
into a very different state from the one it was in at first. Offended
and irritated by the profanation implied in this abusive and unnatural
extension, it becomes aggressive and inclined to destructive violences:
it tends to avenge itself for the offence suffered. Therefore the
infected subject seems to be filled with a mighty and harmful force
which menaces all that approaches him; it is as though he were marked
with a stain or blemish. Yet the cause of this blemish is the same
psychic state which, in other circumstances, consecrates and sanctifies.
But if the anger thus aroused is satisfied by an expiatory rite, it
subsides, alleviated; the offended sentiment is appeased and returns to
its original state. So it acts once more as it acted in the beginning;
instead of contaminating, it sanctifies. As it continues to infect the
object to which it is attached, this could never become profane and
religiously indifferent again. But the direction of the religious force
with which it seems to be filled is inverted: from being impure, it has
become pure and an instrument of purification.

In résumé, the two poles of the religious life correspond to the two
opposed states through which all social life passes. Between the
propitiously sacred and the unpropitiously sacred there is the same
contrast as between the states of collective well-being and ill-being.
But since both are equally collective, there is, between the
mythological constructions symbolizing them, an intimate kinship of
nature. The sentiments held in common vary from extreme dejection to
extreme joy, from painful irritation to ecstatic enthusiasm; but, in
any case, there is a communion of minds and a mutual comfort resulting
from this communion. The fundamental process is always the same; only
circumstances colour it differently. So, at bottom, it is the unity and
the diversity of social life which make the simultaneous unity and
diversity of sacred beings and things.

This ambiguity, moreover, is not peculiar to the idea of sacredness
alone; something of this characteristic has been found in all the rites
which we have been studying. Of course it was essential to distinguish
them; to confuse them would have been to misunderstand the multiple
aspects of the religious life. But, on the other hand, howsoever
different they may be, there is no break of continuity between them.
Quite on the contrary, they overlap one another and may even replace
each other mutually. We have already shown how the rites of oblation and
communion, the imitative rites and the commemorative rites frequently
fulfil the same function. One might imagine that the negative cult, at
least, would be more sharply separated from the positive cult; yet we
have seen that the former may produce positive effects, identical with
those produced by the latter. The same results are obtained by fasts,
abstinences and self-mutilations as by communions, oblations and
commemorations. Inversely, offerings and sacrifices imply privations and
renunciations of every sort. The continuity between ascetic and piacular
rites is even more apparent: both are made up of sufferings, accepted or
undergone, to which an analogous efficacy is attributed. Thus the
practices, like the beliefs, are not arranged in two separate classes.
Howsoever complex the outward manifestations of the religious life may
be, at bottom it is one and simple. It responds everywhere to one and
the same need, and is everywhere derived from one and the same mental
state. In all its forms, its object is to raise man above himself and to
make him lead a life superior to that which he would lead, if he
followed only his own individual whims: beliefs express this life in
representations; rites organize it and regulate its working.




CONCLUSION


At the beginning of this work we announced that the religion whose study
we were taking up contained within it the most characteristic elements
of the religious life. The exactness of this proposition may now be
verified. Howsoever simple the system which we have studied may be, we
have found within it all the great ideas and the principal ritual
attitudes which are at the basis of even the most advanced religions:
the division of things into sacred and profane, the notions of the soul,
of spirits, of mythical personalities, and of a national and even
international divinity, a negative cult with ascetic practices which are
its exaggerated form, rites of oblation and communion, imitative rites,
commemorative rites and expiatory rites; nothing essential is lacking.
We are thus in a position to hope that the results at which we have
arrived are not peculiar to totemism alone, but can aid us in an
understanding of what religion in general is.

It may be objected that one single religion, whatever its field of
extension may be, is too narrow a base for such an induction. We have
not dreamed for a moment of ignoring the fact that an extended
verification may add to the authority of a theory, but it is equally
true that when a law has been proven by one well-made experiment, this
proof is valid universally. If in one single case a scientist succeeded
in finding out the secret of the life of even the most protoplasmic
creature that can be imagined, the truths thus obtained would be
applicable to all living beings, even the most advanced. Then if, in our
studies of these very humble societies, we have really succeeded in
discovering some of the elements out of which the most fundamental
religious notions are made up, there is no reason for not extending the
most general results of our researches to other religions. In fact, it
is inconceivable that the same effect may be due now to one cause, now
to another, according to the circumstances, unless the two causes are at
bottom only one. A single idea cannot express one reality here and
another one there, unless the duality is only apparent. If among certain
peoples the ideas of sacredness, the soul and God are to be explained
sociologically, it should be presumed scientifically that, in principle,
the same explanation is valid for all the peoples among whom these same
ideas are found with the same essential characteristics. Therefore,
supposing that we have not been deceived, certain at least of our
conclusions can be legitimately generalized. The moment has come to
disengage these. And an induction of this sort, having at its foundation
a clearly defined experiment, is less adventurous than many summary
generalizations which, while attempting to reach the essence of religion
at once, without resting upon the careful analysis of any religion in
particular, greatly risk losing themselves in space.


I

The theorists who have undertaken to explain religion in rational terms
have generally seen in it before all else a system of ideas,
corresponding to some determined object. This object has been conceived
in a multitude of ways: nature, the infinite, the unknowable, the ideal,
etc.; but these differences matter but little. In any case, it was the
conceptions and beliefs which were considered as the essential elements
of religion. As for the rites, from this point of view they appear to be
only an external translation, contingent and material, of these internal
states which alone pass as having any intrinsic value. This conception
is so commonly held that generally the disputes of which religion is the
theme turn about the question whether it can conciliate itself with
science or not, that is to say, whether or not there is a place beside
our scientific knowledge for another form of thought which would be
specifically religious.

But the believers, the men who lead the religious life and have a direct
sensation of what it really is, object to this way of regarding it,
saying that it does not correspond to their daily experience. In fact,
they feel that the real function of religion is not to make us think, to
enrich our knowledge, nor to add to the conceptions which we owe to
science others of another origin and another character, but rather, it
is to make us act, to aid us to live. The believer who has communicated
with his god is not merely a man who sees new truths of which the
unbeliever is ignorant; he is a man who is _stronger_. He feels within
him more force, either to endure the trials of existence, or to conquer
them. It is as though he were raised above the miseries of the world,
because he is raised above his condition as a mere man; he believes that
he is saved from evil, under whatever form he may conceive this evil.
The first article in every creed is the belief in salvation by faith.
But it is hard to see how a mere idea could have this efficacy. An idea
is in reality only a part of ourselves; then how could it confer upon us
powers superior to those which we have of our own nature? Howsoever rich
it might be in affective virtues, it could add nothing to our natural
vitality; for it could only release the motive powers which are within
us, neither creating them nor increasing them. From the mere fact that
we consider an object worthy of being loved and sought after, it does
not follow that we feel ourselves stronger afterwards; it is also
necessary that this object set free energies superior to these which we
ordinarily have at our command and also that we have some means of
making these enter into us and unite themselves to our interior lives.
Now for that, it is not enough that we think of them; it is also
indispensable that we place ourselves within their sphere of action, and
that we set ourselves where we may best feel their influence; in a word,
it is necessary that we act, and that we repeat the acts thus necessary
every time we feel the need of renewing their effects. From this point
of view, it is readily seen how that group of regularly repeated acts
which form the cult get their importance. In fact, whoever has really
practised a religion knows very well that it is the cult which gives
rise to these impressions of joy, of interior peace, of serenity, of
enthusiasm which are, for the believer, an experimental proof of his
beliefs. The cult is not simply a system of signs by which the faith is
outwardly translated; it is a collection of the means by which this is
created and recreated periodically. Whether it consists in material acts
or mental operations, it is always this which is efficacious.

Our entire study rests upon this postulate that the unanimous sentiment
of the believers of all times cannot be purely illusory. Together with a
recent apologist of the faith[1301] we admit that these religious
beliefs rest upon a specific experience whose demonstrative value is, in
one sense, not one bit inferior to that of scientific experiments,
though different from them. We, too, think that "a tree is known by its
fruits,"[1302] and that fertility is the best proof of what the roots
are worth. But from the fact that a "religious experience," if we choose
to call it this, does exist and that it has a certain foundation--and,
by the way, is there any experience which has none?--it does not follow
that the reality which is its foundation conforms objectively to the
idea which believers have of it. The very fact that the fashion in which
it has been conceived has varied infinitely in different times is enough
to prove that none of these conceptions express it adequately. If a
scientist states it as an axiom that the sensations of heat and light
which we feel correspond to some objective cause, he does not conclude
that this is what it appears to the senses to be. Likewise, even if the
impressions which the faithful feel are not imaginary, still they are in
no way privileged intuitions; there is no reason for believing that they
inform us better upon the nature of their object than do ordinary
sensations upon the nature of bodies and their properties. In order to
discover what this object consists of, we must submit them to an
examination and elaboration analogous to that which has substituted for
the sensuous idea of the world another which is scientific and
conceptual.

This is precisely what we have tried to do, and we have seen that this
reality, which mythologies have represented under so many different
forms, but which is the universal and eternal objective cause of these
sensations _sui generis_ out of which religious experience is made, is
society. We have shown what moral forces it develops and how it awakens
this sentiment of a refuge, of a shield and of a guardian support which
attaches the believer to his cult. It is that which raises him outside
himself; it is even that which made him. For that which makes a man is
the totality of the intellectual property which constitutes
civilization, and civilization is the work of society. Thus is explained
the preponderating rôle of the cult in all religions, whichever they may
be. This is because society cannot make its influence felt unless it is
in action, and it is not in action unless the individuals who compose it
are assembled together and act in common. It is by common action that it
takes consciousness of itself and realizes its position; it is before
all else an active co-operation. The collective ideas and sentiments are
even possible only owing to these exterior movements which symbolize
them, as we have established.[1303] Then it is action which dominates
the religious life, because of the mere fact that it is society which is
its source.

In addition to all the reasons which have been given to justify this
conception, a final one may be added here, which is the result of our
whole work. As we have progressed, we have established the fact that the
fundamental categories of thought, and consequently of science, are of
religious origin. We have seen that the same is true for magic and
consequently for the different processes which have issued from it. On
the other hand, it has long been known that up until a relatively
advanced moment of evolution, moral and legal rules have been
indistinguishable from ritual prescriptions. In summing up, then, it may
be said that nearly all the great social institutions have been born in
religion.[1304] Now in order that these principal aspects of the
collective life may have commenced by being only varied aspects of the
religious life, it is obviously necessary that the religious life be the
eminent form and, as it were, the concentrated expression of the whole
collective life. If religion has given birth to all that is essential in
society, it is because the idea of society is the soul of religion.

Religious forces are therefore human forces, moral forces. It is true
that since collective sentiments can become conscious of themselves only
by fixing themselves upon external objects, they have not been able to
take form without adopting some of their characteristics from other
things: they have thus acquired a sort of physical nature; in this way
they have come to mix themselves with the life of the material world,
and then have considered themselves capable of explaining what passes
there. But when they are considered only from this point of view and in
this rôle, only their most superficial aspect is seen. In reality, the
essential elements of which these collective sentiments are made have
been borrowed by the understanding. It ordinarily seems that they should
have a human character only when they are conceived under human
forms;[1305] but even the most impersonal and the most anonymous are
nothing else than objectified sentiments.

It is only by regarding religion from this angle that it is possible to
see its real significance. If we stick closely to appearances, rites
often give the effect of purely manual operations: they are anointings,
washings, meals. To consecrate something, it is put in contact with a
source of religious energy, just as to-day a body is put in contact with
a source of heat or electricity to warm or electrize it; the two
processes employed are not essentially different. Thus understood,
religious technique seems to be a sort of mystic mechanics. But these
material man[oe]uvres are only the external envelope under which the
mental operations are hidden. Finally, there is no question of
exercising a physical constraint upon blind and, incidentally, imaginary
forces, but rather of reaching individual consciousnesses, of giving
them a direction and of disciplining them. It is sometimes said that
inferior religions are materialistic. Such an expression is inexact. All
religions, even the crudest, are in a sense spiritualistic: for the
powers they put in play are before all spiritual, and also their
principal object is to act upon the moral life. Thus it is seen that
whatever has been done in the name of religion cannot have been done in
vain: for it is necessarily the society that did it, and it is humanity
that has reaped the fruits.


But, it is said, what society is it that has thus made the basis of
religion? Is it the real society, such as it is and acts before our very
eyes, with the legal and moral organization which it has laboriously
fashioned during the course of history? This is full of defects and
imperfections. In it, evil goes beside the good, injustice often reigns
supreme, and the truth is often obscured by error. How could anything so
crudely organized inspire the sentiments of love, the ardent enthusiasm
and the spirit of abnegation which all religions claim of their
followers? These perfect beings which are gods could not have taken
their traits from so mediocre, and sometimes even so base a reality.

But, on the other hand, does someone think of a perfect society, where
justice and truth would be sovereign, and from which evil in all its
forms would be banished for ever? No one would deny that this is in
close relations with the religious sentiment; for, they would say, it is
towards the realization of this that all religions strive. But that
society is not an empirical fact, definite and observable; it is a
fancy, a dream with which men have lightened their sufferings, but in
which they have never really lived. It is merely an idea which comes to
express our more or less obscure aspirations towards the good, the
beautiful and the ideal. Now these aspirations have their roots in us;
they come from the very depths of our being; then there is nothing
outside of us which can account for them. Moreover, they are already
religious in themselves; thus it would seem that the ideal society
presupposes religion, far from being able to explain it.[1306]

But, in the first place, things are arbitrarily simplified when religion
is seen only on its idealistic side: in its way, it is realistic. There
is no physical or moral ugliness, there are no vices or evils which do
not have a special divinity. There are gods of theft and trickery, of
lust and war, of sickness and of death. Christianity itself, howsoever
high the idea which it has made of the divinity may be, has been obliged
to give the spirit of evil a place in its mythology. Satan is an
essential piece of the Christian system; even if he is an impure being,
he is not a profane one. The anti-god, is a god, inferior and
subordinated, it is true, but nevertheless endowed with extended
powers; he is even the object of rites, at least of negative ones. Thus
religion, far from ignoring the real society and making abstraction of
it, is in its image; it reflects all its aspects, even the most vulgar
and the most repulsive. All is to be found there, and if in the majority
of cases we see the good victorious over evil, life over death, the
powers of light over the powers of darkness, it is because reality is
not otherwise. If the relation between these two contrary forces were
reversed, life would be impossible; but, as a matter of fact, it
maintains itself and even tends to develop.

But if, in the midst of these mythologies and theologies we see reality
clearly appearing, it is none the less true that it is found there only
in an enlarged, transformed and idealized form. In this respect, the
most primitive religions do not differ from the most recent and the most
refined. For example, we have seen how the Arunta place at the beginning
of time a mythical society whose organization exactly reproduces that
which still exists to-day; it includes the same clans and phratries, it
is under the same matrimonial rules and it practises the same rites. But
the personages who compose it are ideal beings, gifted with powers and
virtues to which common mortals cannot pretend. Their nature is not only
higher, but it is different, since it is at once animal and human. The
evil powers there undergo a similar metamorphosis: evil itself is, as it
were, made sublime and idealized. The question now raises itself of
whence this idealization comes.

Some reply that men have a natural faculty for idealizing, that is to
say, of substituting for the real world another different one, to which
they transport themselves by thought. But that is merely changing the
terms of the problem; it is not resolving it or even advancing it. This
systematic idealization is an essential characteristic of religions.
Explaining them by an innate power of idealization is simply replacing
one word by another which is the equivalent of the first; it is as if
they said that men have made religions because they have a religious
nature. Animals know only one world, the one which they perceive by
experience, internal as well as external. Men alone have the faculty of
conceiving the ideal, of adding something to the real. Now where does
this singular privilege come from? Before making it an initial fact or a
mysterious virtue which escapes science, we must be sure that it does
not depend upon empirically determinable conditions.

The explanation of religion which we have proposed has precisely this
advantage, that it gives an answer to this question. For our definition
of the sacred is that it is something added to and above the real: now
the ideal answers to this same definition; we cannot explain one without
explaining the other. In fact, we have seen that if collective life
awakens religious thought on reaching a certain degree of intensity, it
is because it brings about a state of effervescence which changes the
conditions of psychic activity. Vital energies are over-excited,
passions more active, sensations stronger; there are even some which are
produced only at this moment. A man does not recognize himself; he feels
himself transformed and consequently he transforms the environment which
surrounds him. In order to account for the very particular impressions
which he receives, he attributes to the things with which he is in most
direct contact properties which they have not, exceptional powers and
virtues which the objects of every-day experience do not possess. In a
word, above the real world where his profane life passes he has placed
another which, in one sense, does not exist except in thought, but to
which he attributes a higher sort of dignity than to the first. Thus,
from a double point of view it is an ideal world.

The formation of the ideal world is therefore not an irreducible fact
which escapes science; it depends upon conditions which observation can
touch; it is a natural product of social life. For a society to become
conscious of itself and maintain at the necessary degree of intensity
the sentiments which it thus attains, it must assemble and concentrate
itself. Now this concentration brings about an exaltation of the mental
life which takes form in a group of ideal conceptions where is portrayed
the new life thus awakened; they correspond to this new set of psychical
forces which is added to those which we have at our disposition for the
daily tasks of existence. A society can neither create itself nor
recreate itself without at the same time creating an ideal. This
creation is not a sort of work of supererogation for it, by which it
would complete itself, being already formed; it is the act by which it
is periodically made and remade. Therefore when some oppose the ideal
society to the real society, like two antagonists which would lead us in
opposite directions, they materialize and oppose abstractions. The ideal
society is not outside of the real society; it is a part of it. Far from
being divided between them as between two poles which mutually repel
each other, we cannot hold to one without holding to the other. For a
society is not made up merely of the mass of individuals who compose it,
the ground which they occupy, the things which they use and the
movements which they perform, but above all is the idea which it forms
of itself. It is undoubtedly true that it hesitates over the manner in
which it ought to conceive itself; it feels itself drawn in divergent
directions. But these conflicts which break forth are not between the
ideal and reality, but between two different ideals, that of yesterday
and that of to-day, that which has the authority of tradition and that
which has the hope of the future. There is surely a place for
investigating whence these ideals evolve; but whatever solution may be
given to this problem, it still remains that all passes in the world of
the ideal.

Thus the collective ideal which religion expresses is far from being due
to a vague innate power of the individual, but it is rather at the
school of collective life that the individual has learned to idealize.
It is in assimilating the ideals elaborated by society that he has
become capable of conceiving the ideal. It is society which, by leading
him within its sphere of action, has made him acquire the need of
raising himself above the world of experience and has at the same time
furnished him with the means of conceiving another. For society has
constructed this new world in constructing itself, since it is society
which this expresses. Thus both with the individual and in the group,
the faculty of idealizing has nothing mysterious about it. It is not a
sort of luxury which a man could get along without, but a condition of
his very existence. He could not be a social being, that is to say, he
could not be a man, if he had not acquired it. It is true that in
incarnating themselves in individuals, collective ideals tend to
individualize themselves. Each understands them after his own fashion
and marks them with his own stamp; he suppresses certain elements and
adds others. Thus the personal ideal disengages itself from the social
ideal in proportion as the individual personality develops itself and
becomes an autonomous source of action. But if we wish to understand
this aptitude, so singular in appearance, of living outside of reality,
it is enough to connect it with the social conditions upon which it
depends.

Therefore it is necessary to avoid seeing in this theory of religion a
simple restatement of historical materialism: that would be
misunderstanding our thought to an extreme degree. In showing that
religion is something essentially social, we do not mean to say that it
confines itself to translating into another language the material forms
of society and its immediate vital necessities. It is true that we take
it as evident that social life depends upon its material foundation and
bears its mark, just as the mental life of an individual depends upon
his nervous system and in fact his whole organism. But collective
consciousness is something more than a mere epiphenomenon of its
morphological basis, just as individual consciousness is something more
than a simple efflorescence of the nervous system. In order that the
former may appear, a synthesis _sui generis_ of particular
consciousnesses is required. Now this synthesis has the effect of
disengaging a whole world of sentiments, ideas and images which, once
born, obey laws all their own. They attract each other, repel each
other, unite, divide themselves, and multiply, though these combinations
are not commanded and necessitated by the condition of the underlying
reality. The life thus brought into being even enjoys so great an
independence that it sometimes indulges in manifestations with no
purpose or utility of any sort, for the mere pleasure of affirming
itself. We have shown that this is often precisely the case with ritual
activity and mythological thought.[1307]


But if religion is the product of social causes, how can we explain the
individual cult and the universalistic character of certain religions?
If it is born _in foro externo_, how has it been able to pass into the
inner conscience of the individual and penetrate there ever more and
more profoundly? If it is the work of definite and individualized
societies, how has it been able to detach itself from them, even to the
point of being conceived as something common to all humanity?

In the course of our studies, we have met with the germs of individual
religion and of religious cosmopolitanism, and we have seen how they
were formed; thus we possess the more general elements of the reply
which is to be given to this double question.

We have shown how the religious force which animates the clan
particularizes itself, by incarnating itself in particular
consciousnesses. Thus secondary sacred beings are formed; each
individual has his own, made in his own image, associated to his own
intimate life, bound up with his own destiny; it is the soul, the
individual totem, the protecting ancestor, etc. These beings are the
object of rites which the individual can celebrate by himself, outside
of any group; this is the first form of the individual cult. To be sure,
it is only a very rudimentary cult; but since the personality of the
individual is still only slightly marked, and but little value is
attributed to it, the cult which expresses it could hardly be expected
to be very highly developed as yet. But as individuals have
differentiated themselves more and more and the value of an individual
has increased, the corresponding cult has taken a relatively greater
place in the totality of the religious life and at the same time it is
more fully closed to outside influences.

Thus the existence of individual cults implies nothing which contradicts
or embarrasses the sociological interpretation of religion; for the
religious forces to which it addresses itself are only the
individualized forms of collective forces. Therefore, even when religion
seems to be entirely within the individual conscience, it is still in
society that it finds the living source from which it is nourished. We
are now able to appreciate the value of the radical individualism which
would make religion something purely individual: it misunderstands the
fundamental conditions of the religious life. If up to the present it
has remained in the stage of theoretical aspirations which have never
been realized, it is because it is unrealizable. A philosophy may well
be elaborated in the silence of the interior imagination, but not so a
faith. For before all else, a faith is warmth, life, enthusiasm, the
exaltation of the whole mental life, the raising of the individual above
himself. Now how could he add to the energies which he possesses without
going outside himself? How could he surpass himself merely by his own
forces? The only source of life at which we can morally reanimate
ourselves is that formed by the society of our fellow beings; the only
moral forces with which we can sustain and increase our own are those
which we get from others. Let us even admit that there really are beings
more or less analogous to those which the mythologies represent. In
order that they may exercise over souls the useful direction which is
their reason for existence, it is necessary that men believe in them.
Now these beliefs are active only when they are partaken by many. A man
cannot retain them any length of time by a purely personal effort; it is
not thus that they are born or that they are acquired; it is even
doubtful if they can be kept under these conditions. In fact, a man who
has a veritable faith feels an invincible need of spreading it:
therefore he leaves his isolation, approaches others and seeks to
convince them, and it is the ardour of the convictions which he arouses
that strengthens his own. It would quickly weaken if it remained alone.

It is the same with religious universalism as with this individualism.
Far from being an exclusive attribute of certain very great religions,
we have found it, not at the base, it is true, but at the summit of the
Australian system. Bunjil, Daramulun or Baiame are not simple tribal
gods; each of them is recognized by a number of different tribes. In a
sense, their cult is international. This conception is therefore very
near to that found in the most recent theologies. So certain writers
have felt it their duty to deny its authenticity, howsoever
incontestable this may be.

And we have been able to show how this has been formed.

Neighbouring tribes of a similar civilization cannot fail to be in
constant relations with each other. All sorts of circumstances give an
occasion for it: besides commerce, which is still rudimentary, there are
marriages; these international marriages are very common in Australia.
In the course of these meetings, men naturally become conscious of the
moral relationship which united them. They have the same social
organization, the same division into phratries, clans and matrimonial
classes; they practise the same rites of initiation, or wholly similar
ones. Mutual loans and treaties result in reinforcing these spontaneous
resemblances. The gods to which these manifestly identical institutions
were attached could hardly have remained distinct in their minds.
Everything tended to bring them together and consequently, even
supposing that each tribe elaborated the notion independently, they must
necessarily have tended to confound themselves with each other. Also, it
is probable that it was in inter-tribal assemblies that they were first
conceived. For they are chiefly the gods of initiation, and in the
initiation ceremonies, the different tribes are usually represented. So
if sacred beings are formed which are connected with no geographically
determined society, that is not because they have an extra-social
origin. It is because there are other groups above these geographically
determined ones, whose contours are less clearly marked: they have no
fixed frontiers, but include all sorts of more or less neighbouring and
related tribes. The particular social life thus created tends to spread
itself over an area with no definite limits. Naturally the mythological
personages who correspond to it have the same character; their sphere of
influence is not limited; they go beyond the particular tribes and their
territory. They are the great international gods.

Now there is nothing in this situation which is peculiar to Australian
societies. There is no people and no state which is not a part of
another society, more or less unlimited, which embraces all the peoples
and all the States with which the first comes in contact, either
directly or indirectly; there is no national life which is not dominated
by a collective life of an international nature. In proportion as we
advance in history, these international groups acquire a greater
importance and extent. Thus we see how, in certain cases, this
universalistic tendency has been able to develop itself to the point of
affecting not only the higher ideas of the religious system, but even
the principles upon which it rests.


II

Thus there is something eternal in religion which is destined to survive
all the particular symbols in which religious thought has successively
enveloped itself. There can be no society which does not feel the need
of upholding and reaffirming at regular intervals the collective
sentiments and the collective ideas which make its unity and its
personality. Now this moral remaking cannot be achieved except by the
means of reunions, assemblies and meetings where the individuals, being
closely united to one another, reaffirm in common their common
sentiments; hence come ceremonies which do not differ from regular
religious ceremonies, either in their object, the results which they
produce, or the processes employed to attain these results. What
essential difference is there between an assembly of Christians
celebrating the principal dates of the life of Christ, or of Jews
remembering the exodus from Egypt or the promulgation of the decalogue,
and a reunion of citizens commemorating the promulgation of a new moral
or legal system or some great event in the national life?

If we find a little difficulty to-day in imagining what these feasts and
ceremonies of the future could consist in, it is because we are going
through a stage of transition and moral mediocrity. The great things of
the past which filled our fathers with enthusiasm do not excite the same
ardour in us, either because they have come into common usage to such an
extent that we are unconscious of them, or else because they no longer
answer to our actual aspirations; but as yet there is nothing to replace
them. We can no longer impassionate ourselves for the principles in the
name of which Christianity recommended to masters that they treat their
slaves humanely, and, on the other hand, the idea which it has formed of
human equality and fraternity seems to us to-day to leave too large a
place for unjust inequalities. Its pity for the outcast seems to us too
Platonic; we desire another which would be more practicable; but as yet
we cannot clearly see what it should be nor how it could be realized in
facts. In a word, the old gods are growing old or already dead, and
others are not yet born. This is what rendered vain the attempt of Comte
with the old historic souvenirs artificially revived; it is life itself,
and not a dead past which can produce a living cult. But this state of
incertitude and confused agitation cannot last for ever. A day will come
when our societies will know again those hours of creative
effervescence, in the course of which new ideas arise and new formulæ
are found which serve for a while as a guide to humanity; and when these
hours shall have been passed through once, men will spontaneously feel
the need of reliving them from time to time in thought, that is to say,
of keeping alive their memory by means of celebrations which regularly
reproduce their fruits. We have already seen how the French Revolution
established a whole cycle of holidays to keep the principles with which
it was inspired in a state of perpetual youth. If this institution
quickly fell away, it was because the revolutionary faith lasted but a
moment, and deceptions and discouragements rapidly succeeded the first
moments of enthusiasm. But though the work may have miscarried, it
enables us to imagine what might have happened in other conditions; and
everything leads us to believe that it will be taken up again sooner or
later. There are no gospels which are immortal, but neither is there any
reason for believing that humanity is incapable of inventing new ones.
As to the question of what symbols this new faith will express itself
with, whether they will resemble those of the past or not, and whether
or not they will be more adequate for the reality which they seek to
translate, that is something which surpasses the human faculty of
foresight and which does not appertain to the principal question.

But feasts and rites, in a word, the cult, are not the whole religion.
This is not merely a system of practices, but also a system of ideas
whose object is to explain the world; we have seen that even the
humblest have their cosmology. Whatever connection there may be between
these two elements of the religious life, they are still quite
different. The one is turned towards action, which it demands and
regulates; the other is turned towards thought, which it enriches and
organizes. Then they do not depend upon the same conditions, and
consequently it may be asked if the second answers to necessities as
universal and as permanent as the first.

When specific characteristics are attributed to religious thought, and
when it is believed that its function is to express, by means peculiar
to itself, an aspect of reality which evades ordinary knowledge as well
as science, one naturally refuses to admit that religion can ever
abandon its speculative rôle. But our analysis of the facts does not
seem to have shown this specific quality of religion. The religion which
we have just studied is one of those whose symbols are the most
disconcerting for the reason. There all appears mysterious. These beings
which belong to the most heterogeneous groups at the same time, who
multiply without ceasing to be one, who divide without diminishing, all
seem, at first view, to belong to an entirely different world from the
one where we live; some have even gone so far as to say that the mind
which constructed them ignored the laws of logic completely. Perhaps the
contrast between reason and faith has never been more thorough. Then if
there has ever been a moment in history when their heterogeneousness
should have stood out clearly, it is here. But contrary to all
appearances, as we have pointed out, the realities to which religious
speculation is then applied are the same as those which later serve as
the subject of reflection for philosophers: they are nature, man,
society. The mystery which appears to surround them is wholly
superficial and disappears before a more painstaking observation: it is
enough merely to set aside the veil with which mythological imagination
has covered them for them to appear such as they really are. Religion
sets itself to translate these realities into an intelligible language
which does not differ in nature from that employed by science; the
attempt is made by both to connect things with each other, to establish
internal relations between them, to classify them and to systematize
them. We have even seen that the essential ideas of scientific logic are
of religious origin. It is true that in order to utilize them, science
gives them a new elaboration; it purges them of all accidental elements;
in a general way, it brings a spirit of criticism into all its doings,
which religion ignores; it surrounds itself with precautions to "escape
precipitation and bias," and to hold aside the passions, prejudices and
all subjective influences. But these perfectionings of method are not
enough to differentiate it from religion. In this regard, both pursue
the same end; scientific thought is only a more perfect form of
religious thought. Thus it seems natural that the second should
progressively retire before the first, as this becomes better fitted to
perform the task.

And there is no doubt that this regression has taken place in the course
of history. Having left religion, science tends to substitute itself for
this latter in all that which concerns the cognitive and intellectual
functions. Christianity has already definitely consecrated this
substitution in the order of material things. Seeing in matter that
which is profane before all else, it readily left the knowledge of this
to another discipline, _tradidit mundum hominum disputationi_, "He gave
the world over to the disputes of men"; it is thus that the natural
sciences have been able to establish themselves and make their authority
recognized without very great difficulty. But it could not give up the
world of souls so easily; for it is before all over souls that the god
of the Christians aspires to reign. That is why the idea of submitting
the psychic life to science produced the effect of a sort of profanation
for a long time; even to-day it is repugnant to many minds. However,
experimental and comparative psychology is founded and to-day we must
reckon with it. But the world of the religious and moral life is still
forbidden. The great majority of men continue to believe that here there
is an order of things which the mind cannot penetrate except by very
special ways. Hence comes the active resistance which is met with every
time that someone tries to treat religious and moral phenomena
scientifically. But in spite of these oppositions, these attempts are
constantly repeated and this persistence even allows us to foresee that
this final barrier will finally give way and that science will establish
herself as mistress even in this reserved region.

That is what the conflict between science and religion really amounts
to. It is said that science denies religion in principle. But religion
exists; it is a system of given facts; in a word, it is a reality. How
could science deny this reality? Also, in so far as religion is action,
and in so far as it is a means of making men live, science could not
take its place, for even if this expresses life, it does not create it;
it may well seek to explain the faith, but by that very act it
presupposes it. Thus there is no conflict except upon one limited point.
Of the two functions which religion originally fulfilled, there is one,
and only one, which tends to escape it more and more: that is its
speculative function. That which science refuses to grant to religion is
not its right to exist, but its right to dogmatize upon the nature of
things and the special competence which it claims for itself for knowing
man and the world. As a matter of fact, it does not know itself. It does
not even know what it is made of, nor to what need it answers. It is
itself a subject for science, so far is it from being able to make the
law for science! And from another point of view, since there is no
proper subject for religious speculation outside that reality to which
scientific reflection is applied, it is evident that this former cannot
play the same rôle in the future that it has played in the past.

However, it seems destined to transform itself rather than to disappear.

We have said that there is something eternal in religion: it is the cult
and the faith. Men cannot celebrate ceremonies for which they see no
reason, nor can they accept a faith which they in no way understand. To
spread itself or merely to maintain itself, it must be justified, that
is to say, a theory must be made of it. A theory of this sort must
undoubtedly be founded upon the different sciences, from the moment
when these exist; first of all, upon the social sciences, for religious
faith has its origin in society; then upon psychology, for society is a
synthesis of human consciousnesses; and finally upon the sciences of
nature, for man and society are a part of the universe and can be
abstracted from it only artificially. But howsoever important these
facts taken from the constituted sciences may be, they are not enough;
for faith is before all else an impetus to action, while science, no
matter how far it may be pushed, always remains at a distance from this.
Science is fragmentary and incomplete; it advances but slowly and is
never finished; but life cannot wait. The theories which are destined to
make men live and act are therefore obliged to pass science and complete
it prematurely. They are possible only when the practical exigencies and
the vital necessities which we feel without distinctly conceiving them
push thought in advance, beyond that which science permits us to affirm.
Thus religions, even the most rational and laicized, cannot and never
will be able to dispense with a particular form of speculation which,
though having the same subjects as science itself, cannot be really
scientific: the obscure intuitions of sensation and sentiment too often
take the place of logical reasons. On one side, this speculation
resembles that which we meet with in the religions of the past; but on
another, it is different. While claiming and exercising the right of
going beyond science, it must commence by knowing this and by inspiring
itself with it. Ever since the authority of science was established, it
must be reckoned with; one can go farther than it under the pressure of
necessity, but he must take his direction from it. He can affirm nothing
that it denies, deny nothing that it affirms, and establish nothing that
is not directly or indirectly founded upon principles taken from it.
From now on, the faith no longer exercises the same hegemony as formerly
over the system of ideas that we may continue to call religion. A rival
power rises up before it which, being born of it, ever after submits it
to its criticism and control. And everything makes us foresee that this
control will constantly become more extended and efficient, while no
limit can be assigned to its future influence.


III

But if the fundamental notions of science are of a religious origin, how
has religion been able to bring them forth? At first sight, one does not
see what relations there can be between religion and logic. Or, since
the reality which religious thought expresses is society, the question
can be stated in the following terms, which make the entire difficulty
appear even better: what has been able to make social life so important
a source for the logical life? It seems as though nothing could have
predestined it to this rôle, for it certainly was not to satisfy their
speculative needs that men associated themselves together.

Perhaps we shall be found over bold in attempting so complex a question
here. To treat it as it should be treated, the sociological conditions
of knowledge should be known much better than they actually are; we are
only beginning to catch glimpses of some of them. However, the question
is so grave, and so directly implied in all that has preceded, that we
must make an effort not to leave it without an answer. Perhaps it is not
impossible, even at present, to state some general principles which may
at least aid in the solution.

Logical thought is made up of concepts. Seeking how society can have
played a rôle in the genesis of logical thought thus reduces itself to
seeking how it can have taken a part in the formation of concepts.

If, as is ordinarily the case, we see in the concept only a general
idea, the problem appears insoluble. By his own power, the individual
can compare his conceptions and images, disengage that which they have
in common, and thus, in a word, generalize. Then it is hard to see why
this generalization should be possible only in and through society. But,
in the first place, it is inadmissible that logical thought is
characterized only by the greater extension of the conceptions of which
it is made up. If particular ideas have nothing logical about them, why
should it be different with general ones? The general exists only in the
particular; it is the particular simplified and impoverished. Then the
first could have no virtues or privileges which the second has not.
Inversely, if conceptual thought can be applied to the class, species or
variety, howsoever restricted these may be, why can it not be extended
to the individual, that is to say, to the limit towards which the
conception tends, proportionately as its extension diminishes? As a
matter of fact, there are many concepts which have only individuals as
their object. In every sort of religion, gods are individualities
distinct from each other; however, they are conceived, not perceived.
Each people represents its historic or legendary heroes in fashions
which vary with the time. Finally, every one of us forms an idea of the
individuals with whom he comes in contact, of their character, of their
appearance, their distinctive traits and their moral and physical
temperaments: these notions, too, are real concepts. It is true that in
general they are formed crudely enough; but even among scientific
concepts, are there a great many that are perfectly adequate for their
object? In this direction, there are only differences of degree between
them.

Therefore the concept must be defined by other characteristics. It is
opposed to sensual representations of every order--sensations,
perceptions or images--by the following properties.

Sensual representations are in a perpetual flux; they come after each
other like the waves of a river, and even during the time that they
last, they do not remain the same thing. Each of them is an integral
part of the precise instant when it takes place. We are never sure of
again finding a perception such as we experienced it the first time; for
if the thing perceived has not changed, it is we who are no longer the
same. On the contrary, the concept is, as it were, outside of time and
change; it is in the depths below all this agitation; it might be said
that it is in a different portion of the mind, which is serener and
calmer. It does not move of itself, by an internal and spontaneous
evolution, but, on the contrary, it resists change. It is a manner of
thinking that, at every moment of time, is fixed and crystallized.[1308]
In so far as it is what it ought to be, it is immutable. If it changes,
it is not because it is its nature to do so, but because we have
discovered some imperfection in it; it is because it had to be
rectified. The system of concepts with which we think in everyday life
is that expressed by the vocabulary of our mother tongue; for every word
translates a concept. Now language is something fixed; it changes but
very slowly, and consequently it is the same with the conceptual system
which it expresses. The scholar finds himself in the same situation in
regard to the special terminology employed by the science to which he
has consecrated himself, and hence in regard to the special scheme of
concepts to which this terminology corresponds. It is true that he can
make innovations, but these are always a sort of violence done to the
established ways of thinking.

And at the same time that it is relatively immutable, the concept is
universal, or at least capable of becoming so. A concept is not my
concept; I hold it in common with other men, or, in any case, can
communicate it to them. It is impossible for me to make a sensation pass
from my consciousness into that of another; it holds closely to my
organism and personality and cannot be detached from them. All that I
can do is to invite others to place themselves before the same object as
myself and to leave themselves to its action. On the other hand,
conversation and all intellectual communication between men is an
exchange of concepts. The concept is an essentially impersonal
representation; it is through it that human intelligences
communicate.[1309]

The nature of the concept, thus defined, bespeaks its origin. If it is
common to all, it is the work of the community. Since it bears the mark
of no particular mind, it is clear that it was elaborated by a unique
intelligence, where all others meet each other, and after a fashion,
come to nourish themselves. If it has more stability than sensations or
images, it is because the collective representations are more stable
than the individual ones; for while an individual is conscious even of
the slight changes which take place in his environment, only events of a
greater gravity can succeed in affecting the mental status of a society.
Every time that we are in the presence of a _type_[1310] of thought or
action which is imposed uniformly upon particular wills or
intelligences, this pressure exercised over the individual betrays the
intervention of the group. Also, as we have already said, the concepts
with which we ordinarily think are those of our vocabulary. Now it is
unquestionable that language, and consequently the system of concepts
which it translates, is the product of a collective elaboration. What it
expresses is the manner in which society as a whole represents the facts
of experience. The ideas which correspond to the diverse elements of
language are thus collective representations.

Even their contents bear witness to the same fact. In fact, there are
scarcely any words among those which we usually employ whose meaning
does not pass, to a greater or less extent, the limits of our personal
experience. Very frequently a term expresses things which we have never
perceived or experiences which we have never had or of which we have
never been the witnesses. Even when we know some of the objects which it
concerns, it is only as particular examples that they serve to
illustrate the idea which they would never have been able to form by
themselves. Thus there is a great deal of knowledge condensed in the
word which I never collected, and which is not individual; it even
surpasses me to such an extent that I cannot even completely appropriate
all its results. Which of us knows all the words of the language he
speaks and the entire signification of each?

This remark enables us to determine the sense in which we mean to say
that concepts are collective representations. If they belong to a whole
social group, it is not because they represent the average of the
corresponding individual representations; for in that case they would be
poorer than the latter in intellectual content, while, as a matter of
fact, they contain much that surpasses the knowledge of the average
individual. They are not abstractions which have a reality only in
particular consciousnesses, but they are as concrete representations as
an individual could form of his own personal environment: they
correspond to the way in which this very special being, society,
considers the things of its own proper experience. If, as a matter of
fact, the concepts are nearly always general ideas, and if they express
categories and classes rather than particular objects, it is because the
unique and variable characteristics of things interest society but
rarely; because of its very extent, it can scarcely be affected by more
than their general and permanent qualities. Therefore it is to this
aspect of affairs that it gives its attention: it is a part of its
nature to see things in large and under the aspect which they ordinarily
have. But this generality is not necessary for them, and, in any case,
even when these representations have the generic character which they
ordinarily have, they are the work of society and are enriched by its
experience.

That is what makes conceptual thought so valuable for us. If concepts
were only general ideas, they would not enrich knowledge a great deal,
for, as we have already pointed out, the general contains nothing more
than the particular. But if before all else they are collective
representations, they add to that which we can learn by our own personal
experience all that wisdom and science which the group has accumulated
in the course of centuries. Thinking by concepts, is not merely seeing
reality on its most general side, but it is projecting a light upon the
sensation which illuminates it, penetrates it and transforms it.
Conceiving something is both learning its essential elements better and
also locating it in its place; for each civilization has its organized
system of concepts which characterizes it. Before this scheme of ideas,
the individual is in the same situation as the [Greek: noûs] of Plato
before the world of Ideas. He must assimilate them to himself, for he
must have them to hold intercourse with others; but the assimilation is
always imperfect. Each of us sees them after his own fashion. There are
some which escape us completely and remain outside of our circle of
vision; there are others of which we perceive certain aspects only.
There are even a great many which we pervert in holding, for as they are
collective by nature, they cannot become individualized without being
retouched, modified, and consequently falsified. Hence comes the great
trouble we have in understanding each other, and the fact that we even
lie to each other without wishing to: it is because we all use the same
words without giving them the same meaning.

We are now able to see what the part of society in the genesis of
logical thought is. This is possible only from the moment when, above
the fugitive conceptions which they owe to sensuous experience, men have
succeeded in conceiving a whole world of stable ideas, the common ground
of all intelligences. In fact, logical thinking is always impersonal
thinking, and is also thought _sub species ætrnitatis_--as though for
all time. Impersonality and stability are the two characteristics of
truth. Now logical life evidently presupposes that men know, at least
confusedly, that there is such a thing as truth, distinct from sensuous
appearances. But how have they been able to arrive at this conception?
We generally talk as though it should have spontaneously presented
itself to them from the moment they opened their eyes upon the world.
However, there is nothing in immediate experience which could suggest
it; everything even contradicts it. Thus the child and the animal have
no suspicion of it. History shows that it has taken centuries for it to
disengage and establish itself. In our Western world, it was with the
great thinkers of Greece that it first became clearly conscious of
itself and of the consequences which it implies; when the discovery was
made, it caused an amazement which Plato has translated into magnificent
language. But if it is only at this epoch that the idea is expressed in
philosophic formulæ, it was necessarily pre-existent in the stage of an
obscure sentiment. Philosophers have sought to elucidate this sentiment,
but they have not succeeded. In order that they might reflect upon it
and analyse it, it was necessary that it be given them, and that they
seek to know whence it came, that is to say, in what experience it was
founded. This is in collective experience. It is under the form of
collective thought that impersonal thought is for the first time
revealed to humanity; we cannot see by what other way this revelation
could have been made. From the mere fact that society exists, there is
also, outside of the individual sensations and images, a whole system of
representations which enjoy marvellous properties. By means of them, men
understand each other and intelligences grasp each other. They have
within them a sort of force or moral ascendancy, in virtue of which they
impose themselves upon individual minds. Hence the individual at least
obscurely takes account of the fact that above his private ideas, there
is a world of absolute ideas according to which he must shape his own;
he catches a glimpse of a whole intellectual kingdom in which he
participates, but which is greater than he. This is the first intuition
of the realm of truth. From the moment when he first becomes conscious
of these higher ideas, he sets himself to scrutinizing their nature; he
asks whence these pre-eminent representations hold their prerogatives
and, in so far as he believes that he has discovered their causes, he
undertakes to put these causes into action for himself, in order that he
may draw from them by his own force the effects which they produce; that
is to say, he attributes to himself the right of making concepts. Thus
the faculty of conception has individualized itself. But to understand
its origins and function, it must be attached to the social conditions
upon which it depends.

It may be objected that we show the concept in one of its aspects only,
and that its unique rôle is not the assuring of a harmony among minds,
but also, and to a greater extent, their harmony with the nature of
things. It seems as though it had a reason for existence only on
condition of being true, that is to say, objective, and as though its
impersonality were only a consequence of its objectivity. It is in
regard to things, thought of as adequately as possible, that minds ought
to communicate. Nor do we deny that the evolution of concepts has been
partially in this direction. The concept which was first held as true
because it was collective tends to be no longer collective except on
condition of being held as true: we demand its credentials of it before
according it our confidence. But we must not lose sight of the fact that
even to-day the great majority of the concepts which we use are not
methodically constituted; we get them from language, that is to say,
from common experience, without submitting them to any criticism. The
scientifically elaborated and criticized concepts are always in the very
slight minority. Also, between them and those which draw all their
authority from the fact that they are collective, there are only
differences of degree. A collective representation presents guarantees
of objectivity by the fact that it is collective: for it is not without
sufficient reason that it has been able to generalize and maintain
itself with persistence. If it were out of accord with the nature of
things, it would never have been able to acquire an extended and
prolonged empire over intellects. At bottom, the confidence inspired by
scientific concepts is due to the fact that they can be methodically
controlled. But a collective representation is necessarily submitted to
a control that is repeated indefinitely; the men who accept it verify it
by their own experience. Therefore, it could not be wholly inadequate
for its subject. It is true that it may express this by means of
imperfect symbols; but scientific symbols themselves are never more than
approximative. It is precisely this principle which is at the basis of
the method which we follow in the study of religious phenomena: we take
it as an axiom that religious beliefs, howsoever strange their
appearance may be at times, contain a truth which must be
discovered.[1311]

On the other hand, it is not at all true that concepts, even when
constructed according to the rules of science, get their authority
uniquely from their objective value. It is not enough that they be true
to be believed. If they are not in harmony with the other beliefs and
opinions, or, in a word, with the mass of the other collective
representations, they will be denied; minds will be closed to them;
consequently it will be as though they did not exist. To-day it is
generally sufficient that they bear the stamp of science to receive a
sort of privileged credit, because we have faith in science. But this
faith does not differ essentially from religious faith. In the last
resort, the value which we attribute to science depends upon the idea
which we collectively form of its nature and rôle in life; that is as
much as to say that it expresses a state of public opinion. In all
social life, in fact, science rests upon opinion. It is undoubtedly true
that this opinion can be taken as the object of a study and a science
made of it; this is what sociology principally consists in. But the
science of opinion does not make opinions; it can only observe them and
make them more conscious of themselves. It is true that by this means it
can lead them to change, but science continues to be dependent upon
opinion at the very moment when it seems to be making its laws; for, as
we have already shown, it is from opinion that it holds the force
necessary to act upon opinion.[1312]

Saying that concepts express the manner in which society represents
things is also saying that conceptual thought is coeval with humanity
itself. We refuse to see in it the product of a more or less retarded
culture. A man who did not think with concepts would not be a man, for
he would not be a social being. If reduced to having only individual
perceptions, he would be indistinguishable from the beasts. If it has
been possible to sustain the contrary thesis, it is because concepts
have been defined by characteristics which are not essential to them.
They have been identified with general ideas[1313] and with clearly
limited and circumscribed general ideas.[1314] In these conditions it
has possibly seemed as though the inferior societies had no concepts
properly so called; for they have only rudimentary processes of
generalization and the ideas which they use are not generally very well
defined. But the greater part of our concepts are equally indetermined;
we force ourselves to define them only in discussions or when doing
careful work. We have also seen that conceiving is not generalizing.
Thinking conceptually is not simply isolating and grouping together the
common characteristics of a certain number of objects; it is relating
the variable to the permanent, the individual to the social. And since
logical thought commences with the concept, it follows that it has
always existed; there is no period in history when men have lived in a
chronic confusion and contradiction. To be sure, we cannot insist too
much upon the different characteristics which logic presents at
different periods in history; it develops like the societies themselves.
But howsoever real these differences may be, they should not cause us to
neglect the similarities, which are no less essential.


IV

We are now in a position to take up a final question which has already
been raised in our introduction[1315] and which has been taken as
understood in the remainder of this work. We have seen that at least
some of the categories are social things. The question is where they got
this character.

Undoubtedly it will be easily understood that since they are themselves
concepts, they are the work of the group. It can even be said that there
are no other concepts which present to an equal degree the signs by
which a collective representation is recognized. In fact, their
stability and impersonality are such that they have often passed as
being absolutely universal and immutable. Also, as they express the
fundamental conditions for an agreement between minds, it seems evident
that they have been elaborated by society.

But the problem concerning them is more complex, for they are social in
another sense and, as it were in the second degree. They not only come
from society, but the things which they express are of a social nature.
Not only is it society which has founded them, but their contents are
the different aspects of the social being: the category of class was at
first indistinct from the concept of the human group; it is the rhythm
of social life which is at the basis of the category of time; the
territory occupied by the society furnished the material for the
category of space; it is the collective force which was the prototype of
the concept of efficient force, an essential element in the category of
causality. However, the categories are not made to be applied only to
the social realm; they reach out to all reality. Then how is it that
they have taken from society the models upon which they have been
constructed?

It is because they are the pre-eminent concepts, which have a
preponderating part in our knowledge. In fact, the function of the
categories is to dominate and envelop all the other concepts: they are
permanent moulds for the mental life. Now for them to embrace such an
object, they must be founded upon a reality of equal amplitude.

Undoubtedly the relations which they express exist in an implicit way in
individual consciousnesses. The individual lives in time, and, as we
have said, he has a certain sense of temporal orientation. He is
situated at a determined point in space, and it has even been held, and
sustained with good reasons, that all sensations have something special
about them.[1316] He has a feeling of resemblances; similar
representations are brought together and the new representation formed
by their union has a sort of generic character. We also have the
sensation of a certain regularity in the order of the succession of
phenomena; even an animal is not incapable of this. However, all these
relations are strictly personal for the individual who recognizes them,
and consequently the notion of them which he may have can in no case go
beyond his own narrow horizon. The generic images which are formed in my
consciousness by the fusion of similar images represent only the objects
which I have perceived directly; there is nothing there which could give
me the idea of a class, that is to say, of a mould including the _whole_
group of all possible objects which satisfy the same condition. Also, it
would be necessary to have the idea of group in the first place, and the
mere observations of our interior life could never awaken that in us.
But, above all, there is no individual experience, howsoever extended
and prolonged it may be, which could give a suspicion of the existence
of a whole class which would embrace every single being, and to which
other classes are only co-ordinated or subordinated species. This idea
of _all_, which is at the basis of the classifications which we have
just cited, could not have come from the individual himself, who is only
a part in relation to the whole and who never attains more than an
infinitesimal fraction of reality. And yet there is perhaps no other
category of greater importance; for as the rôle of the categories is to
envelop all the other concepts, the category _par excellence_ would seem
to be this very concept of _totality_. The theorists of knowledge
ordinarily postulate it as if it came of itself, while it really
surpasses the contents of each individual consciousness taken alone to
an infinite degree.

For the same reasons, the space which I know by my senses, of which I am
the centre and where everything is disposed in relation to me, could not
be space in general, which contains all extensions and where these are
co-ordinated by personal guide-lines which are common to everybody. In
the same way, the concrete duration which I feel passing within me and
with me could not give me the idea of time in general: the first
expresses only the rhythm of my individual life; the second should
correspond to the rhythm of a life which is not that of any individual
in particular, but in which all participate.[1317] In the same way,
finally, the regularities which I am able to conceive in the manner in
which my sensations succeed one another may well have a value for me;
they explain how it comes about that when I am given the first of two
phenomena whose concurrence I have observed, I tend to expect the other.
But this personal state of expectation could not be confounded with the
conception of a universal order of succession which imposes itself upon
all minds and all events.

Since the world expressed by the entire system of concepts is the one
that society regards, society alone can furnish the most general notions
with which it should be represented. Such an object can be embraced only
by a subject which contains all the individual subjects within it. Since
the universe does not exist except in so far as it is thought of, and
since it is not completely thought of except by society, it takes a
place in this latter; it becomes a part of society's interior life,
while this is the totality, outside of which nothing exists. The concept
of totality is only the abstract form of the concept of society: it is
the whole which includes all things, the supreme class which embraces
all other classes. Such is the final principle upon which repose all
these primitive classifications where beings from every realm are placed
and classified in social forms, exactly like men.[1318] But if the world
is inside of society, the space which this latter occupies becomes
confounded with space in general. In fact, we have seen how each thing
has its assigned place in social space, and the degree to which this
space in general differs from the concrete expanses which we perceive is
well shown by the fact that this localization is wholly ideal and in no
way resembles what it would have been if it had been dictated to us by
sensuous experience alone.[1319] For the same reason, the rhythm of
collective life dominates and embraces the varied rhythms of all the
elementary lives from which it results; consequently the time which it
expresses dominates and embraces all particular durations. It is time in
general. For a long time the history of the world has been only another
aspect of the history of society. The one commences with the other; the
periods of the first are determined by the periods of the second. This
impersonal and total duration is measured, and the guide-lines in
relation to which it is divided and organized are fixed by the movements
of concentration or dispersion of society; or, more generally, the
periodical necessities for a collective renewal. If these critical
instants are generally attached to some material phenomenon, such as the
regular recurrence of such or such a star or the alternation of the
seasons, it is because objective signs are necessary to make this
essentially social organization intelligible to all. In the same way,
finally, the causal relation, from the moment when it is collectively
stated by the group, becomes independent of every individual
consciousness; it rises above all particular minds and events. It is a
law whose value depends upon no person. We have already shown how it is
clearly thus that it seems to have originated.

Another reason explains why the constituent elements of the categories
should have been taken from social life: it is because the relations
which they express could not have been learned except in and through
society. If they are in a sense immanent in the life of an individual,
he has neither a reason nor the means for learning them, reflecting upon
them and forming them into distinct ideas. In order to orient himself
personally in space and to know at what moments he should satisfy his
various organic needs, he has no need of making, once and for all, a
conceptual representation of time and space. Many animals are able to
find the road which leads to places with which they are familiar; they
come back at a proper moment without knowing any of the categories;
sensations are enough to direct them automatically. They would also be
enough for men, if their sensations had to satisfy only individual
needs. To recognize the fact that one thing resembles another which we
have already experienced, it is in no way necessary that we arrange them
all in groups and species: the way in which similar images call up each
other and unite is enough to give the feeling of resemblance. The
impression that a certain thing has already been seen or experienced
implies no classification. To recognize the things which we should seek
or from which we should flee, it would not be necessary to attach the
effects of the two to their causes by a logical bond, if individual
conveniences were the only ones in question. Purely empirical sequences
and strong connections between the concrete representations would be as
sure guides for the will. Not only is it true that the animal has no
others, but also our own personal conduct frequently supposes nothing
more. The prudent man is the one who has a very clear sensation of what
must be done, but which he would ordinarily be quite incapable of
stating as a general law.

It is a different matter with society. This is possible only when the
individuals and things which compose it are divided into certain groups,
that is to say, classified, and when these groups are classified in
relation to each other. Society supposes a self-conscious organization
which is nothing other than a classification. This organization of
society naturally extends itself to the place which this occupies. To
avoid all collisions, it is necessary that each particular group have a
determined portion of space assigned to it: in other terms, it is
necessary that space in general be divided, differentiated, arranged,
and that these divisions and arrangements be known to everybody. On the
other hand, every summons to a celebration, a hunt or a military
expedition implies fixed and established dates, and consequently that a
common time is agreed upon, which everybody conceives in the same
fashion. Finally, the co-operation of many persons with the same end in
view is possible only when they are in agreement as to the relation
which exists between this end and the means of attaining it, that is to
say, when the same causal relation is admitted by all the co-operators
in the enterprise. It is not surprising, therefore, that social time,
social space, social classes and causality should be the basis of the
corresponding categories, since it is under their social forms that
these different relations were first grasped with a certain clarity by
the human intellect.

In summing up, then, we must say that society is not at all the
illogical or a-logical, incoherent and fantastic being which it has too
often been considered. Quite on the contrary, the collective
consciousness is the highest form of the psychic life, since it is the
consciousness of the consciousnesses. Being placed outside of and above
individual and local contingencies, it sees things only in their
permanent and essential aspects, which it crystallizes into communicable
ideas. At the same time that it sees from above, it sees farther; at
every moment of time, it embraces all known reality; that is why it
alone can furnish the mind with the moulds which are applicable to the
totality of things and which make it possible to think of them. It does
not create these moulds artificially; it finds them within itself; it
does nothing but become conscious of them. They translate the ways of
being which are found in all the stages of reality but which appear in
their full clarity only at the summit, because the extreme complexity of
the psychic life which passes there necessitates a greater development
of consciousness. Attributing social origins to logical thought is not
debasing it or diminishing its value or reducing it to nothing more than
a system of artificial combinations; on the contrary, it is relating it
to a cause which implies it naturally. But this is not saying that the
ideas elaborated in this way are at once adequate for their object. If
society is something universal in relation to the individual, it is none
the less an individuality itself, which has its own personal physiognomy
and its idiosyncrasies; it is a particular subject and consequently
particularizes whatever it thinks of. Therefore collective
representations also contain subjective elements, and these must be
progressively rooted out, if we are to approach reality more closely.
But howsoever crude these may have been at the beginning, the fact
remains that with them the germ of a new mentality was given, to which
the individual could never have raised himself by his own efforts: by
them the way was opened to a stable, impersonal and organized thought
which then had nothing to do except to develop its nature.

Also, the causes which have determined this development do not seem to
be specifically different from those which gave it its initial impulse.
If logical thought tends to rid itself more and more of the subjective
and personal elements which it still retains from its origin, it is not
because extra-social factors have intervened; it is much rather because
a social life of a new sort is developing. It is this international life
which has already resulted in universalizing religious beliefs. As it
extends, the collective horizon enlarges; the society ceases to appear
as the only whole, to become a part of a much vaster one, with
indetermined frontiers, which is susceptible of advancing indefinitely.
Consequently things can no longer be contained in the social moulds
according to which they were primitively classified; they must be
organized according to principles which are their own, so logical
organization differentiates itself from the social organization and
becomes autonomous. Really and truly human thought is not a primitive
fact; it is the product of history; it is the ideal limit towards which
we are constantly approaching, but which in all probability we shall
never succeed in reaching.

Thus it is not at all true that between science on the one hand, and
morals and religion on the other, there exists that sort of antinomy
which has so frequently been admitted, for the two forms of human
activity really come from one and the same source. Kant understood this
very well, and therefore he made the speculative reason and the
practical reason two different aspects of the same faculty. According to
him, what makes their unity is the fact that the two are directed
towards the universal. Rational thinking is thinking according to the
laws which are imposed upon all reasonable beings; acting morally is
conducting one's self according to those maxims which can be extended
without contradiction to all wills. In other words, science and morals
imply that the individual is capable of raising himself above his own
peculiar point of view and of living an impersonal life. In fact, it
cannot be doubted that this is a trait common to all the higher forms of
thought and action. What Kant's system does not explain, however, is the
origin of this sort of contradiction which is realized in man. Why is he
forced to do violence to himself by leaving his individuality, and,
inversely, why is the impersonal law obliged to be dissipated by
incarnating itself in individuals? Is it answered that there are two
antagonistic worlds in which we participate equally, the world of matter
and sense on the one hand, and the world of pure and impersonal reason
on the other? That is merely repeating the question in slightly
different terms, for what we are trying to find out is why we must lead
these two existences at the same time. Why do these two worlds, which
seem to contradict each other, not remain outside of each other, and why
must they mutually penetrate one another in spite of their antagonism?
The only explanation which has ever been given of this singular
necessity is the hypothesis of the Fall, with all the difficulties which
it implies, and which need not be repeated here. On the other hand, all
mystery disappears the moment that it is recognized that impersonal
reason is only another name given to collective thought. For this is
possible only through a group of individuals; it supposes them, and in
their turn, they suppose it, for they can continue to exist only by
grouping themselves together. The kingdom of ends and impersonal truths
can realize itself only by the co-operation of particular wills, and the
reasons for which these participate in it are the same as those for
which they co-operate. In a word, there is something impersonal in us
because there is something social in all of us, and since social life
embraces at once both representations and practices, this impersonality
naturally extends to ideas as well as to acts.

Perhaps some will be surprised to see us connect the most elevated forms
of thought with society: the cause appears quite humble, in
consideration of the value which we attribute to the effect. Between the
world of the senses and appetites on the one hand, and that of reason
and morals on the other, the distance is so considerable that the second
would seem to have been able to add itself to the first only by a
creative act. But attributing to society this preponderating rôle in the
genesis of our nature is not denying this creation; for society has a
creative power which no other observable being can equal. In fact, all
creation, if not a mystical operation which escapes science and
knowledge, is the product of a synthesis. Now if the synthesis of
particular conceptions which take place in each individual consciousness
are already and of themselves productive of novelties, how much more
efficacious these vast syntheses of complete consciousnesses which make
society must be! A society is the most powerful combination of physical
and moral forces of which nature offers us an example. Nowhere else is
an equal richness of different materials, carried to such a degree of
concentration, to be found. Then it is not surprising that a higher life
disengages itself which, by reacting upon the elements of which it is
the product, raises them to a higher plane of existence and transforms
them.

Thus sociology appears destined to open a new way to the science of man.
Up to the present, thinkers were placed before this double alternative:
either explain the superior and specific faculties of men by connecting
them to the inferior forms of his being, the reason to the senses, or
the mind to matter, which is equivalent to denying their uniqueness; or
else attach them to some super-experimental reality which was
postulated, but whose existence could be established by no observation.
What put them in this difficulty was the fact that the individual passed
as being the _finis naturæ_--the ultimate creation of nature; it seemed
that there was nothing beyond him, or at least nothing that science
could touch. But from the moment when it is recognized that above the
individual there is society, and that this is not a nominal being
created by reason, but a system of active forces, a new manner of
explaining men becomes possible. To conserve his distinctive traits it
is no longer necessary to put them outside experience. At least, before
going to this last extremity, it would be well to see if that which
surpasses the individual, though it is within him, does not come from
this super-individual reality which we experience in society. To be
sure, it cannot be said at present to what point these explanations may
be able to reach, and whether or not they are of a nature to resolve all
the problems. But it is equally impossible to mark in advance a limit
beyond which they cannot go. What must be done is to try the hypothesis
and submit it as methodically as possible to the control of facts. This
is what we have tried to do.




INDEX


  _Alatunja_, 327.

  _Alcheringa_, or mythical period, 247.

  Ambiguity of sacredness, 409 ff.;
    explanation of, 412 ff.

  Animal-worship, totemism not, 94, 139, 170 f.

  Animism, as expounded by Tylor and Spencer, 49 ff.;
    how it explains the origin of the idea of the soul, 50 f.;
    of spirits, 51 f.;
    their cult, 52;
    and the nature-cult, 53 f.;
    criticism of these theories, 55 ff.;
    implies that religions are systems of hallucinations, 68;
    which is its best refutation, 70.

  Anthropomorphism, not found among primitives, 67 f.;
    denied by Spencer, 53 ff., 65;
    cannot explain totemic view of world, 235,
      or primitive rites, 406 f.

  Apriorism, philosophical, 14 f., 368.

  Art, why principal forms of, have been born in religion, 381;
    dramatic, in totemic ceremonies, 373, 380;
    totemic emblems first form of, 127 and n. 4.

  _Arungquiltha_, or magic force, in Australia, 197 f.;
   how it enables us to understand totemic principle, 198.

  Asceticism, nature of, 39, 311;
    based on negative rites, 311;
    essential element of religious life, 311 f.;
    religious function of, 314 ff.;
    sociological import of, 316;
    implied in the notion of sacredness, 317,
      its antagonism to the profane, 39 f., 317,
      and its contagiousness, 318;
    not dependent upon idea of divine personalities, 321;
    positive effects of, 312 ff., 386.

  Atonement for faults by rites, 385, 405, 408.

  Authority, moral, of society, 207 f., 208 n. 4;
    based on social opinion, 208, 213.


  Beliefs, how related to rites, 101, 403;
    translate social facts, 431,
      what  they seem destined to become, 429 ff.;
    all contain an element of truth, 438.

  Blood, human, sacredness of, 126, 137, 330 f.

  Body, essentially profane, 262;
    explanation of this, 263.

  Bull-roarers, definition of, 119.


  Categories of the understanding, religious origin of, 9 ff.;
    social origin of, 10 ff., 439;
    necessity of, explained, 17 ff.;
    real function of, 440;
    only social necessity for, 443;
    modelled on social forms, 18 ff., 144 ff., 440.

  Causality, law of, 362 ff.;
    first stated in imitative rites, 363;
    social origin, 363, 367 f., 443;
    imposed by society, 368;
    sociological theory of, and classical theories, 368 f., 443;
    varying statements of, 369 and n. 1.

  Charms, magic, explanation of, 356.

  Church, essential to religion, 44 ff.

  _Churinga_, definition of, 119;
    eminently sacred character of, 120;
    due to totemic mark, 122 f.;
    as religious force, 198 and n. 4.

  Civilizing heroes, 283 ff.;
    common to whole tribe, 284;
    tribal rites personified, 285;
    moral rôle of, 285;
    connecting link between spirits and gods, 290 f.

  Clan, characteristics of, 102;
    basis of simplest social system known, 96, 167;
    how recruited, 106 f.;
    totem as name of, 102 f.;
    symbolized by totem, 206;
    implied by totemism, 167;
    basis for classification of natural things, 141 ff.

  Classes, logical, religious origin of, 148 ff.;
    in higher religions, 144;
    based on social classifications, 141 ff.;
    collective life basis of, 147 ff., 443.

  Communion, alimentary, essential to sacrifice, 337;
    found in Australia, 334 f., 337, 340;
    positive effects of, 337 f.

  Concept, society's rôle in the genesis of, 432 ff.;
    not equivalent to general idea, 432;
    distinguished from sensations, 433;
    immutability of, 433;
    universality of, 433;
    essentially social nature of, 435;
    coeval with humanity, 438;
    objective truth of, 437 ff.

  Contagiousness of sacredness, 222;
    at basis of ascetic rites, 318 ff.;
    not due to associations of ideas, 321,
      but to the externality of religious forces, 323 f.;
    at basis of logical classifications, 324 f.

  Contradiction, idea of, religious nature of, 38 f.;
    social nature of, 12 f.;
    based on social life, 146;
    origin of, 234 ff.

  Contraries, logical, nature of primitive, 235, 238 f.

  _Corrobbori_, 215 n. 2, 380.

  Cosmology of totemism, 141 ff.;
    in all religions, 9, 428 ff.

  Cult, needed by gods, 345 ff.;
    moral reasons for, 63, 346, 417 f.;
    social interpretation of, 347 ff.;
    real function of, 386;
    periodical nature of, 63;
    imitative rites first form of, 387;
    æsthetic nature of, 382.


  Death, insufficiency of, to make a soul into a spirit, 60 f., 398,
    or give sacredness, 62.

  Deity. See _Gods_, _Spiritual Beings_.

  Dreams, as origin of idea of double or soul, 50 f., 58 f., 264;
    inadequacy of this theory, 56 f.;
    as suggesting posthumous life, 268.


  Ecstasy, in religion, explained, 226 f.

  Efficacy, idea of, social origin of, 363 f.

  Emblem, totem as, of clan, 206, 219 ff.;
    psychological need for, 220, 230;
    creates unity of group, 230;
    and maintains it, 231;
    incarnates collective sentiments, 232;
    why primitives chose theirs in animal or vegetable worlds, 233 f.

  Empiricism, philosophical, 13 f., 368.

  _Ertnatulunga_, 120, 247.

  Eschatology, Australian, 245, 287.

  Evil spirits, 281 ff., 420.

  Expiatory rites, 406 ff.


  Faith, religious, nature of, 360 f., 430 f.

  Family group, based on totemism, 106 n. 2.

  Fear, religion not based on, 223 ff., 406.

  Fetishism, 175.

  Folk-lore, how related to religion, 41, 83 n. 1;
    related to totemism, 90.

  Force, religious, ambiguity of, 222;
    why outside object in which it resides, 229;
    as collective force, 221, 229;
    takes form from society, 336;
    represents how collective consciousness acts on individuals, 223;
    idea of, precedes that of scientific force, 203 f., 363;
    collective force as prototype of physical force, 365.
    See _Sacred_, _Totemic Principle_.

  Formalism, religious, explanation of, 35;
    first form of legal, 35 f.

  Free-will, doctrine of, how explained, 271 f.


  Games, born in religion, 381 and n. 1.

  Gods, religions without, 30 ff.;
    in Australia, 285 ff.;
    immortal, 286;
    creators, 287;
    benefactors, 287;
    connected with initiation rites, 288;
    international character of, 288, 294 f., 425 ff.;
    of indigenous origin, 289 f.;
    developed form of civilizing heroes, 290 f., 295;
    closely connected with totemic system, 191, 291 f.;
    first conceived in tribal assemblies, 293;
    expressions of tribal unity, 294, 426.


  Hair, human, sacredness of, 64, 137 f.

  Hazing, sociological import of, 313 n. 4.


  Ideal, the, in religion, 420 ff.;
    formation of, a natural and necessary product of collective life, 422.

  Idealism, essential, of social and religious worlds, 228, 345, 347.

  Imitative Rites, 351 ff.;
    in Australia, 351 ff.;
    based on so-called sympathetic magic, 355 ff.;
    distinguished from charms, 356;
    reasons for, 357 ff.;
    material efficacy attributed to, 359;
    explained by moral efficacy of, 359 f.;
    first expression of law of causality, 363;
    original form of cult, 387.

  Immortality of soul, idea of, not established for moral purposes, 267;
    nor to escape annihilation, 267;
    influence of dreams, 268;
    but this not enough to account for doctrine, 268;
    doctrine of, invented to explain origin of souls, 268 f.,
      and expresses the immortality of society, 268 f.;
    moral value of, an after-thought, 269;
    doctrine of future judgment in Australia, 245, 287;
    influence of mourning upon, 402 f.

  Individual totem, 157 ff.;
    relations of, to individual, 158 f.;
    his _alter ego_, 159;
    individual, not a species, 160;
    how related to collective totem, 161;
    how acquired, 161 ff.;
    how related to _genius_, 279;
    origin of, 280 f., 281 n. 1.
    See _Totemism, Individual_.

  Individualism, religious, 157 ff., 172 ff., 179 f.;
    importance attributed to, by some, 45 ff., 172;
    how explained, 424 f.

  Infinite, conception of, in religion, 74;
    not equivalent to sacred, 85;
    the, not characteristic of religion, 25.

  Initiation into tribe by religious ceremonies, 39, 384;
    no special rites for, 385 n. 2.

  Interdictions, or taboos, various sorts of, 300 ff.;
    forms of, in Australia, 302 ff.;
    of touch, 302;
    of eating, 303;
    of seeing, 304;
    of speech, 305;
    sexual, 304 and n. 1;
    of all temporal activity on certain days, 306 f., 334;
    ideas at the basis of, 308;
    positive effects of, 309 ff.;
    implied in notion of sacredness, 317.

  _Intichiuma_, 326 ff.;
    description of among the Australians, 327-336;
    as elementary form of sacrifice, 336;
    material efficacy expected of, 331, 333;
    alimentary communion in, 334 f., 337;
    imitative elements in, 353;
    commemorative nature of, 371 f.;
    used for initiating young men into tribe, 385 and n. 1.


  Knowledge, theory of. See _Apriorism_, _Empiricism_, _Sociological_.


  Language, importance of, for logical thought, 75 ff., 434;
    social character of, 434.

  Logic, related to religion and society, 234, 237 ff.;
    basis for, furnished by society, 18 ff., 148, 431 ff.


  Magic, based on religious ideas, 42 ff., 361 f., 362 n. 1;
    distinguished from religion, 43 ff.;
    hostility of, towards religion, 43;
    sympathetic, 355 ff.

  Majesty, essentially religious nature of idea of, 62, cf. 213.

  Man, sacred character of, 134,
      explained, 221 f.;
    partakes of nature of totemic animal, 134 ff.;
    sacred to varying degrees, 138 ff.;
    double nature of, 263 f., 444 ff.

  Mana, of the Melanesians, 194 f. See _Totemic Principle_.

  Matrimonial classes, definition of, 109.

  Metempsychosis, not found in Australia, 169, cf. 261 f.

  Mourning, 390 ff.;
    nature of, determined by etiquette, 391;
    especially severe for women, 391 ff., 400 ff.;
    anger as well as sorrow expressed in, 393;
    how related to vendetta, 394;
    not the expression of individual emotions, 397,
      but a duty imposed by group, 397;
    classic interpretation of, unsustainable, 398 f.;
    not connected with ideas of souls or spirits, 398, 401;
    social interpretation of, 399 ff.

  Mystery in religion, 25;
    idea of, not primitive, 25;
    absent from many religions, 29.

  Myths, essential element of religious life, 82;
    distinguished from fables, 83 n. 1;
    as work of art, 82, 101;
    interpret rites, 101, 130;
    as a society's representation of man and the world, 375.


  _Nanji_, rock or tree, 250 f.

  Naturism, as expounded by Max Müller, 73 ff.;
    seeks to establish religion  in reality, 73;
    teaches that gods are personifications of natural phenomena, 73;
    distinguishes between religion and mythology, 81;
    but makes religion a fabric of errors, 79 ff.;
    cannot account for origin of sacredness, 84 ff.

  Negative rites, nature of, in Australia, 302 ff.;
      see also _Interdictions_;
    positive effects of, 309 ff.;
    as preparation for positive rites, 310 f.;
    basis of asceticism, 311;
    in mourning, 390.

  _Nurtunja_, 124;
    as rallying-centre for group, 125.


  Oblations, essential to sacrifice, 341;
    this denied by Smith, 340 f.;
    found in Australia, 341 f.;
    vicious circle implied in, 340 f.,
      explained, 344 ff.;
    profound reasons for, 344 f.

  _Orenda_, of the Iroquois, 193 f., 198.
    See _Totemic Principle_.

  Origins, definition of, 8 n. 1.


  Pantheism, totemic, 153 f.

  Part equal to whole, religious principle that, explained, 229;
    in magic, 229 n. 3;
    in sacrificial communions, 338.

  Personality, idea of, double origin of, 270;
    impersonal elements in, 271;
    its alleged autonomy explained, 271;
    importance of social elements in, 272;
    represented by individual totem, 280.

  Phratry, definition of, 107 ff.;
    predecessor of clan, 108 and n. 9, 109, 145;
    as basis for classifications of natural things, 141 ff., 145.

  Piacular rites, definition of, 389;
    distinguished from ascetic rites, 396;
    based on same needs as positive rites, 399-403;
    material benefits expected of, 404 f.;
    as expiation for ritual faults, 405 f.;
    social function of, 407 f.

  _Pitchi_, 334.

  Primitives, definition of, 1 n. 1;
    best studied in Australia, 95;
    why especially important for us, 3 ff.

  Profane, absolute distinction of, from sacred, 38 f.


  Ratapa, or soul-germs, 251, 252.

  Recreative elements of religion, 379 ff., 382 f.

  Reincarnation of souls, doctrine of, in Australia, 169, 250, 253 f.,
  256, 265.

  Religion, must have a foundation in reality, 2, 70, 225;
    none are false, 3, 417, 438;
    real purpose of, 416;
    eternal elements of, 427 ff.;
    as source of all civilization, 9, 70, 223, 418 f., 419 n. 1;
    source of science and philosophy, 9, 203, 238, 325, 362 ff.;
    so-called conflict of, with science, 416 ff.;
    speculative functions of, 430;
    recreative and æsthetic elements of, 379 ff.;
    as pre-eminent expression of social life, 419 ff.;
    said to be characterized by supernatural, 24 ff.,
      or by idea of spiritual beings, 29 ff.;
    not based on fear, 223 ff.,
      but happy confidence, 224;
    characterized by that which is sacred, 37;
    distinguished from magic, 42 ff.;
    none proceeds on any unique principle, 41;
    importance of primitive, 3 ff.;
    totemism most elementary form of, 167 f.;
    definition of, 47.

  Representative rites, 370 ff.;
    value of, for showing real reasons for cult, 371, 378 f.;
    as dramatic representations, 373, 376 ff., 380;
    moral purpose of, evident, 375;
    expect no material benefits, 377 ff.

  Respect, inspired by society, 207 f.

  Rites, how related to beliefs, 101;
    totemic principle attached to, 200;
    social function of, 226;
    material efficacy attributed to, due to moral efficacy of, 346, 359 f.;
    moral and social significance of, 370 ff.;
    reasons for, as given by Australians, 371;
    as form of dramatic art, 373, 380;
    æsthetic nature of, 381;
    interchangeability of, 384 ff.


  Sacred, the, characteristic of all that is religious, 37;
    not characterized by its exalted position, 37,
      but by its distinction from the profane, 38;
    superimposed upon its basis, 229;
    created by society, 206 ff.
    See _Totemic Principle_;
    double nature of, 301, 320, 409 ff.

  Sacrifice, forms of, in Australia, 327 ff., 336;
      see _Intichiuma_;
    theory of Robertson Smith of, 336 ff., 340;
    alimentary communion essential part of, 337;
    how this strengthens one's religious nature, 337 f.;
    sacrilege inherent in, explained, 338 f.;
    oblations essential to, 341;
    why gods have need of, 38, 346;
    social function of, 347 ff.

  Science, so-called conflict of, with religion, 416 ff., 430, 445;
    religious origin of, 9, 203, 238, 325, 362 ff.;
    supplants religious speculation, 429 ff.;
    but cannot do so completely, 431;
    authority of, 208, 431.

  Sexual totems, 165 f.

  Social life, basis for religious representations, 221, 316, 347;
    rhythm of, and religion, 219, 349;
    model for philosophical representations, 18, 19 n. 2, 144 ff.

  Society, how forms of, determine character of religion, 94, 196 f., 234;
    characterized by institutions, 366 n. 1;
    ideal nature of, 288, 345, 420 ff., 422 f.;
    not an illogical or a-logical being, 444;
    how it recasts animal nature into human nature, 66;
    how it arouses sensations of divine, 206 ff.,
      of dependence, 206 f.,
      of respect, 207,
      of moral authority, 207 f.,
      of an external moral force, 209,
      of kindly external forces, 212,
      of the sacred, 212 ff., 218;
    stimulating and sustaining action of, 209 ff.;
    how it gives men their most characteristic attributes, 212;
    how it exists only through its individual members, 221, 347;
    how this gives men their sacred character, 221 f.;
    foundation of religious experience, 418.

  Sociological theory of knowledge, 13, 15 ff., 18 ff., 144 ff., 203 f.,
  234 ff., 269 ff., 321 ff., 362 ff., 431 ff., 439 ff.

  Soul, idea of, found in all religions, 240;
    various representations of, 241 ff.;
    relation of, to body, 242 ff.;
    after death, 244 ff.;
    origin of, according to the Arunta, 247 ff.;
    reincarnation of, 250, 253 ff., 265;
    as totemic principle incarnate in the individual, 248 ff., 254 ff.,
          259 ff.;
    or parts of totemic divinity, 65, 249;
    close relations of, with totemic animal, 259 f;
    sacred character of, 262;
    notion of, founded in reality, 262 f.;
    represents the social part of our nature, 262 f.;
    reality of our double nature, 263 f., 444 ff.;
    coeval with notion of mana, 266 f.;
    how a secondary formation, 266;
    idea of immortality of, explained, 267 ff., see _Immortality_;
    how related to idea of personality, 269 ff., see _Personality_;
    distinguished from spirit, 273;
    form in which human force is represented, 366;
    social elements of, 366;
    how employed to explain mourning, 401;
    origin of idea of, according to animism, 50 f.

  Space, category of, religious and social origin of, 11 f., 441 and n. 1.

  Spirits, distinguished from souls, 273;
    from ghosts, 274;
    related to Roman _genius_, 275;
    relations of, to things, 275 f.;
    how derived from idea of soul, 277 f.;
    objective basis of idea of, 280 f.;
    spirits of evil, 281 f., 420;
    animistic theory of origin of, 51 f.

  Spiritual beings, as characteristic of religion, 29;
    absent from many religions, 30, 137,
      or strictly religious rites, 35;
    not sufficient to explain religion, 35.
    See _Soul_, _Spirits_.

  Spiritualism, Lang's theory of, as origin of idea of soul, 60 n. 1.

  Suffering, religious rôle of, in inferior societies, 312 ff.;
    believed to give extra strength, 314;
    how this idea is well founded, 315.

  Supernatural, the, as characteristic of religion, 24 ff.;
    conception of, quite modern, 26;
    not the essential element of religion, 28.

  Sympathetic magic, so-called, at basis of imitative rites, 355 ff.;
    fundamental principles of, 356;
    why this term is inexact, 361 f.


  Taboo, derivation of word, 300. See _Interdictions_.

  Tattooings, totemic, 117, 232.

  Time, category of, religious and social origin of, 10 f., 440 f.,
  441 n. 1.

  Totality, concept of,
    could never be suggested by individual experience, 441;
    related to concepts of society and divinity, 442 n. 1.

  Totem, derivation of word, 103;
    as name of clan, 102 f.;
    nature of things serving as, 103 ff.;
    species, not individuals, 104 f.;
    how inherited, 106 ff.;
    of phratries, 107 ff., 112;
    of matrimonial classes, 109 ff.;
    as emblem or coat-of-arms of group, 113;
    religious nature of, 119;
    relations of, with men and things, 150;
    sub-totems, 151;
    individual totems, 157 ff.;
    symbol of totemic principle of clan, 206;
    clan inseparable from, 167.

  Totemic animals,
    interdiction against eating by men of that clan, 128 ff.;
    or by those of other clans of the same phratry, 131 and n. 1;
    and against killing, 132;
    less sacred and powerful than totemic emblems, 133;
    related to men, 134, 139, 259 ff.;
    sacredness of, due to resemblance to emblem, 222.

  Totemic emblem, as collective emblem, 113;
    sacred character of, 122, 126;
    conventional nature of, 126 f.;
    more sacred and powerful than totemic animal, 133;
    as first form of art, 127 n. 4.

  Totemic principle, or Mana,
    cause of the sacredness of things, 62 ff., 188, 199 f.;
    totem material representation of, 189, 206;
    as a force, 190;
    as source of moral life of clan, 190;
    compared to totemic god, 189;
    personified in gods of higher religions, 191, 199, 291 f.;
    as Wakan, 192 f.;
    as Orenda, 193 f.;
    as Mana, 194 f.;
    ubiquity of, 189, 193, 194;
    multiformity of, 193;
    used in magic, 198, 201 f.;
    attached to rites, words, etc., 200;
    as representation of clan, 206, 214 ff.;
    first conceived in the midst of great social effervescence, 218 f.;
    how it comes to be symbolized by totem, 219 ff.

  Totemic system, unity of, 295 f.;
    work of whole tribe, 154 f., 283, 295.

  Totemism, early theoricians of, 88 ff.;
    Australia as classic land of, 93 f.;
    importance of American, 96 f.;
    as most elementary religion, 88, 167;
    former universality of, unimportant, 95;
    religious nature of, unquestionable, 167;
    not animal-worship, 139, 170 f.,
      nor nature-cult, 171 f.;
    contains all the elements of the religious life, 415;
    conceptional totemism, inadequacies of, 180 ff.

  Tribe, totemic system work of whole, 154 f., 283, 295;
    unity of, expressed by great gods, 294 f.


  Universalism, religious, 294 f.;
    how explained, 425 ff.


  Vendetta, how related to rites of mourning, 394.


  _Wakan_, or "great spirit" of Sioux, 192 f., 195 f., 199.
    See _Totemic Principle_.

  _Waninga_, 124.




FOOTNOTES:


[1] In the same way, we shall say of these societies that they are
primitive, and we shall call the men of these societies primitives.
Undoubtedly the expression lacks precision, but that is hardly evitable,
and besides, when we have taken pains to fix the meaning, it is not
inconvenient.

[2] But that is not equivalent to saying that all luxury is lacking to
the primitive cults. On the contrary, we shall see that in every
religion there are beliefs and practices which do not aim at strictly
utilitarian ends (Bk. III, ch. iv, § 2). This luxury is indispensable to
the religious life; it is at its very heart. But it is much more
rudimentary in the inferior religions than in the others, so we are
better able to determine its reason for existence here.

[3] It is seen that we give a wholly relative sense to this word
"origins," just as to the word "primitive." By it we do not mean an
absolute beginning, but the most simple social condition that is
actually known or that beyond which we cannot go at present. When we
speak of the origins or of the commencement of religious history or
thought, it is in this sense that our statements should be understood.

[4] We say that time and space are categories because there is no
difference between the rôle played by these ideas in the intellectual
life and that which falls to the ideas of class or cause (on this point
see, Hamelin, _Essai sur les éléments principaux de la représentation_,
pp. 63, 76).

[5] See the support given this assertion in Hubert and Mauss, _Mélanges
d'Histoire des Religions_ (_Travaux de l'Année Sociologique_), chapter
on _La Représentation du Temps dans la Religion_.

[6] Thus we see all the difference which exists between the group of
sensations and images which serve to locate us in time, and the category
of time. The first are the summary of individual experiences, which are
of value only for the person who experienced them. But what the category
of time expresses is a time common to the group, a social time, so to
speak. In itself it is a veritable social institution. Also, it is
peculiar to man; animals have no representations of this sort.

This distinction between the category of time and the corresponding
sensations could be made equally well in regard to space or cause.
Perhaps this would aid in clearing up certain confusions which are
maintained by the controversies of which these questions are the
subject. We shall return to this point in the conclusion of the present
work (§ 4).

[7] _Op. cit._, pp. 75 ff.

[8] Or else it would be necessary to admit that all individuals, in
virtue of their organo-physical constitution, are spontaneously affected
in the same manner by the different parts of space: which is more
improbable, especially as in themselves the different regions are
sympathetically indifferent. Also, the divisions of space vary with
different societies, which is a proof that they are not founded
exclusively upon the congenital nature of man.

[9] See Durkheim and Mauss, _De quelques formes primitives de
classification_, in _Année Sociologique_, VI, pp. 47 ff.

[10] See Durkheim and Mauss, _De quelques formes primitives de
classification_, in _Année Sociologique_, VI, p. 34.

[11] _Zuñi Creation Myths_, in _13th Rep. of the Bureau of Amer.
Ethnol._, pp. 367 ff.

[12] See Hertz, _La prééminence de la main droite_. _Etude de polarité
religieuse_, in the _Revue Philosophique_, Dec., 1909. On this same
question of the relations between the representation of space and the
form of the group, see the chapter in Ratzel, _Politische Geographie_,
entitled _Der Raum in Geist der Völker_.

[13] We do not mean to say that mythological thought ignores it, but
that it contradicts it more frequently and openly than scientific
thought does. Inversely, we shall show that science cannot escape
violating it, though it holds to it far more scrupulously than religion
does. On this subject, as on many others, there are only differences of
degree between science and religion; but if these differences should not
be exaggerated, they must be noted, for they are significant.

[14] This hypothesis has already been set forth by the founders
of the _Völkerpsychologie_. It is especially remarked in a short
article by Windelbrand entitled _Die Erkenntnisslehre unter
dem Völkerpsychologischen Gesichtspunke_, in the _Zeitsch. f.
Völkerpsychologie_, viii, pp. 166 ff. Cf. a note of Steinthal on
the same subject, _ibid._, pp. 178 ff.

[15] Even in the theory of Spencer, it is by individual experience that
the categories are made. The only difference which there is in this
regard between ordinary empiricism and evolutionary empiricism is that
according to this latter, the results of individual experience are
accumulated by heredity. But this accumulation adds nothing essential to
them; no element enters into their composition which does not have its
origin in the experience of the individual. According to this theory,
also, the necessity with which the categories actually impose themselves
upon us is the product of an illusion and a superstitious prejudice,
strongly rooted in the organism, to be sure, but without foundation in
the nature of things.

[16] Perhaps some will be surprised that we do not define the apriorist
theory by the hypothesis of innateness. But this conception really plays
a secondary part in the doctrine. It is a simple way of stating the
impossibility of reducing rational knowledge to empirical data. Saying
that the former is innate is only a positive way of saying that it is
not the product of experience, such as it is ordinarily conceived.

[17] At least, in so far as there are any representations which are
individual and hence wholly empirical. But there are in fact probably
none where the two elements are not found closely united.

[18] This irreducibility must not be taken in any absolute sense. We do
not wish to say that there is nothing in the empirical representations
which shows rational ones, nor that there is nothing in the individual
which could be taken as a sign of social life. If experience were
completely separated from all that is rational, reason could not operate
upon it; in the same way, if the psychic nature of the individual were
absolutely opposed to the social life, society would be impossible. A
complete analysis of the categories should seek these germs of
rationality even in the individual consciousness. We shall have occasion
to come back to this point in our conclusion. All that we wish to
establish here is that between these indistinct germs of reason and the
reason properly so called, there is a difference comparable to that
which separates the properties of the mineral elements out of which a
living being is composed from the characteristic attributes of life
after this has once been constituted.

[19] It has frequently been remarked that social disturbances result in
multiplying mental disturbances. This is one more proof that logical
discipline is a special aspect of social discipline. The first gives way
as the second is weakened.

[20] There is an analogy between this logical necessity and moral
obligation but there is not an actual identity. To-day society treats
criminals in a different fashion than subjects whose intelligence only
is abnormal; that is a proof that the authority attached to logical
rules and that inherent in moral rules are not of the same nature, in
spite of certain similarities. They are two species of the same class.
It would be interesting to make a study on the nature and origin of this
difference, which is probably not primitive, for during a long time, the
public conscience has poorly distinguished between the deranged and the
delinquent. We confine ourselves to signalizing this question. By this
example, one may see the number of problems which are raised by the
analysis of these notions which generally pass as being elementary and
simple, but which are really of an extreme complexity.

[21] This question will be treated again in the conclusion of this work.

[22] The rationalism which is imminent in the sociological theory of
knowledge is thus midway between the classical empiricism and apriorism.
For the first, the categories are purely artificial constructions; for
the second, on the contrary, they are given by nature; for us, they are
in a sense a work of art, but of an art which imitates nature with a
perfection capable of increasing unlimitedly.

[23] For example, that which is at the foundation of the category of
time is the rhythm of social life; but if there is a rhythm in
collective life, one may rest assured that there is another in the life
of the individual, and more generally, in that of the universe. The
first is merely more marked and apparent than the others. In the same
way, we shall see that the notion of class is founded on that of the
human group. But if men form natural groups, it can be assumed that
among things there exists groups which are at once analogous and
different. Classes and species are natural groups of things.

If it seems to many minds that a social origin cannot be attributed to
the categories without depriving them of all speculative value, it is
because society is still too frequently regarded as something that is
not natural; hence it is concluded that the representations which
express it express nothing in nature. But the conclusion is not worth
more than the premise.

[24] This is how it is legitimate to compare the categories to tools;
for on its side, a tool is material accumulated capital. There is a
close relationship between the three ideas of tool, category and
institution.

[25] We have already attempted to define religious phenomena in a paper
which was published in the _Année Sociologique_ (Vol. II, pp. 1 ff.).
The definition then given differs, as will be seen, from the one we give
to-day. At the end of this chapter (p. 47, n. 1), we shall explain the
reasons which have led us to these modifications, but which imply no
essential change in the conception of the facts.

[26] See above, p. 3. We shall say nothing more upon the necessity of
these preliminary definitions nor upon the method to be followed to
attain them. That is exposed in our _Règles de la Méthode sociologique_,
pp. 43 ff. Cf. _Le Suicide_, pp. 1 ff. (Paris, F. Alcan).

[27] _First Principles_, p. 37.

[28] _Introduction to the Science of Religions_, p. 18. Cf. _Origin and
Development of Religion_, p. 23.

[29] This same frame of mind is also found in the scholastic period, as
is witnessed by the formula with which philosophy was defined at this
time: _Fides quærens intellectum_.

[30] _Introduction to the History of Religions_, pp. 15 ff.

[31] _Introduction to the History of Religions_, p. 23.

[32] See below, Bk. III, ch. ii.

[33] _Prolegomena to the History of Religions_, p. 25 (tr. by Squire).

[34] _Primitive Culture_, I, p. 424. (Fourth edition, 1903.)

[35] Beginning with the first edition of the _Golden Bough_, I, pp.
30-32.

[36] Notably Spencer and Gillen and even Preuss, who gives the name
magic to all non-individualized religious forces.

[37] Burnouf, _Introduction à l'histoire du bouddhisme indien_, sec.
edit., p. 464. The last word of the text shows that Buddhism does not
even admit the existence of an eternal Nature.

[38] Barth, _The Religions of India_, p. 110 (tr. by Wood).

[39] Oldenberg, _Buddha_, p. 53 (tr. by Hoey).

[40] Oldenberg, _ibid._, pp. 313 ff. Cf. Kern, _Histoire du bouddhisme
dans l'Inde_, I, pp. 389 ff.

[41] Oldenberg, p. 250; Barth, p. 110.

[42] Oldenberg, p. 314.

[43] Barth, p. 109. In the same way, Burnouf says, "I have the profound
conviction that if Çâkya had not found about him a Pantheon already
peopled with the gods just named, he would have felt no need of
inventing them" (_Introd. à l'hist. du bouddhisme indien_, p. 119).

[44] Burnouf, _op. cit._, p. 117.

[45] Kern, _op. cit._, I, p. 289.

[46] "The belief, universally admitted in India, that great holiness is
necessarily accompanied by supernatural faculties, is the only support
which he (Çâkya) should find in spirits" (Burnouf, p. 119).

[47] Burnouf, p. 120.

[48] _Ibid._, p. 107.

[49] _Ibid._, p. 302.

[50] This is what Kern expresses in the following terms: "In certain
regards, he is a man; in certain others, he is not a man; in others, he
is neither the one nor the other" (_op. cit._, I, p. 290).

[51] "The conception" "was foreign to Buddhism" "that the divine Head of
the Community is not absent from his people, but that he dwells
powerfully in their midst as their lord and king, so that all cultus is
nothing else but the expression of this continuing living fellowship.
Buddha has entered into Nirvâna; if his believers desired to invoke him,
he could not hear them" (Oldenberg, p. 369).

[52] "Buddhist doctrine might be in all its essentials what it actually
is, even if the idea of Buddha remained completely foreign to it"
(Oldenberg, p. 322).--And whatever is said of the historic Buddha can be
applied equally well to the mythological Buddhas.

[53] For the same idea, see Max Müller, _Natural Religion_, pp. 103 ff.
and 190.

[54] _Op. cit._, p. 146.

[55] Barth, in _Encyclopédie des sciences religieuses_, VI, p. 548.

[56] Oldenberg, _op. cit._, p. 53.

[57] 1 Sam. xxi., 6.

[58] Levit. xii.

[59] Deut. xxii., 10 and 11.

[60] _La religion védique_, I, p. 122.

[61] _Ibid._, p. 133.

[62] "No text," says Bergaigne, "bears better witness to the
consciousness of a magic action by man upon the waters of heaven than
verse x, 32, 7, where this belief is expressed in general terms,
applicable to an actual man, as well as to his real or mythological
ancestors: 'The ignorant man has questioned the wise; instructed by the
wise, he acts, and here is the profit of his instruction: he obtains the
flowing of streams'" (p. 137).

[63] _Ibid._, p. 139.

[64] Examples will also be found in Hubert, art. _Magia_ in the
_Dictionnaire des Antiquités_, VI, p. 1509.

[65] Not to mention the sage and the saint who practise these truths and
who for that reason are sacred.

[66] This is not saying that these relations cannot take a religious
character. But they do not do so necessarily.

[67] Schultze, _Fetichismus_, p. 129.

[68] Examples of these usages will be found in Frazer, _Golden Bough_,
2 edit., I, pp. 81 ff.

[69] The conception according to which the profane is opposed to the
sacred, just as the irrational is to the rational, or the intelligible
is to the mysterious, is only one of the forms under which this
opposition is expressed. Science being once constituted, it has taken a
profane character, especially in the eyes of the Christian religions;
from that it appears as though it could not be applied to sacred things.

[70] See Frazer, _On Some Ceremonies of the Central Australian Tribes in
Australian Association for the Advancement of Science_, 1901, pp. 313
ff. This conception is also of an extreme generality. In India, the
simple participation in the sacrificial act has the same effects; the
sacrificer, by the mere act of entering within the circle of sacred
things, changes his personality. (See, Hubert and Mauss, _Essai sur le
Sacrifice in the Année Sociologique_, II, p. 101.)

[71] See what was said of the initiation above, p. 39.

[72] We shall point out below how, for example, certain species of
sacred things exist, between which there is an incompatibility as
all-exclusive as that between the sacred and the profane (Bk. III, ch.
v, § 4).

[73] This is the case with certain marriage and funeral rites, for
example.

[74] See Spencer and Gillen, _Native Tribes of Central Australia_, pp.
534 ff.; _Northern Tribes of Central Australia_, p. 463; Howitt, _Native
Tribes of S.E. Australia_, pp. 359-361.

[75] See Codrington, _The Melanesians_, ch. xii.

[76] See Hubert, art. _Magia_ in _Dictionnaire des Antiquités_.

[77] For example, in Melanesia, the _tindalo_ is a spirit, now
religious, now magic (Codrington, pp. 125 ff., 194 ff.).

[78] See Hubert and Mauss, _Théorie Générale de la Magie_, in _Année
Sociologique_, vol. VII, pp. 83-84.

[79] For example, the host is profaned in the black mass.

[80] One turns his back to the altar, or goes around the altar
commencing by the left instead of by the right.

[81] _Loc. cit._, p. 19.

[82] Undoubtedly it is rare that a ceremony does not have some director
at the moment when it is celebrated; even in the most crudely organized
societies, there are generally certain men whom the importance of their
social position points out to exercise a directing influence over the
religious life (for example, the chiefs of the local groups of certain
Australian societies). But this attribution of functions is still very
uncertain.

[83] At Athens, the gods to whom the domestic cult was addressed were
only specialized forms of the gods of the city ([Greek: Zeus ktêsios,
Zeus herkeios]). In the same way, in the Middle Ages, the patrons of the
guilds were saints of the calendar.

[84] For the name Church is ordinarily applied only to a group whose
common beliefs refer to a circle of more special affairs.

[85] Hubert and Mauss, _loc. cit._, p. 18.

[86] Robertson Smith has already pointed out that magic is opposed to
religion, as the individual to the social (_The Religion of the
Semites_, 2 edit., pp. 264-265). Also, in thus distinguishing magic from
religion, we do not mean to establish a break of continuity between
them. The frontiers between the two domains are frequently uncertain.

[87] Codrington, _Trans. and Proc. Roy. Soc. of Victoria_, XVI, p. 136.

[88] Negrioli, _Dei Genii presso i Romani_.

[89] This is the conclusion reached by Spencer in his _Ecclesiastical
Institutions_ (ch. xvi), and by Sabatier in his _Outlines of a
Philosophy of Religion, based on Psychology and History_ (tr. by Seed),
and by all the school to which he belongs.

[90] Notably among numerous Indian tribes of North America.

[91] This statement of fact does not touch the question whether exterior
and public religion is not merely the development of an interior and
personal religion which was the primitive fact, or whether, on the
contrary, the second is not the projection of the first into individual
consciences. The problem will be directly attacked below (Bk. II, ch. v,
§ 2, cf. the same book, ch. vi and vii, § 1). For the moment, we confine
ourselves to remarking that the individual cult is presented to the
observer as an element of, and something dependent upon, the collective
cult.

[92] It is by this that our present definition is connected to the one
we have already proposed in the _Année Sociologique_. In this other
work, we defined religious beliefs exclusively by their obligatory
character; but, as we shall show, this obligation evidently comes from
the fact that these beliefs are the possession of a group which imposes
them upon its members. The two definitions are thus in a large part the
same. If we have thought it best to propose a new one, it is because the
first was too formal, and neglected the contents of the religious
representations too much. It will be seen, in the discussions which
follow, how important it is to put this characteristic into evidence at
once. Moreover, if their imperative character is really a distinctive
trait of religious beliefs, it allows of an infinite number of degrees;
consequently there are even cases where it is not easily perceptible.
Hence come difficulties and embarrassments which are avoided by
substituting for this criterium the one we now employ.

[93] We thus leave aside here those theories which, in whole or in part,
make use of super-experimental data. This is the case with the theory
which Andrew Lang exposed in his book, _The Making of Religion_, and
which Father Schmidt has taken up again, with variations of detail, in a
series of articles on _The Origin of the Idea of God_ (_Anthropos_,
1908, 1909). Lang does not set animism definitely aside, but in the last
analysis, he admits a sense or intuition of the divine directly. Also,
if we do not consider it necessary to expose and discuss this conception
in the present chapter, we do not intend to pass it over in silence; we
shall come to it again below, when we shall ourselves explain the facts
upon which it is founded (Bk. II, ch. ix, § 4).

[94] This is the case, for example, of Fustel de Coulanges who accepts
the two conceptions together (_The Ancient City_, Bk. I and Bk. III, ch.
ii).

[95] This is the case with Jevons, who criticizes the animism taught by
Tylor, but accepts his theories on the origin of the idea of the soul
and the anthropomorphic instinct of man. Inversely, Usener, in his
_Götternamen_, rejects certain hypotheses of Max Müller which will be
described below, but admits the principal postulates of naturism.

[96] _Primitive Culture_, chs. xi-xviii.

[97] _Principles of Sociology_, Parts I and VI.

[98] This is the word used by Tylor. It has the inconvenience of seeming
to imply that men, in the proper sense of the term, existed before there
was a civilization. However, there is no proper term for expressing the
idea; that of primitive, which we prefer to use, lacking a better, is,
as we have said, far from satisfactory.

[99] Tylor, _op. cit._, I, pp. 455 f.

[100] See Spencer, _Principles of Sociology_, I, pp. 143 ff., and Tylor,
_op. cit._, I, pp. 434 ff., 445 ff.

[101] Tylor, II, pp. 113 ff.

[102] Tylor, I, pp. 481 ff.

[103] _Principles of Sociology_, I, p. 126.

[104] _Ibid._, pp. 322 ff.

[105] _Ibid._, pp. 366-367.

[106] _Ibid._, p. 346. Cf. p. 384.

[107] See below, Bk. II, ch. viii.

[108] See Spencer and Gillen, _The Native Tribes of Central Australia_,
pp. 123-127; Strehlow, _Die Aranda- und Loritja-Stämme in Zentral
Australien_, II, pp. 52 ff.

[109] _The Melanesians_, pp. 249-250.

[110] Howitt, _The Native Tribes of South-Eastern Australia_, p. 358.

[111] _Ibid._, pp. 434-442.

[112] Of the negroes of southern Guinea, Tylor says that "their sleeping
hours are characterized by almost as much intercourse with the dead as
their waking are with the living" (_Primitive Culture_, I, p. 443). In
regard to these peoples, the same author cites this remark of an
observer: "_All their dreams_ are construed into visits from the spirits
of their deceased friends" (_ibid._, p. 443). This statement is
certainly exaggerated; but it is one more proof of the frequency of
mystic dreams among the primitives. The etymology which Strehlow
proposes for the Arunta word _altjirerama_, which means "to dream," also
tends to confirm this theory. This word is composed of _altjira_, which
Strehlow translates by "god" and _rama_, which means "see." Thus a
dream would be the moment when a man is in relations with sacred beings
(_Die Aranda- und Loritja-Stämme_, I, p. 2).

[113] Andrew Lang, who also refuses to admit that the idea of the soul
was suggested to men by their dream experiences, believes that he can
derive it from other empirical data: these are the data of spiritualism
(telepathy, distance-seeing, etc.). We do not consider it necessary to
discuss the theory such as it has been exposed in his book _The Making
of Religion_. It reposes upon the hypothesis that spiritualism is a fact
of constant observation, and that distance-seeing is a real faculty of
men, or at least of certain men, but it is well known how much this
theory is scientifically contested. What is still more contestable is
that the facts of spiritualism are apparent enough and of a sufficient
frequency to have been able to serve as the basis for all the religious
beliefs and practices which are connected with souls and spirits. The
examination of these questions would carry us too far from what is the
object of our study. It is still less necessary to engage ourselves in
this examination, since the theory of Lang remains open to many of the
objections which we shall address to that of Tylor in the paragraphs
which follow.

[114] Jevons has made a similar remark. With Tylor, he admits that the
idea of the soul comes from dreams, and that after it was created, men
projected it into things. But, he adds, the fact that nature has been
conceived as animated like men does not explain how it became the object
of a cult. "The man who believes the bowing tree or the leaping flame to
be a living thing like himself, does not therefore believe it to be a
supernatural being--rather, so far as it is like himself, it, like
himself, is not supernatural" (_Introduction to the History of
Religions_, p. 55).

[115] See Spencer and Gillen, _Nor. Tr._, p. 506, and _Nat. Tr._, p.
512.

[116] This is the ritual and mythical theme which Frazer studies in his
_Golden Bough_.

[117] _The Melanesians_, p. 119.

[118] _Ibid._, p. 125.

[119] There are sometimes, as it seems, even funeral offerings. (See
Roth, _Superstition, Magic and Medicine_, in _North Queensland Ethnog._,
Bulletin No. 5, § 69 c., and _Burial Customs_, in _ibid._, No. 10, in
_Records of the Australian Museum_, Vol. VI, No. 5, p. 395). But these
offerings are not periodical.

[120] Spencer and Gillen, _Nat. Tr._, pp. 538, 553, and _Nor. Tr._, pp.
463, 543, 547.

[121] See especially, Spencer and Gillen, _Northern Tribes_, ch. vi,
vii, ix.

[122] _The Religions of Primitive Peoples_, pp. 47 ff.

[123] _Myth, Ritual and Religions_, p. 123.

[124] _Les Religions des peuples non civilisés_, II, _Conclusion_.

[125] _The Religion of the Semites_, 2 ed., pp. 126, 132.

[126] This is the reasoning of Westermarck (_Origins of Human Marriage_,
p. 6).

[127] By sexual communism we do not mean a state of promiscuity where
man knows no matrimonial rules: we believe that such a state has never
existed. But it has frequently happened that groups of men have been
regularly united to one or several women.

[128] See our _Suicide_, pp. 233 ff.

[129] Spencer, _Principles of Sociology_, I, pp. 129 f.

[130] _The Melanesians_, p. 123.

[131] Dorsey, _A Study of Siouan Cults_, in _XIth Annual Report of the
Bureau of Amer. Ethnology_, pp. 431 ff., and _passim_.

[132] _La religion des peuples non civilisés_, I, p. 248.

[133] V. W. de Visser, _De Graecorum diis non referentibus speciem
humanam_. Cf. P. Perdrizet, _Bulletin de correspondance hellénique_,
1899, p. 635.

[134] However, according to Spencer, there is a germ of truth in the
belief in spirits: this is the idea that "the power which manifests
itself inside the consciousness is a different form of power from that
manifested outside the consciousness" (_Ecclesiastical Institutions_, §
659). Spencer understands by this that the notion of force in general is
the sentiment of the force which we have extended to the entire
universe; this is what animism admits implicitly when it peoples nature
with spirits analogous to our own. But even if this hypothesis in regard
to the way in which the idea of force is formed were true--and it
requires important reservations which we shall make (Bk. III, ch. iii, §
3)--it has nothing religious about it; it belongs to no cult. It thus
remains that the system of religious symbols and rites, the
classification of things into sacred and profane, all that which is
really religious in religion, corresponds to nothing in reality. Also,
this germ of truth, of which he speaks, is still more a germ of error,
for if it be true that the forces of nature and those of the mind are
related, they are profoundly distinct, and one exposes himself to grave
misconceptions in identifying them.

[135] This is undoubtedly what explains the sympathy which folk-lorists
like Mannhardt have felt for animistic ideas. In popular religions as in
inferior religions, these spiritual beings of a second order hold the
first place.

[136] In the essay entitled _Comparative Mythology_ (pp. 47 ff).

[137] _Herabkunft des Feuers und G[=o]ttertranks_, Berlin, 1859 (a new
edition was given by Ernst Kuhn in 1886). Cf. _Der Schuss des Wilden
Jägers auf den Sonnen-hirsch_, Zeitschrift f. d. Phil., I, 1869, pp.
89-169. _Entwickelungsstufen des Mythus_, Abhandl. d. Berl. Akad., 1873.

[138] _Der Ursprung der Mythologie_, Berlin, 1860.

[139] In his book _Hercule et Cacus_. _Étude de mythologie comparée._
Max Müller's _Comparative Mythology_ is there signalized as a work
"which marks a new epoch in the history of Mythology" (p. 12).

[140] _Die Griechischen Kulte und Mythen_, I, p. 78.

[141] Among others who have adopted this conception may be cited Renan.
See his _Nouvelles études d'histoire religieuse_, 1884, p. 31.

[142] Aside from the _Comparative Mythology_, the works where Max Müller
has exposed his general theories on religion are: _Hibbert Lectures_
(1878) under the title _The Origin and Development of Religion; Natural
Religion_ (1889); _Physical Religion_ (1890); _Anthropological Religion_
(1892); _Theosophy, or Psychological Religion_ (1893); _Contributions to
the Science of Mythology_ (1897). Since his mythological theories are
closely related to his philosophy of language, these works should be
consulted in connection with the ones consecrated to language or logic,
especially _Lectures on the Science of Language_, and _The Science of
Thought_.

[143] _Natural Religion_, p. 114.

[144] _Physical Religion_, pp. 119-120.

[145] _Ibid._, p. 121; cf. p. 304.

[146] _Natural Religion_, pp. 121 ff., and 149-155.

[147] "The overwhelming pressure of the infinite" (_ibid._, p. 138).

[148] _Ibid._, pp. 195-196.

[149] Max Müller even goes so far as to say that until thought has
passed this first stage, it has very few of the characteristics which we
now attribute to religion (_Physic. Rel._, p. 120).

[150] _Physic. Rel._, p. 128.

[151] _The Science of Thought_, p. 30.

[152] _Natural Religion_, pp. 393 ff.

[153] _Physic. Rel._, p. 133; _The Science of Thought_, p. 219;
_Lectures on the Science of Language_, II, pp. 1 ff.

[154] _The Science of Thought_, p. 272.

[155] _The Science of Thought_, I, p. 327; _Physic. Rel_., pp. 125 ff.

[156] _Mélanges de mythologie et de linguistique_, p. 8.

[157] _Anthropological Religion_, pp. 128-130.

[158] This explanation is not as good as that of Tylor. According to Max
Müller, men could not admit that life stopped with death; therefore they
concluded that there were two beings within them, one of which survived
the body. But it is hard to see what made them think that life continued
after the body was decomposed.

[159] For the details, see _Anthrop. Rel._, pp. 351 ff.

[160] _Anthrop. Rel._, p. 130.--This is what keeps Max Müller from
considering Christianity the climax of all this development. The
religion of ancestors, he says, supposes that there is something divine
in man. Now is that idea not the one at the basis of the teaching of
Christ? (_ibid._, pp. 378 ff.). It is useless to insist upon the
strangeness of the conception which makes Christianity the latest of the
cults of the dead.

[161] See the discussion of the hypothesis in Gruppe, _Griechishen Kulte
und Mythen_, pp. 79-184.

[162] See Meillet, _Introduction à l'étude comparative des langues
indo-européennes_, p. 119.

[163] Oldenberg, _Die Religion des Vedas_, pp. 59 ff.; Meillet, _Le dieu
Iranien Mythra_, in _Journal Asiatique_, X, No. 1, July-August, 1907,
pp. 143 ff.

[164] In this category are a large number of the maxims of popular
wisdom.

[165] It is true that this argument does not touch those who see in
religion a code (especially of hygiene) whose provisions, though placed
under the sanction of imaginary beings, are nevertheless well founded.
But we shall not delay to discuss a conception so insupportable, and
which has, in fact, never been sustained in a systematic manner by
persons somewhat informed upon the history of religions. It is difficult
to see what good the terrible practices of the initiation bring to the
health which they threaten; what good the dietetic restrictions, which
generally deal with perfectly clean animals, have hygienically; how
sacrifices, which take place far from a house, make it more solid, etc.
Undoubtedly there are religious precepts which at the same time have a
practical utility; but they are lost in the mass of others, and even the
services which they render are frequently not without some drawbacks. If
there is a religiously enforced cleanliness, there is also a religious
filthiness which is derived from these same principles. The rule which
orders a corpse to be carried away from the camp because it is the seat
of a dreaded spirit is undoubtedly useful. But the same belief requires
the relatives to anoint themselves with the liquids which issue from a
corpse in putrefaction, because they are supposed to have exceptional
virtues.--From this point of view, magic has served a great deal more
than religion.

[166] _Contributions to the Science of Mythology_, I, pp. 68 f.

[167] _Lectures on the Science of Language_, II, p. 456 ff.; _Physic.
Rel._, pp. 276 ff.--Also Bréal, _Mélanges_, p. 6, "To bring the
necessary clarity into this question of the origin of mythology, it is
necessary to distinguish carefully the _gods_, which are the immediate
product of the human intelligence, from the _fables_, which are its
indirect and involuntary product."

[168] Max Müller recognized this. See _Physic. Rel._, p. 132, and
_Comparative Mythology_, p. 58. "The gods are _nomina_ and not _numina_,
names without being and not beings without name."

[169] It is true that Max Müller held that for the Greeks, "Zeus was,
and remained, in spite of all mythological obscurations, the name of the
Supreme Deity" (_Science of Language_, II, p. 478). We shall not dispute
this assertion, though it is historically contestable; but in any case,
this conception of Zeus could never have been more than a glimmer in the
midst of all the other religious beliefs of the Greeks.

Besides this, in a later work, Max Müller went so far as to make even
the notion of god in general the product of a wholly verbal process and
thus of a mythological elaboration (_Physic. Rel._, p. 138).

[170] Undoubtedly outside the real myths there were always fables which
were not believed, or at least were not believed in the same way and to
the same degree, and hence had no religious character. The line of
demarcation between fables and myths is certainly floating and hard to
determine. But this is no reason for making all myths stories, any more
than we should dream of making all stories myths. There is at least one
characteristic which in a number of cases suffices to differentiate the
religious myth: that is its relation to the cult.

[171] See above, p. 28.

[172] More than that, in the language of Max Müller, there is a
veritable abuse of words. Sensuous experience, he says, implies, at
least in certain cases, "beyond the known, _something unknown, something
which I claim the liberty to call infinite_" (_Natural Rel._, p. 195;
cf. p. 218). The unknown is not necessarily the infinite, any more than
the infinite is necessarily the unknown if it is in all points the same,
and consequently like the part which we know. It would be necessary to
prove that the part of it which we perceive differs in nature from that
which we do not perceive.

[173] Max Müller involuntarily recognizes this in certain passages. He
confesses that he sees little difference between Agni, the god of fire,
and the notion of ether, by which the modern physicist explains light
and heat (_Phys. Rel._, pp. 126 f.). Also, he connects the notion of
divinity to that of agency (p. 138) or of a causality which is not
natural and profane. The fact that religion represents the causes thus
imagined, under the form of personal agents, is not enough to explain
how they got a sacred character. A personal agent can be profane, and
also, many religious forces are essentially impersonal.

[174] We shall see below, in speaking of the efficacy of rites and
faith, how these illusions are to be explained (Bk. III, ch. ii).

[175] _Voyages and Travels of an Indian Interpreter._

[176] This idea was so common that even M. Réville continued to make
America the classic land of totemism (_Religions des peuples non
civilisés_, I, p. 242).

[177] _Journals of Two Expeditions in North-West and Western Australia_,
II, p. 228.

[178] _The Worship of Animals and Plants._ _Totems and Totemism_ (1869,
1870).

[179] This idea is found already very clearly expressed in a study by
Gallatin entitled _Synopsis of the Indian Tribes_ (_Archæologia
Americana_, II, pp. 109 ff.), and in a notice by Morgan in the _Cambrian
Journal_, 1860, p. 149.

[180] This work had been prepared for and preceded by two others by the
same author: _The League of the Iroquois_ (1851), and _Systems of
Consanguinity_ and _Affinity of the Human Family_ (1871).

[181] _Kamilaroi and Kurnai_, 1880.

[182] In the very first volumes of the _Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology_ are found the study of Powell, _Wyandot Government_
(I, p. 59), that of Cushing, _Zuñi Fetiches_ (II, p. 9), Smith, _Myths
of the Iroquois_ (_ibid._, p. 77), and the important work of Dorsey,
_Omaha Sociology_ (III, p. 211), which are also contributions to the
study of totemism.

[183] This first appeared, in an abridged form, in the _Encyclopædia
Britannica_ (9th ed.).

[184] In his _Primitive Culture_, Tylor had already attempted an
explanation of totemism, to which we shall return presently, but which
we shall not give here; for by making totemism only a particular case of
the ancestor-cult, he completely misunderstood its importance. In this
chapter we mention only those theories which have contributed to the
progress of the study of totemism.

[185] Published at Cambridge, 1885.

[186] First edition, 1889. This is the arrangement of a course given at
the University of Aberdeen in 1888. Cf. the article _Sacrifice_ in the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_ (9th edition).

[187] London, 1890. A second edition in three volumes has since appeared
(1900) and a third in five volumes is already in course of publication.

[188] In this connection must be mentioned the interesting work of
Sidney Hartland, _The Legend of Perseus_, 3 vols., 1894-1896.

[189] We here confine ourselves to giving the names of the authors;
their works will be indicated below, when we make use of them.

[190] If Spencer and Gillen have been the first to study these tribes in
a scientific and thorough manner, they were not the first to talk about
them. Howitt had already described the social organization of the
Wuaramongo (Warramunga of Spencer and Gillen) in 1888 in his _Further
