CHAPTER II

THE POSITIVE CULT

I.--_The Elements of the Sacrifice_


Whatever the importance of the negative cult may be, and though it may
indirectly have positive effects, it does not contain its reason for
existence in itself; it introduces one to the religious life, but it
supposes this more than it constitutes it. If it orders the worshipper
to flee from the profane world, it is to bring him nearer to the sacred
world. Men have never thought that their duties towards religious forces
might be reduced to a simple abstinence from all commerce; they have
always believed that they upheld positive and bilateral relations with
them, whose regulation and organization is the function of a group of
ritual practices. To this special system of rites we give the name of
_positive cult_.

For some time we almost completely ignored the positive cult of the
totemic religion and what it consists in. We knew almost nothing more
than the initiation rites, and we do not know those sufficiently well
even now. But the observations of Spencer and Gillen, prepared for by
those of Schulze and confirmed by those of Strehlow, on the tribes of
central Australia, have partially filled this gap in our information.
There is one ceremony especially which these explorers have taken
particular pains to describe to us and which, moreover, seems to
dominate the whole totemic cult: this is the one that the Arunta,
according to Spencer and Gillen, call the _Intichiuma_. It is true that
Strehlow contests the meaning of this word. According to him, intichiuma
(or, as he writes it, _intijiuma_) means "to instruct" and designates
the ceremonies performed before the young man to teach him the
traditions of the tribe. The feast which we are going to describe bears,
he says, the name _mbatjalkatiuma_, which means "to fecundate" or "to
put into a good condition."[1104] But we shall not try to settle this
question of vocabulary, which touches the real problem but slightly, as
the rites in question are all celebrated in the course of the
initiation. On the other hand, as the word Intichiuma now belongs to the
current language of ethnography, and has almost become a common noun, it
seems useless to replace it with another.[1105]

The date on which the Intichiuma takes place depends largely upon the
season. There are two sharply separated seasons in Australia: one is dry
and lasts for a long time; the other is rainy and is, on the contrary,
very short and frequently irregular. As soon as the rains arrive,
vegetation springs up from the ground as though by enchantment and
animals multiply, so that the country which had recently been only a
sterile desert is rapidly filled with a luxurious flora and fauna. It is
just at the moment when the good season seems to be close at hand that
the Intichiuma is celebrated. But as the rainy season is extremely
variable, the date of the ceremonies cannot be fixed once for all. It
varies with the climatic circumstances, which only the chief of the
totemic group, the Alatunja, is qualified to judge: on a day which he
considers suitable, he informs his companions that the moment has
arrived.[1106]

Each totemic group has its own Intichiuma. Even if this rite is general
in the societies of the centre, it is not the same everywhere; among the
Warramunga, it is not what it is among the Arunta; it varies, not only
among the tribes, but also within the tribe, among the clans. But it is
obvious that the different mechanisms in use are too closely related to
each other to be dissociated completely. There is no ceremony, perhaps,
which is not made up of several, though these are very unequally
developed: what exists only as a germ in one, occupies the most
important place in another, and inversely. Yet they must be carefully
distinguished, for they constitute just so many different ritual types
to be described and explained separately, but afterwards we must seek
some common source from which they were derived.

Let us commence with those observed among the Arunta.


I

The celebration includes two successive phases. The object of the rites
which take place in the first is to assure the prosperity of the animal
or vegetable species serving the clan as totem. The means employed for
this end may be reduced to two principal types.

It will be remembered that the fabulous ancestors from whom each clan is
supposed to be descended, formerly lived on earth and left traces of
their passage there. These traces consist especially in stones and rocks
which they deposited at certain places, or which were formed at the
spots where they entered into the ground. These rocks and stones are
considered the bodies or parts of the bodies of the ancestors, whose
memory they keep alive; they represent them. Consequently, they also
represent the animals and plants which served these same ancestors as
totems, for an individual and his totem are only one. The same reality
and the same properties are attributed to them as to the actually living
plants or animals of the same species. But they have this advantage over
these latter, that they are imperishable, knowing neither sickness nor
death. So they are like a permanent immutable and ever-available reserve
of animal and vegetable life. Also, in a certain number of cases, it is
this reserve that they annually draw upon to assure the reproduction of
the species.

Here, for example, is how the Witchetty grub clan, at Alice Springs,
proceeds at its Intichiuma.[1107]

On the day fixed by the chief, all the members of the totemic group
assemble in the principal camp. The men of the other totems retire to a
distance;[1108] for among the Arunta, they are not allowed to be present
at the celebration of the rite, which has all the characteristics of a
secret ceremony. An individual of a different totem, but of the same
phratry, may be invited to be present, as a favour; but this is only as
a witness. In no case can he take an active part.

After the men of the totem have assembled, they leave the camp, leaving
only two or three of their number behind. They advance in a profound
silence, one behind another, all naked, without arms and without any of
their habitual ornaments. Their attitude and their pace are marked with
a religious gravity: this is because the act in which they are taking
part has an exceptional importance in their eyes. Also, until the end of
the ceremony they are required to observe a rigorous fast.

The country which they traverse is all filled with souvenirs left by the
glorious ancestors. Thus they arrive at a spot where a huge block of
quartz is found, with small round stones all around it. This block
represents the witchetty grub as an adult. The Alatunja strikes it with
a sort of wooden tray called _apmara_,[1109] and at the same time he
intones a chant, whose object is to invite the animal to lay eggs. He
proceeds in the same fashion with the stones which are regarded as the
eggs of the animal and with one of which he rubs the stomach of each
assistant. This done, they all descend a little lower, to the foot of a
cliff also celebrated in the myths of the Alcheringa, at the base of
which is another stone, also representing the witchetty grub. The
Alatunja strikes it with his apmara; the men accompanying him do so as
well, with branches of a gum-tree which they have gathered on the way,
all of which goes on in the midst of chants renewing the invitation
previously addressed to the animal. About ten different spots are
visited in turn, some of which are a mile or more from the others. At
each of them there is a stone at the bottom of a cave or hole, which is
believed to represent the witchetty grub in one of his aspects or at one
of the phases of his existence, and upon each of these stones, the same
ceremonies are repeated.

The meaning of the rite is evident. When the Alatunja strikes the sacred
stones, it is to detach some dust. The grains of this very holy dust are
regarded as so many germs of life; each of them contains a spiritual
principle which will give birth to a new being, when introduced into an
organism of the same species. The branches with which the assistants are
provided serve to scatter this precious dust in all directions; it is
scattered everywhere, to accomplish its fecundating work. By this means,
they assure, in their own minds, an abundant reproduction of the animal
species over which the clans guard, so to speak, and upon which it
depends.

The natives themselves give the rite this interpretation. Thus, in the
clan of the _ilpirla_ (a kind of "manna"), they proceed in the following
manner. When the day of the Intichiuma arrives, the group assembles near
a huge rock, about fifty feet high; on top of this rock is another, very
similar to the first in aspect and surrounded by other smaller ones.
Both represent masses of manna. The Alatunja digs up the ground at the
foot of this rock and uncovers a churinga which is believed to have been
buried there in Alcheringa times, and which is, as it were, the
quintessence of the manna. Then he climbs up to the summit of the higher
rock and rubs it, first with the churinga and then with the smaller
stones which surround it. Finally, he brushes away the dust which has
thus been collected on the surface of the rock, with the branches of a
tree; each of the assistants does the same in his turn. Now Spencer and
Gillen say that the idea of the natives is that the dust thus scattered
will "settle upon the mulga trees and so produce manna." In fact, these
operations are accompanied by a hymn sung by those present, in which
this idea is expressed.[1110]

With variations, this same rite is found in other societies. Among the
Urabunna, there is a rock representing an ancestor of the Lizard clan;
bits are detached from it which they throw in every direction, in order
to secure an abundant production of lizards.[1111] In this same tribe,
there is a sand-bank which mythological souvenirs closely associate with
the louse totem. At the same spot are two trees, one of which is called
the ordinary louse tree, the other, the crab-louse tree. They take some
of this sand, rub it on these trees, throw it about on every side and
become convinced that, as a result of this, lice will be born in large
numbers.[1112] The Mara perform the Intichiuma of the bees by scattering
dust detached from sacred rocks.[1113] For the kangaroo of the plains, a
slightly different method is used. They take some kangaroo-dung and wrap
it up in a certain herb of which the animal is very fond, and which
belongs to the kangaroo totem for this reason. Then they put the dung,
thus enveloped, on the ground between two bunches of this herb and set
the whole thing on fire. With the flame thus made, they light the
branches of trees and then whirl them about in such a way that sparks
fly in every direction. These sparks play the same rôle as the dust in
the preceding cases.[1114]

In a certain number of clans,[1115] men mix something of their own
substance with that of the stone, in order to make the rite more
efficacious. Young men open their veins and let streams of blood flow on
to the rock. This is the case, for example, in the Intichiuma of the
Hakea flower among the Arunta. The ceremony takes place in a sacred
place around an equally sacred rock which, in the eyes of the natives,
represents Hakea flowers. After certain preliminary operations, "the old
leader asks one of the young men to open a vein in his arm, which he
does, and allows the blood to sprinkle freely, while the other men
continue the singing. The blood flows until the stone is completely
covered."[1116] The object of this practice is to revivify the virtues
of the stone, after a fashion, and to reinforce its efficacy. It should
not be forgotten that the men of the clan are relatives of the plant or
animal whose name they bear; the same principle of life is in them, and
especially in their blood. So it is only natural that one should use
this blood and the mystic germs which it carries to assure the regular
reproduction of the totemic species. It frequently happens among the
Arunta that when a man is sick or tired, one of his young companions
opens his veins and sprinkles him with his blood in order to reanimate
him.[1117] If blood is able to reawaken life in a man in this way, it is
not surprising that it should also be able to awaken it in the animal or
vegetable species with which the men of the clan are confounded.

The same process is employed in the Intichiuma of the Undiara kangaroo
among the Arunta. The theatre of the ceremony is a water-hole vaulted
over by a peaked rock. This rock represents an animal-kangaroo of the
Alcheringa which was killed and deposited there by a man-kangaroo of the
same epoch; many kangaroo spirits are also believed to reside there.
After a certain number of sacred stones have been rubbed against each
other in the way we have described, several of the assistants climb up
on the rock upon which they let their blood flow.[1118] "The purpose of
the ceremony at the present day, so say the natives, is by means of
pouring out the blood of kangaroo men upon the rock, to drive out in all
directions the spirits of the kangaroo animals and so to increase the
number of the animals."[1119]

There is even one case among the Arunta where the blood seems to be the
active principle in the rite. In the Emu group, they do not use sacred
stones or anything resembling them. The Alatunja and some of his
assistants sprinkle the ground with their blood; on the ground thus
soaked, they trace lines in various colours, representing the different
parts of the body of an emu. They kneel down around this design and
chant a monotonous hymn. From the fictitious emu to which this chant is
addressed, and, consequently, from the blood which has served to make
it, they believe that vivifying principles go forth, which animate the
embryos of the new generation, and thus prevent the species from
disappearing.[1120]

Among the Wonkgongaru,[1121] there is one clan whose totem is a certain
kind of fish; in the Intichiuma of this totem also, it is the blood that
plays the principal part. The chief of the group, after being
ceremoniously painted, goes into a pool of water and sits down there.
Then he pierces his scrotum and the skin around his navel with small
pointed bones. "The blood from the wounds goes into the water and gives
rise to fish."[1122]

By a wholly similar process, the Dieri think that they assure the
reproduction of two of their totems, the carpet snake and the woma snake
(the ordinary snake). A Mura-mura named Minkani is thought to live under
a dune. His body is represented by some fossil bones of animals or
reptiles, such as the deltas of the rivers flowing into Lake Eyre
contain, according to Howitt. When the day of the ceremony arrives, the
men assemble and go to the home of the Minkani. There they dig until
they come to a layer of damp earth which they call "the excrement of
Minkani." From now on, they continue to turn up the soil with great care
until they uncover "the elbow of Minkani." Then two young men open their
veins and let their blood flow on to the sacred rock. They chant the
hymn of Minkani while the assistants, carried away in a veritable
frenzy, beat each other with their arms. The battle continues until they
get back to the camp, which is about a mile away. Here, the women
intervene and put an end to the combat. They collect the blood which has
flown from the wounds, mix it with the "excrement of Minkani," and
scatter the resulting mixture over the dune. When this rite has been
accomplished, they are convinced that carpet snakes will be born in
abundance.[1123]

In certain cases, they use the very substance which they wish to produce
as the vivifying principle. Thus among the Kaitish, in the course of a
ceremony whose object is to create rain, they sprinkle water over a
sacred rock which represents the mythical heroes of the Water clan. It
is evident that they believe that by this means they augment the
productive virtues of the rock just as well as with blood, and for the
same reasons.[1124] Among the Mara, the actor takes water from a sacred
hole, puts it in his mouth and spits it out in every direction.[1125]
Among the Worgaia, when the yams begin to sprout, the chief of the Yam
clan sends men of the phratry of which he is not a member himself to
gather some of these plants; these bring some to him, and ask him to
intervene, in order that the species may develop well. He takes one,
chews it, and throws the bits in every direction.[1126] Among the
Kaitish when, after various rites which we shall not describe, the grain
of a certain grass called Erlipinna has reached its full development,
the chief of the totem brings a little of it to camp and grinds it
between two stones; the dust thus obtained is piously gathered up, and a
few grains are placed on the lips of the chief, who scatters them by
blowing. This contact with the mouth of the chief, which has a very
special sacramental virtue, undoubtedly has the object of stimulating
the vitality of the germs which these grains contain and which, being
blown to all the quarters of the horizon, go to communicate these
fecundating virtues which they possess to the plants.[1127]

The efficacy of these rites is never doubted by the native: he is
convinced that they must produce the results he expects, with a sort of
necessity. If events deceive his hopes, he merely concludes that they
were counteracted by the sorcery of some hostile group. In any case, it
never enters his mind that a favourable result could be obtained by any
other means. If by chance the vegetation grows or the animals produce
before he has performed his Intichiuma, he supposes that another
Intichiuma has been celebrated under the ground by the ancestors and
that the living reap the benefits of this subterranean ceremony.[1128]


II

This is the first act of the celebration.

During the period immediately following, there are no regular
ceremonies. However, the religious life remains intense: this is
manifested especially by an aggravation of the system of interdicts. It
is as though the sacred character of the totem were reinforced: they do
not even dare to touch it. In ordinary times, the Arunta may eat the
animal or plant which serves as totem, provided they do so with
moderation, but on the morrow of the Intichiuma this right is suspended;
the alimentary interdiction is strict and without exceptions. They
believe that any violation of this interdict would result in
neutralizing the good effects of the rite and in preventing the increase
of the species. It is true that the men of other totems who happen to be
in the same locality are not submitted to the same prohibition. However,
their liberty is less than ordinary at this time. They may not consume
the totemic animal wherever they place, in the brush, for example; they
must bring it to camp, and it is there only that it may be cooked.[1129]

A final ceremony terminates this period of extraordinary interdictions
and definitely closes this long series of rites. It varies somewhat in
different clans, but the essential elements are the same everywhere.
Here are the two principal forms which it takes among the Arunta. One of
these is in connection with the witchetty grub, the other with the
kangaroo.

When the grubs have attained full maturity and appear in abundance, the
men of the totem, as well as others, collect as many of them as
possible; then they all bring those they have found back to camp and
cook them until they become hard and brittle. They are then preserved in
wooden vessels called _pitchi_. The harvest of grubs is possible only
during a very short time, for they appear only after the rain. When they
begin to be less numerous, the Alatunja summons everybody to the camp;
on his invitation, each one brings his supply. The others place theirs
before the men of that totem. The Alatunja takes one of these _pitchi_
and, with the aid of his companions, he grinds its contents between two
stones; after this, he eats a little of the powder thus obtained, his
assistants do the same, and what remains is given to the men of the
other clans, who may now dispose of it freely. They proceed in exactly
the same manner with the supply provided by the Alatunja. From now on,
the men and women of the totem may eat it, but only a little at a time;
if they went beyond the limits allowed, they would lose the powers
necessary to celebrate the Intichiuma and the species would not
reproduce. Yet, if they did not eat any at all, and especially if the
Alatunja ate none in the circumstances we have just described, they
would be overtaken by the same incapacity.

In the totemic group of the Kangaroo, which has its centre at Undiara,
certain characteristics of the ceremony are more clearly marked. After
the rites which we have described have been accomplished on the sacred
rock, the young men go and hunt the kangaroo, bringing their game back
to the camp. Here, the old men, with the Alatunja in their midst, eat a
little of the flesh of the animal, and anoint the bodies of those who
took part in the Intichiuma with its fat. The rest is divided up among
the men assembled. Next, the men of the totem decorate themselves with
totemic designs and the night is passed in songs commemorating the
exploits accomplished by men and animal kangaroos in the times of the
Alcheringa. The next day, the young men go hunting again in the forest
and bring back a larger number of kangaroos than the first time, and the
ceremonies of the day before recommence.[1130]

With variations of detail, the same rite is found in other Arunta
clans,[1131] among the Urabunna,[1132] the Kaitish,[1133] the
Unmatjera,[1134] and in the Encounter Bay Tribe.[1135] Everywhere, it is
made up of the same essential elements. A few specimens of the totemic
animal or plant are presented to the chief of the clan, who solemnly
eats them and who must eat them. If he did not fulfil this duty, he
would lose the power of celebrating the Intichiuma efficaciously, that
is to say, so as to recreate the species annually. Sometimes the ritual
consumption is followed by an unction made with the fat of the animal or
certain parts of the plant.[1136] This rite is generally repeated by the
men of the totem, or at least by the old men, and after it has been
accomplished, the exceptional interdictions are raised.

In the tribes located farther north, among the Warramunga and
neighbouring societies,[1137] this ceremony is no longer found. However,
traces are found which seem to indicate that there was a time when it
was known. It is true that the chief of the clan never eats the totem
ritually and obligatorily. But in certain cases, men who are not of the
totem whose Intichiuma has just been celebrated, must bring the animal
or plant to camp and offer it to the chief, asking him if he wants to
eat it. He refuses and adds, "I have made this for you; you may eat it
freely."[1138] So the custom of the presentation remains and the
question asked of the chief seems to date back to an epoch when the
ritual consumption was practised.[1139]


III

The interest of the system of rites which has just been described lies
in the fact that in them we find, in the most elementary form that is
actually known, all the essential principles of a great religious
institution which was destined to become one of the foundation stones of
the positive cult in the superior religions: this is the institution of
sacrifice.

We know what a revolution the work of Robertson Smith brought about in
the traditional theory of sacrifice.[1140] Before him, sacrifice was
regarded as a sort of tribute or homage, either obligatory or optional,
analogous to that which subjects owe to their princes. Robertson Smith
was the first to remark that this classic explanation did not account
for two essential characteristics of the rite. In the first place, it is
a repast: its substance is food. Secondly, it is a repast in which the
worshippers who offer it take part, along with the god to whom it is
offered. Certain parts of the victim are reserved for the divinity;
others are attributed to the sacrificers, who consume them; this is why
the Bible often speaks of the sacrifice as a repast in the presence of
Jahveh. Now in a multitude of societies, meals taken in common are
believed to create a bond of artificial kinship between those who assist
at them: In fact, relatives are people who are naturally made of the
same flesh and blood. But food is constantly remaking the substance of
the organism. So a common food may produce the same effects as a common
origin. According to Smith, sacrificial banquets have the object of
making the worshipper and his god communicate in the same flesh, in
order to form a bond of kinship between them. From this point of view,
sacrifice takes on a wholly new aspect. Its essential element is no
longer the act of renouncement which the word sacrifice ordinarily
expresses; before all, it is an act of alimentary communion.

Of course there are some reservations to be made in the details of this
way of explaining the efficacy of sacrificial banquets. This does not
result exclusively from the act of eating together. A man does not
sanctify himself merely by sitting down, in some way, at the same table
with a god, but especially by eating food at this ritual repast which
has a sacred character. It has been shown how a whole series of
preliminary operations, lustrations, unctions, prayers, etc., transform
the animal to be immolated into a sacred thing, whose sacredness is
subsequently transferred to the worshipper who eats it.[1141] But it is
true, none the less, that the alimentary communion is one of the
essential elements of the sacrifice. Now when we turn to the rite which
terminates the ceremonies of the Intichiuma, we find that it, too,
consists in an act of this sort. After the totemic animal has been
killed, the Alatunja and the old men solemnly eat it. So they
communicate with the sacred principle residing in it and they assimilate
it. The only difference we find here is that the animal is naturally
sacred while it ordinarily acquires this character artificially in the
course of the sacrifice.

Moreover, the object of this communion is manifest. Every member of a
totemic clan contains a mystic substance within him which is the
pre-eminent part of his being, for his soul is made out of it. From it
come whatever powers he has and his social position, for it is this
which makes him a person. So he has a vital interest in maintaining it
intact and in keeping it, as far as is possible, in a state of perpetual
youth. Unfortunately all forces, even the most spiritual, are used up in
the course of time if nothing comes to return to them the energy they
lose through the normal working of things; there is a necessity of the
first importance here which, as we shall see, is the real reason for the
positive cult. Therefore the men of a totem cannot retain their position
unless they periodically revivify the totemic principle which is in
them; and as they represent this principle in the form of a vegetable or
animal, it is to the corresponding animal or vegetable species that they
go to demand the supplementary forces needed to renew this and to
rejuvenate it. A man of the Kangaroo clan believes himself and feels
himself a kangaroo; it is by this quality that he defines himself; it is
this which marks his place in the society. In order to keep it, he takes
a little of the flesh of this same animal into his own body from time to
time. A small bit is enough, owing to the rule: _the part is equal to
the whole_.[1142]

If this operation is to produce all the desired effects, it may not take
place at no matter what moment. The most opportune time is when the new
generation has just reached its complete development, for this is also
the moment when the forces animating the totemic species attain their
maximum intensity. They have just been drawn with great difficulty from
those rich reservoirs of life, the sacred trees and rocks. Moreover, all
sorts of means have been employed to increase their intensity still
more; this is the use of the rites performed during the first part of
the Intichiuma. Also, by their very aspect, the firstfruits of the
harvest manifest the energy which they contain: here the totemic god
acclaims himself in all the glory of his youth. This is why the
firstfruits have always been regarded as a very sacred fruit, reserved
for very holy beings. So it is natural that the Australian uses it to
regenerate himself spiritually. Thus both the date and the circumstances
of the ceremonies are explained.

Perhaps some will be surprised that so sacred a food may be eaten by
ordinary profane persons. But in the first place, there is no positive
cult which does not face this contradiction. Every sacred being is
removed from profane touch by this very character with which it is
endowed; but, on the other hand, they would serve for nothing and have
no reason whatsoever for their existence if they could not come in
contact with these same worshippers who, on another ground, must remain
respectfully distant from them. At bottom, there is no positive rite
which does not constitute a veritable sacrilege, for a man cannot hold
commerce with the sacred beings without crossing the barrier which
should ordinarily keep them separate. But the important thing is that
the sacrilege should be accompanied with precautions which attenuate
it. Among those employed, the most usual one consists in arranging the
transition so as to introduce the worshipper slowly and gradually into
the circle of sacred things. When it has been broken and diluted in this
fashion, the sacrilege does not offend the religious conscience so
violently; it is not regarded as a sacrilege and so vanishes. This is
what happens in the case now before us. The effect of the whole series
of rites which has preceded the moment when the totem is solemnly eaten
has been to sanctify those who took an active part in them. They
constitute an essentially religious period, through which no one could
go without a transformation of his religious state. The fasts, the
contact with sacred rocks, the churinga,[1143] the totemic decorations,
etc., have gradually conferred upon him a character which he did not
have before and which enables him to approach, without a shocking and
dangerous profanation, this desirable and redoubtable food which is
forbidden him in ordinary times.[1144]

If the act by which a sacred being is first immolated and then eaten by
those who adore it may be called a sacrifice, the rite of which we have
just been speaking has a right to this same name. Moreover, its
significance is well shown by the striking analogies it presents with so
many practices met with in a large number of agrarian cults. It is a
very general rule that even among peoples who have attained a high
degree of civilization, the firstfruits of the harvest are used in the
ritual repasts, of which the pascal feast is the best known
example.[1145] On the other hand, as the agrarian rites are at the very
basis of the most advanced forms of the cult, we see that the Intichiuma
of the Australian societies is closer to us than one might imagine from
its apparent crudeness.

By an intuition of genius, Smith had an intuition of all this, though he
was not acquainted with the facts. By a series of ingenious
deductions--which need not be reproduced here, for their interest is now
only historical[1146]--he thought that he could establish the fact that
at the beginning the animal immolated in the sacrifice must have been
regarded as quasi-divine and as a close relative of those who immolated
it: now these characteristics are just the ones with which the totemic
species is defined. Smith even went so far as to suppose that totemism
must have known and practised a rite wholly similar to the one we have
been studying; he was even inclined to see the original source of the
whole sacrificial institution in a sacrifice of this sort.[1147]
Sacrifice was not founded to create a bond of artificial kinship between
a man and his gods, but to maintain and renew the natural kinship which
primitively united them. Here, as elsewhere, the artifice was born only
to imitate nature. But in the book of Smith this hypothesis was
presented as scarcely more than a theory which the then known facts
supported very imperfectly. The rare cases of totemic sacrifice which he
cites in support of his theory do not have the significance he
attributed to them; the animals which figure in them are not real
totems.[1148] But to-day we are able to state that on at least one point
the demonstration is made: in fact, we have just seen that in an
important number of societies the totemic sacrifice, such as Smith
conceived it, is or has been practised. Of course, we have no proof that
this practice is necessarily inherent to totemism or that it is the germ
out of which all the other types of sacrifices have developed. But if
the universality of the rite is hypothetical, its existence is no longer
to be contested. Hereafter it is to be regarded as established that the
most mystical form of the alimentary communion is found even in the most
rudimentary cults known to-day.


IV

But on another point the new facts at our disposal invalidate the
theories of Smith.

According to him, the communion was not only an essential element of the
sacrifice, but at the beginning, at least, it was the unique element.
Not only is one mistaken when he reduces sacrifice to nothing more than
a tribute or offering, but the very idea of an offering was originally
absent from it; this intervened only at a late period and under the
influence of external circumstances; so instead of being able to aid us
in understanding it, it has rather masked the real nature of the ritual
mechanism. In fact, Smith claimed to find in the very notion of oblation
an absurdity so revolting that it could never have been the fundamental
reason for so great an institution. One of the most important functions
incumbent upon the divinity is to assure to men that food which is
necessary for life; so it seems impossible that the sacrifice, in its
turn, should consist in a presentation of food to the divinity. It even
seems self-contradictory that the gods should expect their food from a
man, when it is from them that he gets his. Why should they have need of
his aid in order to deduct beforehand their just share of the things
which he receives from their hands? From these considerations Smith
concluded that the idea of a sacrifice-offering could have been born
only in the great religions, where the gods, removed from the things
with which they were primitively confused, were thought of as sorts of
kings and the eminent proprietors of the earth and its products. From
this moment onwards, the sacrifice was associated with the tribute which
subjects paid to their prince, as a price of the rights which were
conceded to them. But this new interpretation was really an alteration
and even a corruption of the primitive conception. For "the idea of
property materializes all that it touches"; by introducing itself into
the sacrifice, it denatured it and made it into a sort of bargain
between the man and the divinity.[1149]

But the facts which we have described overthrow this argumentation.
These rites are certainly among the most primitive that have ever been
observed. No determined mythical personality appears in them; there is
no question of gods or spirits that are properly so called; it is only
vaguely anonymous and impersonal forces which they put into action. Yet
the reasoning which they suppose is exactly the one that Smith declared
impossible because of its absurdity.

Let us return to the first act of the Intichiuma, to the rites destined
to assure the fecundity of the animal or vegetable species which serves
the clan as totem. This species is the pre-eminently sacred thing; in it
is incarnated that which we have been able to call, by metaphor, the
totemic divinity. Yet we have seen that to perpetuate itself it has need
of the aid of men. It is they who dispense the life of the new
generation each year; without them, it would never be born. If they
stopped celebrating the Intichiuma, the sacred beings would disappear
from the face of the earth. So in one sense, it is from men that they
get their existence; yet in another way, it is from them that men get
theirs; for after they have once arrived at maturity, it is from them
that men acquire the force needed to support and repair their spiritual
beings. Thus we are able to say that men make their gods, or, at least,
make them live; but at the same time, it is from them that they live
themselves. So they are regularly guilty of the circle which, according
to Smith, is implied in the very idea of a sacrificial tribute: they
give to the sacred beings a little of what they receive from them, and
they receive from them all that they give.

But there is still more to be said: the oblations which he is thus
forced to make every year do not differ in nature from those which are
made later in the rites properly called sacrifices. If the sacrificer
immolates an animal, it is in order that the living principles within it
may be disengaged from the organism and go to nourish the divinity.
Likewise, the grains of dust which the Australian detaches from the
sacred rock are so many sacred principles which he scatters into space,
so that they may go to animate the totemic species and assure its
renewal. The gesture with which this scattering is made is also that
which normally accompanies offerings. In certain cases, the resemblance
between the two rites may be followed even to the details of the
movements effected. We have seen that in order to have rain the Kaitish
pour water over the sacred stone; among certain peoples, the priest
pours water over the altar, with the same end in view.[1150] The
effusions of blood which are usual in a certain number of Intichiuma are
veritable oblations. Just as the Arunta or Dieri sprinkle the sacred
rock or the totemic design with blood, so it frequently happens that in
the more advanced cults, the blood of the sacrificed victim or of the
worshipper himself is spilt before or upon the altar.[1151] In these
cases, it is given to the gods, of whom it is the preferred food; in
Australia, it is given to the sacred species. So we have no ground for
saying that the idea of oblation is a late product of civilization.

A document which we owe to Strehlow puts this kinship of the Intichiuma
and the sacrifice clearly into evidence. This is a hymn which
accompanies the Intichiuma of the Kangaroo; the ceremony is described at
the same time that its expected effects are announced. A morsel of
kangaroo fat has been placed by the chief upon a support made of
branches. The text says that this fat makes the fat of the kangaroos
increase.[1152] This time, they do not confine themselves to sprinkling
sacred dust or human blood about; the animal itself is immolated, or
sacrificed as one might say, placed upon a sort of altar, and offered to
the species, whose life it should maintain.

Now we see the sense in which we may say that the Intichiuma contains
the germs of the sacrificial system. In the form which it takes when
fully constituted, a sacrifice is composed of two essential elements: an
act of communion and an act of oblation. The worshipper communes with
his god by taking in a sacred food, and at the same time he makes an
offering to this god. We find these two acts in the Intichiuma, as we
have described it. The only difference is that in the ordinary
sacrifice[1153] they are made simultaneously or else follow one another
immediately, while in the Australian ceremony they are separated. In the
former case, they are parts of one undivided rite; here, they take place
at different times, and may even be separated by a rather long interval.
But, at bottom, the mechanism is the same. Taken as a whole, the
Intichiuma is a sacrifice, but one whose parts are not yet articulated
and organized.

The relating of these two ceremonies has the double advantage of
enabling us to understand better the nature of the Intichiuma and that
of sacrifice.

We understand the Intichiuma better. In fact, the conception of Frazer,
which made it a simple magic operation[1154] with no religious character
at all, is now seen to be unsupportable. One cannot dream of excluding
from religion a rite which is the forerunner of so great a religious
institution.

But we also understand what the sacrifice itself is better. In the first
place, the equal importance of the two elements entering into it is now
established. If the Australian makes offerings to his sacred beings,
there is no reason for supposing that the idea of oblation was foreign
to the primitive organization of the sacrificial institution and later
upset its natural arrangement. The theory of Smith must be revised on
this point.[1155] Of course the sacrifice is partially a communion; but
it is also, and no less essentially, a gift and an act of renouncement.
It always presupposes that the worshipper gives some of his substance or
his goods to his gods. Every attempt to deduce one of these elements
from the other is hopeless. Perhaps the oblation is even more permanent
than the communion.[1156]

In the second place, it ordinarily seems as though the sacrifice, and
especially the sacrificial oblation, could only be addressed to personal
beings. But the oblations which we have met with in Australia imply no
notion of this sort. In other words, the sacrifice is independent of the
varying forms in which the religious forces are conceived; it is founded
upon more profound reasons, which we shall seek presently.

In any case, it is clear that the act of offering naturally arouses in
the mind the idea of a moral subject, whom this offering is destined to
please. The ritual acts which we have described become more
intelligible when it is believed that they are addressed to persons. So
the practices of the Intichiuma, while actually putting only impersonal
forces into play, prepare the way for a different conception.[1157] Of
course they were not sufficient to form the idea of mythical
personalities by themselves, but when this idea had once been formed,
the very nature of these rites made it enter into the cult; thus, taking
a more direct interest in action and life, it also acquired a greater
reality. So we are even able to believe that the cult favoured, in a
secondary manner, no doubt, but nevertheless one which is worthy of
attention, the personification of the religious forces.


V

But we still have to explain the contradiction in which Robertson Smith
saw an inadmissible logical scandal.

If the sacred beings always manifested their powers in a perfectly equal
manner, it would appear inconceivable that men should dream of offering
them services, for we cannot see what need they could have of them. But
in the first place, in so far as they are confused with things, and in
so far as they are regarded as principles of the cosmic life, they are
themselves submitted to the rhythm of this life. Now this goes in
oscillations in contrary directions, which succeed one another according
to a determined law. Sometimes it is affirmed in all its glory;
sometimes it weakens to such an extent that one may ask himself whether
it is not going to fade away. Vegetation dies every year; will it be
reborn? Animal species tend to become extinguished by the effect of
natural and violent death; will they be renewed at such a time and in
such a way as is proper? Above all, the rain is capricious; there are
long periods during which it seems to have disappeared for ever. These
periodical variations of nature bear witness to the fact that at the
corresponding periods, the sacred beings upon whom the plants, animals,
rain, etc., depend are themselves passing through grave crises; so they,
too, have their periods of giving way. But men could not regard these
spectacles as indifferent spectators. If he is to live, the universal
life must continue, and consequently the gods must not die. So he seeks
to sustain and aid them; for this, he puts at their service whatever
forces he has at his disposition, and mobilizes them for this purpose.
The blood flowing in his veins has fecundating virtues; he pours it
forth. From the sacred rocks possessed by his clan he takes those germs
of life which lie dormant there, and scatters them into space. In a
word, he makes oblations.

The external and physical crises, moreover, duplicate internal and
mental crises which tend toward the same result. Sacred beings exist
only when they are represented as such in the mind. When we cease to
believe in them, it is as though they did not exist. Even those which
have a material form and are given by sensible experience, depend upon
the thought of the worshippers who adore them; for the sacred character
which makes them objects of the cult is not given by their natural
constitution; it is added to them by belief. The kangaroo is only an
animal like all others; yet, for the men of the Kangaroo, it contains
within it a principle which puts it outside the company of others, and
this principle exists only in the minds of those who believe in
it.[1158] If these sacred beings, when once conceived, are to have no
need of men to continue, it would be necessary that the representations
expressing them always remain the same. But this stability is
impossible. In fact, it is in the communal life that they are formed,
and this communal life is essentially intermittent. So they necessarily
partake of this same intermittency. They attain their greatest intensity
at the moment when the men are assembled together and are in immediate
relations with one another, when they all partake of the same idea and
the same sentiment. But when the assembly has broken up and each man has
returned to his own peculiar life, they progressively lose their
original energy. Being covered over little by little by the rising flood
of daily experiences, they would soon fall into the unconscious, if we
did not find some means of calling them back into consciousness and
revivifying them. If we think of them less forcefully, they amount to
less for us and we count less upon them; they exist to a lesser degree.
So here we have another point of view, from which the services of men
are necessary to them. This second reason for their existence is even
more important than the first, for it exists all the time. The
intermittency of the physical life can affect religious beliefs only
when religions are not yet detached from their cosmic basis. The
intermittency of the social life, on the other hand, is inevitable; even
the most idealistic religions cannot escape it.

Moreover, it is owing to this state of dependency upon the thought of
men, in which the gods find themselves, that the former are able to
believe in the efficacy of their assistance. The only way of renewing
the collective representations which relate to sacred beings is to
retemper them in the very source of the religious life, that is to say,
in the assembled groups. Now the emotions aroused by these periodical
crises through which external things pass induce the men who witness
them to assemble, to see what should be done about it. But by the very
fact of uniting, they are mutually comforted; they find a remedy because
they seek it together. The common faith becomes reanimated quite
naturally in the heart of this reconstituted group; if is born again
because it again finds those very conditions in which it was born in the
first place. After it has been restored, it easily triumphs over all the
private doubts which may have arisen in individual minds. The image of
the sacred things regains power enough to resist the internal or
external causes which tended to weaken it. In spite of their apparent
failure, men can no longer believe that the gods will die, because they
feel them living in their own hearts. The means employed to succour
them, howsoever crude these may be, cannot appear vain, for everything
goes on as if they were really effective. Men are more confident because
they feel themselves stronger; and they really are stronger, because
forces which were languishing are now reawakened in the consciousness.

So we must be careful not to believe, along with Smith, that the cult
was founded solely for the benefit of men and that the gods have nothing
to do with it: they have no less need of it than their worshippers. Of
course men would be unable to live without gods, but, on the other hand,
the gods would die if their cult were not rendered. This does not have
the sole object of making profane subjects communicate with sacred
beings, but it also keeps these latter alive and is perpetually remaking
and regenerating them. Of course it is not the material oblations which
bring about this regeneration by their own virtues; it is the mental
states which these actions, though vain in themselves, accompany or
reawaken. The real reason for the existence of the cults, even of those
which are the most materialistic in appearance, is not to be sought in
the acts which they prescribe, but in the internal and moral
regeneration which these acts aid in bringing about. The things which
the worshipper really gives his gods are not the foods which he places
upon the altars, nor the blood which he lets flow from his veins: it is
his thought. Nevertheless, it is true that there is an exchange of
services, which are mutually demanded, between the divinity and its
worshippers. The rule _do ut des_, by which the principle of sacrifice
has sometimes been defined, is not a late invention of utilitarian
theorists: it only expresses in an explicit way the very mechanism of
the sacrificial system and, more generally, of the whole positive cult.
So the circle pointed out by Smith is very real; but it contains nothing
humiliating for the reason. It comes from the fact that the sacred
beings, though superior to men, can live only in the human
consciousness.

But this circle will appear still more natural to us, and we shall
understand its meaning and the reason for its existence still better if,
carrying our analysis still farther and substituting for the religious
symbols the realities which they represent, we investigate how these
behave in the rite. If, as we have attempted to establish, the sacred
principle is nothing more nor less than society transfigured and
personified, it should be possible to interpret the ritual in lay and
social terms. And, as a matter of fact, social life, just like the
ritual, moves in a circle. On the one hand, the individual gets from
society the best part of himself, all that gives him a distinct
character and a special place among other beings, his intellectual and
moral culture. If we should withdraw from men their language, sciences,
arts and moral beliefs, they would drop to the rank of animals. So the
characteristic attributes of human nature come from society. But, on the
other hand, society exists and lives only in and through individuals. If
the idea of society were extinguished in individual minds and the
beliefs, traditions and aspirations of the group were no longer felt and
shared by the individuals, society would die. We can say of it what we
just said of the divinity: it is real only in so far as it has a place
in human consciousnesses, and this place is whatever one we may give it.
We now see the real reason why the gods cannot do without their
worshippers any more than these can do without their gods; it is because
society, of which the gods are only a symbolic expression, cannot do
without individuals any more than these can do without society.

Here we touch the solid rock upon which all the cults are built and
which has caused their persistence ever since human societies have
existed. When we see what religious rites consist of and towards what
they seem to tend, we demand with astonishment how men have been able to
imagine them, and especially how they can remain so faithfully attached
to them. Whence could the illusion have come that with a few grains of
sand thrown to the wind, or a few drops of blood shed upon a rock or the
stone of an altar, it is possible to maintain the life of an animal
species or of a god? We have undoubtedly made a step in advance towards
the solution of this problem when we have discovered, behind these
outward and apparently unreasonable movements, a mental mechanism which
gives them a meaning and a moral significance. But we are in no way
assured that this mechanism itself does not consist in a simple play of
hallucinatory images. We have pointed out the psychological process
which leads the believers to imagine that the rite causes the spiritual
forces of which they have need to be reborn about them; but it does not
follow from the fact that this belief is psychologically explicable that
it has any objective value. If we are to see in the efficacy attributed
to the rites anything more than the product of a chronic delirium with
which humanity has abused itself, we must show that the effect of the
cult really is to recreate periodically a moral being upon which we
depend as it depends upon us. Now this being does exist: it is society.

Howsoever little importance the religious ceremonies may have, they put
the group into action; the groups assemble to celebrate them. So their
first effect is to bring individuals together, to multiply the relations
between them and to make them more intimate with one another. By this
very fact, the contents of their consciousnesses is changed. On ordinary
days, it is utilitarian and individual avocations which take the greater
part of the attention. Every one attends to his own personal business;
for most men, this primarily consists in satisfying the exigencies of
material life, and the principal incentive to economic activity has
always been private interest. Of course social sentiments could never be
totally absent. We remain in relations with others; the habits, ideas
and tendencies which education has impressed upon us and which
ordinarily preside over our relations with others, continue to make
their action felt. But they are constantly combated and held in check by
the antagonistic tendencies aroused and supported by the necessities of
the daily struggle. They resist more or less successfully, according to
their intrinsic energy: but this energy is not renewed. They live upon
their past, and consequently they would be used up in the course of
time, if nothing returned to them a little of the force that they lose
through these incessant conflicts and frictions. When the Australians,
scattered in little groups, spend their time in hunting and fishing,
they lose sight of what concerns their clan or tribe: their only thought
is to catch as much game as possible. On feast days, on the contrary,
these preoccupations are necessarily eclipsed; being essentially
profane, they are excluded from these sacred periods. At this time,
their thoughts are centred upon their common beliefs, their common
traditions, the memory of their great ancestors, the collective ideal
of which they are the incarnation; in a word, upon social things. Even
the material interests which these great religious ceremonies are
designed to satisfy concern the public order and are therefore social.
Society as a whole is interested that the harvest be abundant, that the
rain fall at the right time and not excessively, that the animals
reproduce regularly. So it is society that is in the foreground of every
consciousness; It dominates and directs all conduct; this is equivalent
to saying that it is more living and active, and consequently more real,
than in profane times. So men do not deceive themselves when they feel
at this time that there is something outside of them which is born
again, that there are forces which are reanimated and a life which
reawakens. This renewal is in no way imaginary and the individuals
themselves profit from it. For the spark of a social being which each
bears within him necessarily participates in this collective renovation.
The individual soul is regenerated too, by being dipped again in the
source from which its life comes; consequently it feels itself stronger,
more fully master of itself, less dependent upon physical necessities.

We know that the positive cult naturally tends to take periodic forms;
this is one of its distinctive features. Of course there are rites which
men celebrate occasionally, in connection with passing situations. But
these episodic practices are always merely accessory, and in the
religions studied in this book, they are almost exceptional. The
essential constituent of the cult is the cycle of feasts which return
regularly at determined epochs. We are now able to understand whence
this tendency towards periodicity comes; the rhythm which the religious
life follows only expresses the rhythm of the social life, and results
from it. Society is able to revivify the sentiment it has of itself only
by assembling. But it cannot be assembled all the time. The exigencies
of life do not allow it to remain in congregation indefinitely; so it
scatters, to assemble anew when it again feels the need of this. It is
to these necessary alternations that the regular alternations of sacred
and profane times correspond. Since the apparent object, at least, of
the cult was at first to regularize the course of natural phenomena, the
rhythm of the cosmic life has put its mark on the rhythm of the ritual
life. This is why the feasts have long been associated with the seasons;
we have seen this characteristic already in the Intichiuma of Australia.
But the seasons have only furnished the outer frame-work for this
organization, and not the principle upon which it rests; for even the
cults which aim at exclusively spiritual ends have remained periodical.
So this periodicity must be due to other causes. Since the seasonal
changes are critical periods for nature, they are a natural occasion for
assembling, and consequently for religious ceremonies. But other events
can and have successfully fulfilled this function of occasional cause.
However, it must be recognized that this frame-work, though purely
external, has given proof of a singular resistive force, for traces of
it are found even in the religions which are the most fully detached
from all physical bases. Many Christian celebrations are founded, with
no break of continuity, on the pastoral and agrarian feasts of the
ancient Hebrews, although in themselves they are neither pastoral nor
agrarian.

Moreover, this rhythm is capable of varying in different societies.
Where the period of dispersion is long, and the dispersion itself is
extreme, the period of congregation, in its turn, is very prolonged, and
produces veritable debauches of collective and religions life. Feasts
succeed one another for weeks or even for months, while the ritual life
sometimes attains to a sort of frenzy. This is what happens among the
Australian tribes and many of the tribes of North-western America.[1159]
Elsewhere, on the contrary, these two phases of the social life succeed
one another after shorter intervals, and then the contrast between them
is less marked. The more societies develop, the less they seem to allow
of too great intermittences.




