
A JOURNEY FROM THIS WORLD TO THE NEXT



By Henry Fielding


CONTENTS:

INTRODUCTION

     BOOK I


     CHAPTER I.
     The author dies, meets with Mercury, and is by him conducted to
     the stage which sets out for the other world


     CHAPTER II.
     In which the author first refutes some idle opinions concerning
     spirits, and then the passengers relate their several deaths.


     CHAPTER III.
     The adventures we met with in the City of Diseases


     CHAPTER IV.
     Discourses on the road, and a description of the palace of Death


     CHAPTER V.
     The travelers proceed on their journey, and meet several spirits
     who are coming into the flesh


     CHAPTER VI.
     An account of the wheel of fortune, with a method of preparing a
     spirit for this world


     CHAPTER VII.
     The proceedings of judge Minos at the gate of Elysium


     CHAPTER VIII.
     The adventures which the author met on his first entrance into Elysium


     CHAPTER IX.
     More adventures in Elysium

     CHAPTER X.
     The author is surprised at meeting Julian the apostate in Elysium;
     but is satisfied by him by what means he procured  his entrance there.
     Julian relates his adventures in the character of a slave

     CHAPTER XI.
     In which Julian relates his adventures in the character of an
     avaricious Jew

     CHAPTER XII.
     What happened to Julian in the characters of a general, an heir,
     a carpenter, and a beau

     CHAPTER XIII.
     Julian passes into a fop

     CHAPTER XIV.
     Adventures in the person of a monk

     CHAPTER XV.
     Julian passes into the character of a fiddler

     CHAPTER XVI.
     The history of the wise man

     CHAPTER XVII.
     Julian enters into the person of a king

     CHAPTER XVIII.
     Julian passes into a fool

     CHAPTER XIX.
     Julian appears in the character of a beggar

     CHAPTER XX.
     Julian performs the part of a statesman

     CHAPTER XXI.
     Julian’s adventures in the post of a soldier

     CHAPTER XXII.
     What happened to Julian in the person of a tailor

     CHAPTER XXIII.
     The life of alderman Julian

     CHAPTER XXIV.
     Julian recounts what happened to him while he was a poet

     CHAPTER XXV.
     Julian performs the parts of a knight and a dancing-master


     BOOK II.

     CHAPTER VII.
     Wherein Anna Boleyn relates the history of her life





A JOURNEY FROM THIS WORLD TO THE NEXT




INTRODUCTION

Whether the ensuing pages were really the dream or vision of some very
pious and holy person; or whether they were really written in the other
world, and sent back to this, which is the opinion of many (though
I think too much inclining to superstition); or lastly, whether, as
infinitely the greatest part imagine, they were really the production
of some choice inhabitant of New Bethlehem, is not necessary nor easy
to determine. It will be abundantly sufficient if I give the reader an
account by what means they came into my possession. Mr. Robert Powney,
stationer, who dwells opposite to Catherine-street in the Strand, a
very honest man and of great gravity of countenance; who, among other
excellent stationery commodities, is particularly eminent for his pens,
which I am abundantly bound to acknowledge, as I owe to their peculiar
goodness that my manuscripts have by any means been legible: this
gentleman, I say, furnished me some time since with a bundle of those
pens, wrapped up with great care and caution, in a very large sheet of
paper full of characters, written as it seemed in a very bad hand.
Now, I have a surprising curiosity to read everything which is almost
illegible; partly perhaps from the sweet remembrance of the dear
Scrawls, Skrawls, or Skrales (for the word is variously spelled), which
I have in my youth received from that lovely part of the creation for
which I have the tenderest regard; and partly from that temper of mind
which makes men set an immense value on old manuscripts so effaced,
bustoes so maimed, and pictures so black that no one can tell what to
make of them. I therefore perused this sheet with wonderful application,
and in about a day’s time discovered that I could not understand it. I
immediately repaired to Mr. Powney, and inquired very eagerly whether
he had not more of the same manuscript? He produced about one hundred
pages, acquainting me that he had saved no more; but that the book was
originally a huge folio, had been left in his garret by a gentleman
who lodged there, and who had left him no other satisfaction for nine
months’ lodging. He proceeded to inform me that the manuscript had been
hawked about (as he phrased it) among all the booksellers, who refused
to meddle; some alleged that they could not read, others that they could
not understand it. Some would haze it to be an atheistical book, and
some that it was a libel on the government; for one or other of which
reasons they all refused to print it. That it had been likewise shown to
the R--l Society, but they shook their heads, saying, there was nothing
in it wonderful enough for them. That, hearing the gentleman was gone
to the West-Indies, and believing it to be good for nothing else, he had
used it as waste paper. He said I was welcome to what remained, and he
was heartily sorry for what was missing, as I seemed to set some value
on it.

I desired him much to name a price: but he would receive no
consideration farther than the payment of a small bill I owed him, which
at that time he said he looked on as so much money given him.

I presently communicated this manuscript to my friend parson Abraham
Adams, who, after a long and careful perusal, returned it me with his
opinion that there was more in it than at first appeared; that the
author seemed not entirely unacquainted with the writings of Plato; but
he wished he had quoted him sometimes in his margin, that I might be
sure (said he) he had read him in the original: for nothing, continued
the parson, is commoner than for men now-a-days to pretend to have read
Greek authors, who have met with them only in translations, and cannot
conjugate a verb in mi.

To deliver my own sentiments on the occasion, I think the author
discovers a philosophical turn of thinking, with some little knowledge
of the world, and no very inadequate value of it. There are some indeed
who, from the vivacity of their temper and the happiness of their
station, are willing to consider its blessings as more substantial, and
the whole to be a scene of more consequence than it is here represented:
but, without controverting their opinions at present, the number of wise
and good men who have thought with our author are sufficient to keep him
in countenance: nor can this be attended with any ill inference, since
he everywhere teaches this moral: That the greatest and truest happiness
which this world affords, is to be found only in the possession of
goodness and virtue; a doctrine which, as it is undoubtedly true, so
hath it so noble and practical a tendency, that it can never be too
often or too strongly inculcated on the minds of men.




BOOK I



