CHAPTER XI.

1760-1762. Æt. 49-51.

     Alterations of the History in the direction of Despotic
     Principles--Specimens--Alterations in Style--Specimens--His
     Elaboration--Ossian's Poems--Labours at the early part of the
     History--Ferguson's "Sister Peg"--Acquaintance with Madame de
     Boufflers--Account of that lady--First intercourse with
     Rousseau--Rousseau's position--The exiled Earl Marishal--
     Campbell and his Dissertation on Miracles.


We have seen, from various indications in Hume's letters to his friends,
that he employed himself occasionally in corrections and alterations of
the published volumes of his History. In these revisals, and especially
in that of the "History of the Stuarts," his alterations were not
limited to the style. He tells us, with a sort of scornful candour, in
his "own life," "Though I had been taught by experience that the Whig
party were in possession of bestowing all places, both in the state and
in literature, I was so little inclined to yield to their senseless
clamour, that in above a hundred alterations which farther study,
reading, or reflection engaged me to make in the reigns of the two first
Stuarts, I have made all of them invariably to the Tory side. It is
ridiculous to consider the English constitution, before that period, as
a regular plan of liberty."

It was part of his nature, when popular clamour called for the adoption
of a particular course, to turn his steps for that reason the more
distinctly in the opposite direction. He has not exaggerated the extent
or character of his alterations; for an inspection of the various
editions of his History which came under his own revision, shows him, by
turns of expression, structure of narrative, and other gentle
alterations, approaching closer and closer to despotic principles. The
democratic opinions contained in his early essays, have already been
alluded to; and their suppression in subsequent editions, harmonizes
with these variations of the opinions expressed in his History.[74:1]

There are, however, a very few alterations in an opposite spirit. Thus,
in the following sentence relative to the proceedings of the House of
Commons regarding the militia, the part in italics is suppressed in the
later editions. "He [the king] issued proclamations against this
manifest usurpation; _the most precipitant and most enormous of which
there is any instance in the English history_."

On one incident of some importance in history, he was obliged materially
to change his ground of argument, yet would not alter his original
opinion. During the fervour of the civil wars in 1646, Lord Glamorgan
had in the name of Charles I. concluded a treaty with the confederated
Irish Catholics, by which, on the condition of their aiding the king,
besides other concessions, the Roman Catholic religion was to be
restored to its old supremacy through a great part of Ireland. Ormond,
the lord lieutenant, charged Glamorgan with high treason: but he
produced two commissions from the king. The king disowned the
commissions: but the parliament believed in their genuineness.--It was
in this shape that the matter appeared in the first instance before
Hume. In his first edition he accordingly maintained that the
commissions were forgeries; and a long note, explanatory of the grounds
of this belief, is a remarkable instance of a plausible fabric of
historical reasoning, doomed afterwards to fall to pieces by the removal
of its foundation. Before he published his second edition, he received a
letter from the Rev. John Douglas, afterwards Bishop of Carlisle,[78:1]
who was intrusted with the editing of the Clarendon Papers. In this
communication, the reverend gentleman regrets that he cannot send to
Hume a letter written by Glamorgan, describing the method in which the
commissions were actually prepared, and its object; but he gives an
account of the contents of the letter.[78:2] Hume could no longer hold
that the commissions were not genuine: but he still maintained Charles
to be guiltless; and though they were unknown to the lord lieutenant,
and bore no attestation of having passed through the proper offices, he
still argued that Glamorgan, in treating with the Irish, though he was
within the letter of his very wide powers, must have exceeded his
instructions; and ingeniously pointed to his work, "The century of
Inventions," in connexion with which Lord Glamorgan is better known, by
his subsequent title of Marquis of Worcester, as the production of a man
who never could have been trusted with powers so extensive as those
which he arrogated.

Besides the variations in political opinion, there were in the
subsequent editions of Hume's History other alterations suggested by
other influences. His opinions were self-formed, and he jealously
protected them in their formation from the influence of other minds; but
in the cultivation of his style he sought assistance with avidity
from all who could afford it. Hence he appears to have earnestly
solicited the aid of Lyttelton, Mallet, and others, whose experience of
English composition might enable them to detect Scotticisms.

[Illustration: SPECIMEN OF THE M.S. OF HUME'S HISTORY.

REIGN OF HENRY II. PUBLISHED IN 1762.]

Before they went to press, his compositions underwent a minute and
rigorous correction. His manuscripts, as the small fac-simile engraved
for these volumes shows, were subjected to a painful revisal. We
sometimes find him, after he has adopted a form of expression, scoring
it out and substituting another; but again, on a comparison of their
mutual merits, restoring the rejected form, and perhaps again discarding
it when he has lighted on a happier collocation of words.[79:1] It is
worthy of remark, that his most brilliant passages are those which bear
the least appearance of being amended. It is not thence to be inferred
that these passages sprang from his mind in their full symmetry and
beauty: but rather that they had been elaborated, and made ready for
insertion in their proper place, before they were put in writing.

We now resume the correspondence; which will be found to have reference,
among other topics, to the preparation of the History anterior to the
accession of the Tudors.


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

"_Edinburgh, 22d March, 1760._

"DEAR SIR,--You gave me a very sensible pleasure in informing me so
early of the success of 'The Siege of Aquileia'[81:1] on its first
representation. I hope it sustained its reputation after it came into
print. I showed Mr. Kincaid your letter; and he has published an
edition here, of a thousand, which go off very well. As he had published
a pamphlet, this winter, which he got from you, I told him that I
fancied you would be satisfied with the same terms, which he then agreed
to.

"I am very busy, and am making some progress; but find that this part of
English History is a work of infinite labour and study; which, however,
I do not grudge; for I have nothing better nor more agreeable to employ
me. I have sent you a short catalogue of books, which either are not in
the Advocates' Library, or are not to be found at present. I must beg of
you to procure them for me, and to send them down with the first ship.
Send me also the prices; for I shall be able to engage the curators of
the library to take from me such as they want at the price.

"Dr. Birch, (to whom make my compliments,) will be so good as to give
you his advice about buying these books; and will tell you if several of
them are collected in volumes, as is often the case with the old English
historians.

"I hope Lord Lyttelton and Mr. Mallet are as busy as I; if so, we may
expect to see their history soon. Please to inform me what you hear of
them. We are informed that Lord Lyttelton is soon to appear. I wish very
much to have the benefit of his work before I go to the press. Donaldson
told me, that Strahan has, at last, finished the small edition of my
Essays, and that you have shipped his and Kincaid's number. They are
resolved, I find, to dispose of them all in this place. I hope you have
not forgot to send me half a dozen of copies in sheets, the number which
we agreed to on any new edition.

"Your press, in London, has been somewhat barren this winter. We have
had nothing from you but a good pamphlet or two, and have, I think,
paid the same in kind. Our militia pamphlet was certainly wrote with
spirit; and has been twice reprinted, as I hear, in London.[83:1] I beg
to be remembered to Mrs. Millar; and please tell her that I am very
sorry we shall not have the pleasure of seeing her here this summer. I
could wish her just as much sickness as to make her sensible that
travelling is good for her. My compliments to Dr. Douglas and Strahan,
and to Friend Cummin, who, I hope, sees now a better prospect of
overcoming all his difficulties. I am," &c.


The following letter, though it must be already familiar to many
readers, is so clear an exposition of the writer's views on some
branches of historical and biographical literature, that it ought not to
be omitted.


HUME _to_ DR. ROBERTSON.

     I have frequently thought, and talked with our common friends
     upon the subject of your letter. There always occurred to us
     several difficulties with regard to every subject we could
     propose. The ancient Greek history has several
     recommendations, particularly the good authors from which it
     must be drawn: but this same circumstance becomes an
     objection, when more narrowly considered; for what can you do
     in most places with these authors but transcribe and translate
     them? no letters or state papers from which you could correct
     their errors, or authenticate their narration, or supply
     their defects. Besides, Rollin is so well wrote with respect
     to style, that with superficial people it passes for
     sufficient. There is one Dr. Lelland, who has lately wrote the
     life of Philip of Macedon, which is one of the best periods.
     The book, they tell me, is perfectly well wrote; yet it has
     had such small sale, and has so little excited the attention
     of the public, that the author has reason to think his labour
     thrown away. I have not read the book; but by the size, I
     should judge it to be too particular. It is a pretty large
     quarto. I think a book of that size sufficient for the whole
     History of Greece till the death of Philip: and I doubt not
     but such a work would be successful, notwithstanding all these
     discouraging circumstances. The subject is noble, and Rollin
     is by no means equal to it.

     I own, I like still less your project of the age of Charles
     the Fifth. That subject is disjointed; and your hero, who is
     the sole connexion, is not very interesting. A competent
     knowledge at least is required of the state and constitution
     of the empire; of the several kingdoms of Spain, of Italy, of
     the Low Countries, which it would be the work of half a life
     to acquire; and, though some parts of the story may be
     entertaining, there would be many dry and barren; and the
     whole seems not to have any great charms.

     But I would not willingly start objections to these schemes,
     unless I had something to propose, which would be plausible;
     and I shall mention to you an idea which has sometimes pleased
     me, and which I had once entertained thoughts of
     attempting.[84:1] You may observe that, among modern readers,
     Plutarch is, in every translation, the chief favourite of the
     ancients. Numberless translations and numberless editions have
     been made of him in all languages; and no translation has been
     so ill done as not to be successful. Though those who read the
     originals never put him in comparison either with Thucydides
     or Xenophon, he always attaches more the reader in the
     translation; a proof that the idea and execution of his work
     is, in the main, happy. Now, I would have you think of writing
     modern lives, somewhat after that manner: not to enter into a
     detail of the actions, but to mark the manners of the great
     personages, by domestic stories, by remarkable sayings, and by
     a general sketch of their lives and adventures. You see that
     in Plutarch the life of Cæsar may be read in half an hour.
     Were you to write the life of Henry the Fourth of France after
     that model, you might pillage all the pretty stories in Sully,
     and speak more of his mistresses than of his battles. In
     short, you might gather the flower of all modern history in
     this manner: the remarkable Popes, the Kings of Sweden, the
     great discoverers and conquerors of the New World; even the
     eminent men of letters, might furnish you with matter, and the
     quick despatch of every different work would encourage you to
     begin a new one. If one volume were successful, you might
     compose another at your leisure, and the field is
     inexhaustible. There are persons whom you might meet with in
     the corners of history, so to speak, who would be a subject of
     entertainment quite unexpected; and as long as you live, you
     might give and receive amusement by such a work; even your
     son, if he had a talent for history, would succeed to the
     subject, and his son to him. I shall insist no farther on this
     idea; because, if it strikes your fancy, you will easily
     perceive all its advantages, and, by farther thought, all its
     difficulties.[85:1]

In 1760, Macpherson published those "Fragments of Ancient Poetry,
collected in the Highlands of Scotland, and translated from the Gaelic
or Erse language," which, afterwards enlarged, became the celebrated
"Ossian's Poems." Hume took an early interest in this professed
resuscitation of early national literature. He at first doubted the
truth of assertions so unprecedented in literary history, as those by
which the genuineness of the poems was maintained. But there was nothing
to which his heart would have responded with a warmer enthusiasm than
the discovery, that his ancestors, generally reputed to be but late
accessions to civilization, could look back upon a literature as rich
and great as that which had crowned Greece with the literary supremacy
of the world. Hence, he seems to have, after some time, willingly
yielded to a belief in the genuineness of these poems. His good sense
and sceptical spirit, however, resumed the supremacy, and he afterwards
wrote a very searching though short "Essay on the Authenticity of
Ossian's Poems." It is printed in the Appendix; and thither the whole
correspondence on the subject is transferred, that the reader may peruse
the various pieces in a series. It is probable that the sole reason why
Hume never published this detection, was a kindly feeling to his friend
Dr. Blair, against whom he might not wish to appear in a controversy,
where the critical powers of the latter would be so severely tested. And
yet they stood on perfectly fair ground. Neither Hume nor Blair had any
knowledge of the archæological merits of the question. Each of them
discussed the probable genuineness of the poems on grounds as purely
critical as if they had been brought from Central Africa, instead of
being the alleged literature of a people who are supposed to have at one
time occupied the ground on which Edinburgh is built; and at the time of
that controversy, as at the present day, might be visited on a journey
of fifty miles. In such a state of knowledge, it required great freedom
and decision in criticism to pronounce the poems forgeries. Then, as
now, every genuine Celt protested that he had heard them over and over
again in Gaelic with his own ears; and with this only difference from
the translation, that there were peculiar delicate beauties in the
native Gaelic, which neither Macpherson, nor any other man, was capable
of expressing in English. In such an unequal controversy, between the
internal evidence of criticism, and the external evidence of broad
assertion, it is singular that no one should have attempted to solve the
question through the faint light which the chronicles of the surrounding
tribes throw on the history of the Celts in Scotland. That knowledge has
now been pretty widely extended; and hence "Ossian's Poems" have been
estimated at their true value, as an embossment of poetical language and
imagery, on the surface of such barren metrical narratives as all
uncivilized and warlike people possess; it has been found that the
structure of the narratives, the characteristic names, the events of
history, and the manners of the times, have been treated with no more
deference, when an alteration was found to suit the purpose of the
"translator."[87:1]

Intensely occupied with his History anterior to the accession of the
Tudors, we thus find Hume writing to Millar on 27th October:--


"I have been very busy ever since I came down; and if I keep my health,
shall be able to publish the winter after the next, or at farthest in
the subsequent spring; which I fancy will serve your purpose well
enough. At any rate, this is not a matter which I can hurry on faster
than I am able to satisfy myself in the execution.

"I am very much pleased with what you tell me, that the Clarendon Papers
have fallen into Dr. Douglas's hands, especially as Dr. Robertson tells
me he intends to publish them. What my sentiments are on the question
you mention, you may learn from my letter to the Doctor, which I have
sent you open, and which I beg you to take the trouble of sending; for I
do not know how to direct it."


Hume wished to amuse himself with mystifying his friends about the
pamphlet above alluded to, called Sister Peg. The circumstance which
suggested to him the following letter, is said to have been his being
kept in ignorance that his friend Ferguson was the author of the piece.


HUME _to_ DR. CARLYLE.

"_Edinburgh, 3d February, 1761._

"DEAR SIR,--I am informed that you have received a letter from London,
by which you learn that the manuscript of Sister Peg has been traced to
the printer's, and has been found to be, in many places, interlined and
corrected in my handwriting. I could have wished that you had not
published this piece of intelligence before you told me of it. The truth
is, after I had composed that trifling performance, and thought I had
made it as correct as I could, I gave it to a sure hand to be
transcribed, that in case any of the London printers had known my hand,
they might not be able to discover me. But as it lay by me some weeks
afterwards, I could not forbear reviewing it; and not having my
amanuensis at hand, I was obliged in several places to correct it
myself, rather than allow it to go to the press with inaccuracies of
which I was sensible. I little dreamed that this small want of
precaution would have betrayed me so soon; but as you know that I am
very indifferent about princes or presidents, ministers of the gospel or
ministers of state, kings or keysars, and set at defiance all powers,
human or infernal, I had no other reason for concealing myself, but in
order to try the taste of the public; whom, though I also set in some
degree at defiance, I cannot sometimes forbear paying a little regard
to. I find that frivolous composition has been better received than I
had any reason to expect, and therefore cannot much complain of the
injury you have done me by revealing my secret, and obliging me to
acknowledge it more early than I intended. The only reason of my writing
to you is, to know the printer's name, who has so far broke his
engagements as to show the manuscript; for the bookseller assured my
friend to whom I intrusted it, that we might depend upon an absolute
secrecy. I beg my compliments to Mrs. Carlyle, and am, dear sir,"
&c.[89:1]


We see by the date of the following letter, that Hume varied his city
life with an occasional residence with his brother in Berwickshire.


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Ninewells, 29th June, 1761._

"DEAR SMITH,--As your professorship of Hebrew is vacant, I have been
applied to in behalf of young Mr. Cummin; and you are the person with
whom I am supposed to have some interest. But as I imagine you will not
put this election on the footing of interest, I shall say nothing on
that head; but shall speak much more to the purpose by informing you,
that I have known Mr. Cummin for some time, and have esteemed him a
young man of exceeding good capacity, and of a turn towards literature.
He tells me that he has made the oriental tongues, and particularly the
Hebrew, a part of his study, and has made some proficiency in them. But
of this fact, craving his pardon, I must be allowed to entertain some
doubt; for if Hebrew roots, as Cowley says, thrive best in barren
soil,[90:1] he has a small chance of producing any great crop of them.
But as you commonly regard the professorship of Hebrew as a step towards
other professorships, in which a good capacity can better display
itself, you will permit me to give it as my opinion, that you will find
it difficult to pitch on a young man, who is more likely to be a credit
to your college, by his knowledge and industry.

"I am so far on my road to London, where I hope to see you this season.
I shall lodge in Miss Elliot's, Lisle Street, Leicester Fields; and I
beg it of you to let me hear from you the moment of your arrival."[90:2]


In 1761, commenced Hume's acquaintance with Madame de Boufflers. It
afterwards ripened into a friendship, of which we cannot fully estimate
the nature, without looking not only at the character and position of
the parties, but at some conventional notions of morality, to which Hume
had been, previously, a stranger. Hyppolyte de Saujon, Comtesse de
Boufflers-Rouvel, is not to be confounded with her contemporary the
Marquise de Boufflers-Rémencourt, mother of the witty Chevalier de
Boufflers. The prominent difference between them is but too startlingly
characteristic of the moral atmosphere in which they both lived--that
the former was mistress of the Prince of Conti, while the latter is
supposed to have held the same relation to Prince Stanislaus Augustus of
Poland, of whose court she was the great ornament and attraction. A
friendship between a respectable Scotsman of letters and a person in
Madame de Boufflers' position, is apt to excite a smile or a frown,
according to the habits or temper of the reader. Hume himself was not
likely to take the most austere view of the matter; and must have felt,
at any rate, that the scandal and even the blame of such connexions must
be greatly affected by the countenance they receive from the society to
which the parties belong. On the vileness of this code of organized
immorality, it would be superfluous, at this hour, to enlarge; but there
is a great difference between those who act up to the standard of a low
social system and those who do the same acts in breach of a higher code.
A Mahomedan who keeps a harem in Constantinople is inferior in his tone
of morality to an English gentleman, of good domestic conduct; but he is
infinitely superior to an Englishman with a harem in Piccadilly.

The lady in question undoubtedly held a very high station in the best
society of Paris; and at that time, and in that country, it is certain
that such attachments, if permanent and decorous, and in a very high
class of society, acquired a more than tolerated respectability. In
1769, Madame de Boufflers speaks of her attachment as one of twenty
years' duration. Early in life, and soon after her marriage, she had
been placed at the court of the Duchess of Orleans: but quarrelling with
that princess, she came under the protection of the Prince of Conti. Of
course, her correspondence bears no mark of her having been subjected to
slights, or of her dreading them; or indeed of any suspicion that there
was any thing in her position to prevent her from being rigid in her
ideas of virtue, and a teacher of social duties. On her visit to
England, she was well received by the British aristocracy, and was even
honoured by a laudatory growl from Johnson. We find her exchanging
visits with the Marchioness of Hertford, the wife of the English
ambassador, one of the purest of that portion of the English female
aristocracy which had not suffered taint. In one of her letters to Hume,
she describes the death-bed of the prince's mother; speaks of her
displaying the heroism of a grand-daughter of the great Condé; and talks
with tearful gratitude of the early kindness of that princess to
herself, and of her attempts to pay the debt by solacing her old age,
and performing to her the last duties which the living receive from each
other. It is in all its spirit the letter of a daughter-in-law.

The prince, though a generous and kind-hearted man, could not be
prevailed on to make her his wife on her husband's death; but when he
died in 1776, he had raised no princess over her head. We shall find
that she made Hume the confidant in her griefs and disappointments, and
the adviser in her difficulties. There is a great air of earnestness and
solicitude in these appeals; and though we cannot help presuming, that a
woman so full in her disclosures to a foreigner, living among a people
of totally different habits and morals, must have distributed a still
larger portion of her confidential revelations nearer home; yet it is
evident that she had much reliance on Hume's counsel, and perhaps he was
not ill fitted for a father-confessor to such a penitent.

The letters of Hume to the countess, have already been for some time
before the English reader.[92:1] On the present occasion some
characteristic extracts will be interwoven with the letters which form
the other side of the correspondence. It is difficult for a native of
this country, with the fullest allowance for the redundancy of the
French laudatory and amicable vocabulary, to estimate at its true value
the ardour of these letters, or to adjust the amount of solid truth and
friendliness represented by such a blaze of ardent expressions. The
correspondence was of the lady's seeking and pursuing. Frequently, when
there is a pause, an impassioned letter from her rouses up the
philosopher; who starts into a sort of artificial excitement, and, when
it is over, sinks into lethargy again. Yet it must be admitted that Hume
acted his part pretty well, and that the fat philosopher was not far
behind the vivacious Frenchwoman. But with him it is visibly all acting;
and there is a total absence of the playful ease which adorns those
letters to his own chosen friends, with whom he was in heart and habits
at ease. In some instances, perhaps, he studied a formal and measured
style, as being more intelligible to a foreigner; and occasionally we
find him offering his correspondent facilities by the adoption of idioms
more French than English; as where he says, "I am truly ashamed, dear
madam, of your having _prevented_ me in breaking our long silence; but
you have _prevented_ me only a few days."[93:1]

The letter with which the countess opens the correspondence, seems to
have been forwarded to Hume by Lord Elibank's brother, Alexander Murray,
who was then mixing with the Jacobites abroad, and who appears to have
enjoyed a very wide and much varied circle of acquaintance in France. He
says, in a letter of the 18th May, 1761:--


"MY DEAR SIR,--It would appear great presumption in me to make you any
compliments upon your History of England, after having read the
enclosed; which with infinite pleasure I send you, as it procures you a
correspondence with the most amiable and accomplished lady of this
kingdom, or indeed any other. If after the peace you take a trip to this
polite and elegant country, you are sure, by the means of your new
female correspondent, of being made acquainted in a very short time with
all the wits in this part of the world. It is true your most
incomparable productions justly entitle you to that distinction.
However, being took by the hand by Madame de Boufflers, won't diminish
your intrinsic value, even among the most profound philosophers. In case
I can't return to England, and you take the resolution of coming here .
. . . . . I beg leave to assure you that I am, with as much esteem and
veneration as human creature can be, my dear sir, your most obedient and
most humble servant, and avowed friend,

                                                 "A. MURRAY.

"When you answer the enclosed, I beg it may be in English, as the lady
is quite mistress of that language."[94:1]


The letter forwarded to Hume was as follows:


MADAME DE BOUFFLERS _to_ HUME.

(_Translation._)

     For a long time, sir, I have struggled with conflicting
     sentiments. The admiration which your sublime work has
     awakened in me, and the esteem with which it has inspired me
     for your person, your talents, and your virtue, have often
     aroused the desire of writing to you, that I might express
     those sentiments towards you with which I am so deeply
     penetrated.

     On the other hand, keeping in view the little value you can
     have for my opinion, your want of personal acquaintance with
     me, and the reserve and privacy, even, which are suitable to
     my sex, I fear being accused of presumption, and of making
     myself be known, to my own disadvantage, by a man whose good
     opinion I shall always regard as the most flattering, and the
     most precious of benefits. Nevertheless, although the
     reflections I have made on this subject appeared to have much
     force, an irresistible inclination rendered them unavailing;
     and I come to add one to the thousand other instances, to
     justify the truth of that remark which I have read in your
     "History of the House of Stuart,"--"Men's views of things are
     the result of their understanding alone: their conduct is
     regulated by their understanding, their temper, and their
     passions." Thus, when my reason tells me I ought to be silent,
     my enthusiasm prevents me from regarding its voice.

     Although a woman, and of no very advanced age, despite the
     dissipation attendant on the life one leads in this country,
     having always loved reading, there are few good books in any
     language, or of any kind, that I have not read, either in the
     original, or in translations; and I can assure you, sir, with
     a sincerity which cannot be questioned, that I have found none
     which, to my judgment, unites so many perfections as your own.
     I know no terms capable of expressing what I felt in reading
     this work. I was moved, transported: and the emotion which it
     caused me is, in some measure, painful by its continuance. It
     elevates the soul; it fills the heart with sentiments of
     humanity and benevolence; it enlightens the intellect, by
     showing that true happiness is closely connected with virtue;
     and discovers, by the same light, what is the end, and the
     sole end, of every reasonable being. In the midst of the
     calamities which, on all sides, surrounded Charles the First,
     we see peace and security shining in their brightness, and
     accompanying him to the scaffold; whilst trouble and remorse,
     the inseparable companions of crime, follow the steps of
     Cromwell, even to the throne.

     Your book also teaches how the best of things are liable to
     abuse; and the reflections which are made on this subject
     ought to augment our caution and distrust of ourselves. It
     animates with a noble emulation; it inspires love of liberty;
     and teaches, at the same time, submission to the government
     under which we are obliged to live. In a word, it is a _terra
     fecunda_ of morals and instruction, presented in colours so
     bright, that we believe we see them for the first time.

     The clearness, the majesty, the touching simplicity of your
     style delight me. Its beauties are so striking, that,
     notwithstanding my ignorance of the English language, they
     cannot escape me. You are, sir, an admirable painter: your
     pictures have a grace, a nature, an energy, which surpass even
     what the imagination can portray.

     But how shall I be able to express the effect produced upon me
     by your divine impartiality? I would that I had, on this
     occasion, your own eloquence in which to express my thought!
     In truth, I believed I had before my eyes the work of some
     celestial being, free from the passions of humanity, who, for
     the benefit of the human race, has deigned to write the events
     of these latter times.

     I dare only add, that in all which issues from your pen, you
     show yourself a perfect philosopher, a statesman, a historian
     full of genius, an enlightened politician, a genuine patriot.
     All these sublime qualities are so far above the understanding
     of a woman, that it is fitting I should say little on the
     subject; and I have already great need of your indulgence for
     the faults I have committed against discretion and decorum, by
     the excess of my veneration for your merit. I entreat this of
     you, sir, and, at the same time, the greatest secrecy. The
     step I have taken is rather extraordinary. I fear it may
     attract blame: and I would be grieved if the sentiment which
     has constrained me to it should be misunderstood.

     I have the honour to be, sir, your very humble and very
     obedient servant,

                 HYPPOLYTE DE SAUJON, COMTESSE DE BOUFFLERS.

     They tell me, sir, you have some idea of coming to France--to
     Paris. I earnestly wish you would execute this resolution,
     and that I may be able to assist in rendering your sojourn
     agreeable.

     PARIS, _15th March, 1761_.[97:1]

Hume must have been the more than mortal being which his new friend
describes, if he had resisted such an appeal; and he thus wrote in
answer:--


HUME _to the_ COMTESSE DE BOUFFLERS.

     _Edinburgh, 15th May, 1761._

     MADAM,--It is not easy for your ladyship to imagine the
     pleasure I received from the letter, with which you have so
     unexpectedly honoured me, nor the agreeable visions of vanity,
     in which, upon that occasion, I indulged myself. I concluded,
     and, as I fancied, with certainty, that a person, who could
     write so well herself, must certainly be a good judge of
     writing in others; and that an author, who could please a lady
     of your distinction, educated in the court of France, and
     familiarized with every thing elegant and polite, might
     reasonably pretend to some degree of merit, and might presume
     to take his rank above the middling historians. But, madam, it
     is but fair, that I, who have pretended, in so long a work, to
     do justice to all parties and persons, should also do some to
     myself; and should not feed my vanity with chimeras, which, I
     am sensible, in my cooler moments, can have no foundation in
     reason. When I had the pleasure of passing some time in
     France, I had the agreeable experience of the polite
     hospitality, by which your nation is distinguished; and I now
     find, that the same favourable indulgence has appeared in your
     ladyship's judgment of my writings. And, perhaps, your esteem
     for the entire impartiality which I aim at, and which, to tell
     the truth, is so unusual in English historians, has made your
     ladyship overlook many defects, into which the want of art or
     genius has betrayed me.

     In this particular, madam, I must own, that I am inclined to
     take your civilities in their full latitude, and to hope that
     I have not fallen much short of my intentions. The spirit of
     faction, which prevails in this country, and which is a
     natural attendant on civil liberty, carries every thing to
     extremes on the one side, as well as on the other; and I have
     the satisfaction to find, that my performance has alternately
     given displeasure to both parties. I could not reasonably hope
     to please both: such success is impossible from the nature of
     things; and next to your ladyship's approbation, who, as a
     foreigner, must necessarily be a candid judge, I shall always
     regard the anger of both as the surest warrant of my
     impartiality.

     As I find that you are pleased to employ your leisure hours in
     the perusal of history, I shall presume to recommend to your
     ladyship a late work of this kind, wrote by my friend and
     countryman, Dr. Robertson, which has met with the highest
     approbation from all good judges.

     It is the "History of Scotland" during the age of the
     unfortunate Queen Mary; and it is wrote in an elegant,
     agreeable, and interesting manner, and far exceeding, I shall
     venture to say, any performance of that kind that has appeared
     in English. The failings of that princess are not covered
     over; but her singular catastrophe is rendered truly
     lamentable and tragical; and the reader cannot forbear
     shedding tears for her fate, at the same time that he blames
     her conduct. There are few historical productions, where both
     the subject and execution have appeared so happy.

     Some prospect is now given us, that this miserable war between
     the two nations is drawing towards a period, and that the
     former intercourse between them will again be renewed. If this
     happy event take place, I have entertained hopes that my
     affairs will permit me to take a journey to Paris; and the
     obliging offer, which you are pleased to make me, of allowing
     me to pay my respects to you, will prove a new and very
     powerful inducement to make me hasten the execution of my
     purpose.

     But I give your ladyship warning, that I shall, on many
     accounts, stand in need of your indulgence. I passed a few
     years in France during my early youth; but I lived in a
     provincial town, where I enjoyed the advantages of leisure for
     study, and an opportunity of learning the language: what I had
     imperfectly learned, long disuse, I am afraid, has made me
     forget. I have rusted amid books and study; have been little
     engaged in the active, and not much in the pleasurable scenes
     of life; and am more accustomed to a select society than to
     general companies.

     But all these disadvantages, and much greater, will be
     abundantly compensated by the honour of your ladyship's
     protection; and I hope that my profound sense of your obliging
     favours will render me not altogether unworthy of it.

     I have the honour to be, with the greatest respect, madam,
     your ladyship's most obedient and most humble servant.[101:1]

In return, Madame De Boufflers reiterates her compliments, vouches for
her sincerity, and if Hume should fulfil his intention of visiting
France, offers him the use of apartments, saying, that if he accept the
offer it will be an infinite obligation to her; if he refuse it, she
will be vexed but not offended. She will introduce him to her circle of
friends, and do every thing that can tend to make his visit
agreeable.[101:2] In answer to this, Hume finds that the warlike aspect
of affairs will preclude him, in the meantime, from enjoying the society
"of a person so celebrated for her accomplishments by all who have any
knowledge of the court of France."[101:3]

Mr. Murray's praise of Madame de Boufflers' knowledge of the English
language was not misapplied; as the following short letter, and another
of greater length, which will be found a few pages farther on, show.
With a few inaccuracies, they afford a very remarkable instance of
idiomatic acquaintance with our tongue.


"I have received, sir, by an unknown hand, the continuation of your
admirable performance. Some little perhaps of the pride so common in my
sex, but much more the desire to contract an obligation with a man of
your merit, and to obtain from him so valuable a favour, have persuaded
me I was indebted to you for it. 'Tis natural to bend our thoughts
towards what is most advantageous for us, however elevated it may be.
The wrong should be only to believe we deserve it. Then, sir, I think,
that in wishing such a proof of your kindness, and confessing in the
same time I have no right to pretend to it, I prove my just opinion of
both. I am, sir, your humble servant.

"_Paris, May 29, 1762._"


On this, Hume, after observing with ingenious courtesy, that a fairy, a
sylph, or a good genius, who knew his inmost thoughts, must have
anticipated him in sending the copy of his History, continues:--"But,
madam, what new wonder is this which your letter presents to me? I not
only find a lady, who, in the bloom of beauty and height of reputation,
can withdraw herself from the pleasures of a gay court, and find leisure
to cultivate the sciences; but deigns to support a correspondence with a
man of letters in a remote country, and to reward his labours by a
suffrage the most agreeable of all others, to a man who has any spark of
generous sentiments or taste for true glory. Besides these unusual
circumstances, I find a lady, who, without any other advantages than her
own talents, has made herself mistress of a language commonly esteemed
very difficult to strangers, and possesses it to such a degree as might
give jealousy to us who have made it the business of our lives to
acquire and cultivate it.

"I cannot but congratulate my country on this incident, which marks the
progress made by its literature and reputation in foreign countries."

       *       *       *       *       *

Nearly contemporary with the Comtesse de Boufflers, comes on the scene a
person with whom we shall hereafter have much concern, Jean Jacques
Rousseau. He had been living under the protection of the Maréchal de
Luxembourg, in the celebrated hermitage near the castle of Montmorency,
when he published his "Emile." Highly as he was supported, the wrath of
the clergy prevailed; and a writ of _prise de corps_ was issued for his
apprehension. It appears that in those strange times of intolerance and
infidelity, there would have been no cause of wonder, if the proceedings
had ended in a capital conviction. With the aid of his friends, the
Luxembourgs and Choiseuls, Rousseau fled the kingdom. On this occasion
he seems to have been thoroughly frightened; and his conduct was
occasioned neither by ostentation, nor perverse discontent. His first
place of refuge was Neufchâtel, one of the Swiss Cantons, of which the
sovereignty was in the house of Brandenburg. Rousseau was thus for a
time one of the illustrious literary men under the protection of
Frederick the Great, though distant from his philosophical capital.

He appealed, however, to a warmer heart than ever beat in the breast of
the conqueror of Prague. The exiled Earl Marischal of Scotland--a valued
friend of Hume, as of all who became acquainted with him--was then
Governor of Neufchâtel. Subsequently to his flight from his native
country, for his concern in the rebellion of 1715, when he was a mere
youth, he had suffered a long series of hardships, privations, and
uncertainties; until Frederick saw his value, and purchased his services
at such a rate as a friendless exile might not refuse. Adversity, which
too often hardens the selfishness, and debases the propensities of an
aristocracy driven from home by internal convulsions, had but taught him
how much men are dependent on each other, and had opened his heart to a
wider sympathy with his fellow creatures. His opinions were as tolerant
as his nature was kind; and the fugitive could not have sought an asylum
where he would be more sincerely welcomed. The power of the king of
Prussia's representative, was, however, not sufficient to protect him
from the people,--or from himself; and from the time of his flight from
France, those who believed that he sincerely desired a retreat where he
would be safe from all molestation, looked towards Britain. The
following letters from the forfeited earl, at a few months' interval
from each other, chiefly relate to Rousseau. The earl appears to have
been so thoroughly imbued with foreign habits, that he wrote English
with difficulty: most of his letters to Hume are in French, and when he
commences in English, he generally relapses into French. Though so long
employed by the Prussian court, he seems to have been ignorant of
German. It may be observed, however, that French is the vernacular
language of Neufchâtel.


THE FORFEITED EARL MARISCHAL _to_ HUME.

     _April 29._

     In answer to your question, the Donquixotisme you mention
     never entered into my head. I wish I could see you, to answer
     honestly all your questions; for though I had my share of
     folly with others, yet as my intentions were at bottom honest,
     I should open to you my whole budget, and let you know many
     things which are perhaps ill-represented, I mean not truly. I
     remember to have recommended to your acquaintance Mr. Floyd,
     son to old David Floyd, at St. Germains, as a man of good
     sense, honour, and honesty. I fear he is dead: he would have
     been of great service to you in a part of your History since
     1688. Apropos of History, when you see Helvetius, tell I
     desired you to inquire of him concerning a certain History. I
     fancy he will answer you with his usual frankness. I do
     believe Mr. Rousseau will find it impossible to live where he
     finds nobody who understands a word of what he says; there
     occurs so often occasion, even of trifling things necessary,
     that it is a vexation not to understand the language of the
     country. I feel it often, though I understand many words of
     German, such as kleigh, nigh, nogh, ter migh, ter
     Teyfel,[105:1] and others, high sounding as here pronounced,
     and of which the Ter Tunder would, I believe, put to flight
     the delicate ears of the whole town of Sienna.

     I hear you are going to France this summer. If you will come
     to Frankfort on Main, I will meet you there the end of July,
     and stay with you a fortnight. Bon jour.

     N.B.--You have better roads than I, you are strong as a giant,
     and I am growing ten years older every month; so I think my
     offer fair.


     _Oct. 2, 1762._

     Jean Jacques Rousseau, persecuted for having writ what he
     thinks good, or rather, as some folks think, for having
     displeased persons in great power, who attributed to him what
     he never meant, came here to seek retreat, which I readily
     granted; and the king of Prussia not only approved of my so
     doing, but gave me orders to furnish him his small
     necessaries, if he would accept them; and though that king's
     philosophy be very different from that of Jean Jacques, yet he
     does not think that a man of an irreproachable life is to be
     persecuted because his sentiments are singular. He designs to
     build him a hermitage with a little garden, which I find he
     will not accept, nor perhaps the rest which I have not yet
     offered to him. He is gay in company, polite, and what the
     French call _aimable_, and gains ground daily in the opinion
     of even the clergy here. His enemies elsewhere continue to
     persecute him: he is pestered with anonymous letters. This is
     not a country for him: his attachment and love to his native
     town is a strong tie to its neighbourhood. The liberty of
     England, and the character of my good and honoured friend, D.
     Hume, F----i D----r, (perhaps more singular than that of J.
     Jacques, for I take him to be the only historian impartial,)
     draws his inclinations to be near to the F----i D----r. For my
     part, though it be to me a very great pleasure to converse
     with the honest savage, yet I advise him to go to England,
     where he will enjoy

          ----placidam sub libertate quietem.

     He wishes to know, if he can print all his works, and make
     some profit, merely to live, from such an edition. I entreat
     you will let me know your thoughts on this, and if you can be
     of use to him in finding him a bookseller to undertake the
     work: you know he is not interested, and little will content
     him. If he goes to Britain, he will be a treasure to you, and
     you to him, and perhaps both to me (if I were not so old.) I
     have offered him lodging in Keith-hall. I am ever, with the
     greatest regard, your most obedient servant,

                                                      M----.

At the same time Madame de Boufflers wrote as follows:--


MADAME DE BOUFFLERS _to_ HUME.

(_Translation._)

     _Paris, 16th June, 1762._

     Jean Jacques Rousseau, citizen of Geneva, and the author of
     many works with which you are probably acquainted, has
     composed a Treatise on Education, in four volumes, in which he
     sets forth many principles contrary to ours, both in politics
     and religion. As we do not enjoy here the liberty of the
     press, the Parliament, by a decree, just, (if it is, as I
     doubt not, conformable to the laws of the kingdom,) but
     nevertheless rigorous, has decreed the _prise de corps_; and
     it is said that, if he had not taken to flight, he would have
     been condemned to death. I can scarcely think they could have
     proceeded so far against him as a stranger; but, be that as it
     may, it would have been imprudent in him to remain in France
     under such circumstances. He has therefore departed, uncertain
     what asylum he will choose. I have advised him to go to
     England, promising him letters of recommendation to you, and
     other friends. I fulfil my promise, and I cannot, in my
     opinion, choose for him, in all Europe, a protector more
     respectable by his position, and more to be commended for his
     humanity. M. Rousseau is known to the greater part of the
     people in this country for an eccentric man. This epithet,
     according to its true signification, is most justly applied to
     him; for he differs, in many respects, in his modes of acting
     and thinking, from the men of his day. He has an upright
     heart, a noble and disinterested soul. He dreads every
     species of dependence, and consequently would have preferred
     being in France, gaining his subsistence by copying music, to
     receiving benefits even from his best friends, who are anxious
     to make up for his misfortunes. This delicacy may appear
     excessive, but it is not criminal, and it even augurs elevated
     sentiments. He flies from intercourse with the world; he feels
     pleasure only in solitude. This partiality for retirement has
     made him enemies. The self-love of those who court him is
     wounded by his rebuffs; but notwithstanding such apparent
     misanthropy, I do not believe you will find any where, a man
     more gentle, more humane, more compassionate to the sorrows of
     others, and more patient under his own. In short, his virtue
     appears so pure, so contented, so equal, that, until now,
     those who hated him could find only in their own heart reasons
     for suspecting him. As for me, with appearances so much in his
     favour, I would rather be deceived than doubt his sincerity.

     From the opinion that I have of him, sir, he has been judged
     worthy of being known to you; and in procuring him this
     honour, I believe I give the most marked proof of my
     consideration for him.[107:1]

To this Hume made answer in the postscript of the letter cited above.


"P.S.--So far I had wrote in answer to your ladyship's of the 29th of
May, when I was again honoured with yours of the 14th of June. Good God!
madam, how much I regret my being absent from London on this occasion,
which deprives me of the opportunity of showing in person my regard for
your recommendation, and my esteem, I had almost said veneration, for
the virtue and genius of M. Rousseau. I assure your ladyship there is no
man in Europe of whom I have entertained a higher idea, and whom I would
be prouder to serve; and as I find his reputation very high in England,
I hope every one will endeavour to make him sensible of it by
civilities, and by services, as far as he will accept of them. I revere
his greatness of mind, which makes him fly obligations and dependence;
and I have the vanity to think, that through the course of my life I
have endeavoured to resemble him in those maxims.

"But as I have some connexions with men of rank in London, I shall
instantly write to them, and endeavour to make them sensible of the
honour M. Rousseau has done us in choosing an asylum in England. We are
happy at present in a king who has a taste for literature; and I hope M.
Rousseau will find the advantage of it, and that he will not disdain to
receive benefits from a great monarch, who is sensible of his merit. I
am only afraid that your friend will find his abode in England not so
agreeable as may be wished, if he does not possess the language, which I
am afraid is the case: for I never could observe in his writings any
marks of his acquaintance with the English tongue."[109:1]


From these communications, Hume derived the notion that Rousseau had
immediately proceeded to London. The following paragraph, in a letter
from Elliot, indicates the nature of the inquiries pursued under this
supposition.

     DEAR SIR,--As soon as I received your letter, I applied to Mr.
     Home, who had also heard from you by the same post, and
     desired him to make all possible inquiry after M. Rousseau. If
     he be in London we shall certainly find him out; and I need
     not assure you, that both on account of his own merit, and
     your recommendation, I shall not fail to show him all the
     attention in my power. I should doubt, from the known
     character of the man, whether he would accept a pension if it
     could be procured for him; and should rather apprehend that,
     though this government will protect and tolerate the boldness
     of his pen, yet it will hardly reward it. Rousseau is not the
     only man of genius, the singularity of whose opinions has
     intercepted the rewards due to the superiority of his talents.

In the supposition that he had passed over to England, Hume addressed a
letter to Rousseau, as then in London, which was answered by the Chien
de Diogène, as Voltaire called him, from his retreat in Neufchâtel, on
19th February, 1763. He says he has just received the letter, regrets
that he should have made the mistake of trusting himself among his own
countrymen, who have treated him with insult and outrage, instead of
seeking the hospitable shores of Britain. He does something like justice
to the kindness of Lord Marischal, in the midst of his general mordacity
and discontent; and he praises the wide views, the wonderful
impartiality, the genius of Hume, which would raise him so far above the
rest of his kind, did not the goodness of his heart bring him nearer to
their level.[110:1]

The following letter from Madame de Boufflers, written in English, had
been received in the meantime.


MADAME DE BOUFFLERS _to_ HUME.

     _July 30._

     How difficult it is, sir, for one very far from being
     insensible to reputation, to refuse the praises of a man,
     whose sincerity and admirable talents render them so valuable.
     But in regard to veracity, and perhaps more to my true
     interest, I am obliged to acknowledge, I stand a great
     distance, for internal or external accomplishments, from the
     favourable opinion you have taken of me, whether, in
     consulting the noble sentiments which ever inspire you with
     sublime ideas, whether in hearkening to some of your
     countrymen, disposed to indulgence towards me, by my
     well-known inclination for their country.

     Perhaps, sir, I confess it with ingenuity, had I been doomed
     to be never personally acquainted with you, I should not have
     generosity enough to correct your judgment of me. But in this
     particular occasion, as in all other, according to my humble
     opinion, right and good are closely united. What a shame
     indeed for me, and disappointment for you, in place of the
     object your imagination has adorned with such shining
     qualifications, to find a person to whom Nature has granted
     but indifferent ones. A great part of my youth is over. Some
     delicacy in features, mildness and decency in countenance, are
     the only exterior advantages I can boast of; and as for
     interior, common sense, improved a little by early good
     reading, are all I possess. My knowledge of the English
     language also is confined, as you can easily perceive. I have,
     indeed, acquired without assistance that which I know of it;
     but if I am entitled to some elegancy, I owe it to the
     repeated readings of your admirable works.

     After this true picture of myself, in which I have struggled
     to exert the noble impartiality and candour which shine in all
     your writings, my first care is, sir, to acknowledge the
     infinite obligations you have conferred upon me by your kind
     letter. I have translated the P. S. to send it to my friend.
     The esteem of such a man must be the best balm for his wounded
     heart. But I am afraid he will not accept the glorious support
     you are so good as to offer him. I fear that the weight of his
     calamities has impaired his health, and he cannot sustain the
     fatigues of a long journey. In his last letter to me, he
     expresses a resolution never to see England upon that account.
     Nevertheless, I am informed since, that new persecutions may
     possibly determine him to alter his mind. An irregular trial
     has deprived him of the natural rights in his own country. The
     commonwealth of Berne, from the example of Geneva and France,
     has burnt his book, and he has been reduced to leave in a
     hurry the asylum that a friend had proffered him there. Such
     are the grievous misfortunes of this virtuous and unhappy man.
     I pity, I love him, and wish earnestly to sooth the sorrows
     under which he labours. Nevertheless, sir, I would fain also
     vindicate the honour of my nation in the eyes of so good a
     judge as you are. The reflection you cast upon it gives
     uneasiness; but mistrusting greatly my capacity, I fear to
     betray the cause I would defend by an enterprise so unequal to
     my force. I dare only to say, that your happy country has not
     attained in a moment the perfect constitution which gives us
     admiration. All convenient and well-calculated laws are not
     framed at once; and those most exceptionable, while they
     stand, deserve obedience and respect.

     Is it possible, sir, that this late unhappy event could
     deprive of the honour of your presence, a country filled with
     your fervent admirers, and where every one will endeavour to
     outdo each other in expressing the veneration and regard you
     so justly deserve? I hope you will not keep this severe
     resolution. If we want a liberty you think an advantage, 'tis
     a reason to pity, and not to punish us. Besides, your case and
     that of M. Rousseau, though both foreigners in France, are
     quite different. Few days before I received your letter, I
     heard that it was a friend of mine who has favoured me with
     your last performance. I am infinitely obliged to him for this
     gracious gift, and to you, sir, for your good intention.

     But what strange a creature will you think me, to venture to
     point a mistake in a work so perfect? In several parts of the
     first volume our countryman Godefroy of Bouillon is named
     Godefroy de Boulogne. You have reasons, perhaps, for the
     alteration, and I am ready to submit to them. I would only
     express my doubts: I hope you will excuse this freedom.

     Since I have gone so far, permit me, sir, to ask your opinion
     upon the last book of M. Rousseau. I should be very glad to
     have my judgment of it confirmed or mended by yours. Nothing
     would be wanting to my satisfaction, if in the same letter,
     where you could grant me the favour I wish for, I was assured
     you had renewed the project to come here, and that you would
     speedily execute it. I am, sir, with esteem, gratitude, and,
     permit me to add, friendship, your most humble servant.

In answer to this letter, Hume says that he had at first regarded it as
a sort of challenge to answer it in French, but that he had given up the
attempt as an unequal contest with "the sole instance of a foreigner,
not habituated to our tongue, who has, from reading alone, become so
entirely mistress of it." He then gives an account of the letter he had
received from Lord Marischal, and says of Rousseau's refusal of the
kindnesses proferred to him,--"Rousseau, with his usual dignity, refused
all these gratuities, though at the same time he desired my lord to
learn from me, whether it were possible for him to gain from the London
booksellers as much money as would suffice for his maintenance; and this
recompense, being the fruit of his own industry, he would have no
scruple to accept of. I think this instance of conduct a kind of
phenomenon in the republic of letters, and one very honourable for M.
Rousseau. One is only apt to wish that he could practise this virtue
with less hardship and difficulty; though we must also confess, that the
difficulty adds to the lustre of it. I have heard, that the circumstance
which deterred him from coming over to England, as he first intended,
was a harsh reflection, which he threw out on the people in his
'Treatise of Education:' if this was his motive, I am persuaded that he
would find it a vain fear, and that every one would rather have been
anxious to show respect to his merit."[113:1]

He then obeys the mandate to criticise the "Emile."

     You deign, madam, to ask my opinion of the new performance of
     M. Rousseau. I know that it becomes me better to form my
     judgment upon yours; but in compliance with your commands, I
     shall not make a secret of my sentiments. All the writings of
     that author appear to me admirable, particularly on the head
     of eloquence; and if I be not much mistaken, he gives to the
     French tongue an energy, which it scarce seems to have reached
     in any other hands. But as his enemies have objected, that
     with this domineering force of genius there is always
     intermingled some degree of extravagance, it is impossible for
     his friends altogether to deny the charge; and were it not for
     his frequent and earnest protestations to the contrary, one
     would be apt to suspect, that he chooses his topics less from
     persuasion, than from the pleasure of showing his invention,
     and surprising the reader by his paradoxes. The "Treatise of
     Education," as it possesses much of the merit, seems also
     exposed to the faults of his other performances; and as he
     indulges his love of the marvellous even in so serious and
     important a subject, he has given a pledge to the public that
     he was in earnest in all his other topics. If I dared to
     object any thing to M. Rousseau's eloquence, which is the
     shining side of his character, I should say, that it was not
     wholly free from the defect sometimes found in that of the
     Roman orator; and that their great talent for expression was
     apt to produce a prolixity in both. This last performance
     chiefly is exposed to this objection; and I own, that though
     it abounds in noble and shining passages, it gave me rather
     less pleasure than his former writings. However, it carries
     still the stamp of a great genius; and, what enhances its
     beauty, the stamp of a very particular genius. The noble pride
     and spleen and indignation of the author bursts out with
     freedom in a hundred places, and serves fully to characterize
     the lofty spirit of the man.

     When I came to peruse that passage of Mons. Rousseau's
     Treatise, which has occasioned all the persecution against
     him, I was not in the least surprised that it gave offence.
     He has not had the precaution to throw any veil over his
     sentiments; and as he scorns to dissemble his contempt of
     established opinions, he could not wonder that all the zealots
     were in arms against him. The liberty of the press is not so
     secured in any country, scarce even in this, as not to render
     such an open attack of popular prejudices somewhat
     dangerous.[115:1]

In 1761, Dr. Blair communicated to Hume the sermon by Dr. Campbell,
which, when subsequently expanded, became the "Dissertation on
Miracles," already referred to.[115:2] On this occasion, Hume wrote in
the following terms to Dr. Blair:--


"DEAR SIR,--I have perused the ingenious performance, which you was so
obliging as to put into my hands, with all the attention possible;
though not perhaps with all the seriousness and gravity which you have
so frequently recommended to me. But the fault lies not in the piece,
which is certainly very acute; but in the subject. I know you will say,
it lies in neither, but in myself alone. If that be so, I am sorry to
say that I believe it is incurable.

"I could wish that your friend had not chosen to appear as a
controversial writer, but had endeavoured to establish his principles in
general, without any reference to a particular book or person; though I
own he does me a great deal of honour, in thinking that any thing I have
wrote deserves his attention. For besides many inconveniences which
attend that kind of writing, I see it is almost impossible to preserve
decency and good manners in it. This author, for instance, says
sometimes obliging things of me, much beyond what I can presume to
deserve, and I thence conclude that in general he did not mean to insult
me; yet I meet with some other passages, more worthy of Warburton and
his followers, than of so ingenious an author.

"But as I am not apt to lose my temper, and would still less incline to
do so with a friend of yours, I shall calmly communicate to you some
remarks on the argument, since you seem to desire it. I shall employ
very few words, since a hint will suffice to a gentleman of this
author's penetration."


This is followed by a particular examination of some parts of Dr.
Campbell's work, which may be perused to most advantage in conjunction
with the Dissertation itself, along with which the letter is generally
printed. He then says,--


"I could wish your friend had not denominated me an infidel writer, on
account of ten or twelve pages, which seem to him to have that tendency,
while I have wrote so many volumes on history, literature, politics,
trade, morals, which, in that particular at least, are entirely
inoffensive. Is a man to be called a drunkard, because he has been seen
fuddled once in his lifetime?"[116:1]


The letter terminates with a recommendation which accounts for the
absence of all observations on religious topics in the correspondence
between Blair and Hume: while it shows that their intercourse had not
always excluded discussions of such a character.


"Having said so much to your friend, who is certainly a very ingenious
man, though a little too zealous for a philosopher, permit me also the
freedom of saying a word to yourself. Whenever I have had the pleasure
to be in your company, if the discourse turned upon any common subject
of literature, or reasoning, I always parted from you both entertained
and instructed. But when the conversation was diverted by you from this
channel towards the subject of your profession; though I doubt not but
your intentions were very friendly towards me, I own I never received
the same satisfaction: I was apt to be tired, and you to be angry. I
would therefore wish, for the future, whenever my good fortune throws me
in your way, that these topics should be forborne between us. I have
long since done with all inquiries on such subjects, and am become
incapable of instruction; though I own no one is more capable of
conveying it than yourself. After having given you the liberty of
communicating to your friend what part of this letter you think proper,
I remain, sir," &c.


Hume afterwards wrote the following letter on the same subject:--


HUME _to_ DR. CAMPBELL.

"_January 7, 1762._

"DEAR SIR,--It has so seldom happened that controversies in philosophy,
much more in theology, have been carried on without producing a personal
quarrel between the parties, that I must regard my present situation as
somewhat extraordinary, who have reason to give you thanks for the civil
and obliging manner in which you have conducted the dispute against me,
on so interesting a subject as that of miracles. Any little symptoms of
vehemence, of which I formerly used the freedom to complain, when you
favoured me with a sight of the manuscript, are either removed or
explained away, or atoned for by civilities, which are far beyond what I
have any title to pretend to. It will be natural for you to imagine,
that I will fall upon some shift to evade the force of your arguments,
and to retain my former opinion in the point controverted between us;
but it is impossible for me not to see the ingenuity of your
performance, and the great learning which you have displayed against me.

"I consider myself as very much honoured in being thought worthy of an
answer by a person of so much merit; and as I find that the public does
you justice with regard to the ingenuity and good composition of your
piece, I hope you will have no reason to repent engaging with an
antagonist, whom, perhaps, in strictness, you might have ventured to
neglect. I own to you, that I never felt so violent an inclination to
defend myself as at present, when I am thus fairly challenged by you,
and I think I could find something specious at least to urge in my
defence; but as I had fixed a resolution, in the beginning of my life,
always to leave the public to judge between my adversaries and me,
without making any reply, I must adhere inviolably to this resolution,
otherwise my silence on any future occasion would be construed an
inability to answer, and would be matter of triumph against me."[119:1]


He then, in the passage already cited,[119:2] describes the occasion on
which the "Theory of Miracles" was suggested to him.

In answer to this, there is a letter by Campbell, in which he endeavours
to rival his opponent in candour, politeness, and gentlemanlike feeling.
The happy courtesy with which he apologizes for the occasionally
irascible tone of his essay, shows that the retired northern divine
possessed in no small degree the qualities that might have adorned a
more showy station.


DR. CAMPBELL _to_ HUME.

     _25th June, 1762._

     The testimony you are pleased to give in favour of my
     performance, is an honour of which I should be entirely
     unworthy, were I not sensible of the uncommon generosity you
     have shown in giving it. Ever since I was acquainted with your
     works, your talents as a writer have, notwithstanding some
     differences in abstract principles, extorted from me the
     highest veneration. But I could scarce have thought that, in
     spite of differences of a more interesting nature, even such
     as regard morals and religion, you could ever force me to love
     and honour you as a man. Yet no religious prejudices (as you
     would probably term them,) can hinder me from doing justice to
     that goodness and candour, which appear in every line of your
     letter.

     It would be in vain to dissemble the pleasure which it gives
     me, that I am thought to have acquitted myself tolerably in a
     dispute with an author of such acknowledged merit. At the same
     time, it gives me real pain, that any symptoms of vehemence
     (which are not so easily avoided in disputation as one would
     imagine,) should give so generous an adversary the least
     ground of complaint. You have (if I remember right, for I have
     not the book here,) in the appendix to the third volume of
     your "Treatise on Human Nature," apologized for using
     sometimes the expressions--'Tis certain, 'Tis evident, and the
     like. These, you observe, were in a manner forced from you by
     the strong, though transient light in which a particular
     object then appeared, and are therefore not to be considered
     as at all inconsistent with the general principles of
     scepticism which are maintained in the Treatise. My apology is
     somewhat similar. There is in all controversy a struggle for
     victory, which I may say compels one to take every fair
     advantage that either the sentiments or the words of an
     antagonist present him with. But the appearances of asperity
     or raillery, which one will be thereby necessarily drawn into,
     ought not to be constructed as in the least affecting the
     habitual good opinion, or even the high esteem, which the
     writer may nevertheless entertain of his adversary.


FOOTNOTES:

[74:1] The following contrasted extracts represent some of the
variations above alluded to. The passages on the one side will be found
in the first, and those in the other in the last corrected edition of
the "History of the Stuarts."

_First edition._

     _Later editions._

_King James_ inculcated those monarchical tenets with which he was so
much infatuated. P. 54.

     Inculcated those monarchical tenets which he had so strongly
     imbibed.

_Divine right._ And though these doctrines were perhaps more openly
inculcated and more strenuously insisted on during the reign of the
Stuarts, they were not then invented. P. 120.

     And though it is pretended that these doctrines were more
     openly inculcated, and more strenuously insisted on, during
     the reign of the Stuarts, they were not then invented.

_America._ The seeds of many a noble state have been sown in climates
kept desolate by the wild manners of the ancient inhabitants; and an
asylum secured in that solitary world for liberty and science, if ever
the spreading of unlimited empire, or the inroad of barbarous nations,
should again extinguish them in this turbulent and restless hemisphere.
P. 134.

     Expunged.

_Charles I._ However moderate his temper, the natural illusions of
self-love, joined to his education under James, and to the flattery of
courtiers and churchmen, had represented his political tenets as certain
and uncontroverted. P. 148.

     However moderate his temper, the natural and unavoidable
     prepossessions of self-love, joined to the late uniform
     precedents in favour of prerogative, had made him regard his
     political tenets as certain and uncontroverted.

Loans were by privy seal required of several: to others the way of
benevolence was proposed; methods supported by precedents, condemned by
positive laws, and always invidious even to times more submissive and
compliant. In the most despotic governments, such expedients would be
regarded as irregular and disorderly. P. 159.

     Of some, loans were required: to others, the way of
     benevolence was proposed: methods supported by precedent, but
     always invidious even in times more submissive and compliant.
     In the most absolute governments, such expedients would be
     regarded as irregular and unequal.

The new counsels which Charles had mentioned to the parliament, were now
to be tried in order to supply his necessities. Had he possessed any
military force on which he could depend, 'tis likely that he had at once
taken off the mask, and governed without any regard to the ancient laws
and constitution: so high an idea had he imbibed of kingly prerogative,
and so contemptible a notion of the privileges of those popular
assemblies, from which he thought he had met with such ill usage. But
his army was new levied, ill-paid, and worse disciplined; no way
superior to the militia, who were much more numerous, and who were in a
great measure under the influence of the country gentlemen. It behoved
him therefore to proceed cautiously, and to cover his enterprises under
pretext of ancient precedents. P. 158.

     The new counsels which Charles had mentioned to the
     parliament, were now to be tried, in order to supply his
     necessities. Had he possessed any military force on which he
     could rely, it is not improbable that he had at once taken off
     the mask, and governed without any regard to parliamentary
     privileges: so high an idea had he received of kingly
     prerogative, and so contemptible a notion of the rights of
     those popular assemblies, from which he very naturally thought
     he had met with such ill-usage. But his army was new levied,
     ill-paid, and worse disciplined; nowise superior to the
     militia, who were much more numerous, and who were in a great
     measure under the influence of the country gentlemen. It
     behoved him therefore to proceed cautiously, and to cover his
     enterprises under pretence of ancient precedents, which,
     considering the great authority commonly enjoyed by his
     predecessors, could not be wanting to himself.

In most national debates, though the reasons may not be equally
balanced, yet are there commonly some plausible topics, which may be
pleaded even in favour of the weaker side; so complicated are all human
affairs, and so uncertain the consequences of every public measure. But
it must be confessed, that in the present case, nothing of weight can be
thrown into the opposite scale. The imposition of ship-money, is
apparently the most avowed and most dangerous invasion of national
privileges, not only which Charles was ever guilty of, but which the
most arbitrary princes in England, since any liberty had been
ascertained to the people, had ever ventured upon. P. 218.

     Expunged.

Perhaps the King, who dreaded above all things the House of Commons, and
who never sufficiently respected the constitution, thought, that, in his
present urgent distresses, he might be enabled to levy subsidies, by the
authority of the peers alone. But the employing so long a plea of
necessity, which was evidently false, and ill grounded, rendered it
impossible for him to avail himself of a necessity which was now at last
become real and inevitable. P. 247.

     Perhaps the King, who dreaded above all things the House of
     Commons, and who expected no supply from them on any
     reasonable terms, thought, that in his present distresses, he
     might be enabled to levy supplies by the authority of the
     peers alone. But the employing so long the plea of a
     necessity, which appeared distant and doubtful, rendered it
     impossible for him to avail himself of a necessity which was
     now at last become real, urgent, and inevitable.


_The attempt to seize the Five Members._

This strange resolution, so incompatible with the majesty of a king, so
improper even for the dignity of any great magistrate, was discovered to
the Countess of Carlisle, sister to Northumberland, a lady of great
spirit, wit, and intrigue. P. 318.

     This resolution was discovered to the Countess of Carlisle,
     sister to Northumberland, a lady of spirit, wit, and intrigue.

[78:1] In the MSS. R.S.E.

[78:2] See the letter itself in the Clarendon Papers, ii. 201-3.

[79:1] The following are some instances of the alterations made on the
first edition of his History. The collection of these instances has been
facilitated by the use of a copy of the first edition of the Histories
of the Houses of Stuart and Tudor, in the possession of a friend, on
which the alterations embodied in the subsequent editions are written in
red ink.

_In the first edition._

     _As altered._

Scotch.

     Scottish.

Such was the terror, respectable and rare in a monarch.

     So great was the terror, respectable as well as rare, in a
     monarch.

May be esteemed a great reflection on his memory.

     May be deemed a great reflection on his memory.

Betwixt.

     Between.

We come now to relate.

     We are now to relate.

Under pretext of a hunting match.

     On pretence of a hunting match.

Making account that.

     Thinking himself assured that.

Their concurrence became requisite.

     Their concurrence became necessary.

Along with.

     Together with.

Esteemed impartial.

     Deemed impartial.

To a pitch beyond what had ever been known since.

     To a height beyond what had been known since.

Entirely requisite for their future safety.

     Absolutely necessary for their future safety.

When the exception really occurs, even though it be not precedently
expected.

     When the exception really occurs, even though it be not
     previously expected.

Any way displeased at the, &c.

     Any-wise displeased at the, &c.

Monarchical tenets with which he was so much infatuated.

     Monarchical tenets which he had so strongly imbibed.

Graced with ecclesiastical titles.

     Endowed with ecclesiastical titles.

Inflicting this sentence.

     Pronouncing this sentence.

Confined in the Tower.

     Confined to the Tower.

Debarred from such sports.

     Debarred such sports.

Raleigh pretended not.

     Raleigh did not pretend.

War with the Spaniards.

     War against the Spaniards.

As to the circumstance of the narration.

     As to the circumstance of the narrative.

Would have had a most just cause.

     Would have had a just cause.

Such as together with.

     Such as along with.

Interposal in the wars.

     Interposition in the wars.

Effectuate a marriage.

     Effect a marriage.

He was utterly devoid.

     He was utterly destitute.

Headlong in his passions.

     Headstrong in his passions.

Obtained at last.

     Obtained at length.

A bill declarative.

     A bill declaratory.

Forced into a breach.

     Constrained to make a breach.

Had sat.

     Had sitten.

However little inclined.

     How little soever inclined.

Besides being a most atrocious violence.

     Besides its being a most atrocious act of violence.

Precedent to Strafford's trial.

     Previous to Strafford's trial.

Afraid that.

     Afraid lest.

Was ordinarily lodged in.

     Was commonly lodged in.

Was the person who introduced.

     Was the person that introduced.

During all the time when.

     During the time that.

Reduced to shifts.

     Reduced to extremities.

The Star Chamber, who were sitting.

     The Star Chamber, which was sitting.

A story which, as it marks the genius of parties, may be worth reciting.

     A story which, as it discovers the genius of parties, may be
     worth relating.

Contempt entertained towards.

     Contempt entertained for.

Could such an attempt be interpreted treason.

     Could such an attempt be considered as treason.

Lay great weight upon.

     Lay great stress upon.

Devoid of temporal sanction.

     Destitute of temporal sanction.

Parliament designed to levy war.

     Parliament intended to levy war.

It would ascertain the devoted obedience.

     It would ensure the devoted obedience.

His dignity was exempted from pride.

     His dignity was free from pride.

When the exception really occurs, even though it be not precedently
expected.

     When the exception really occurs, even though it be not
     previously expected.

To those effects which were operated.

     To those effects which were wrought.

[81:1] A tragedy by John Home.

[83:1] The militia of England had, owing to the unpopularity of the
foreign mercenaries in British pay, been strengthened and enlarged. A
proposal was entertained, to extend the system to Scotland: but it was
not executed till many years afterwards. There were several pamphlets on
the subject. Probably the one here referred to is the well known
"History of the Proceedings in the case of Margaret, commonly called
Peg, only lawful Sister of John Bull, Esq.;" attributed to Adam
Ferguson, which will have to be mentioned farther on.

[84:1] Hume seems to have himself commenced a translation of Plutarch.
See above, vol. i. p. 417.

[85:1] Stewart's Life of Robertson.

[87:1] It will be observed, that Hume's strongest argument from internal
criticism is, that the state of society and feeling exhibited in these
poems was that of the middle ages, and involved the spirit of chivalry
peculiar to that period.

[89:1] Mackenzie's Account of Home, p. 155. The original is in the MSS.
R.S.E. Mr. Mackenzie says, "I could not read this letter without being
confirmed in an observation which I have often ventured to make, on the
uncertainty of the evidence arising from _letters_, when the writers are
dead, and the motives of their correspondence cannot be known."

[90:1] It is not Cowley but Butler who makes this sarcasm.

     For Hebrew roots although they're found
     To flourish most in barren ground.

[90:2] MS. R.S.E.

[92:1] Private Correspondence of David Hume with several distinguished
persons, between the years 1761 and 1776. London, 1820, 4to.

[93:1] Private Correspondence, p. 269.

[94:1] MS. R.S.E.

[97:1] Depuis long-tems, Monsieur, je suis combattue par des sentimens
contraires. L'admiration que me cause votre sublime ouvrage, et l'estime
qu'il m'inspire pour votre personne, vos talents, et votre vertu, m'ont
fait naître souvent le désir de vous écrire, pour vous exprimer les
sentimens dont je suis profondément pénétrée. D'un autre côté,
considérant que je vous suis inconnue, le peu de prix que doit avoir mon
suffrage, la réserve et l'obscurité même qui convient à mon sexe: j'ai
craint d'être accusée de présomption, et de me faire connoître à mon
désavantage, d'un homme de qui je regarderai toujours la bonne opinion
comme le bien le plus flatteur et le plus précieux. Néanmoins, puisque
les réflexions que j'ai faites à cet égard ne paroissent avoir beaucoup
de force, un penchant irrésistible les rend infructueuses, et je vais
ajouter mon exemple à mille autres, pour justifier la vérité de cette
remarque que j'ai lue dans votre histoire de la Maison de
Stuard,--"Men's views of things are the result of their understanding
alone; their conduct is regulated by their understanding, their temper,
and their passions,"--puisque quand ma raison me dit que je devrais me
tenir dans le silence, l'enthousiasme, où je suis, m'empêche de le
pouvoir garder.

Quoique femme, et dans un âge qui n'est pas encore avancé, et malgré la
dissipation de la vie qu'on tient dans ce pays, ayant toujours aimé la
lecture, il est peu de bons livres, en quelque langue et en quelque
genre que ce soit, que je n'ai lus, ou dans l'original, ou dans les
traductions; et je puis vous assurer, monsieur, avec une sincérité qui
ne doit pas vous être suspecte, que je n'ai trouvé aucun qui réunit à
mon jugement, autant de perfections que le vôtre. Je ne sais point de
termes qui puissent vous rendre ce que j'aprouve en lisant cet ouvrage.
Je me suis attendrie, transportée, et l'émotion qu'il me cause est en
quelque façon pénible par sa continuité. Il élève l'âme, il remplit le
cœur de sentimens d'humanité et bienfaisance. Il éclaire l'esprit, et
en lui montrant la véritable félicité intimement liée à la vertu, il lui
découvre par le même rayon le seul et unique but de tout être
raisonnable. Au milieu des calamités qui environnent de toutes parts le
Roi Charles Premier, l'on voit la paix et la sérénité briller avec éclat
et l'accompagner sur l'échafaud; tandis que le trouble et les remords,
cortége inséparable du crime, suivent les pas de Cromwell et s'asseyent
sur le trône avec lui. Votre livre apprend encore combien l'abus est
voisin des meilleures choses, et les réflexions qu'il fait faire à ce
sujet, doit [doivent] augmenter la vigilance et la défiance de soi-même.
Il anime d'une noble émulation, il inspire l'amour de la liberté, et
instruit en même tems à la soumettre au gouvernement sous lequel on est
obligé de vivre. En un mot c'est un _terra fecunda_ de morale et
d'instructions présentées avec des couleurs si vives qu'on croit les
voir pour la première fois.

La clarté, la majesté, la simplicité touchante de votre style, me ravit.
Les beautés sont si frappantes, que malgré mon ignorance dans la langue
Angloise, elles n'ont pu m'échapper. Vous êtes, Monsieur, un peintre
admirable. Vos tableaux ont une grâce, un naturel, une énergie, qui
surpasse ce que l'imagination même peut attendre.

Mais quelles expressions employerai-je pour vous faire connoitre l'effet
que produit sur moi votre divine impartialité? J'avois besoin en cette
occasion de votre propre éloquence, pour bien rendre ma pensée. En
vérité je crois avoir devant les yeux l'ouvrage de quelque substance
céleste, dégagé des passions, qui pour l'utilité a daigné écrire les
évènemens de ces derniers tems.

Je n'ose ajouter, que dans tout ce qui sort de votre plume vous vous
montrez un philosophe parfait, un homme d'état, un historien plein de
génie, un politique éclairé, un vrai patriote, toutes ces sublimes
qualités sont si fort au dessus des connoissances d'une femme, qu'il me
convient peu d'en parler; et j'ai déjà grand besoin de votre indulgence
pour les fautes que j'ai commises centre la discrétion et la bienséance
par l'excès de ma vénération pour votre mérite. Je vous la demande,
Monsieur, et en même tems le plus profond secret. La démarche que je
fais a quelque chose d'extraordinaire. Je craindrois qu'elle ne
m'attirât le blâme, et je serois fâchée que le sentiment qui me l'a
dictée pût être inconnu. J'ai l'honneur d'être, Monsieur, votre très
humble et très obéissante servante,

HYPPOLYTE DE SAUJON, COMTESSE DE BOUFFLERS.

On me dit, Monsieur, que vous avez en vue de venir en France, à Paris.
Je souhaite bien vivement que vous exécutiez cette résolution, et
pouvoir contribuer à vous en rendre le séjour agréable.

Ce 15 Mars, 1761. A Paris.[97:A]

     [97:A] MS. R.S.E.

[101:1] Private Correspondence, &c. 1-4.

[101:2] MS. R.S.E.

[101:3] Private Correspondence, 5.

[105:1] It will be observed that this is an attempt to spell those
expressions according to the pronunciation.

[107:1]

_A Paris, 16 Juin, 1762._

Jean Jacques Rousseau, citoyen de Genève, et auteur de plusieurs écrits
qui vous sont vraisemblablement connus, vient de composer un Traité sur
l'Education, en quatre volumes, où il expose plusieurs principes
contraires aux nôtres, tant sur la politique, que sur la religion. Comme
nous ne jouissons pas ici de la liberté de la presse, le Parlement par
un arrêt, juste, s'il est comme je n'en doute pas conforme aux lois du
royaume, mais néanmoins rigoureux, l'a décrété de prise de corps, et
l'on prétend que s'il n'avoit pas pris la fuite, il auroit été condamné
à la mort. J'ai de la peine à croire qu'on eût pu aller si loin sur la
qualité d'étranger. Mais quoi qu'il en soit, il eut été imprudent de
lui, de rester en France dans de pareilles circonstances. Il est donc
parti, incertain quel asile il choisiroit. Je lui ai conseillé de se
retirer en Angleterre, lui promettant des lettres de recommendation pour
vous, Monsieur, et pour d'autres personnes de mes amis. Je m'acquitte de
ma promesse, et je ne puis pas à mon avis lui choisir dans tout
l'Europe, un protecteur plus respectable par ses liaisons, et plus
recommendable par son humanité. M. Rousseau passe chez la plupart des
gens en ce pays pour un homme singulier. A prendre cette épithète selon
la vraie signification, elle lui est justement donnée, car il diffère, a
beaucoup d'égards, de la façon d'agir et de penser des hommes du jour.
Il a le cœur droit, l'âme noble et désintéressée. Il craint toute
espèce de dépendance, et par cette raison il a mieux aimé, étant en
France, gagner sa vie en copiant de la musique, que de recevoir les
bienfaits de ses meilleurs amis, qui s'empressoient de réparer sa
mauvaise fortune. Cette délicatesse peut paroître excessive, mais elle
n'a rien de criminelle, et même elle suppose des sentimens élevés. Il
fuit le commerce du monde, il ne se plaît que dans la solitude, ce goût
pour la retraite lui a fait des ennemis. L'amour propre de ceux qui
l'ont recherché s'est trouvé blessé de ses refus. Mais malgré sa
misanthropie apparente, je ne crois pas qu'il y ait nulle part, un homme
plus doux, plus humain, plus compâtissant aux peines des autres, et plus
patient dans les siennes, en un mot, sa vertu paroît si pure, si
contente, si uniforme, que, jusqu'à, présent, ceux qui le haïssent,
n'ont pas trouvé que dans leur propre coeur des raisons pour le
soupçonner. Pour moi, avec des apparences aussi avantageuses, j'aimerois
mieux en être trompé que de me défier de sa sincérité.

D'après l'opinion que j'en ai monsieur, je l'ai jugé digne d'être connu
de vous, et en lui procurant cet honneur, je crois lui donner la preuve
la plus marquée du cas que je fais de lui.[107:A]

     [107:A] MS. R.S.E.

[109:1] Private Correspondence, &c. pp. 8, 9.

[110:1] This letter is printed in the Private Correspondence, p. 58.
There are two duplicate originals of it among the MSS. R.S.E.

[113:1] Private Correspondence, &c. p. 54.

[115:1] Private Correspondence, p. 54.

[115:2] Vol. i. p. 283.

[116:1] The following anecdote of Hume, by Lord Charlemont, seems
appropriate to this passage. "He never failed, in the midst of any
controversy, to give its due praise to every thing tolerable that was
either said or written against him. One day that he visited me in
London, he came into my room laughing and apparently well pleased. 'What
has put you into this good humour, Hume?' said I. 'Why man,' replied he,
'I have just now had the best thing said to me I ever heard. I was
complaining in a company where I spent the morning, that I was very ill
treated by the world, and that the censures put upon me were hard and
unreasonable. That I had written many volumes, throughout the whole of
which there were but a few pages that contained any reprehensible
matter, and yet that for those few pages, I was abused and torn to
pieces.' 'You put me in mind,' said an honest fellow in the company,
whose name I did not know, 'of an acquaintance of mine, a notary public,
who having been condemned to be hanged for forgery, lamented the
hardship of his case; that after having written many thousand
inoffensive sheets, he should be hanged for one line.'" _Hardy's Memoirs
of Charlemont_, p. 121.

[119:1] _European Magazine_, 1785, p. 250.

[119:2] Vol. i. p. 57.




