CHAPTER XVII.

1771-1776. Æt. 60-65.

     Hume's social character--His conversation--His disposition--
     Traditional anecdotes regarding him--Correspondence--Letter
     about the Pretender--Gilbert Stuart's quarrel with Dr. Henry--
     Commercial State of Scotland--Letter to his nephew on
     Republicanism--Smith's "Wealth of Nations"--Hume's illness--
     His Will--Smith appointed Literary Executor--Strahan
     substituted--His journey to England with Home--Prospects of
     Death--Communications with his Friends and Relations--His
     Death--General view of his influence on Thought and Action.


It is to the period from the year 1770 to his death, when he lived among
his early friends in Edinburgh, that we ought to refer such traditional
accounts of Hume's private life and social habits, as are not expressly
connected with any known event in his history. He was, it is true, a
distinguished man when he left his native city, in 1763. He had then,
indeed, performed all the services which entitled him to immortality.
But his foreign celebrity, and his official honours, had since added
many ostensible glories to his name, and introduced him to a wider
sphere of public notice than the substantial fruits of his genius and
industry would have of themselves secured. When we remember that this
was the most celebrated period of his life, and was the only one of
which persons who are still, or who have lately been alive, could have
any recollection, we naturally refer to it those traditional notices and
incidents which have no distinct place.

The impression of Hume's character, acquired by one who has sought it in
the tenor of his works, and the history of his literary career, is quite
different from that which we derive from those who knew him, and were
connected with the social circle in which he lived. The former is
solitary, self-relying, and unimpressible even to sternness; the latter
is good, easy, simple, social, and amenable to the sway of gentle
impulses. These two representations are not without a harmony of
principle. In all serious matters, in his projects of literary ambition,
in the philosophy he taught mankind, in all that was to connect him with
posterity and the intellectual destiny of the human race, he was
resolute and uncompromising. But the exhibition of his strength was
reserved for the arena of his triumphs; and in domestic and social
intercourse he put aside his helmet, with its nodding plumes; feeling,
that the intellectual exhibitions suited for _that_ sphere, should
spring from whatever Nature had bestowed on him of sweet, and peaceful,
and kind,--whatever was fitted to drive rancour or angry emulation from
the bosom, and to render life delightful. Hence, to appear in the social
circle as an intellectual gladiator, does not appear to have been his
wish; he was content if he gave himself and others pleasure.

This view of his character is confirmed by Mackenzie, who, when a young
man, enjoyed the high distinction of mingling in that group, of which he
was the principal figure.

     But the most illustrious of that circle was David Hume, who
     had a sincere affection for his poetical namesake,--an
     affection which was never abated during the life of that
     celebrated man. The unfortunate nature of his opinions with
     regard to the theoretical principles of moral and religious
     truth, never influenced his regard for men who held very
     opposite sentiments on those subjects; subjects which he
     never, like some vain and shallow sceptics, introduced into
     social discourse: On the contrary, when at any time the
     conversation tended that way, he was desirous rather of
     avoiding any serious discussion on matters which he wished to
     confine to the graver and less dangerous consideration of
     cool philosophy. He had, it might be said, in the language
     which the Grecian historian applies to an illustrious Roman,
     two minds; one which indulged in the metaphysical scepticism
     which his genius could invent, but which it could not always
     disentangle; another, simple, natural, and playful, which made
     his conversation delightful to his friends, and even
     frequently conciliated men whose principles of belief his
     philosophical doubts, if they had not power to shake, had
     grieved and offended. During the latter period of his life, I
     was frequently in his company amidst persons of genuine piety,
     and I never heard him venture a remark at which such men, or
     ladies, still more susceptible than men, could take
     offence.[439:1]

The late Lord Chief Commissioner Adam was another of the young men who
were so fortunate as to be admitted to this circle. In a curious little
collection of notices of eminent persons, called "The Gift of a
Grandfather," privately printed at his own press at Blair-Adam, he says
of Hume:

     He was an intimate friend and acquaintance: and in all the
     intercourse of life, and in all he said, and wrote, and did,
     when not employed in his unnecessary metaphysical scepticism
     (well named, by a friend of mine, intellectual rope-dancing,)
     was innocent, playful, and moral, and most natural in his
     conversation: equally pleasing and instructive to the young
     and old of both sexes. . . . . . . . . .

     His simple unaffected nature, and kindly disposition, exalted
     him as much as the singular powers of his mind, and his
     talents for expressing in writing what he contemplated--so
     well described by Gibbon, as careless inimitable beauties of
     style; which, when he read, he laid down the book in despair
     that he should ever be able to imitate them.

     I have before shown that he never introduced, in conversation,
     his abstruse or sceptical speculations; that all his
     sentiments were moral and natural and pleasing, and even
     playful in the extreme. This is evinced by his letters, which
     are perfect in their kind. He could bring himself down,
     without effort, to the most familiar playfulness with young
     persons, and particularly delighted in the conversation of
     youthful females.

     Mr. Hume was one of our constant visiters, making, as was the
     custom of those days, tea-time the hour of calling. In the
     summer he would often stroll to my father's beautiful villa of
     North Merchiston. On one occasion--I was then a boy of
     thirteen--he, missing my mother, made his tea-drinking good
     with two or three young ladies of eighteen or nineteen, (his
     acquaintances,) who were my mother's guests. I recollect
     perfectly how agreeably he talked to them; and my recollection
     has been rendered permanent by an occurrence which caused some
     mirth and no mischief.

     When the philosopher was amusing himself in conversation with
     the young ladies, the chair began to give way under him, and
     gradually brought him to the floor.

     The damsels were both alarmed and amused, when Mr. Hume,
     recovering himself, and getting upon his legs, said in his
     broad Scotch tone, but in English words, (for he never used
     Scotch,) "Young ladies, you must tell Mr. Adam to keep
     stronger chairs for heavy philosophers."

     This simple story is a good specimen of the man. He was above
     all affectation. I was a companion of his eldest nephew, and
     saw much of him when I was very young. As I grew up he used to
     invite me to dinner, and I took great delight in his
     conversation. I continued in and about Edinburgh long enough
     to be able to relish it, and perhaps to join in it. On one
     particular occasion I met him at tea at Professor Ferguson's;
     it was at the period of my attending Dr. Blair's class on
     rhetoric and belles lettres: their conversation became very
     interesting to me, as it bore upon subjects which had an
     affinity to what I was in the habit of hearing prelected upon.
     They discussed particularly the Henriade of Voltaire; they
     were not displeased with any want of brilliancy in the
     versification, but they condemned the choice of the subject.
     Mr. Hume said, "He should never choose for an epic poem
     history, the truth of which is well known; for no fiction can
     come up to the interest of the actual story and incidents of
     the singular life of Henry IV.;" and Professor Ferguson added,
     "What epic poet could improve upon the chivalrous life of
     Chevalier Bayard, or on the event of his extraordinary
     romantic death?"

"I always lived," says James Boswell, in a passage where he has to
record some of his great patron's expressions of contempt and dislike,
"on good terms with Mr. Hume, though I have frankly told him I was not
clear that it was right of me to keep company with him; 'but,' said I,
'how much better are you than your books!' He was cheerful, obliging,
and instructive. He was charitable to the poor;[441:1] and many an
agreeable hour have I passed with him."

The testimony which Adam Smith bore to his character and disposition, in
the letter which accompanies his autobiography, though so well known,
must not here be omitted.

     His temper seemed to be more happily balanced, if I may be
     allowed such an expression, than that perhaps of any other man
     I have ever known. Even in the lowest state of his fortune,
     his great and necessary frugality never hindered him from
     exercising, upon proper occasions, acts both of charity and
     generosity. It was a frugality founded, not upon avarice, but
     upon the love of independency. The extreme gentleness of his
     nature never weakened either the firmness of his mind, or the
     steadiness of his resolutions. His constant pleasantry was the
     genuine effusion of good nature and good humour; tempered with
     delicacy and modesty, and without even the slightest tincture
     of malignity, so frequently the disagreeable source of what is
     called wit in other men. It never was the meaning of his
     raillery to mortify; and, therefore, far from offending, it
     seldom failed to please and delight, even those who were the
     objects of it. To his friends, who were frequently the objects
     of it, there was not, perhaps, any one of all his great and
     amiable qualities which contributed more to endear his
     conversation. And that gaiety of temper, so agreeable in
     society, but which is so often accompanied with frivolous and
     superficial qualities, was, in him, certainly attended with
     the most severe application, the most extensive learning, the
     greatest depth of thought, and a capacity in every respect the
     most comprehensive. Upon the whole, I have always considered
     him, both in his lifetime, and since his death, as approaching
     as nearly to the idea of a perfectly wise and virtuous man,
     as, perhaps, the nature of human frailty will permit.

Of any description of his character, his own account of it must form a
material feature. The mere circumstance that a man should have thus
written about himself, is a noticeable element in his mental history. He
says, in his "own life:"

     To conclude, historically, with my own character. I am, or
     rather was, (for that is the style I must now use in speaking
     of myself, which emboldens me the more to speak my
     sentiments,)--I was, I say, a man of mild disposition, of
     command of temper, of an open, social, and cheerful humour,
     capable of attachment, but little susceptible of enmity, and
     of great moderation in all my passions. Even my love of
     literary fame, my ruling passion, never soured my temper,
     notwithstanding my frequent disappointments. My company was
     not unacceptable to the young and careless, as well as to the
     studious and literary; and as I took a particular pleasure in
     the company of modest women, I had no reason to be displeased
     with the reception I met with from them. In a word, though
     most men, any wise eminent, have found reason to complain of
     calumny, I never was touched, or even attacked by her baleful
     tooth: and though I wantonly exposed myself to the rage of
     both civil and religious factions, they seemed to be disarmed,
     in my behalf, of their wonted fury. My friends never had
     occasion to vindicate any one circumstance of my character and
     conduct: not but that the zealots, we may well suppose, would
     have been glad to invent and propagate any story to my
     disadvantage, but they could never find any which they thought
     would wear the face of probability. I cannot say there is no
     vanity in making this funeral oration of myself, but I hope
     it is not a misplaced one; and this is a matter of fact which
     is easily cleared and ascertained.

We have here a generous testimony to the tolerant spirit of his age: And
yet his history and correspondence show, that he did not always feel
himself safe from the influence of political or polemical resentment. He
seemed, however, to take a pride in contrasting his own personal
reception, by the world, with that of his writings; the one being all
courtesy, the other all prejudice and dislike. A late eminent judge
remembered meeting him at dinner with Black, Smith, and others, a few
months before his death. Smith was speaking of the ingratitude,
perversity, and intolerance of human nature. Hume said he differed with
him. There was he, who had written on history, on politics, and on
morals--some said on divinity; yet, in discussing these exciting topics,
he had not made a single enemy; unless, indeed, all the Whigs, and all
the Tories, and all the Christians! As, in his playful conversation
among his intimate friends, he was inclined to indulge in practical
humour, he made the general unpopularity of his opinions a common theme
of amusement; picturesquely exaggerating the more offensive features,
and exhibiting them as bugbears to frighten the well-meaning. Asking his
friend, Clephane, to look for lodgings for him in London, he represents
the person who is to inhabit them as "a sober, discreet, virtuous,
frugal, regular, quiet, good-natured man--of a bad character." This "bad
character," he seems to have occasionally used as a method of gently
alarming innocent females. A lady, of strictly evangelical principles,
walking home from church, through a crowded part of Edinburgh, was
rather surprised by the zealous attention with which he proffered his
arm. After they had passed through the crowd, he gave his reason for
being so obsequious--it was, that she might be congratulated, by her
friends, on having been seen walking on Sunday with "Hume the Deist."
Mackenzie relates the following incident, which shows that he was not,
however, always proof against the effect of jocular attacks on his
principles by others.

     In the same _bonhommie_, Mr. Hume bore with perfect good
     nature the pleasantries which humorous deductions from his
     theoretical scepticisms sometimes produced. Once, I have been
     told, he was in a small degree ruffled by a witticism of Mr.
     John Home's, who, though always pleasant, and often lively,
     seldom produced what might be termed or repeated as wit. The
     clerk of an eminent banker in Edinburgh, a young man of
     irreproachable conduct, and much in the confidence of his
     master, eloped with a considerable sum with which he had been
     intrusted. The circumstance was mentioned at a dinner where
     the two Humes, the historian and the poet, and several of
     their usual friendly circle, were present. David Hume spoke of
     it as a kind of moral problem, and wondered what could induce
     a man of such character and habits as this clerk was said to
     possess, thus to incur, for an inconsiderable sum, the guilt
     and the infamy of such a transaction. "I can easily account
     for it," said his friend, John Home, "from the nature of his
     studies, and the kind of books which he was in the habit of
     reading." "What were they?" said the philosopher. "Boston's
     Fourfold State," rejoined the poet, "and Hume's Essays." David
     was more hurt by the joke than was usual with him; probably
     from the singular conjunction of the two works, which formed,
     according to his friend's account, the library of the
     unfortunate young man.[444:1]

As appropriate to his popularity among women and young people, the
following anecdotes from the pen of one who has gained no little
celebrity by her genius, cannot fail to give interest. They are
contained in a letter by Lady Anne Lindsay, authoress of the song _Auld
Robin Gray_, when she was a young lady living in her grandmother's house
in Edinburgh, to her sister Margaret:--

     Dinners go on as usual, which, being monopolized by the
     divines, wits, and writers of the present day, are not
     unjustly called the Dinners of the Eaterati, by Lord Kellie,
     who laughs at his own pun till his face is purple.

     Our friend, David Hume, along with his friend, Principal
     Robertson, continue to maintain their ground at these
     convivial meetings. To see the lion and the lamb lying down
     together, the deist and the doctor, is extraordinary; it makes
     one hope that some day Hume will say to him, "Thou almost
     persuadest me to be a Christian." He is a constant morning
     visiter of ours. My mother jested him lately on a circumstance
     which had a good deal of character in it.

     When we were very young girls, too young to remember the
     scene, there happened to be a good many clever people at
     Balcarres at Christmas; and as a gambol of the season, they
     agreed to write each his own character, to give them to Hume,
     and make him show them to my father, as extracts he had taken
     from the pope's library at Rome.[445:1]

     He did. My father said, "I don't know who the rest of your
     fine fellows and charming princesses are, Hume; but if you had
     not told me where you got _this_ character, I should have said
     it was that of my wife."

     "I was pleased," said my mother, "with my lord's answer, it
     showed that at least I had been an honest woman."

     "Hume's character of himself," said she, "was well drawn and
     full of candour; he spoke of himself as he ought;" but added,
     what surprised us all, that, "plain as his manners were, and
     apparently careless of attention, vanity was his predominant
     weakness. That vanity led him to publish his Essays, which he
     grieved over; not that he had changed his opinions, but that
     he thought he had injured society by disseminating them."

     "Do you remember the sequel of that affair?" said Hume.

     "Yes, I do," replied my mother, laughing: "you told me that,
     although I thought your character a sincere one, it was not
     so; there was a particular feature omitted that we were still
     ignorant of, and that you would add it; like a fool I gave you
     the manuscript, and you thrust it into the fire, adding, 'Oh,
     what an idiot I had nearly proved myself to be, to leave such
     a document in the hands of a parcel of women!'"

     "Villain!" said my mother, laughing, and shaking her head at
     him.

     "Do you remember all this, my little woman?" said Hume to me.

     "I was too young," said I, "to think of it at the time."

     "How's this? have not you and I grown up together?"

     I looked surprised.

     "Yes," added he, "you have grown tall, and I have grown
     broad."[446:1]

It may give us some farther idea of the refined simplicity that made his
conversation agreeable to intellectual and right thinking women, to
observe the manner in which he was addressed in the following very
lively letter from Lady Elliot Murray, the wife of his friend, Sir
Gilbert.

     _Minto, 12th October, 1772._

     I am resolved to take the reins of government into my own
     hands. I don't know what has made me such a humble subservient
     animal hitherto. I will dictate from this time forth. I will
     give the law, and insist on an implicit obedience to my
     superior wisdom; for am I not wiser than the wisest? did I not
     foretell what has come to pass, that Mons. De Guigne would not
     reach Edinburgh before the middle of this week? and did I not
     prove my judgment surpassing that best of historians, who is a
     mere pedler in understanding to me? Had he taken my advice, he
     need not have jumbled himself seventy long miles over
     mountains and plains in one day, and left a family who were
     happy in his company, and exchanged the cheering blaze of a
     good coal fire, for the dreary glimpses of a clouded moon.
     But, however, he had the pleasure of gratifying a sense which
     few people are much troubled with, a delicacy and ardour in
     politeness; and as that is pretty near akin to benevolence, I
     believe the indulgence of it may be a full recompense for the
     trouble. But that last principle will lead you back the road
     you went; for you left three ladies mourning for your
     departure, and the good man of the house has been in a
     vexation ever since, and can only be contented by a renewal of
     your kind intentions towards us, of passing some quiet days
     under our roof. Sir Gilbert came home from Jedburgh, and had
     seen your brother there, who told him he would find you here
     when he came back.

     Enter Sir Gilbert. Where is Mr. Hume?--Answer: He is gone.
     When did he come?--About one o'clock. And when did he go
     away?--About five. What! have you quarrelled?--Yes. He and I
     had some little difference about his _byeuks_, and I tried to
     persuade him to burn them all, and write the other way; for,
     as I said, I was sure he would be a shining light, and equal
     the author of the "Pilgrim's Progress," or Mr. Ebenezer
     Erskine, if he would only take the right side; and he flew in
     a passion and went away in a huff! How could you think he
     would be persuaded by you? Pooh! though I am but a simple
     woman, before it be long he may be convinced I can see farther
     into a millstone than he can do; and if he had taken my
     advice, he might have rested his bones here this night in
     quiet, in place of rumbling along in the dark in a post
     chaise; and so in other matters too, I might perhaps do him a
     service if he would be ruled by me. My dear, how can you be so
     wild? And, my dear, where is the harm in telling one's mind,
     when you think you can do good by it, to a good worthy
     creature that is only a little mistaken or so? Good by it,
     what a chimera! but come, there is some other reason than this
     for his going away? None that I know; except a fine flim-flam
     letter that he received from the French Ambassador, saying, he
     expected to have the exquisite joy of beholding him at
     Edinburgh to-morrow. Ah, now I understand it. But when does he
     come back? Why he either comes back with Mons. De Guigne, or
     after he has done the last duties to him at Edinburgh. So you
     see, if you do not come, you will have brought me in for the
     lesser excommunication; for you will have been the cause of my
     deceiving my husband, and telling him a lie: although, for
     that matter, neither you nor I _lukelly_ have any thing to
     fear now-a-days, for either the greater or lesser
     excommunication: For, as you justly observe, line 12, first
     page of your letter, how are things changed! Old prejudices
     are done away, but behold new ones arise; and the last errors
     I am afraid are worse than the first: but, for my own part, I
     would willingly have stood before the kirk-session, to have
     shown any respect and regard to Mons{r.} L'Ambassador, who is
     a man we all esteem in this house, and from whom we have
     always received every possible civility, of which we retain a
     grateful sense. But we perceive he is travelling in his public
     capacity, and unless Sir Gilbert had had it in his power to go
     to town to wait of him, and give him welcome from us to our
     house, should it suit his conveniency to rest here upon his
     road to England, we think any other invitation would appear
     improper and abrupt; and as it so happens he cannot possibly
     accomplish this at present, for we are to have company with us
     most part of this week; and after that we go to our visits,
     which will take us most of next week; and then we shall be
     chez nous till our journey southwards, when we will require
     from you to restore us your good society, else we shall verily
     believe your flying visit was all a hum, and we won't be
     _Humed_ so!

     Bless me, I thought I was writing to my poor good Harry. How
     does he do, sanctified soul? I have really hopes of you, now
     that he and you are come hand to fist at a conversation; as he
     tells me you are very often with him, and he really thinks you
     are a saint in your nature; and I say that is a great pity,
     for tho' I cannot deny the fact, I deplore it for the
     consequences of it; but give my best wishes to him, and tell
     him I long to hear of better prospects for him. I am really
     confounded, when I think what a parcel of nonsense I have
     wrote you: But learn to prefer the truth and sincerity of a
     Scots wife, to the pernicious flattery of Les Dames
     Françaises, of which you have had enough in your days; and so
     it is fit you should be made to hear on the other side of the
     head. And so wishing you all health and happiness, and
     clearness of understanding, I remain, sir, your well wisher,
     friend, and obedient servant,

                                          AG. ELLIOT MURRAY.

     P.S. I don't think the quiet Euthanasia of England will happen
     in the year 1773, the mayoralty of J. W. Esq.

Hume had been for many years very corpulent. In a letter to Sir Harry
Erskine, in 1756, he complains of this tendency to obesity. He
occasionally alludes to his partiality for plain food, and to his being,
to use his own sufficiently distinct expression, "a glutton, not an
epicure."[449:1] We have found him telling Sir Gilbert Elliot, that for
beef and cabbage, which he calls "a charming dish," and old mutton, no
one could excel him; and that the Duc de Nivernois would become
apprentice to his "lass," to learn how she made sheeps'-head broth. The
zest with which he returned to the simple food of his native country,
after the diplomatic feasts of Paris, seems to have been characteristic
of all his habits. Burke is said to have affirmed, that, "in manners he
was an easy unaffected man, previous to going to Paris as secretary to
Lord Hertford; but that the adulation and caresses of the female wits of
that capital had been too powerful even for a philosopher, and the
result was, he returned a literary coxcomb." But the saying is not in
harmony with the characteristics noted by others; and it is not quite
clear that it was ever uttered by Burke.[450:1] All who speak as having
been familiarly acquainted with him, concur in describing his manners as
kind, simple, and polite. He had, as no one who has read his
correspondence can fail to see, a good heart, ever ready to do
benevolent acts where occasions for their performance came under his
notice; and his exterior appearance and manner corresponded with this
part of his character. One occasionally meets with venerable persons who
remember having been dandled on Hume's knee, and the number of these
reminiscences indicates that he was fond of children.[450:2]

The broad Scottish pronunciation, in which, by all accounts, he
indulged, was a rather singular habit in one who desired to throw off
all marks of provincialism. Yet we are told that in this rude Doric garb
he clothed a very pure English colloquial style. We must take this
statement with allowances: He never probably in his most finished
writings completely divested his style of Scotticisms; and the English
he spoke must have been pure only in comparison with the language of his
fellow countrymen. But it may be remarked, that provincial broadness of
pronunciation in Scotland is far from being incompatible with a very
pure and unprovincial style of language. It has often been observed,
that in those parts of the country where the speech of the uneducated is
most peculiar, English, when spoken at all, is found in greatest
purity. Thus, an inhabitant of the border districts makes his southern
tones, though hardly distinguishable from those of his English
neighbours, the vehicle of intense Scotticisms; while beyond the
Grampians, the deep broad Teutonic pronunciation sometimes gives voice
to uncontaminated English, as established by literary and colloquial
rules.

Hume had very clearly two kinds of conversation, one for strangers and
the world at large, the other for his chosen friends with whom he was at
ease, and who could understand the good humour of that jocularity which
a contemporary pronounced to have something in it perfectly infantine.
His friend John Home was somewhat renowned for a warlike and romantic
pomp in his ideas, like those which pervade his own tragic personations.
In Hume's conversation we may believe that there was nothing either
heroic or enthusiastic. A good humoured sly application of the fugitive
subjects of discussion, to the peculiarities of the guests; an
occasional vigorous and apt remark; a fantastic wit sometimes let loose
to wander where it pleased, and choose whatever it thought fit for its
object,--seem to have constituted the charm of his society. Yet the tone
of his thoughts sometimes rose to enthusiasm. Thus the son of his valued
friend Ferguson, remembers his father saying, that, one clear and
beautiful night, when they were walking home together, Hume suddenly
stopped, looked up to the starry sky, and said, more after the manner of
"Hervey's Meditations" than the "Treatise of Human Nature," "Oh, Adam,
can any one contemplate the wonders of that firmament, and not believe
that there is a God!"

In a late collection of casual reminiscences, there is the following
notice of his social habits.

"Major M----, with whom I dined yesterday, said that he had frequently
met David Hume at their military mess in Scotland, and in other parties;
that he was very polite and pleasant, though thoughtful in company,
generally reclining his head upon his hand, as if in study; from which
he would suddenly recover, however, with some indifferent
question;[452:1] extremely inquisitive, but quite easy to himself and
all around him. One is glad to catch personal notices, however slight,
of memorable men and of speculative philosophers. I know no one so
memorable as Hume. He seems to have so far outstripped the spirit of the
times in his original and profound researches, that the world is in no
condition at present to do justice to his merits."[452:2]

Those who know him solely by his philosophical reputation, will perhaps
believe him to have been

     Parcus deorum cultor et infrequens.

But this does not seem to have been the case, at least in his outward
conduct. We find him, in writing home from France, casually mentioning
his not having seen Elliot's sons "in church;" and on another occasion
making a like allusion, indicative of his having been a pretty regular
attendant at the ambassador's chapel. He is said to have been fond of
Dr. Robertson's preaching, and not averse to that of his colleague and
opponent, John Erskine. A lady, distinguished in literature, remembers
that in a conversation with a respectable tradesman's wife, who had been
a servant to Hume, she said that her master one day asked her very
seriously, why she was never seen in church, where he had provided seats
for all his household. At that time there were very few of the humbler
classes in Edinburgh, who did not belong to the Church of Scotland. The
woman's defence was, that she belonged to a dissenting congregation; and
it was admitted to be quite satisfactory.

Social in his habits, and living the life of a wealthy bachelor, it was
natural that Hume should connect himself with the societies, whether of
a literary or convivial character, which brought the good company of
Edinburgh together. He appears to have been a pretty active member of
the Philosophical Society. In a letter, of which part has already been
printed, and which would probably in strict chronological order belong
to an earlier period, we find him with mild dignity enforcing the
tolerance and philosophical equanimity, that ought to reign wherever men
of different sentiments meet each other in intellectual discussion.


"_Tuesday Forenoon._

"SIR,--I am so great a lover of peace, that I am resolved to drop this
matter altogether, and not to insert a syllable in the Preface, which
can have a reference to your Essay. The truth is, I could take no
revenge but such a one as would have been a great deal too cruel, and
much exceeding the offence: for, though most authors think, that a
contemptuous manner of treating their writings is but slightly revenged
by hurting the personal character and the honour of their antagonists, I
am very far from that opinion. Besides, I am as certain as I can be of
any thing, (and I am not such a sceptic as you may perhaps imagine,)
that your inserting such remarkable alterations in the printed copy,
proceeded entirely from precipitancy and passion, not from any formed
intention of deceiving the Society. I would not take advantage of such
an incident to throw a slur on a man of merit, whom I esteem, though I
might have reason to complain of him.

"When I am abused by such a fellow as Warburton, whom I neither know nor
care for, I can laugh at him. But if Dr. Stewart approaches any way
towards the same style of writing, I own it vexes me; because I
conclude, that some unguarded circumstance of my conduct, though
contrary to my intention, had given occasion to it.

"As to your situation with regard to Lord Kames, I am not so good a
judge. I only think that you had so much the better of the argument,
that you ought, upon that account, to have been more reserved in your
expressions. All raillery ought to be avoided in philosophical argument,
both because it is unphilosophical, and because it cannot but be
offensive, let it be ever so gentle. What, then, must we think with
regard to so many insinuations of irreligion, to which Lord Kames's
paper gave not the least occasion? This spirit of the inquisitor is, in
you, the effect of passion, and what a _cool_ moment would easily
correct. But where it predominates in the character, what ravages has it
committed on reason, virtue, truth, liberty, and every thing that is
valuable among mankind! I shall now speak a word as to the justness of
your censure with regard to myself after these remarks on the manner of
it. I have no scruple of confessing my mistakes. You see I have owned
that I think Lord Kames is mistaken in his argument; and I would sooner
give up my _own_ cause than my _friend's_, if I thought that imputation
of any consequence to a man's character. . . . .[455:1]

"As I am resolved to drop this matter entirely from the Preface, so I
hope to persuade Lord Kames to be entirely silent with regard to it in
our meeting. But in case I should not prevail, or if any body else start
the subject, I think it better that some of your friends should be
there, and be prepared to mollify the matter. If I durst pretend to
advise, I should think it better you yourself were absent, unless you
bring a greater spirit of composition than you express in your letter. I
am persuaded that whatever a person of Mr. Monro's authority proposes
will be agreed to: though I must beg leave to differ from his judgment
in proposing to alter two pages. That chiefly removes the offence given
to me; but what regards Lord Kames is so interwoven with the whole
discourse, that there is not now any possibility of altering it. I am,
sir, your most obedient humble servant," &c.

"P. S.--I hope you are very zealous in promoting the sale of Blacklock's
Poems. I will never be reconciled to you unless you dispose of at least
a score of them; and make your friends Sir John Maxwell and Lord Buchan
pay a guinea a piece for their copy."[455:2]


The Poker Club, occasionally mentioned in these pages, seems to have
had no other direct and specific object but the consumption of claret.
The duty laid on that national wine, by "the English statesman," so
pathetically commemorated by John Home, was a heavy blow and great
discouragement to the club; but it rallied, and returned to its old
esteemed beverage; and, indeed, it is a somewhat curious circumstance,
that the national taste, created by the early intercourse with France
and the consequent cheapness of French wines, still lingers in Scotland,
where claret is much more generally consumed than in England. The club
met in Fortune's tavern every Friday. It was the practice, at each
meeting, to name two to be, what were called, "attendant members;" an
arrangement, probably, designed to form a nucleus round which those
whose attendance was uncertain, but who might drop in occasionally in
the course of the evening, could form themselves; and to prevent any
general desertion of the club, or, what might be, perhaps, more
calamitous, the accident of any individual finding himself, for the
night, its sole and solitary representative. We find Hume duly taking
his turn in these attendances, and keeping the minutes according to
rotation. On the 20th January, 1775, there is this emphatic entry, in
his handwriting, "As Mr. Nairne was one of the attendant members, and
neglected his duty, the club sent him the bill." The last meeting of
the club, attended by Hume, appears to have been that of 8th December,
1775.[457:1]

It does not appear to be necessary that traditional anecdotes, such as
the few we possess of Hume, must either be authenticated, or excluded
from such a work as the present. It seems to entitle them to a place,
that they were current among those who knew his character and habits.
They thus afford all that is expected from such sources--passing fancy
sketches, recognised as likenesses. Like several others that have
appeared in these pages, as mere traditions, the following anecdote,
which is eminently natural and curious, has no farther authentication
than the general belief, in Edinburgh, that it "was like the man."

About the commencement of his last illness, a female member of the
respectable Berean congregation, in Leith, presented herself at his
door, with the information that she had been intrusted with a message to
him from on High; and, becoming very urgent, succeeded in obtaining
admission. "This is a very important matter, madam," said the
philosopher, "we must take it with deliberation;--perhaps you had better
get a little temporal refreshment before you begin. 'Lassie, bring this
good lady a glass of wine.'" While she was preparing for the attack,
Hume entered, good-humouredly, into conversation with her; and,
discovering that her husband was a chandler, announced that he stood
very much in want, at that time, of some temporal lights, and intrusted
his guest with a very large order. This unexpected stroke of business at
once absorbed all the good woman's thoughts; and, forgetting her
important mission, she immediately trotted home to acquaint her husband
with the good news.

There is an anecdote, which has appeared in numerous collections of such
literary scraps, which represents him as having slipped into the boggy
ground at the base of the castle rock, and called to a woman to help him
out. In his unwieldy and infirm state, during his latter years, the
accident is not improbable. The anecdote proceeds to say, that the
female called on had great doubts of the propriety of helping "Hume, the
Deist," out of that slough of despond into which it had pleased
Providence to cast him. "But, my good woman, does not your religion as a
Christian, teach you to do good, even to your enemies?" "That may be,"
said she, "but ye shallna get out o' that, till ye become a Christian
yersell: and repeat the Lord's Prayer and the Belief," a feat which is
said to have been very rapidly performed, much to the worthy catechist's
astonishment.

Some of his witticisms have a tone of sarcastic severity, which he does
not appear to have been disposed to suppress, even when women were the
victims, if it was called forth by affectation or folly. To a celebrated
"fine woman" of his day, who said she was often pestered to tell her
age, and desired his opinion what answer she should give: he is reported
to have said, "Madam, say you are not yet come to years of discretion."
To the same lady, who, when crossing one of the ferries of the Firth of
Forth, during a fresh breeze, was making a loud outcry about danger, he
remarked, with much coolness, that they would probably soon be food for
fishes; "and who," said the frightened belle, probably a little confused
by the horrors of their position, "who will they begin with?" The answer
she received was, "Why, madam, those of them that are gluttons will
begin with me; those that are epicures with your ladyship."

We now resume Hume's correspondence. The letters of the last five years
of his life, which have been preserved, are comparatively few; a
circumstance which may be accounted for from his living, during that
period, among his correspondents. On 28th January, 1772, he writes to
Smith, that he would be glad to receive a visit from him; but that his
house would be rather dull, from his sister having fever. In
continuation he says:--


"I shall not take an excuse from your own state of health; which I
suppose only a subterfuge invented by indolence and love of solitude.
Indeed, my dear Smith, if you continue to hearken to complaints of this
nature, you will cut yourself out entirely from human society, to the
great loss of both parties.

"P.S.--I have not yet read 'Orlando Inamorato;' but intend soon to do
it. I am now in a course of reading the 'Italian Historians,' and am
confirmed in my former opinion, that that language has not produced one
author who knew how to write elegant correct prose, though it contains
several excellent poets."[459:1]


In the following letters, we find several details about that remarkable
revulsion in the state of trade in Scotland, which, at the present day,
is chiefly known by the quantity of decisions on points of bankruptcy
law, with which it filled the Reports.


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH

"_St. Andrew's Square, 27th June, 1772._

"We are here in a very melancholy situation, continual bankruptcies,
universal loss of credit, and endless suspicions. There are but two
standing houses in this place--Mansfields and the Coutses--for I
comprehend not Cummin, whose dealings were always very narrow. Mansfield
has paid away £40,000 in a few days: but it is apprehended that neither
he nor any of them can hold out till the end of next week, if no
alteration happen. The case is little better in London. It is thought
that Sir George Colebroke must soon stop; and even the Bank of England
is not entirely free from suspicion. Those of Newcastle, Norwich, and
Bristol, are said to be stopped. The Thistle Bank has been reported to
be in the same condition. The Carron Company is reeling, which is one of
the greatest calamities of the whole, as they gave employment to near
ten thousand people. Do these events any wise affect your theory, or
will it occasion the revisal of any chapters?

"Of all the sufferers, I am the most concerned for the Adams,
particularly John. But their undertakings were so vast, that nothing
could support them. They must dismiss three thousand workmen, who,
comprehending the materials, must have expended above £100,000 a-year.
They have great funds; but if these must be disposed of in a hurry, and
to disadvantage, I am afraid the remainder will amount to little or
nothing. People's [compa]ssion I see was exhausted for John, in his last
calamity, and every body asks why he incurred any more hazards. But his
friendship for his brothers is an apology; though I believe he has a
projecting turn of his own. To me the scheme of the Adelphi always
appeared so imprudent, that my wonder is how they could have gone on so
long.

"If Sir George Colebroke stop, it will probably disconcert all the
plans of our friends, as it will diminish their patron's influence;
which is a new misfortune.

"On the whole, I believe that the check given to our exorbitant and ill
grounded credit, will prove of advantage in the long run, as it will
reduce people to more solid, and less sanguine projects, and, at the
same time, introduce frugality among the merchants and manufacturers:
what say you? Here is food for your speculation."[461:1]


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_St. Andrew's Square, 23d Nov. 1772._

"DEAR SMITH,--I should agree to your reasoning, if I could trust your
resolution. Come hither for some weeks about Christmas; dissipate
yourself a little; return to Kirkcaldy; finish your work before autumn:
go to London; print it; return and settle in this town, which suits your
studious independent turn, even better than London. Execute this plan
faithfully, and I forgive you.

"Ferguson has returned, fat and fair, and in good humour,
notwithstanding his disappointment, which I am glad of."[461:2]


In 1772, Macpherson published a quarto volume, called "An Introduction
to the History of Great Britain and Ireland," of which Pinkerton,
indignant at the Celtic spirit it displayed, said, "The empty vanity,
shallow reading, vague assertion, and etymological nonsense, in this
production, are truly risible." In a letter to Colonel Dow,[461:3] we
find Hume criticising this book in a rather less emphatic manner.

"My compliments to Ossian. He has given us a work last winter, which
contains a great deal of genius and good writing; but I cannot assent to
his system. I must still adhere to the common opinion regarding our
origin, or rather your origin; for we are all plainly Danes or Saxons in
the low countries. But these subjects I reserve to a discussion over an
evening fire on your return. I charge you not to think of settling in
London, till you have first seen our New Town, which exceeds any thing
you have seen in any part of the world."[462:1]

With the following letter, many readers may perhaps be familiar, but to
those who have not already seen it, the curious historical incident it
details, will give it much interest.


HUME _to_ SIR JOHN PRINGLE.

     _St. Andrew's Square, Edinburgh,
     Feb. 10, 1773._

     MY DEAR SIR,--That the present Pretender was in London, in the
     year 1753, I know with the greatest certainty; because I had
     it from Lord Marischal, who said, it consisted with his
     certain knowledge. Two or three days after his lordship gave
     me this information, he told me, that the evening before, he
     had learned several curious particulars from a lady, (who I
     imagined to be Lady Primrose,) though my lord refused to name
     her. The Pretender came to her house in the evening, without
     giving her any preparatory information; and entered the room
     when she had a pretty large company with her, and was herself
     playing at cards. He was announced by the servant under
     another name. She thought the cards would have dropped from
     her hands on seeing him. But she had presence enough of mind,
     to call him by the name he assumed; to ask him when he came to
     England, and how long he intended to stay there. After he and
     all the company went away, the servants remarked how
     wonderfully like the strange gentleman was to the prince's
     picture, which hung on the chimney-piece, in the very room in
     which he entered. My lord added, (I think from the authority
     of the same lady,) that he used so little precaution, that he
     went abroad openly in day-light, in his own dress; only laying
     aside his blue riband and star; walked once through St.
     James's, and took a turn in the Mall.

     About five years ago, I told this story to Lord Holderness,
     who was secretary of state in the year 1753; and I added, that
     I supposed this piece of intelligence had at that time escaped
     his lordship. "By no means," said he, "and who do you think
     first told it me? it was the king himself, who subjoined, 'And
     what do you think, my lord, I should do with him?'" Lord
     Holderness owned that he was puzzled how to reply; for if he
     declared his real sentiments, they might savour of
     indifference to the royal family. The king perceived his
     embarrassment, and extricated him from it, by adding, "My
     lord, I shall just do nothing at all; and when he is tired of
     England, he will go abroad again." I think this story, for the
     honour of the late king, ought to be more generally known.

     But what will surprise you more, Lord Marischal, a few days
     after the coronation of the present king, told me, that he
     believed the young Pretender was at that time in London; or at
     least had been so very lately, and had come over to see the
     show of the coronation, and had actually seen it. I asked my
     lord the reason for this strange fact. "Why," says he, "a
     gentleman told me so that saw him there; and that he even
     spoke to him, and whispered in his ears these words: 'Your
     royal highness is the last of all mortals whom I should expect
     to see here.'--'It was curiosity that led me,' said the other;
     'but I assure you,' added he, 'that the person who is the
     object of all this pomp and magnificence is the man I envy the
     least.'" You see this story is so near traced from the
     fountain head, as to wear a great face of probability. Query,
     What if the Pretender had taken up Dymock's gauntlet? I find
     that the Pretender's visit in England, in the year 1753, was
     known to all the Jacobites; and some of them have assured me,
     that he took the opportunity of formally renouncing the Roman
     Catholic religion, under his own name of Charles Stuart, in
     the new church in the Strand; and that this is the reason of
     the bad treatment he met with at the court of Rome. I own that
     I am a sceptic with regard to the last particulars.

     Lord Marischal had a very bad opinion of this unfortunate
     prince; and thought there was no vice so mean or atrocious of
     which he was not capable; of which he gave me several
     instances. My lord, though a man of great honour, may be
     thought a discontented courtier; but what quite confounded me
     in the idea of that prince, was a conversation I had with
     Helvétius at Paris, which, I believe, I have told you. In case
     I have not, I shall mention a few particulars. That gentleman
     told me, that he had no acquaintance with the Pretender; but,
     some time after that prince was chased out of France, "a
     letter," said he, "was brought me from him, in which he told
     me that the necessity of his affairs obliged him to be at
     Paris; and, as he knew me, by character, to be a man of the
     greatest probity and honour in France, he would trust himself
     to me, if I would promise to conceal and protect him. I own,"
     added Helvétius to me, "although I knew the danger to be
     greater of harbouring him at Paris than at London; and
     although I thought the family of Hanover not only the lawful
     sovereigns in England, but the only lawful sovereigns in
     Europe, as having the full and free consent of the people; yet
     was I such a dupe to his flattery, that I invited him to my
     house; concealed him there, going and coming, near two years;
     had all his correspondence pass through my hands; met with his
     partisans upon Pont Neuf; and found, at last, that I had
     incurred all this danger and trouble for the most unworthy of
     all mortals; insomuch that I have been assured, when he went
     down to Nantz, to embark on his expedition to Scotland, he
     took fright and refused to go on board; and his attendants,
     thinking the matter gone too far, and that they would be
     affronted for his cowardice, carried him, in the night time,
     into the ship, pieds et mains liés." I asked him, if he meant
     literally? "Yes," said he, "literally. They tied him and
     carried him by main force." What think you now of this hero
     and conqueror?

     Both Lord Marischal and Helvétius agree, that with all this
     strange character, he was no bigot; but rather had learned,
     from the philosophers at Paris, to affect a contempt of all
     religion. You must know that both these persons thought they
     were ascribing to him an excellent quality. Indeed, both of
     them used to laugh at me for my narrow way of thinking in
     these particulars.[465:1] However, my dear Sir John, I hope
     you will do me the justice to acquit me.

     I doubt not but these circumstances will appear curious to
     Lord Hardwicke, to whom you will please to present my
     respects. I suppose his lordship will think this unaccountable
     mixture of temerity and timidity, in the same character, not a
     little singular. I am yours very sincerely.[465:2]

If there should be any doubts of the genuineness of this letter, from
its having first appeared, unauthenticated, in a periodical work, they
will be removed by the perusal of the following answer by Sir John
Pringle, printed from the original manuscript.


SIR JOHN PRINGLE _to_ HUME.

     _London, 5th November, 1773_.

     DEAR SIR,--I was much obliged to you for your letter of the
     10th ult., as it furnished me with sufficient means for
     maintaining my credit with Lord Hardwicke, a person I have not
     the honour to be well known to; and I had the more occasion
     for such a testimony as yours, as the other earl, mentioned in
     your letter, has thought proper, (I presume since he has once
     more become a courtier,) to deny his knowing any thing of the
     story, when one of the company, (where I told the anecdote to
     Lord Hardwicke,) inquired of him about it.

     Lord Hardwicke, not being in town when yours came to hand, I
     charged his intimate friend, Mr. Wray, who was going to visit
     him, with it. Yesterday, that gentleman returned, and, with
     the letter, sent me a line, expressing his lordship's great
     satisfaction in the communication; and with many thanks to us
     both for it. I understand he is very curious in picking up
     such historical facts; and, if so, he certainly never met with
     any thing of that kind more suited to his genius. The most
     extraordinary circumstance is, that of the _pied et poing
     liés_; and yet your authority seems to be unexceptionable.
     What could be expected from an adventurer whom they had been
     obliged to treat in that humiliating manner? and whose
     timidity, they must believe, was every now and then to recur,
     to affront those that set him upon the enterprise? I know that
     _our_ people were at great pains to decry his courage, after
     the battle of Culloden; but that I considered always as done
     upon a political, rather than an historical principle. I had
     good evidence for believing that, at Derby, he was, of the
     council of war, the person who stood longest out against the
     motion for returning, and not advancing to London. Again, he
     was for standing at the Spey; and, lastly, he did not retire
     from Culloden till his whole band was put to flight. It is
     true he never advanced nearer than the corps de réserve; but
     which corresponded to our second line, in which the Duke of
     Cumberland placed himself. I may add, that both of us have
     been informed, that he betrayed no unmanly concern, when he
     skulked so long with his female heroine; and then, surely, he
     was daily in the greatest danger of his life; had he been
     taken he would have met with no quarter. But, after all, these
     testimonies, in favour of his courage, must yield to such
     proofs as you bring to the contrary.[466:1]


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_St. Andrew's Square, 24th Feb., 1773._

"DEAR SMITH,--There are two late publications here which I advise you to
commission. The first is Andrew Stuart's Letters to Lord Mansfield,
which they say have met with vast success in London. Andrew has eased
his own mind, and no bad effects are to follow. Lord Mansfield is
determined, absolutely, to neglect them. The other is Lord Monboddo's
treatise on the Origin and Progress of Language, which is only part of
a larger work. It contains all the absurdity and malignity which I
expected; but is writ with more ingenuity and in a better style than I
looked for."[467:1]


"_St. Andrew's Square, 10th April, 1773._

"To-day news arrived in town, that the Ayr Bank had shut up, and, as
many people think, for ever. I hear that the Duke of Buccleuch is on the
road. The country will be in prodigious distress for money this term.
Sir G. Colebroke's bankruptcy is thought to be the immediate cause of
this event.

"Have you seen Macpherson's Homer? It is hard to tell whether the
attempt or the execution be worse. I hear he is employed by the
booksellers to continue my History. But, in my opinion, of all men of
parts, he has the most anti-historical head in the universe.

"Have you seen Sir John Dalrymple? It is strange what a rage is against
him, on account of the most commendable action in his life. His
collection[467:2] is curious; but introduces no new light into the
civil, whatever it may into the biographical and anecdotical history of
the times.

"Have you seen 'Alonzo?' Very slovenly versification, some pathetic, but
too much resembling 'Douglas.'"[467:3]


We have found Gilbert Stuart deferentially courting Hume's notice of his
earlier literary efforts. A few years of popularity as an author, and
the command of a periodical work, had in the meantime changed the man's
character, by developing all its arrogance, jealousy, conceit, and
vindictiveness. He was one of those who indulge in the comfortable
consciousness, that any comparison between their own genius and that of
any other given person is supremely ludicrous; and as some one said of
La Harpe, it might have proved a good speculation to buy him at what he
was worth, and sell him at his own estimate of his value. Sick of the
praises he heard bestowed on Robertson and the other eminent historians
of his age, he thought it his duty to show the world how the lamp of
such industrious drudges would grow pale before the lustre of true
genius; and thus he favoured the public with some historical efforts, in
which the curious reader of the present day, who takes them from
forgotten shelves, is somewhat surprised to find how effectually
well-turned periods, and a certain audacity of opinion, keep out of view
the meagreness of the author's inquiries.

In 1773, Stuart began to edit the _Edinburgh Magazine and Review_.
Periodical literature was the proper sphere for exhibiting his powers;
which consisted in the ready acquisition of a superficial view of any
subject, and a rapid, yet elegant style; occasionally magniloquent, and
at other times descriptive or sarcastic. No other periodical work of
that day equalled the _Edinburgh Magazine and Review_, in genius and
originality. But the editor made it the vehicle of his tyrannical and
vindictive spirit; and the purse and person of the proprietor--it might
almost be said the peace of society, were endangered by so formidable a
weapon remaining in such hands.[468:1]

At this time, the Rev. Robert Henry was publishing his valuable History
of Britain, volume by volume. Stuart had vowed that he would crush this
work; and the critical columns he concentrated against it, do great
credit to his ability as a tactician. Hume was promised the privilege of
reviewing the book in _the Magazine_, and probably Stuart thought that
to arm him against an interloper in his own province was excellent
policy; but when the article was written, and put in proof, it was found
not adapted to the editor's purpose. We find him thus writing to a
confederate:

     David Hume wants to review Henry; but that task is so
     precious, that I will undertake it myself. Moses, were he to
     ask it as a favour, should not have it: yea, not even the man
     after God's own heart. I wish I could transport myself to
     London, to review him for the _Monthly_: a fire there and in
     the _Critical_, would perfectly annihilate him. Could you do
     nothing in the latter? To the former I suppose David Hume has
     transcribed the criticism he intended for us. It is precious
     and would divert you. I keep a _proof_ of it in my cabinet
     for the amusement of friends. This great philosopher begins to
     dote.[470:1]

A review of Henry's work _did_ appear in _The Monthly Review_, but from
a very different pen. The _proof_, however, which gave Stuart so much
amusement, has fortunately been preserved. After giving a favourable
analysis of Henry's second volume, it concludes with the following
sentences, in many respects remarkable.

     The reader will scarcely find in our language, except in the
     works of the celebrated Dr. Robertson, any performance that
     unites together so perfectly the great points of entertainment
     and instruction. It is happy for the inhabitants of this
     metropolis, which has naturally a great influence on the
     country, that the same persons who can make such a figure in
     profane learning, are intrusted with the guidance of the
     people in their spiritual concerns, which are of such
     superior, and indeed of unspeakable importance. These
     illustrious examples, if any thing, must make the infidel
     abashed of his vain cavils, and put a stop to that torrent of
     vice, profaneness, and immorality, by which the age is so
     unhappily distinguished.

     This city can justly boast of other signal characters of the
     same kind, whom learning and piety, taste and devotion,
     philosophy and faith, joined to the severest morals and most
     irreproachable conduct, concur to embellish. One in
     particular, with the same hand by which he turns over the
     sublime pages of Homer and Virgil, Demosthenes and Cicero, is
     not ashamed to open with reverence the sacred volumes; and
     with the same voice by which, from the pulpit, he strikes vice
     with consternation, he deigns to dictate to his pupils the
     most useful lessons of rhetoric, poetry, and polite
     literature.[470:2]

Hume was an early friend of Benjamin Franklin, whom he was instrumental
in introducing to his Parisian friends.[471:1] The celebrated
publication of the papers revealing the policy of the ascendency party,
and the scene at the council board, of which Franklin so deeply
cherished the memory, are thus alluded to in a letter to Smith, of 13th
February, 1774:--

"Pray, what strange accounts are these we hear of Franklin's conduct? I
am very slow in believing that he has been guilty in the extreme degree
that is pretended; though I always knew him to be a very factious man,
and faction, next to fanaticism, is of all passions the most destructive
of morality. How is it supposed he got possession of these letters? I
hear that Wedderburn's treatment of him before the council was most
cruel, without being in the least blameable. What a pity!"[471:2]

The following, among the very few letters which Hume appears to have
written at this period of his life, is addressed to John Home.


"_St. Andrew's Square, 4th June, 1774._

"DEAR JOHN,--The enclosed came to hand to-day, and, as I take it to be
directed to you, I have sent it you. If on opening it you find it
otherwise, you may return it to me, that I may find the true owner.

"You have seen, no doubt, the specimen of a Scotch review.[472:1] My
first conjecture was that Carlyle was the author; but Dr. Blair has
convinced me that it is much more probably the production of your
spiritual guide, Tom Hepburn;[472:2] but, whoever be the father, the
child has a great deal of salt, and spirit, and humour. I wish he would
continue, though at the hazard of my getting a rap over the knuckles
from time to time; for I see in this hero the spirit of a Drawcansir,
who spares neither friend nor foe. I think I can reckon about twenty
people, not including the king, whom he has attacked in this short
performance. I hope all his spleen is not exhausted. I should desire my
compliments to him, were I not afraid that he would interpret the
civility as paying black mail to him. I am, dear John, yours
sincerely."[472:3]


The following appears to be the earliest letter in which Hume expresses
himself conscious of some unpleasant feelings, systematic of a decay of
the physical functions.


HUME _to_ COLONEL EDMONDSTOUNE.

"_Edinburgh, 23d March, 1775._

"CARO GIUSEPPE,--No request can be more obliging than yours; and no
party could have been proposed to any place, or with any company, more
agreeable to me. But you remember what a plague I was to every body and
to myself on my last journey; and you may recollect that I made a vow,
in the bitterness of my distress, never more to leave my own house, nor
lie out of my own bed. This vow I have religiously kept, except two or
three days last autumn, when I went to my brother's; and though I could
scarcely there esteem myself from home, I resolved never more to pay
them a visit. You have not a bed cool enough for me, which proceeds not
from any distemper or disorder, but from a peculiarity of constitution,
that has been gradually increasing on me these last twelve years. I am
in very good health: but let me tell you, that you express yourself
strangely when you say I have been _complaining_. How could you imagine
that I could ever complain, even though _fractus illabatur orbis_? I
beseech you, know better the people to whom you speak, and the force of
the terms you make use of. Miss Keiths desired me to tell you, that some
time ago they had a letter from Sir Basil, by which they learn that your
request with regard to Maillet's friend, is complied with.

"My compliments to Mrs. Edmondstoune; embrace Jean Jacques in my name.
Dear Guidelianus, I am ever yours."[473:1]


Colonel Edmondstoune's answer to these excuses is not a little curious.

     DEAR OBSTINATE DAVID,

          _Pravum_ et tenacem propositi virum
          Non civium ardor _recta_ jubentium
          Non vultus instantis _Baronnæ_
          Mente quatit _stolida_.

     Will nothing move you, you obdurate philosopher? Your reasons
     are not worth a straw; and I'll prosecute you for scandalizing
     my house. The room next to your last is as cool as any room
     ought to be. It looks to the north, and you was put into a
     south room, merely because it was thought that the sun's
     vivifying ray would be of use to a man that had been worn out
     and so much epuisé in France. Besides, you scrub, have I not
     seen you basking for hours together in the sun, contemplating
     Shellie, and burning with envy at his prowess? and I heard
     nothing about your being heated till we came to Killin, and
     that was Crichen's doing, to season you for still a hotter
     place.[474:1]


HUME _to his Nephew_.[474:2]

"_St. Andrew's Square, 30th August, 1775._

"DEAR DAVY,--Your letter gave me satisfaction, and I approve very much
of your course of study. But I think you are unreasonably diffident of
yourself with regard to the _copia verborum_: you are not wanting in
that particular [consider]ing you as a beginner; and the course you take
will tend very much to [produce] greater facility as well as correctness
of expression. Stylus est optimus [magis]ter eloquentiæ. These, if not
the words, are the sense of Quinctilian, for I cite from memory. You
know that the Roman stylus was the same as the pen.

"I had a letter to-day from Mr. Millar,[474:3] who tells me that he
expects to see you on the first Monday of November.

"I do not go to Inverara as soon as I proposed: it will be next week
before I set out. I think I am the better for jaunting; though in the
main I should like better to stay at home.

"My compliments to your mother; I am glad she has heard from Josey; but
I wonder what has detained him so long at Paris.

"I fancy you and Jock are very happy at present in your field sports;
and your father will not be displeased to see the favourable progress of
the harvest. I am, dear Davy, your affectionate uncle."[475:1]


HUME _to_ JOHN HOME.

     _St. Andrew's Square, Sept. 20th, 1775._

     DEAR JOHN,--Of all the vices of language, the least excusable
     is the want of perspicuity; for, as words were instituted by
     men, merely for conveying their ideas to each other, the
     employing of words without meaning is a palpable abuse, which
     departs from the very original purpose and intention of
     language. It is also to be observed, that any ambiguity in
     expression is next to the having no meaning at all; and is
     indeed a species of it; for while the hearer or reader is
     perplexed between different meanings, he can assign no
     determinate idea to the speaker or writer; and may, on that
     account, say with Ovid, "Inopem me copia fecit." For this
     reason, all eminent rhetoricians and grammarians, both ancient
     and modern, have insisted on perspicuity of language as an
     essential quality; without which, all ornaments of diction are
     vain and fruitless. Quinctilian carries the matter so far, as
     to condemn this expression, _vidi hominem librum legentem_;
     because, says he, legentem may construe as well with _librum_
     as _hominem_; though one would think that the sense were here
     sufficient to prevent all ambiguity. In conformity to this
     way of thinking, Vaugelas, the first great grammarian of
     France, will not permit that any one have recourse to the
     sense, in order to explain the meaning of the words; because,
     says he, it is the business of the words to explain the
     meaning of the sense--not of the sense to give a determinate
     meaning to the words; and this practice is reversing the order
     of nature; like the custom of the Romans (he might have added
     the Greeks,) in their Saturnalia, who made the slaves the
     masters; for you may learn from Lucian that the Greeks
     practised the same frolic during the festival of Saturn, whom
     they called Χρονος.

     Now, to apply, and to come to the use of this principle: I
     must observe to you, that your last letter, besides a
     continued want of distinctness in the form of the literal
     characters, has plainly transgressed the essential rule
     above-mentioned of grammar and rhetoric. You say that Coutts
     has complained to you of not hearing from me; had you said
     either James or Thomas, I could have understood your meaning.
     About two months ago, I heard that James complained of me in
     this respect; and I wrote to him, though then abroad, making
     an apology for my being one of the subscribers of a paper
     which gave him some offence. I was afraid he had not received
     mine. The letter of Thomas, I conceived to be only a circular
     letter, informing me of a change in the firm of the house: and
     having answered it a few days ago, by giving him some
     directions about disposing of my money, which proved that I
     intended to remain a customer to the shop; it happens,
     therefore, luckily, that I had obviated all objections to my
     conduct on both sides.

     In turning over my papers, I find a manuscript journal of the
     last rebellion, which is at your service. I hope Mrs. Home is
     better, and will be able to execute her journey. Are you to be
     in town soon? Yours without ambiguity, circumlocution, or
     mental reservation.[476:1]

Hume, though we have found him censuring the conduct of Franklin, was
opposed to any attempt to coerce America. "I always thought," says Sir
John Pringle, when writing to him, "you were in the wrong, when you
supposed these colonies wanted only a pretext to shake off their
subjection."[477:1] This subjection he seems to have thought they were
entitled to throw off; for he was far more tolerant of the sway of
individuals over numbers, which he looked upon as the means of
preserving order and civilization, than of the predominance of one
territory over another, which he looked upon as subjugation.
Unfortunately, few of his opinions on this subject can be better
ascertained than by the reflex light of the letters addressed to him, in
answer to his remarks. With Strahan, the eminent printer, he carried on
an extensive correspondence on political matters, of which the letters
on his own side have unfortunately been lost.[477:2] The sentiments
which Hume had expressed on the American war, are thus described, by
contrast, in the words of that member of Parliament, to whom Franklin
addressed his celebrated letter of defiance.


WILLIAM STRAHAN _to_ HUME.

     I differ from you _toto cœlo_ with regard to America. I am
     entirely for coercive methods with those obstinate madmen; and
     why should we despair of success? Why should we suffer the
     empire to be so dismembered, without the utmost exertions on
     our part? I see nothing so very formidable in this business,
     if we become a little more unanimous, and could stop the
     mouths of domestic traitors, from whence the evil originated.
     Not that I wish to enslave the colonists, or to make them one
     jot less happy than ourselves; but I am for keeping them
     subordinate to the British legislature; and their trade, in a
     reasonable degree, subservient to the interest of the mother
     country; an advantage she well deserves; but which she must
     inevitably lose, if they are emancipated, as you propose. I am
     really surprised you are of a different opinion. Very true,
     things look oddly at present; and the dispute hath, hitherto,
     been very ill managed; but so we always do at the commencement
     of every war. So we did, most remarkably, in the last. It is
     perhaps owing to the nature of our government, which permits
     not of those sudden and decisive exertions frequently made by
     arbitrary princes. But, so soon as the British lion is roused,
     we never fail to fetch up our lee-way, as the sailors say. And
     so I hope you will find it in this important case.[478:1]

The following letter, which is not, however, written in a spirit of
entire earnestness or sobriety, has some reference to his views on the
American question.


HUME _to_ BARON MURE.

"_St. David's Street, Oct. 27th, 1775._

"OH! DEAR BARON,--You have thrown me into agonies, and almost into
convulsions, by your request. You ask what seems reasonable,--what seems
a mere trifle; yet am I so unfit for it, that it is almost impossible
for me to comply. You are much fitter yourself. That address, by which
you gained immortal honour, was done altogether without my knowledge; I
mean that after the suppression of the late rebellion. Here is Lord Home
teazing me for an address from the Merse; and I have constantly refused
him. Besides, I am an American in my principles, and wish we would let
them alone to govern or misgovern themselves, as they think proper: the
affair is of no consequence, or of little consequence, to us. If the
county of Renfrew think it indispensably necessary for them to
interpose in public matters, I wish they would advise the king, first to
punish those insolent rascals in London and Middlesex, who daily insult
him and the whole legislature, before he thinks of America. Ask him, how
he can expect that a form of government will maintain an authority at
three thousand miles' distance, when it cannot make itself be respected,
or even be treated with common decency, at home. Tell him, that Lord
North, though, in appearance, a worthy gentleman, has not a head for
these great operations; and that, if fifty thousand men, and twenty
millions of money, were intrusted to such a lukewarm coward as Gage,
they never could produce any effect. These are objects worthy of the
respectable county of Renfrew: not mauling the poor infatuated Americans
in the other hemisphere."[479:1]


It has already been said, that Hume appears to have suspected that his
nephew, David, was imbibing republican principles. It is well worthy of
remark, that he does not appear to have considered the training of his
young nephews, in political opinions different from his own, as at all
to be deprecated; and David, to whom the following letter is addressed,
was boarded with Professor Millar, afterwards author of the "Historical
View of the English Government," who had even then shown himself as one
of the most powerful antagonists of Hume's constitutional doctrines. It
must be regretted that the letter is much mutilated; but enough of it is
preserved to show how lightly Hume's political opinions hung on him--how
little they possessed the character of a creed--how tolerant he was of
any system of politics which bore the air of philosophy, and how
curiously he could let his reason vibrate between opinions of the most
opposite character in practical politics.


HUME _to his_ NEPHEW.

"_Edinburgh, 8th December, 1775._

"DEAR DAVY,--All your letters, both to me and to your father, have
[given] great satisfaction, particularly your last; and, in return, I
must give you [the] satisfaction of telling you, that Mr. Millar is very
well pleased with you, [-----] no less than you with him. He complains
only of one thing, which [is not the] usual complaint of tutors against
their pupils; to wit, that he is afraid you [apply too] close, and may
hurt your health by too assiduous study. I should not men[tion this] if
I had the least apprehension that a hint of this nature would m[ake you]
relax too much. But I cannot forbear saying, that every day, fair or
foul, [you] ought to use some exercise. Relaxation from [for?]
amusement, you may use, [or not,] as you fancy; but that, for health, is
absolutely necessary. When I was [of your] age, I was inclined to give
in to excesses of the same kind; and I remember [an anecdote] told me by
a friend, the present Lord Pitfour. A man was riding, with [great]
violence, and running his horse quite out of wind. He stopt a moment to
[ask when] he might reach a particular place. In two hours, replied the
countryman, [if you] will go slower; in four if you be in such a hurry.
Bad health, be[sides other] inconveniencies, is the greatest interrupter
to study in the world.

"I cannot but agree with Mr. Millar, that the republican form of
government is by far the best. The ancient republics were somewhat
ferocious and torn [-----] by bloody factions; but they were still much
preferable to the monarchies or [aristocracies] which seem to have been
quite intolerable. Modern manners have corrected this abuse; and all the
republics in Europe, without exception, are so well governed that one is
at a loss to which we should give the preference. But what is this
general subject of speculation to our purpose? For, besides that an
established government [-----] without the most criminal imputation, be
disjointed from any speculation, [-----] is only fitted for a small
state; and any attempt towards it can, in our [-----] produce only
anarchy, which is the immediate forerunner of despotism [-----] tell us
what is that form of a republic which we must aspire to? Or [-----]stion
be afterwards decided by the sword. [One] great advantage of a
commonwealth over our mixed monarchy, is, that it [would consid]erably
abridge our liberty; which is growing to such an extreme as to be
incom[patible wi]th all. Such fools are they who perpetually cry out
liberty, [and think to] augment it by shaking off the monarchy.

"I have not heard from Josey for some time, which, you may believe, has
produced [-----] reflections in some of your friends. But to show you
that you are not forgotten [-----] I showed Mr. Millar's letter to your
mother. I am afraid, said she, that [-----] some symptoms of a
consumption in poor Davy.

"[I a]m far from thinking Mr. Millar's demands in point of money
unreas[onable.] On the contrary, I believe that I never laid out money
to better purpose.

"[Ha]rrington is an author of genius, but chimerical. No laws, however
rigorous, [would ma]ke his Agrarian practicable. And as the people have
only a negative, the [-----] would perpetually gain ground upon them.
You remember that Montesquieu says, that Harrington establishing his
"Oceana" in opposition to the English constitution, is like the blind
men who built Chalcedon on the opposite [-----] to the seat of
Byzantium. I ask your pardon for not writing to you [sooner,] but beg
the continuance of your correspondence. My compliments to [Mr. Millar,]
to whom I owe a letter. I am, your affectionate uncle."[482:1]


HUME _to_ JOHN HOME.

"_Edinburgh, 8th February, 1776._

"DEAR TYRTAEUS,--It is a remark of Dr. Swift's, that no man in London
ever complained of his being neglected by his friends in the country.
Your complaint of me is the more flattering.

"Two posts ago, I received, under a frank of General Fraser's, a
pamphlet, entitled _A letter from an officer retired_. It is a very good
pamphlet; and I conjecture you to be the author. Sallust makes it a
question, whether the writer or the performer of good things has the
preference? and he ascribes the greater praise to the latter. It is
happy for you, that you may rest your fame on either. I here allude to
what you have done for Ferguson.

"But, pray, why do you say, that the post of Boston is like the camp of
Pirna? I fancy our troops can be withdrawn thence without any
difficulty.

"I make no doubt, since you sound the trumpet for war against the
Americans, that you have a plan ready for governing them, after they are
subdued: but you will not subdue them; unless they break in pieces
among themselves--an event very probable. It is a wonder it has not
happened sooner. But no man can foretell how far these frenzies of the
people may be carried. Yours," &c.[483:1]


The following letter exhibits a feeling of impatience for the appearance
of the long promised "Wealth of Nations." It shows, in discussing some
questions in political economy, that, with his usual sagacity, Hume
predicted that the loss of British supremacy over America, would not
have that dire effect on our commercial prosperity, which had been
anticipated.


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Edinburgh, 8th Feb. 1776._

"DEAR SMITH,--I am as lazy a correspondent as you, yet my anxiety about
you makes me write. By all accounts your book has been printed long ago:
yet it has never yet been so much as advertised. What is the reason? If
you wait till the fate of America be decided, you may wait long.

"By all accounts, you intend to settle with us this spring: yet we hear
no more of it: What is the reason? Your chamber in my house is always
unoccupied. I am always at home. I expect you to land here.

"I have been, am, and shall be probably in an indifferent state of
health. I weighed myself t' other day, and find I have fallen five
complete stones. If you delay much longer I shall probably disappear
altogether.

"The Duke of Buccleuch tells me that you are very zealous in American
affairs. My notion is that the matter is not so important as is
commonly imagined. If I be mistaken, I shall probably correct my error
when I see you, or read you. Our navigation and general commerce may
suffer more than our manufactures. Should London fall as much in its
size as I have done, it will be the better. It is nothing but a hulk of
bad and unclean humours. Yours," &c.[484:1]


It is not perhaps uncharitable to suppose, that the following eulogium
would have been more warm, had the person it was addressed to not been
one of "the barbarians who inhabit the banks of the Thames."


HUME _to_ GIBBON.

     _Edinburgh, 18th March, 1776._

     DEAR SIR,--As I ran through your volume of history with a
     great deal of avidity and impatience, I cannot forbear
     discovering somewhat of the same impatience in returning you
     thanks for your agreeable present, and expressing the
     satisfaction which the performance has given me. Whether I
     consider the dignity of your style, the depth of your matter,
     or the extensiveness of your learning, I must regard the work
     as equally the object of esteem; and I own, that if I had not
     previously had the happiness of your personal acquaintance,
     such a performance, from an Englishman in our age, would have
     given me some surprise. You may smile at this sentiment; but
     as it seems to me that your countrymen, for almost a whole
     generation, have given themselves up to barbarous and absurd
     faction, and have totally neglected all polite letters, I no
     longer expected any valuable production ever to come from
     them. I know it will give you pleasure (as it did me,) to find
     that all the men of letters in this place concur in their
     admiration of your work, and in their anxious desire of your
     continuing it.

     When I heard of your undertaking, (which was some time ago,) I
     own I was a little curious to see how you would extricate
     yourself from the subject of your two last chapters. I think
     you have observed a very prudent temperament; but it was
     impossible to treat the subject so as not to give grounds of
     suspicion against you, and you may expect that a clamour will
     arise. This, if any thing, will retard your success with the
     public; for in every other respect your work is calculated to
     be popular. But, among many other marks of decline, the
     prevalence of superstition in England, prognosticates the fall
     of philosophy and decay of taste; and though nobody be more
     capable than you to revive them, you will probably find a
     struggle in your first advances.

     I see you entertain a great doubt with regard to the
     authenticity of the poems of Ossian. You are certainly right
     in so doing. It is, indeed, strange, that any men of sense
     could have imagined it possible, that above twenty thousand
     verses, along with numberless historical facts, could have
     been preserved by oral tradition during fifty generations, by
     the rudest, perhaps, of all European nations; the most
     necessitous, the most turbulent, and the most unsettled. Where
     a supposition is so contrary to common sense, any positive
     evidence of it ought never to be regarded. Men run with great
     avidity to give their evidence in favour of what flatters
     their passions, and their national prejudices. You are,
     therefore, over and above indulgent to us in speaking of the
     matter with hesitation.

     I must inform you, that we are all very anxious to hear that
     you have fully collected the materials for your second volume,
     and that you are even considerably advanced in the composition
     of it. I speak this more in the name of my friends than in my
     own; as I cannot expect to live so long as to see the
     publication of it. Your ensuing volume will be more delicate
     than the preceding, but I trust in your prudence for
     extricating you from the difficulties; and, in all events, you
     have courage to despise the clamour of bigots. I am, with
     regard, &c.[485:1]

At length appeared the long looked for work, in which the parent of the
first elucidations of political economy was to see his own offspring
eclipsed; and to see it with pride. One must be familiar with the
unenvious friendship which Hume ever bestowed, on the fellow countrymen
who joined him in the noble path of philosophical inquiry, to appreciate
the genuine satisfaction with which he thus hailed the appearance of
"The Wealth of Nations."


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Edinburgh, 1st April, 1776._

"EUGE! BELLE! DEAR MR. SMITH,--I am much pleased with your performance;
and the perusal of it has taken me from a state of great anxiety. It was
a work of so much expectation, by yourself, by your friends, and by the
public, that I trembled for its appearance, but am now much relieved.
Not but that the reading of it necessarily requires so much attention,
and the public is disposed to give so little, that I shall still doubt
for some time of its being at first very popular. But it has depth, and
solidity, and acuteness, and is so much illustrated by curious facts,
that it must at last take the public attention. It is probably much
improved by your last abode in London. If you were here at my fireside,
I should dispute some of your principles. I cannot think that the rent
of farms makes any part of the price of the produce, but that the price
is determined altogether by the quantity and the demand.[486:1] It
appears to me impossible, that the King of France can take a seignorage
of eight per cent upon the coinage. Nobody would bring bullion to the
mint; it would be all sent to Holland or England, where it might be
coined and sent back to France, for less than two per cent. Accordingly,
Necker says, that the French king takes only two per cent of seignorage.
But these and a hundred other points are fit only to be discussed in
conversation; which, till you tell me the contrary, I still flatter
myself with soon. I hope it will be soon; for I am in a very bad state
of health, and cannot afford a long delay. I fancy you are acquainted
with Mr. Gibbon. I like his performance extremely, and have ventured to
tell him, that, had I not been personally acquainted with him, I should
never have expected such an excellent work from the pen of an
Englishman. It is lamentable to consider how much that nation has
declined in literature during our time. I hope he did not take amiss the
national reflection.

"All your friends here are in great grief at present, for the death of
Baron Mure, which is an irreparable loss to our society. He was among
the oldest and best friends I had in the world."[487:1]


In April, 1776, the disease of which Hume subsequently died, had made
alarming progress. The little autobiographical sketch, called "my own
Life," was finished on the eighteenth of that month; and he there speaks
of the rise and progress of his disorder, and of his feelings under the
expectation of a speedy termination of his life, in the following
terms:--

     In spring, 1775, I was struck with a disorder in my bowels,
     which at first gave me no alarm, but has since, as I apprehend
     it, become mortal and incurable. I now reckon upon a speedy
     dissolution. I have suffered very little pain from my
     disorder; and what is more strange, have, notwithstanding the
     great decline of my person, never suffered a moment's
     abatement of my spirits; insomuch, that were I to name the
     period of my life which I should most choose to pass over
     again, I might be tempted to point to this latter period. I
     possess the same ardour as ever in study, and the same gaiety
     in company. I consider, besides, that a man of sixty-five, by
     dying, cuts off only a few years of infirmities; and though I
     see many symptoms of my literary reputation's breaking out at
     last with additional lustre, I knew that I could have but few
     years to enjoy it. It is difficult to be more detached from
     life than I am at present.

It was probably early in the year, and before the disease had made such
progress, as to make his friends in general anticipate its fatal
conclusion, that Dr. Black wrote the following undated letter on the
subject to Smith:--

"I write at present, chiefly to acquaint you with the state of your
friend David Hume's health, which is so bad that I am quite melancholy
upon it, and as I hear that you intend a visit to this country soon, I
wish if possible to hasten your coming, that he may have the comfort of
your company so much the sooner. He has been declining several years,
and this in a slow and gradual manner, until about a twelvemonth ago,
since which the progress of his disorder has been more rapid. One of his
distresses has been a sensation of excessive heat, chiefly in the night
time, and which was only external, for it occasioned no internal
distress, or anxiety, or thirst."

Black then proceeds to describe with more minuteness, than would be
either pleasing or instructive to unscientific readers, a series of
symptoms from which he infers that the most serious part of his
patient's disorder, is a hemorrhage in the upper part of the
intestines.[488:1] He continues,--

"His mother, he says, had precisely the same constitution with himself,
and died of this very disorder; which has made him give up any hopes of
his getting the better of it." He concludes by saying,--

"Do not, however, say much on this subject to any one else; as he does
not like to have it spoke of, and has been shy and slow in acquainting
me fully with the state of his health."

In preparation for the event, which could not be far distant, he had
executed a settlement of his estate, so early as the 4th of January. He
left the bulk of his fortune to his brother, or, in the case of his
predeceasing him, to his nephew David, burdened in the latter case with
special legacies to his other nephews and his nieces. He left his sister
£1200. Along with some legacies to a few obscure private friends and to
his servants, he left £200 to D'Alembert, and the same sum to Adam
Ferguson.[489:1] He appointed Smith his literary executor, in the
following terms:[490:1] "To my friend Dr. Adam Smith, late Professor of
Moral Philosophy in Glasgow, I leave all my manuscripts without
exception, desiring him to publish my 'Dialogues on Natural Religion,'
which are comprehended in this present bequest; but to publish no other
papers which he suspects not to have been written within these five
years, but to destroy them all at his leisure. And I even leave him full
power over all my papers, except the Dialogues above mentioned; and
though I can trust to that intimate and sincere friendship, which has
ever subsisted between us, for his faithful execution of this part of my
will, yet, as a small recompense of his pains in correcting and
publishing this work, I leave him two hundred pounds, to be paid
immediately after the publication of it."

Smith subsequently refused to receive payment of the legacy; and it was
the cause of a long friendly discussion with Mr. Home of Ninewells, who,
in opposition to his argument, that it was bequeathed as a remuneration
for editorial labours, which by a subsequent alteration of the bequest
did not require to be performed, urged such pleas as this, "My brother,
knowing your liberal way of thinking, laid on you something as an
equivalent, not imagining you would refuse a small gratuity from the
funds it was to come from, as a testimony of his friendship."[490:2] But
he pleaded in vain; and Smith continued to refuse the bequest, with all
the firmness of his unmercenary nature.

Previous to his journey to Bath, which has to be presently narrated,
Hume appears to have informed Smith of the desire expressed in his will,
that he should undertake the publication of the "Dialogues on Natural
Religion." The intimation was probably verbal, as it does not form part
of any letter among Hume's papers. Elliot was opposed to the publication
of this work. Blair pleaded strongly for its suppression; and Smith, who
had made up his mind, that he would not edit the work, seems to have
desired that the testamentary injunction laid on him might be revoked.
Hume, however, before his death, took effectual steps to guard against
its suppression.

Thus, after having good-naturedly abstained, for nearly thirty years,
from the publication of a work, which might give pain and umbrage to his
dearest friends; at the close of life, and when the lapse of time since
it was written might have been supposed to render him indifferent to its
fate,--because there appeared some danger of its final suppression, he
took decided and well pondered steps to avert from it this fate. Such
was the character of the man!


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_London, 3d May, 1776._

"MY DEAR FRIEND,--I send you enclosed an ostensible letter, conformably
to your desire. I think, however, your scruples groundless. Was Mallet
any wise hurt by his publication of Lord Bolingbroke? He received an
office afterwards from the present king and Lord Bute, the most prudish
men in the world; and he always justified himself by his sacred regard
to the will of a dead friend. At the same time, I own that your scruples
have a specious appearance. But my opinion is, that if upon my death you
determine never to publish these papers, you should leave them sealed up
with my brother and family, with some inscription that you reserve to
yourself the power of reclaiming them whenever you think proper. If I
live a few years longer, I shall publish them myself. I consider an
observation of Rochefoucault, that a wind, though it extinguishes a
candle, blows up a fire.

"You may be surprised to hear me talk of living years, considering the
state you saw me in, and the sentiments which both I and all my friends
at Edinburgh entertained on that subject. But though I cannot come up
entirely to the sanguine notions of our friend John, I find myself very
much recovered on the road, and I hope Bath waters and farther journeys,
may effect my cure.

"By the little company I have seen, I find the town very full of your
book, which meets with general approbation. Many people think particular
points disputable; but this you certainly expected. I am glad that I am
one of the number; as these points will be the subject of future
conversation between us. I set out for Bath, I believe, on Monday, by
Sir John Pringle's directions, who says, that he sees nothing to be
apprehended in my case. If you write to me (hem! hem!) I say if you
write to me, send your letter under cover to Mr. Strahan, who will have
my direction."[492:1]


The "ostensible letter" which was to serve as Smith's justification, if
he should decline to follow the injunctions of the will, is as
follows:--


"_London, 3d May, 1776._

"MY DEAR SIR,--After reflecting more maturely on that article of my will
by which I left you the disposal of all my papers, with a request that
you should publish my 'Dialogues concerning Natural Religion,' I have
become sensible that, both on account of the nature of the work, and of
your situation, it may be improper to hurry on that publication. I
therefore take the present opportunity of qualifying that friendly
request. I am content to leave it entirely to your discretion, at what
time you will publish that piece, or whether you will publish it at all.

"You will find among my papers a very inoffensive piece, called "my own
Life," which I composed a few days before I left Edinburgh; when I
thought, as did all my friends, that my life was despaired of. There can
be no objection, that the small piece should be sent to Messrs. Strahan
and Cadell, and the proprietors of my other works, to be prefixed to any
future edition of them."[493:1]


Smith did not absolutely refuse to edit the "Dialogues," but Hume saw
pretty clearly that it was a task that would not be performed by him.
That he was correct in this supposition, appears by a letter from Smith
to Strahan after Hume's death, where he says:

"I once had persuaded him to leave it entirely to my discretion either
to publish them at what time I thought proper, or not to publish them at
all. Had he continued of this mind, the manuscript should have been most
carefully preserved, and upon my decease restored to his family; but it
never should have been published in my lifetime. When you have read it,
you will perhaps think it not unreasonable to consult some prudent
friend about what you ought to do."[494:1]

By a codicil to his will, dated 7th August, he thus altered the
arrangement referred to in these letters. "In my later will and
disposition, I made some destinations with regard to my manuscripts: All
these I now retract, and leave my manuscripts to the care of Mr. William
Strahan of London, member of Parliament, trusting to the friendship that
has long subsisted between us, for his careful and faithful execution of
my intentions. I desire that my 'Dialogues concerning Natural Religion'
may be printed and published, any time within two years after my death."
After making the bequest to John Home which is mentioned farther on,
leaving to Blair, Smith, Home, and Edmondstoune, "all of them persons
very dear to me, and whose affection to me I know by repeated proofs to
have been mutual," each a copy of the new edition of his works, and to
Miss Ord, ten guineas to buy a ring, "as a memorial of his friendship
and attachment to so amiable and accomplished a person," the codicil is
signed. There is then a new paragraph appended as follows:

"I do ordain that if my 'Dialogues,' from whatever cause, be not
published within two years and a half after my death, as also the
account of my life, the property shall return to my nephew, David, whose
duty in publishing them, as the last request of his uncle, must be
approved of by all the world."[494:2]

Both Hume and Smith seem to have thought that Strahan would undertake
the publication as a mere matter of business. But this book, like the
little hunchback in the "Arabian Nights," was a commodity which every
one seemed anxious to transfer to his neighbour. Strahan declined to
undertake the task, and the "Dialogues" did not appear until 1779, when
they were published by their author's nephew.

Smith cheerfully agreed to undertake the superintendance of the new
edition of his friend's works, then at press. They appear to have been
all in a state of very finished preparation for the press, and an
edition of the "Inquiries" and the miscellaneous essays was published in
1777, from a copy in which the author had completed that removal of
passages of a democratic tendency, which has been so frequently alluded
to.

By the entreaties of several friends, who believed that travelling might
have a favourable influence on his health, Hume undertook a journey to
London towards the end of April. At Morpeth he met with Adam Smith and
John Home, on their way from London, to visit him in Edinburgh, in
consequence of a letter which the former had received from Ferguson, who
says, "David, I am afraid, loses ground. He is cheerful and in good
spirits as usual; but I confess that my hopes, from the effects of the
turn of the season towards spring, have very much abated."

Smith proceeded to Edinburgh, but Home went back to London with his
friend, and fortunately preserved a diary of the journey, so very
interesting, and containing so lively a picture of Hume's state of mind
and habits, that, though already published,[495:1] the reader would not
excuse its omission on this occasion.


_Note by_ MR. JOHN HOME.

     Soon after Mr. Home received the letter from Dr. Ferguson, he
     left London, and set out for Scotland with Mr. Adam Smith.
     They came to Morpeth on the 23d of April, 1776, and would have
     passed Mr. David Hume, if they had not seen his servant,
     Colin, standing at the gate of an inn. Mr. Home thinks that
     his friend, Mr. David Hume, is much better than he expected to
     find him. His spirits are astonishing: he talks of his
     illness, of his death, as matters of no moment, and gives an
     account of what passed between him and his physicians since
     his illness began, with his usual wit, or with more wit than
     usual.

     He acquainted Mr. Adam Smith and me, that Dr. Black had not
     concealed the opinion he had of the desperateness of his
     condition, and was rather averse to his setting out. "Have you
     no reason against it," said David, "but an apprehension that
     it may make me die sooner?--that is no reason at all." I never
     saw him more cheerful, or in more perfect possession of all
     his faculties, his memory, his understanding, his wit. It is
     agreed that Smith shall go on to Scotland, and that I should
     proceed to Bath with David. We are to travel one stage before
     dinner, and one after dinner. Colin tells me that he thinks
     Mr. Hume better than when he left Edinburgh. We had a fine
     evening as we went from Morpeth to Newcastle. David seeing a
     pair of pistols in the chaise, said, that as he had very
     little at stake, he would indulge me in my humour of fighting
     the highwaymen. Whilst supper was getting ready at the inn,
     Mr. Hume and I played an hour at picquet. Mr. David was very
     keen about his card-playing.


     _Newcastle, Wednesday, 24th April._

     Mr. Hume not quite so well in the morning--says, that he had
     set out merely to please his friends; that he would go on to
     please them; that Ferguson and Andrew Stuart, (about whom we
     had been talking,) were answerable for shortening his life one
     week a-piece; for, says he, you will allow Xenophon to be good
     authority; and he lays it down, that suppose a man is dying,
     nobody has a right to kill him. He set out in this vein, and
     continued all the stage in his cheerful and talking humour. It
     was a fine day, and we went on to Durham--from that to
     Darlington, where we passed the night.

     In the evening Mr. Hume thinks himself more easy and light,
     than he has been any time for three months. In the course of
     our conversation we touched upon the national affairs. He
     still maintains, that the national debt must be the ruin of
     Britain; and laments that the two most civilized nations, the
     English and French, should be on the decline; and the
     barbarians, the Goths and Vandals of Germany and Russia,
     should be rising in power and renown. The French king, he
     says, has ruined the state by recalling the parliaments. Mr.
     Hume thinks that there is only one man in France fit to be
     minister, (the Archbishop of Toulouse,) of the family of
     Brienne. He told me some curious anecdotes with regard to this
     prelate; that he composed and corrected without writing; that
     Mr. Hume had heard him repeat an elegant oration of an hour
     and a quarter in length, which he had never written. Mr. Hume,
     talking with the Princess Beauvais about French policy, said
     that he knew but one man in France capable of restoring its
     greatness; the lady said she knew one too, and wished to hear
     if it was the same. They accordingly named each their man, and
     it was this prelate.[497:1]


     _Thursday, 25th._

     Left Darlington about nine o'clock, and came to Northallerton.
     The same delightful weather. A shower fell that laid the dust,
     and made our journey to Boroughbridge more pleasant. Mr. Hume
     continues very easy, and has a tolerable appetite; tastes
     nothing liquid but water, and sups upon an egg. He assured me,
     that he never possessed his faculties more perfectly; that he
     never was more sensible of the beauties of any classic author
     than he was at present, nor loved more to read. When I am not
     in the room with him he reads continually. The post-boys can
     scarcely be persuaded to drive only five miles an hour, and
     their horses are of the same way of thinking! The other
     travellers, as they pass, look into the chaise, and laugh at
     our slow pace. This evening the post-boy from Northallerton,
     who had required a good deal of threatening to make him drive
     as slow as we desired, had no sooner taken his departure to go
     home, than he set off at full speed. "_Pour se dédommager_,"
     said David.


     _Friday, 26th, Boroughbridge._

     Mr. Hume this morning not quite so well. He observes, and I
     see it, that he has a good day and a bad one. His illness is
     an internal hemorrhage, which has been wasting him for a long
     time. He is so thin that he chooses to have a cushion under
     him when he sits upon an ordinary chair. He told me to-day,
     that if Louis XV. had died in the time of the regency, the
     whole French nation were determined to bring back the King of
     Spain to be King of France,--so zealous were they for
     preserving the line of succession. This evening Mr. Hume not
     quite so well, and goes to bed at a more early hour than he
     used to do.


     _Ferrybridge, Sunday, 28th._

     Mr. Hume much better this morning. He told me, that the French
     nation had no great opinion of Cardinal Fleury; that the
     English had extolled him, in opposition to their own minister
     Sir Robert Walpole; but that Fleury was a little genius, and a
     cheat. Lord Marischal acquainted Mr. Hume with a piece of
     knavery which his lordship said nobody but a Frenchman and a
     priest could have been guilty of. The French ambassador at
     Madrid came to Lord Marischal one day, and told him, that he
     had a letter from the French minister at Petersburgh,
     acquainting him that General Keith was not pleased with his
     situation in Russia, and wished to return to the Spanish
     service, (where he had formerly been;) that it would be proper
     for Lord Marischal to apply to the court of Spain. Lord
     Marischal said nothing could be more agreeable to him than to
     have his brother in the same country with him; but that, as he
     had heard nothing from himself, he could not make any
     application in his name. The French minister still urged him
     to write to the Spanish minister, but in vain. When the
     brothers met, several years after, they explained this matter.
     Keith had never any intention of coming into the Spanish
     service again; and if Lord Marischal had applied to the court
     of Spain, measures were taken to intercept the letter, and
     send it to the court of Russia. General Keith, who commanded
     the Russian army in the field against the Swedes, would have
     been arrested, and sent to Siberia; and the moment he had left
     the army, the Swedes were to attack the Russians. Mr. Hume
     told me, talking of Fleury, that Monsieur Trudent,[499:1] who
     was his eléve, acquainted him with an anecdote of that
     minister and the late French king, which he, Mr. Hume,
     believes Trudent had never ventured to tell to any body but
     him; and he (David) had never told it to any body but me. Now,
     since Fleury, Trudent, and Lewis, are all dead, it may be
     told. Trudent took the liberty of observing to Fleury, that
     the king should be advised to apply a little more to business,
     and take some charge of his own affairs. Fleury, the first
     time Trudent spoke to him upon this subject, made him no
     answer; but upon his speaking again on the same subject, he
     told him, that he had entreated the king to be a man of
     business, and assured him that the French did not like an
     inactive prince; that in former times, there had been a race
     of indolent princes who did nothing at all, and were called
     _Les Rois Fainéants_; that one of them had been put into a
     convent. The king made no reply; but some time afterwards,
     when Fleury resumed the subject, the king asked him, whether
     or no the prince that was put into the convent had a good
     pension allowed him?[499:2]

     Mr. Hume this day told me, that he had bought a piece of
     ground; and when I seemed surprised that I had never heard of
     it, he said it was in the New Church-yard, on the Calton Hill,
     for a burying-place; that he meant to have a small monument
     erected, not to exceed in expense one hundred pounds; that the
     inscription should be

          DAVID HUME.

     I desired him to change the discourse. He did so; but seemed
     surprised at my uneasiness, which he said was very
     nonsensical. I think he is gaining ground; but he laughs at
     me, and says it is impossible; that the year ('76,) sooner or
     later, he takes his departure. He is willing to go to Bath, or
     travel during the summer through England, and return to
     Scotland to die at home; but that Sir John Pringle, and the
     whole faculty, would find it very difficult to boat him,
     (formerly an usual phrase in Scotland for going abroad, that
     is, out of the island, for health.) This day we travelled by
     his desire three stages, and arrived with great ease at
     Grantham.


     _Monday, 29th._

     From the treatment Mr. Hume met with in France, he recurred to
     a subject not unfrequent with him--that is, the design to ruin
     him as an author, by the people that were ministers, at the
     first publication of his History, and called themselves Whigs,
     who, he said, were determined not to suffer truth to be told
     in Britain. Amongst many instances of this, he told me one
     which was new to me. The Duke of Bedford, (who afterwards
     conceived a great affection for Mr. Hume,) by the suggestions
     of some of his party friends, ordered his son, Lord Tavistock,
     not to read Mr. Hume's History of England; but the young man
     was prevailed upon by one of his companions (Mr. Crawford of
     Errol) to disobey the command. He read the History, and was
     extremely pleased with it.

     Mr. Hume told me, that the Duke de Choiseul, at the time Lord
     Hertford was in France, expressed the greatest inclination for
     peace, and a good correspondence between France and Britain.
     He assured Lord Hertford, that if the court of Britain would
     relinquish Falkland Island, he would undertake to procure from
     the court of Spain the payment of the Manilla ransom. Lord
     Hertford communicated the proposal to Mr. Grenville, who
     slighted it. Lord Hertford told Mr. Hume the same day an
     extraordinary instance of the violence of faction. Towards the
     end of Queen Anne's reign, when the Whig ministers were turned
     out of all their places at home, and the Duke of Marlborough
     still continued in the command of the army abroad, the
     discarded ministers met, and wrote a letter, which was signed
     by Lord Somers, Lord Townshend, Lord Sunderland, and Sir
     Robert Walpole, desiring the duke to bring over the troops he
     could depend on, and that they would seize the queen's person,
     and proclaim the Elector of Hanover Regent. The Duke of
     Marlborough answered the letter, and said it was madness to
     think of such a thing. Mr. Horace Walpole, Sir R. Walpole's
     youngest son, confirmed the truth of this anecdote, which he
     had heard his father repeat often and often; and Mr. Walpole
     allowed Mr. Hume to quote him as his authority, and make what
     use he pleased of it. When George I. came to England, he
     hesitated whether to make a Whig or a Tory administration; but
     the German minister, Bernstorf, determined him to take the
     side of the Whigs, who had made a purse of thirty thousand
     guineas, and given it to this German. George I. was of a
     moderate and gentle temper.--He regretted all his life, that
     he had given way to the violence of the Whigs in the beginning
     of his reign. Whenever any difficulty occurred in parliament,
     he used to blame the impeachment of the Tories,--"Ce diable de
     impeachment," as he called it.

     The Whigs, in the end of Queen Anne's reign, bribed the
     Emperor's ministers, not to consent to the peace, and to send
     over Prince Eugene with proposals to continue the war.

     This anecdote from Lord Bath. Another anecdote Mr. Hume
     mentioned, but distrusted the authority, for it was David
     Mallet who told Mr. Hume, that he had evidence in his custody
     of a design to assassinate Lord Oxford.

     Prior, after the accession, was reduced to such poverty by the
     persecution he met with, that he was obliged to publish his
     works by subscription. Lord Bathurst told Mr. Hume, that he
     was with Prior reading the pieces that were to be published,
     and he thought there was not enough to make two small volumes.
     He asked Prior if he had no more poems? He said, No more that
     he thought good enough.--"What is that," said Bathurst,
     pointing to a roll of paper. "A trifle," said Prior, "that I
     wrote in three weeks, not worthy of your attention or that of
     the public." Lord Bathurst desired to see it. This neglected
     piece was _Alma_.


     _Tuesday, 30th._

     Last night, when Mr. Hume was going to bed, he complained of
     cold. One part of his malady had been a continual heat, so
     that he could not endure a soft or warm bed, and lay in the
     night with a single sheet upon him; he desired to have an
     additional covering. Colin observed to him, that he thought it
     a good symptom. Mr. Hume said he thought so too, for it was a
     good thing to be like other people. This morning he is
     wonderfully well; which is visible in his countenance and
     colour, and even the firmness of his step. Talking of the
     state of the nation, which he continually laments, he
     mentioned an anecdote of the former war. He was at Turin with
     General Sinclair, after the peace of Aix-la-Chapelle, and,
     considering the superiority which the French arms had gained,
     he could not conceive why France granted such good terms to
     Britain. He desired General Sinclair to touch upon that
     subject with the King of Sardinia. That prince, who was very
     familiar with the General, said he was at a loss to give any
     account of that matter; but, many years after, when Hume was
     minister in France, and lived in great intimacy with Monsieur
     Puysieux, Secretary of State, who had negociated the peace of
     Aix, Mr. Hume asked him the reason of the conduct of France at
     that time? Puysieux told him, that it was the king's aversion
     to war; that he knew more of it than any man alive, for, the
     year before the peace, he was ordered by the king to propose
     pretty near the same terms. He remonstrated against making the
     offer; said that at least the proposal should come from
     England; and that there was always some advantage to be gained
     by receiving, rather than propounding terms. The king was
     impatient, and obliged Puysieux to write the letter, (which
     General Ligonier carried,) with those terms which next year
     were agreed to by the British court. Mr. John Home said he
     knew that the King of France promoted the peace of Paris from
     the aversion he had to war; and the peace was made at a time
     when it seemed impossible for Britain to carry on a war of
     such extent, and retain her scattered conquests. Mr. Hume
     mentioned another singular anecdote concerning the beginning
     of the last war. When a squadron of the English fleet attacked
     and took two French men of war, the Alcide and the Lys, Louis
     XV. was so averse to war, that he would have pocketed the
     insult; and Madame Pompadour said it was better to put up with
     the affront, than to go to war without any object but the
     point of honour. It is known, that neither the king nor the
     ministers of England wished for war. The French king abhorred
     the thought of war!--What then was the cause? Chiefly the fear
     of the popular clamour, and of the opposition, in the Duke of
     Newcastle's mind. Mr. Hume thinks Lord North no great
     minister, but does not see a better; cannot give any reason
     for the incapacity and want of genius, civil and military,
     which marks this period. He looks upon the country as on the
     verge of decline. His fears seem rather too great, and things
     are not quite so bad as he apprehends; but certainly the first
     show of statesmen, generals, and admirals, is, without
     comparison, the worst that has been seen in this country. I
     said to Mr. Hume, that I thought the great consideration to be
     acquired by speaking in Parliament, was the cause of that want
     of every other quality in men of rank: they do speak readily,
     but there are many orators who can neither judge nor act well.


     _Wednesday, 31st April._

     Arrived in London, where we saw Sir John Pringle, who thought
     Mr. Hume much better than he expected to see him, and in no
     immediate danger. We staid a few days in London, and then set
     out for Bath.

     In travelling from London to Bath, we had occasion frequently
     to make our observations on the passengers whom we met, and on
     those who passed us, as every carriage continued to do.
     Nothing occurred worthy the writing down, except Mr. David's
     plan of managing his kingdom, in case Ferguson and I had been
     princes of the adjacent states. He knew very well, he said,
     (having often disputed the point with us,) the great opinion
     we had of military virtues as essential to every state; that
     from these sentiments rooted in us, he was certain he would be
     attacked and interrupted in his projects of cultivating,
     improving, and civilizing mankind by the arts of peace; that
     he comforted himself with reflecting, that from our want of
     economy and order in our affairs, we should be continually in
     want of money; whilst he would have his finances in excellent
     condition, his magazines well filled, and naval stores in
     abundance; but that his final stroke of policy, upon which he
     depended, was to give one of us a large subsidy to fall upon
     the other, which would infallibly secure to him peace and
     quiet, and after a long war, would probably terminate in his
     being master of all the three kingdoms. At this sally, so like
     David's manner of playing with his friends, I fell into a fit
     of laughing, in which David joined; and the people that passed
     us certainly thought we were very merry travellers.

We have the following account from his own pen of his sojourn at Bath.


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

"_Bath, 13th May, 1776._

"MY DEAR DOCTOR,--You have frequently heard me complain of my physical
friends, that they allowed me to die in the midst of them without so
much as giving a Greek name to my disorder: a consolation which was the
least I had reason to expect from them. Dr. Black, hearing this
complaint, told me that I should be satisfied in that particular, and
that my disorder was a hemorrhage, a word which it was easy to decompose
into αιμος[504:1] and ρηγνυμι. But Sir John Pringle says, that I
have no hemorrhage, but a spincture in the colon, which it will be easy
to cure. This disorder, as it both contained two Greek appellations and
was remediable, I was much inclined to prefer; when, behold! Dr. Gustard
tells me that he sees no symptoms of the former disorder, and as to the
latter, he never met with it and scarcely ever heard of it. He assures
me that my case is the most common of all Bath cases, to wit, a bilious
complaint, which the waters scarcely ever fail of curing: and he never
had a patient of whose recovery he had better hopes.

"Indeed the waters, in the short trial which I have made of them, (for I
have been here only four days,) seem to agree very well with me; and two
days ago I found myself so well, that, for the first time, I began to
entertain hopes of a reprieve. Yesterday I was not so well, from a
misunderstanding in new lodgings with regard to my bedding. My
whimsicalness in this particular surprises Dr. Gustard, and he knows not
what to make of it. By the by, this Dr. Gustard is an excellent kind of
man, very friendly, and I believe very intelligent. He assures me, as do
several others, that the summer is the best time for Bath waters: and if
they continue to agree with me I shall probably pass here that season. I
promised to General Conway, and Lady Aylesbury, that if I had recovered
so much health as to venture myself in company, I should pass some weeks
of the autumn at Park place. This is the only retardment I can foresee
to my return to Scotland before winter. My wishes carry me thither;
though the grievous loss we have suffered in friends makes the abode in
that country less pleasing to my fancy than formerly.

"You must have heard of the agreeable surprise which John Home put upon
me. We travelled up to London very cheerfully together, and thence to
this place, where we found Mrs. Home almost quite recovered. Never was
there a more friendly action, nor better placed; for what between
conversation and gaming, (not to mention sometimes squabbling,) I did
not pass a languid moment; and his company I am certain was the chief
cause why my journey had so good an effect: of which, however, I suppose
he has given too sanguine accounts, as is usual with him.[505:1]

"Be so good as to read this letter to Dr. Black and to Mr. Ferguson.
When I write to one, I suppose myself writing to all my friends: and I
also wish to comprehend the Principal in the number. Pray tell him that
Mrs. Macauley is settled in Bath, and though her muse seems now to be
mute, she is, if not a more illustrious, yet a more fortunate historian
than either of us. There is one Dr. Wilson, a man zealous for liberty,
who has made her a free and full present of a house of £2000 value, has
adopted her daughter by all the rites of Roman jurisprudence, and
intends to leave her all his fortune, which is considerable.

"Two ladies of my acquaintance have laid a scheme of bringing Lady
Huntingdon and me together, for her or my conversion. I wish I may have
spirits to humour this folly."[506:1]


On 10th June, Strahan wrote to Adam Smith, to say that he finds in a
letter from Sir John Pringle, giving an account of Hume's health, "that
all the good symptoms that attended his first trial of the Bath waters
are now vanished. His distemper has returned with its usual violence, so
he intends to leave that place and try Buxton."[506:2] He seems not to
have attempted this change, but returning straight from Bath, he sent,
on the way, invitations to a party of his friends to meet him at dinner.
The note addressed to Dr. Blair is as follows:

"Mr. John Hume,[506:3] alias Home, alias The Home, alias the late Lord
Conservator, alias the late minister of the gospel at Athelstaneford,
has calculated matters so as to arrive infallibly with his friend in St.
David's Street, on Wednesday evening. He has asked several of Dr.
Blair's friends to dine with him there on Thursday, being the 4th of
July, and begs the favour of the Doctor to make one of the
number."[507:1]

Thus did this knot of men, united in friendship by the greatness of
their talents, and their superiority to all things small and mean, meet
for the last time round the social board, to bid, as it were, a farewell
to him who had been the chief ornament and distinction of their circle.
The eyes of these affectionate friends sedulously and anxiously watched
the expiring flame--their pens have recorded the last scenes of its
existence, and leave to the ordinary biographer only the task of
embodying their statements in deferential silence. Nothing, therefore,
remains, but to put together, along with the few remaining letters by
Hume himself, the accounts furnished us by those who had the best means
of knowing the manner in which he spent the last few days of his life.

The following is his last letter to John Home.


"_Edinburgh, 6th August, 1776._

"MY DEAR JOHN,--I shall begin with telling you the only piece of good
news of the family, which is, that my nephew, in no more than two days
that he has staid here, has recovered so surprisingly, that he is
scarcely knowable, or rather is perfectly knowable, for he was not so on
his first arrival.[508:1] Such are the advantages of youth! His uncle
declines, if not with so great rapidity, yet pretty sensibly. Sunday,
ill; half of yesterday the same; easy at present; prepared to suffer a
little to-morrow; perhaps less the day after. Dr. Black says, I shall
not die of a dropsy, as I imagined, but of inanition and weakness. He
cannot, however, fix, with any probability, the time, otherwise he would
frankly tell me.

"Poor Edmondstoune and I parted to-day, with a plentiful effusion of
tears; all those _Belzebubians_[508:2] have not hearts of iron. I hope
you met with every thing well at Foggo, and receive nothing but good
news from Buxton. In spite of Dr. Black's caution, I venture to foretel
that I shall be yours cordially and sincerely till the month of October
next."[508:3]


Next in date is the following affectionate and considerate letter to
his nephew.


"_Edinburgh, 15th August, 1776._

"DEAR DAVY,--You need not doubt but your company, as well as your
father's, would have been very agreeable to me, especially at present,
for the consolation of your company; but I see the immediate
inconveniences that attend it. You cannot be well spared from Josey,
whose state of health, I am sorry to find, is still somewhat precarious;
and there is no immediate call for your being here. For besides that you
would but pass a melancholy time with me, however your affection might
cover it and relieve it, I am weakening very gradually, and am not
threatened with any immediate incident. I shall probably have more
warning, in which case I shall not fail to summon you; and I shall never
die in satisfaction without embracing you. I doubt not but my name would
have procured you friends and credit, in the course of your life,
especially if my brother had allowed you to carry it, for who will know
it in the present disguise? But as he is totally obstinate on this head,
I believe we had better let him alone. I have frequently told him, that
it is lucky for him he sees few things in a wrong light, for where he
does he is totally incurable. I am very much at my ease to-day. I beg my
compliments to all your family. Your affectionate uncle."[509:1]


Of the manner in which he conducted himself when he had come near to the
end of his days, Adam Smith tells us:--

     His cheerfulness was so great, and his conversation and
     amusements run so much in their usual strain, that,
     notwithstanding all bad symptoms, many people could not
     believe he was dying. "I shall tell your friend, Colonel
     Edmondstoune," said Dr. Dundas to him one day, "that I left
     you much better, and in a fair way of recovery." "Doctor,"
     said he, "as I believe you would not choose to tell any thing
     but the truth, you had better tell him, that I am dying as
     fast as my enemies, if I have any, could wish, and as easily
     and cheerfully as my best friends could desire." Colonel
     Edmondstoune soon afterwards came to see him, and take leave
     of him; and on his way home, he could not forbear writing him
     a letter, bidding him once more an eternal adieu, and applying
     to him, as to a dying man, the beautiful French verses in
     which the Abbé Chaulieu, in expectation of his own death,
     laments his approaching separation from his friend, the
     Marquis de la Fare.[510:1] Mr. Hume's magnanimity and firmness
     were such, that his most affectionate friends knew that they
     hazarded nothing in talking or writing to him as to a dying
     man, and that so far from being hurt by this frankness, he was
     rather pleased and flattered by it. I happened to come into
     his room while he was reading this letter, which he had just
     received, and which he immediately showed me. I told him, that
     though I was sensible how very much he was weakened, and that
     appearances were in many respects very bad, yet his
     cheerfulness was still so great, the spirit of life seemed
     still to be so very strong in him, that I could not help
     entertaining some faint hopes. He answered, "Your hopes are
     groundless. An habitual diarrhœa of more than a year's
     standing, would be a very bad disease at any age: at my age it
     is a mortal one. When I lie down in the evening, I feel myself
     weaker than when I rose in the morning; and when I rise in the
     morning, weaker than when I lay down in the evening. I am
     sensible, besides, that some of my vital parts are affected,
     so that I must soon die." "Well," said I, "if it must be so,
     you have at least the satisfaction of leaving all your
     friends, your brother's family in particular, in great
     prosperity." He said that he felt that satisfaction so
     sensibly, that when he was reading, a few days before,
     Lucian's Dialogues of the Dead, among all the excuses which
     are alleged to Charon for not entering readily into his boat,
     he could not find one that fitted him; he had no house to
     finish, he had no daughter to provide for, he had no enemies
     upon whom he wished to revenge himself. "I could not well
     imagine," said he, "what excuse I could make to Charon in
     order to obtain a little delay. I have done every thing of
     consequence which I ever meant to do; and I could at no time
     expect to leave my relations and friends in a better situation
     than that in which I am now likely to leave them. I therefore
     have all reason to die contented." He then diverted himself
     with inventing several jocular excuses, which he supposed he
     might make to Charon, and with imagining the very surly
     answers which it might suit the character of Charon to return
     to them. "Upon further consideration," said he, "I thought I
     might say to him, 'Good Charon, I have been correcting my
     works for a new edition. Allow me a little time, that I may
     see how the public receives the alterations.' But Charon would
     answer, 'When you have seen the effect of these, you will be
     for making other alterations. There will be no end of such
     excuses; so, honest friend, please step into the boat.' But I
     might still urge, 'Have a little patience, good Charon; I have
     been endeavouring to open the eyes of the public. If I live a
     few years longer, I may have the satisfaction of seeing the
     downfal of some of the prevailing systems of superstition.'
     But Charon would then lose all temper and decency. 'You
     loitering rogue, that will not happen these many hundred
     years. Do you fancy I will grant you a lease for so long a
     term? Get into the boat this instant, you lazy loitering
     rogue.'"

     But, though Mr. Hume always talked of his approaching
     dissolution with great cheerfulness, he never affected to make
     any parade of his magnanimity. He never mentioned the subject
     but when the conversation naturally led to it, and never dwelt
     longer upon it than the course of the conversation happened to
     require.[512:1]

How much his mind continued to be occupied with all that it had taken
interest in, in the days of his health and enjoyment, the following
letter, written five days before his death, will show:--


HUME _to the_ COMTESSE DE BOUFFLERS.

"_Edinburgh, 20th of August, 1776._

"THOUGH I am certainly within a few weeks, dear madam, and, perhaps,
within a few days of my own death, I could not forbear being struck with
the death of the Prince of Conti--so great a loss in every particular.
My reflection carried me immediately to your situation in this
melancholy incident. What a difference to you in your whole plan of
life! Pray write me some particulars; but in such terms that you need
not care, in case of decease, into whose hands your letter may fall.

"My distemper is a diarrhœa, or disorder in my bowels, which has been
gradually undermining me these two years; but, within these six months,
has been visibly hastening me to my end. I see death approach
gradually, without any anxiety or regret. I salute you, with great
affection and regard, for the last time."[514:1]


Smith, proceeding with his narrative, says, "He had now become so very
weak, that the company of his most intimate friends fatigued him; for
his cheerfulness was still so great, his complaisance and social
disposition were still so entire, that when any friend was with him, he
could not help talking more, and with greater exertion, than suited the
weakness of his body. At his own desire, therefore, I agreed to leave
Edinburgh, where I was staying, partly upon his account, and returned to
my mother's house here, at Kirkaldy, upon condition that he would send
for me whenever he wished to see me; the physician who saw him most
frequently, Dr. Black, undertaking, in the mean time, to write me,
occasionally, an account of the state of his health.

"On the 22d of August, the Doctor wrote me the following letter:--

"'Since my last, Mr. Hume has passed his time pretty easily, but is much
weaker. He sits up, goes down stairs once a-day, and amuses himself with
reading, but seldom sees any body. He finds that even the conversation
of his most intimate friends fatigues and oppresses him; and it is happy
that he does not need it, for he is quite free from anxiety, impatience,
or low spirits, and passes his time very well with the assistance of
amusing books.'

"I received, the day after, a letter from Mr. Hume himself, of which the
following is an extract.


'_Edinburgh 23d August, 1776._

'MY DEAREST FRIEND,--I am obliged to make use of my nephew's hand in
writing to you, as I do not rise to-day. . . . . . . .

'I go very fast to decline, and last night had a small fever, which I
hoped might put a quicker period to this tedious illness; but,
unluckily, it has, in a great measure, gone off. I cannot submit to your
coming over here on my account, as it is possible for me to see you so
small a part of the day; but Doctor Black can better inform you
concerning the degree of strength which may, from time to time, remain
with me. Adieu,' &c.[515:1]

"Three days after I received the following letter from Doctor Black:--

     '_Edinburgh, Monday, 26th August, 1776._

     'DEAR SIR,--Yesterday, about four o'clock, afternoon, Mr. Hume
     expired. The near approach of his death became evident in the
     night between Thursday and Friday, when his disease became
     excessive, and soon weakened him so much that he could no
     longer rise out of his bed. He continued, to the last,
     perfectly sensible, and free from much pain or feelings of
     distress. He never dropped the smallest expression of
     impatience; but, when he had occasion to speak to the people
     about him, always did it with affection and tenderness. I
     thought it improper to write to you to bring you over,
     especially as I heard that he had dictated a letter to you
     desiring you not to come. When he became very weak, it cost
     him an effort to speak; and he died in such a happy composure
     of mind that nothing could exceed it.'"

The world is fortunately in possession of an account of this event, by
another scientific man of no less eminence, the great Dr. Cullen. From a
letter which he wrote to Dr. Hunter, on 17th September, the following
extracts are made:

     You desire an account of Mr. Hume's last days, and I give it
     you with some pleasure; for, though I could not look upon him
     in his illness without much concern, yet the tranquillity and
     pleasantry which he constantly discovered did, even then, give
     me satisfaction; and, now that the curtain is dropped, allows
     me indulge the less alloyed reflection. It was truly an
     example "des grands hommes qui sont morts en
     plaisantant;"[516:1] and to me, who have been so often shocked
     with the horrors of the superstitious on such occasions, the
     reflexion on such a death is truly agreeable. For many weeks
     before his death, he was very sensible of his gradual decay;
     and his answer to inquiries after his health was, several
     times, that he was going as fast as his enemies could wish,
     and as easily as his friends could desire. He was not,
     however, without a frequent recurrence of pain and uneasiness;
     but he passed most part of the day in his drawing-room,
     admitted the visits of his friends, and with his usual spirit
     conversed with them upon literature, politics, or whatever
     else was accidentally started. In conversation he seemed to be
     perfectly at ease, and to the last abounded with that
     pleasantry, and those curious and entertaining anecdotes,
     which ever distinguished him. This, however, I always
     considered rather as an effort to be agreeable, and he at
     length acknowledged that it became too much for his strength.
     For a few days before his death, he became more averse to
     receive visits; speaking became more and more difficult for
     him; and, for twelve hours before his death, his speech failed
     altogether. His senses and judgment did not fail till the last
     hour of his life. He constantly discovered a strong
     sensibility to the attention and care of his friends, and,
     amidst great uneasiness and languor, never betrayed any
     peevishness or impatience. . . . . .[516:2]

     These are a few particulars, which may perhaps appear
     trifling, but to me no particulars seem trifling that relate
     to so great a man. It is perhaps from trifles that we can best
     distinguish the tranquillity and cheerfulness of the
     philosopher, at a time when the most part of mankind are under
     disquiet, anxiety, and sometimes even horror. I consider the
     sacrifice of the cock as a more certain evidence of the
     tranquillity of Socrates, than his discourse on
     immortality.[517:1]

The death and burial of so distinguished a fellow citizen, were
naturally the objects of much attention among the inhabitants of
Edinburgh. On the one hand his unpopular opinions; on the other, the
blameless character of his life and his great genius, excited
conflicting opinions, and these giving zest to public attention and
curiosity, attracted crowds to witness his funeral, and to look with
mingled feelings, on the spot where his remains were, by the injunctions
of his will, deposited.[517:2]

On the declivity of the Calton Hill there is an old grave-yard, which
seventy years ago was in the open country beyond the boundary of the
city of Edinburgh, and even at the present day, when it is the centre of
a wide circumference of streets and terraces, has an air of solitude,
from its elevated site, and the abrupt rocky banks that separate it from
the crowded thoroughfares. There, on a conspicuous point of rock,
beneath a circular monument built after the simple and solemn fashion of
the old Roman tombs, lies the dust of David Hume. Whither the immortal
spirit that gave life to it is gone, let no man too presumptuously
pronounce; but let us rather contemplate with respectful awe, that
unseen essence which the Deity had imbued with so great a power over the
intellects of men, and believe that this wide sway over the destinies of
the human species had its own wise and beneficent design, and was no
produce of malign influences or untoward accidents. Fallacies may be the
brilliant insects of a day, but truth is eternal; and when the searcher
in philosophy groping amid the darkness of man's imperfect reason,
produces falsehoods, they are speedily forgotten; but if he develop
great truths, they live to bless his species for ever. There are few who
will now deny that mankind have learned many valuable truths of David
Hume. The wide influence of his mind over thought and action, during the
last hundred years, is expressed in the mere naming of the systems of
which he was the author or suggester.

His Metaphysical labours gave birth to two great schools of philosophy.
The one rising at his own door, endeavoured by powerful and earnest
efforts to reconstruct in a more rational and substantial form the old
system which he had sapped--the other in a distant land, where new
lights of science had begun to burn, sought to raise mental philosophy
from its original elements, purified of the dross and rubbish that had
rendered the old materials cumbrous and unsafe, and to endow the whole
with fresh life and a new form and structure.[519:1]

In Ethics he was the first to make an Utilitarian morality assume the
aspect of a theoretical system, which it was the task of a great
successor, aided by subordinate labourers, to apply to the practical
operations of mankind, and to spread widely over the earth.

In History he was the first to divert attention from wars, treaties, and
successions, to the living progress of the people, in all that increases
their civilization and their happiness. The example thus set has been
the chief service of the "History of England;" yet, with all the faults
of its matter, its purely literary merits have been so great, that, as a
classical and popular work, it has hitherto encountered no rival.[519:2]

But his triumphs in Political Economy are those which, in the present
day, stand forth with the greatest prominence and lustre. In no long
time, a hundred years will have elapsed from the day when Hume told the
world, what the legislature of this country is now declaring, that
national exclusiveness in trade was as foolish as it was wicked; that no
nation could profit by stopping the natural flood of commerce between
itself and the rest of the world; that commercial restrictions deprive
the nations of the earth "_of that free communication and exchange,
which the author of the world has intended by giving them soils,
climates, and geniuses, so different from each other_;" and that, like
the healthy circulation of the blood in living bodies, Free Trade is the
vital principle by which the nations of the earth are to become united
in one harmonious whole.[520:1] Those who, with a reverential eye, have
marked the wonders of the animal structure, and discovered beauty,
utility, and harmonious purpose, where presumptuous ignorance has found
uselessness or deformity; or have seen the lower animals, each working
in its own blind ignorance, gregariously constructing a fabric more
perfect, on philosophical principles, than human science can
create,--have thence drawn vivid pictures of the wisdom and goodness
with which the world is ordered. May we not extend this harmony to the
social economy of the globe, and say, that the spirit of activity and
enterprise, harmonizing with the dispersal of the different bounties of
Providence in the distant regions of the globe, are part of the same
harmonious system; that the love of commerce and the desire of
aggrandisement, which in the eye of a narrow philosophy assume the air
of selfish and repulsive passions, represent themselves, when they are
left to their legitimate course, as motives implanted in us for the
great purposes of securing mutual dependance and kind offices, and their
fruits, peace and good-will, throughout the great family of mankind. To
be the first to teach that the earth is not doomed to the eternal curse
of rivalry and strife, and to open up so wide a prospect of beneficence,
may be an atonement for many errors, and in the eye of good taste may
justify the brief assumption of conscious superiority, in which the
subject of this memoir indulged, when he desired that the inscription on
his monument should contain only his name, with the year of his birth
and of his death. _Leaving it to posterity to add the rest._


FOOTNOTES:

[439:1] Account of Home, p. 20.

[441:1] It has been said that, having once given a guinea by mistake to
a beggar, the man, who was a respectable member of his trade, returned
and explained the mistake. He was permitted to keep the coin, the
philosopher observing, "Oh, Honesty--how poor a dwelling-place hast thou
found!"

[444:1] Account of John Home, p. 20-21.

[445:1] See, on this amusement of character drawing, vol. i. p. 226.

[446:1] Lives of the Lindsays. By Lord Lindsay. Vol. ii. p. 183.

[449:1] Among the traditional anecdotes of his habits, one is, that
going to sup with Mrs. Cockburn, and not arriving until after the choice
of the good things had been consumed, when some effort was made to cater
for him, he said, "Trouble yourself very little about what you have, or
how it appears; you know I am no epicure, but only a glutton." Mr.
Chambers says, (Scottish Jests, p. 171,) that he took down this anecdote
from one who was present.

These literary parties at Mrs. Cockburn's, appear to have been frequent
and agreeable. A gentleman still living, was present at many of them
when a youth, and particularly recollects one occasion when a tipsy
relative of that lady chose to lock the door of the room where the
walking habiliments of the guests were preserved. A general borrowing of
articles of clothing from surrounding neighbours took place, and those
which fell to Hume's lot, happened to produce a peculiarly ludicrous
effect.

[450:1] It is given without reference to authority, in Prior's Life of
Burke, vol. i. p. 98.

[450:2] In one instance, a vivid recollection was preserved of the
difficulty, from his fatness, of getting sufficient room on his knee,
and the necessity of keeping fast hold of the corner of his laced
waistcoat.

[452:1] He seems, from this and other notices, to have been occasionally
absent in his habits; but there is no such collection of practical
illustrations of this failing, as we possess in the case of Smith and
others. I only remember having heard of one trifling instance, of which
I had an account from an eye-witness. Hume had been dining with Dr.
Jardine, and there had been much conversation about "internal light." In
descending the stair leading from the Doctor's "flat," when he left the
party, Hume failed to observe that after so many flights which reached
the street door, there was, according to a not uncommon practice,
another flight of stairs leading to the cellars. He continued his
descent, accordingly, till the very end, where some time afterwards he
was found in extreme darkness and perplexity, wondering how it was that
he could find no outlet. The circumstance bore rather curiously on some
opinions he had been maintaining, and Jardine said, shaking his head,
"Oh David! where is your internal light?"

[452:2] Diary of a Lover of Literature.--_Gentleman's Magazine_, N.S. i.
142.

[455:1] The passage here omitted will be found above, vol. i. p. 97.

[455:2] MS. R.S.E. In citing this letter above, vol. i. p. 98, it is
stated that on one MS. there is noted a supposition that it was
addressed to Dr. Traill--on another that it was addressed to Gilbert
Stuart. I now think it must have been addressed to Dr. John Stewart,
Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of Edinburgh, and that
it related to his "Remarks on the Laws of Motion and the Inertion of
Matter," published in "Essays and Observations physical and literary,
read before a Society in Edinburgh."

[457:1] Minute-book of The Poker Club, in possession of Sir Adam
Ferguson.

[459:1] MS. R.S.E.

[461:1] MS. R.S.E.

[461:2] MS. R.S.E.

[461:3] Of the East India Company's service, author of "The History of
Hindostan, translated from the Persian," 1803.

[462:1] _Edinburgh Monthly Magazine_, Sept. 1810.

[465:1] See above, p. 220.

[465:2] _Edinburgh Magazine_, 1788, p. 340.

[466:1] MS. R.S.E.

[467:1] MS. R.S.E.

[467:2] Memoirs of Great Britain and Ireland, from the dissolution of
the last parliament of Charles II. until the sea battle of La Hogue, 3
vols. 4to.

[467:3] MS. R.S.E.

[468:1] William Smellie, the respectable printer of the Magazine, seems
to have led an uneasy life, between the quarrels and the dissipation of
his editor, of which he has left some picturesque memorials. Having come
one night to Smellie's house on magazine business in a very advanced
stage of intoxication, Stuart was charitably put to bed. Roused in the
middle of the night by an immense outcry from the awakened editor,
Smellie rushed to the bedroom in his night clothes. Stuart sitting up in
bed and glaring around him, immediately associated the respectable
printer's presence with the places in which he was himself accustomed to
waken, and said,--"Smellie, I never expected to find _you_ in such a
place: put on your clothes, and go back to your wife and family, I shall
never say a word about this." A journey of six miles, from Edinburgh to
Musselburgh, made by Stuart and some of his companions, in which, by
reason of the abundance of good cheer on the way, they occupied several
days, seems to have been fruitful in adventures. One of the party
falling asleep among the ashes of a steam engine, wakened in the night,
and found himself in the presence of a great red furnace, surrounded by
dusky figures clanging bolts and chains. Associating the exhibition with
the course of life he had been running, and its probable reward, he was
heard to exclaim, "Good God, is it come to this at last!"--See _Kerr's
Memoirs of Smellie_.

[470:1] D'Israeli's Calamities of Authors, ii. 67. The letter, after
such exhortations as the following,--"Strike by all means: the wretch
will tremble, grow pale, and return with a consciousness of his
debility," winds up with the assurance, "When you have an enemy to
attack, I shall in return give my best assistance, and aim at him a
mortal blow, and rush forward to his overthrow, though the flames of
hell should start up to oppose me."

[470:2] The _proof_, with Hume's corrections, is in the possession of
John Christison, Esq., who has kindly allowed me to make this use of it.
The last paragraph is a manuscript addition made in correcting the
proof. The substance of Hume's praise was probably given to Henry in
some other form; for a portion of the analytical part of the review is
printed in a memoir of Henry, in _The Gentleman's Magazine_, (vol. lxxi.
p. 907,) as written by "one of the most eminent historians of the
present age, whose history of the same period possesses the highest
reputation."

[471:1] Madame Geoffrin, in writing to Hume, notices Franklin's
imperfect acquaintance with the French language; this must have been one
of the difficulties which his matchless perseverance conquered.

I may mention that, aware that Hume had written to Franklin, I thought
it not unlikely that the letters might be incorporated in the elaborate
edition of his "Life and Correspondence" by Sparkes. Unfortunately
trusting to the copy in the British Museum, I found, at the last moment,
that that copy was imperfect, and did not afford the means of
ascertaining whether they were published in the work.

[471:2] MS. R.S.E.

[472:1] A specimen of the _Scots Review_, a thin duodecimo pamphlet, is
now very rare. Its chief object of attention is "that great necromancer
and magician David Hume." It is not inaptly described by the _Scots
Magazine_:--

"It professes to give a prospectus, and a specimen of an intended new
review; but the whole object seems to have been to laugh at some
individuals obnoxious to the writer, and particularly to ridicule the
virulence, and to lower the pretensions of those who had signalized
themselves by their attacks upon the philosophical writings of Mr. Hume;
a promise is held out, that this arch-infidel is himself to be reviewed
in the first place; and next, those authors who have waged a holy war
against him; of whom a list is given, with their characters, the
delineation of which, in no very favourable colours, appears, as already
mentioned, to have exhausted the main object of the piece, though one or
two gentle hits are aimed at the historian himself."

[472:2] Rev. Thomas Hepburn, minister of Athelstaneford.

[472:3] _Scots Mag._ New Series. Vol. i.

[473:1] Original in possession of the Cambusmore family.

[474:1] MS. R.S.E.

[474:2] Addressed, "Mr. David Hume, at Ninewells, with a great coat."

[474:3] Professor Millar of Glasgow.

[475:1] MS. R.S.E.

[476:1] Mackenzie's account of Home, p. 158.

[477:1] MS. R.S.E.

[477:2] Strahan's letters were carefully preserved by Hume. On
application to those who would be likely to possess Hume's side of the
correspondence, if it existed, I was informed that it was Mr. Strahan's
practice to destroy all the letters addressed to him; but I was very
politely favoured with a copy of one of his own letters, which Mr.
Strahan had preserved.

[478:1] MS. R.S.E.

[479:1] _Lit. Gazette_, 1822, p. 637. Corrected from original MS. R.S.E.

[482:1] MS. R.S.E. Addressed, "Mr. David Hume, at Mr. Professor
Millar's, at Glasgow." The blanks are caused by a stripe having been
torn off the side of the letter.

[483:1] Mackenzie's Account of Home, p. 160.

[484:1] MS. R.S.E.

[485:1] Life of Gibbon.

[486:1] From this it would appear that Hume had opened up in his own
mind, the theory of rent, afterwards successively suggested by Dr.
Anderson and Ricardo, without the latter, it is believed, knowing that
he had been anticipated by the author of the _Bee_.

[487:1] MS. R.S.E.

[488:1] The letter is of such a character, as one medical man might be
supposed to write to another. Black was no pedant, and he writes as if
his correspondent knew the technicalities of the science in their full
practical meaning,--an addition to the many illustrations of the varied
range of scientific knowledge, at the command of the master of political
economy.

[489:1] The following provision is in a codicil: "I also leave for
rebuilding the bridge of Churnside the sum of a hundred pounds; but on
condition that the manager of the bridge shall take none of the stones
for building the bridge from the quarry of Ninewells, except from that
part of the quarry which has been already opened." With reference to
this, Dr. Cullen, in the letter cited, p. 516, says, "In the
neighbourhood of his brother's house, in Berwickshire, is a brook, by
which the access in time of floods is frequently interrupted. Mr. Hume
bequeaths £100 for building a bridge over this brook, but upon the
express condition that none of the stones for that purpose shall be
taken from a quarry in the neighbourhood, which forms part of a romantic
scene, in which, in his earlier days, Mr. Hume took particular delight."
This is the only authenticated instance that I remember to have met with
of Hume's attachment to local scenery. It is a tradition in Edinburgh,
that he was fond of walking along the base of Salisbury Crags.

[490:1] In 1773, Smith, apparently in bad health, wrote to Hume,
desiring him to take charge of his manuscripts in case of his own
predecease, (MS. R.S.E.) This, and some other letters by Smith, I might
have been tempted to print in this work, had I not the satisfaction of
knowing that they are likely soon to be published under the auspices of
Lord Brougham.

[490:2] MS. R.S.E.

[492:1] MS. R.S.E.

[493:1] MS. R.S.E.

[494:1] MS. R.S.E.

[494:2] MS. R.S.E.

[495:1] In the Appendix to Mackenzie's Account of the Life of Home.

[497:1] It is curious to observe, that the object of this united
prediction was that same Loménie de Brienne, who was put at the head of
affairs before the outbreak of the revolution, and who left behind him
so undisputed a character of utter incapacity to be a statesman in
difficult times.

[499:1] Probably M. Trudaine de Montigny, frequently mentioned above,
whose son translated Hume's "Natural History of Religion." See above, p.
167.

[499:2] This anecdote is told nearly in the same words, in one of
Walpole's posthumous works. Memoirs of George III. vol. ii. p. 240.

[504:1] αιμα.

[505:1] This paragraph is printed by Mackenzie.

[506:1] MS. R.S.E.

[506:2] MS. R.S.E.

[506:3] David Hume, as many of his letters must have shown, persisted in
spelling his friend's name thus. To commemorate this dispute, and Home's
dislike of port wine, he added this codicil to his will on 7th August:--

"I leave to my friend Mr. John Home of Kilduff, ten dozen of my old
claret, at his choice; and one single bottle of that other liquor called
port. I also leave to him six dozen of port, provided that he attests
under his hand, signed John _Hume_, that he has himself alone finished
that bottle at two sittings. By this concession, he will at once
terminate the only two differences that ever arose between us concerning
temporal matters." The original is in the MSS. R.S.E.

[507:1] Subjoined to the card, there is this note in Dr. Blair's
handwriting:--"_Mem._--This the last note received from Mr. David Hume.
He died on the 25th of August, 1776."--_Mackenzie's Account of Home._

[508:1] His nephew, Joseph, had just returned from abroad in very bad
health.

[508:2] Colonel Edmondstoune was a member of what was called the Ruffian
Club; men whose hearts were milder than their manners, and their
principles more correct than their habits of life. _Mackenzie._

[508:3] Mackenzie's Account of Home. On the 13th he wrote thus to his
brother:--

"DEAR BROTHER,--Dr. Black tells me plainly, like a man of sense, that I
shall die soon, which was no disagreeable news to me. He says I shall
die of weakness and inanition, and perhaps give little or no warning.
But though I be growing sensibly weaker every day, this period seems not
to be approaching; and I shall have time enough to inform you, and to
desire your company, which will be very agreeable to me. But at this
time your presence is necessary at Ninewells, to settle Josey, and
comfort his mother. Davie will be also very useful with you. I am much
pleased with his tenderness and friendship. I beg, therefore, that
neither you nor he may set out; and as the communication between us is
open and frequent, I promise to give you timely information."--_Lit.
Gaz._ 1822, p. 746. MS. R.S.E.

[509:1] MS. R.S.E.

[510:1] Colonel Edmondstoune's letter has been preserved, and is as
follows:--

     "_Linlithgow, Wednesday._

     "MY DEAR, DEAR DAVID,--My heart is very full. I could not see
     you this morning. I thought it was better for us both. You
     can't die, you must live in the memory of all your friends and
     acquaintances, and your works will render you immortal. I
     could never conceive that it was possible for any one to
     dislike you or hate you. He must be more than savage who could
     be an enemy to a man of the best head and heart, and of the
     most amiable manners.

          O toi, qui de mon ame es la chère moitié;
            Toi, qui joins la délicatesse
            Des sentimens d'une maitresse
          À la solidité d'une sure amitié,
          _David_, il faut bien-tôt que la parque cruelle
            Vienne rompre des si doux noeuds,
            Et malgré nos cris et nos voeux
          Bien-tôt nous assuirons une absence eternelle.

     Adieu! adieu!"--MS. R.S.E.

[512:1] It is from more, perhaps, than the mere force of contrast,
that, after reading this account of the manner in which the dying
philosopher's thoughts were occupied,--the spelling of the family name,
the imagined interview with Charon, &c. the following letter, addressed
to him by a distant friend, possesses a peculiarly solemn interest.


WILLIAM STRAHAN _to_ HUME.

     "MY DEAR SIR,--Last Friday I received your affectionate
     farewell, and therefore melancholy letter, which disabled me
     from sending an immediate answer to it, as I now do, in hopes
     this may yet find you, not much oppressed with pain, in the
     land of the living. I need not tell you, that your corrections
     are all duly attended to, as every particular shall be that
     you desire or order. Nor shall I now trouble you with a long
     letter.

     "Only permit me to ask you a question or two, to which I am
     prompted, you will believe me, not from a foolish or fruitless
     curiosity, but from an earnest desire to learn the sentiments
     of a man, who had spent a long life in philosophic inquiries,
     and who, upon the extreme verge of it, seems, even in that
     awful and critical period, to possess all the powers of his
     mind in their full vigour, and in unabated tranquillity.

     "I am more particularly led to give you this trouble, from a
     passage in one of your late letters, wherein you say, _It is
     an idle thing in us to be concerned about any thing that shall
     happen after our death; yet this_, you added, _is natural to
     all men_. Now I would eagerly ask, if it is _natural to all
     men_, to be interested in futurity, does not this strongly
     indicate that our existence will be protracted beyond this
     life?

     "Do you _now_ believe, or suspect, that all the powers and
     faculties of your own mind, which you have cultivated with so
     much care and success, will cease and be extinguished with
     your vital breath?

     "Our soul, or immaterial part of us, some say, is able, when
     on the brink of dissolution, to take a glimpse of futurity;
     and for that reason I earnestly wish to have your _last
     thoughts_ on this important subject.

     "I know you will kindly excuse this singular application; and
     believe that I wish you, living or dying, every happiness that
     our nature is capable of enjoying, either here or hereafter;
     being, with the most sincere esteem and affection, my dear
     sir, faithfully yours."--MS. R.S.E.

     "London, _August 19, 1776_."

This letter, if it ever reached him for whom it was designed, must have
done so too late to receive an answer. But if he did peruse it, with his
mind so collected and clear, yet so close on the point of being severed
from those objects of literary ambition which had been its chief glory
and occupation, how valuable would have been the first thought that
passed across it, when the great question was brought thus so distinctly
before his understanding!

[514:1] _Edinburgh Review_, xvii. 306.

[515:1] This letter, and Dr. Black's, are in the MSS. R.S.E.

[516:1] In reference to a work so entitled, published at
Amsterdam.--_Dr. Thomson._

[516:2] The passage here omitted describes the conversation about
Lucian, and other incidents which have been already narrated.

[517:1] Thomson's Life of Cullen, p. 607.

[517:2] In a little book, called "Supplement to the Life of David Hume,
Esq." there is the following curious statement.

"The anxious attention with which the public viewed every circumstance
respecting Mr. Hume's illness was not terminated even by his death. From
the busy curiosity of the mob, one would have presumed them to entertain
notions that the ashes of Mr. Hume were to have been the cause or the
object of miraculous exertion. As the physicians of London and Edinburgh
were divided about the seat of his disorder, those of the city where he
died proposed that his body should be opened; but this his brother, who
was also his executor, agreeably to the orders of the deceased, would
not permit. It is hardly to be credited that the grave-diggers, digging
with pick-axes Mr. Hume's grave, should have attracted the gaping
curiosity of the multitude; that, notwithstanding a heavy rain which
fell during the interment, multitudes of all ranks gazed on the funeral
procession, as if they had expected the hearse to have been consumed in
livid flames, or encircled with a ray of glory; that people in a sphere
much above the rabble would have sent to the sexton for the keys of the
burying-ground, and paid him to have access to visit the grave. And that
on a Sunday evening, (the gates of the burying-ground being opened for
another funeral,) the company from a public walk in the neighbourhood
flocked in such crowds to Mr. Hume's grave, that his brother actually
became apprehensive upon the unusual concourse, and ordered the grave to
be railed in with all expedition."

[519:1] On peut dire que Hume est la fantôme perpétuel de Kant. Dès que
le philosophe Allemand est tenté de faire un pas en arrière, dans
l'ancienne route, Hume lui apparaît et l'en détourne, et tout l'effort
de Kant est de placer la philosophie entre l'ancien dogmatisme et le
sensualisme de Locke et de Condillac, a l'abri des attaques du
scepticisme de Hume.--_Cousin, Leçons sur la Philosophie de Kant_, 18.

[519:2] While this sheet is passing through the press, the French
newspapers announce a new translation of Hume's History, "precedée d'un
essai sur la vie et les écrits de Hume, par Campenon, de l'académie
Française."

[520:1] In one of his epistles to the great Frederic, Voltaire says of
the distribution of the fruits of the earth:--

     Il murit, à Moka, dans le sable Arabique,
     Ce caffé nécessaire aux pays des frimats;
     Il met la fièvre en nos climats,
     Et le remède en Amerique.

But the policy of the earth's distribution, with many other truths not
to be at once penetrated, even by the keenest mortal vision, were
mysteries to the auto-theist, and being so, were therefore to his
self-sufficient wisdom, absurd and ludicrous. Could that be right of
which the sage of Ferney could not understand the ruling principle!




INDEX.


  Abercrombie--General James, i. 212, 222, 311.

  Abingdon--Lord, ii. 185.

  Adam--John, architect, ii. 174, 187, 195, 286.

  ----, William--Lord Chief Commissioner, ii. 174.
    His notices of Hume, 439.

  ----, Mrs., ii. 174, 286.

  Advocates' Library.
    Hume as librarian, i. 367.
    Its extent, 373.
    French works removed from, as improper, 395.
    Hume resigns librarianship of, ii. 18.

  Aiguillon--Duchesse de, ii. 175.

  Albemarle--Lord, i. 245-246.

  Alembert--D', i. 94; ii. 181.
    Hume's friendship with, 218, 270, 323, 345, 348, 350, 354, 355, 377,
        489.

  Allen--Dr., his inquiry into the rise and progress of the royal
      prerogative, ii. 122.

  Amelia--The Princess, ii. 292.

  Ancient Nations--Essay on the populousness of, i. 363.

  Anderson--Revd. George, i. 425.
    His writings against Hume and Lord Kames, 428.
    His death, 432.

  Anderson--Dr. Walter, i. 424.

  Annandale--Marquis of.
    His invitation to Hume, i. 170.
    His mental condition, 172.
    Hume's residence with, 170, _et seq._

  ----, Marchioness-Dowager of, i. 185.
    Letter to, 203.

  Anson--Madame, ii. 236.

  Anstruther--General, i. 383.

  Antiquaries.
    Their use to the historian, ii. 122-123.

  Antiquity, the populousness of.
    Dissertation on, i. 326.

  Aquinas--His theory of association, i. 286.
    Its alleged similarity to Hume's, 287.

  Argyle--Duke of, ii. 55.

  Armstrong--Dr., ii. 64, 148.

  Arnauld--Antony, i. 432.

  Artois--Comte d', ii. 178.

  Assembly--General.
    Its proceedings against Hume, i. 429.
    Overture to, regarding him, 430.

  Association--Hume's theory of, i. 286.

  Aylesbury--Lady, ii. 305, 385.


  Bacon--Lord, ii. 67.

  Balance of trade--Hume's opinions on, i. 358.

  Balcarras--Earl of, letter to, i. 412.
    His appearance, 413.

  Balfour--James of Pilrig, i. 160, 345; ii. 192, 414, 415.

  Bank--Cash credit in.
    Its nature, i. 359.

  Banking--Hume's remarks on, i. 359.

  Barbantane--Marquise de, ii. 280, 309, 322, 360.

  Barré--Colonel, ii. 150, 289.

  Bastide--M., ii. 236, 241.

  Bath--Hume's visit to, ii. 495, _et seq._

  Bayard--The Chevalier, ii. 441.

  Beauchamp--Lord, ii. 161, 162, 171, 183, 204, 245, 268, 287.

  Beauvais--Princess, ii. 497.

  Beauveau--Madame de, ii. 206.

  Beccaria, i. 121.

  Bedford--Duke of, ii. 279, 280, 285, 290.

  ----, Duchess of, ii. 279.

  Bellman's Petition, i. 315, 317.

  Belot--Madame, her translation of Hume's works, ii. 176.

  Bentham, i. 121, 384.

  Berri--Duc de, ii. 178.

  Bertrand--Professor, ii. 187.

  Betham--Mr. and Mrs., i. 411.

  Birch--Dr., i. 416, 436; ii. 82.

  Black--Joseph.
    Letters from, ii. 488, 514-515.

  Blacklock--Thomas, i. 385.
    Hume's first acquaintance with, 388.
    His ideas of light and colours, 389.
    Account of his early life, 390.
    Publication of his poems, 392.
    Miscellaneous notices of, 393, 398; ii. 164, 454.
    Letters from, 399.

  Blacklock--Mrs., ii. 401.

  Blackwell--Hume's criticism on his Court of Augustus, i. 434.

  Blair--Dr., i. 427; ii. 86, 115, 117, 139, 153, 167, 175, 192, 198.
    Letters to, 180, 181, 193, 229, 265, 267, 286, 288, 297, 310, 312,
        318, 344, 365, 371, 386, 395, 421, 472.

  ----, Robert, President of the Court of Session, ii. 423.

  Blanc--Abbé le, i. 365.
    His translations from Hume, 366.
    Letter to, 406, 409; ii. 347.

  Bologna--University of, i. 151.

  Bon--Abbé le, his death, ii. 428.

  Bonne--Hume's account of, i. 249.

  Boswell--James, received Johnson in Hume's house, ii. 138, 139, 307,
      441.

  Boufflers--Madame de, ii. 72.
    Account of, 90.
    Her letters to Hume, 94, 99, 106, 110.
    Letters to, 114, 205, 246, 247.
    Notice of, 251, 279, 280, 298, 303, 323, 330, 346, 352, 353, 429.
    Last letter to, 513.

  Bourgés--University of, i. 151.

  Bower--Archibald, ii. 58.

  Boyle--The Honourable Mr., i. 293.

  Brand--Mr., ii. 225.

  Breda--Hume's account of, i. 244.

  Brest, ii. 63.

  Brienne, Archbishop of Toulouse, ii. 283, 497.

  Bristol--Lord, ii. 407.

  Brodie--George, ii. 66.

  Brougham--Lord, ii. 348.
    His opinion of Hume's Political Discourses, i. 354.

  Brown--Dr. John, ii. 23.

  Browne--Sir Thomas, i. 94.

  Bruce--Professor, ii. 192.

  Bruyére--La, i. 148.

  Buccleuch--Duke of, ii. 58, 227, 467.

  Buchan--Lord, ii. 455.

  Buckingham--Mrs., ii. 186.

  Buffon--M. de, ii. 181, 299.

  Bunbury--Mr. afterwards Sir Charles, ii. 159, 164, 189, 239, 277, 280.

  ----, Lady Sarah, ii. 239.

  Burke--Edmund, i. 351, 353; ii. 59, 333, 449.

  Burnet--James, Lord Monboddo, i. 394; ii. 204, 231.

  Bute--Lord, ii. 34, 149, 159, 162, 163, 187, 258, 265, 282, 290, 334,
      407; ii. 418.

  Butler--Samuel, ii. 90.

  ----, Bishop, i. 64, 143.


  Caldwell--Sir James, i. 260.

  Calton Hill--Hume's monument on, ii. 518.

  Campbell--Dr. George, ii. 115, 116.
    Letter to, 118.
    Letter from, 119.
    Notice of, 154.

  Carlyle--Dr., ii. 88, 164, 266, 472.

  Carraccioli, ii. 53.

  Carre--George, of Nisbet, i. 115.

  Cause and Effect--Hume's views of, i. 79.
    Their effect on Kant, ib.

  Causes--unseen, aptly illustrated by Hume, i. 83.

  Charles Edward--his insurrection, i. 175.
    Anecdotes of, ii. 462.

  Charlemont--Lord.
    Description and anecdotes of Hume by, i. 270, 394; ii. 116, 223.

  Chatham--Lord, ii. 396, 406, 418.
    Hume's dislike to, ii. 420, 422.

  Chaulieu, 510.

  Chesterfield--Lord, ii. 131, 160.

  Cheyne--Dr. George, i. 42.
    His work, "The English Malady," i. 43.

  Chivalry--Essay on, i. 18-25.

  Choiseul--Duc de, ii. 228, 500.

  ----, Duchesse de, her civilities to Hume, ii. 169.

  Choquart--Abbé, ii. 242, 261, 262, 271, 273.

  Christianity--cannot be injured by theories purely metaphysical, i.
      86, 88.

  Church--Catholic.
    Hume's treatment of, ii. 5.

  ----, Scottish Episcopal.
    Its condition in Hume's time, ii. 6.

  ----, English.
    Hume's sympathies with, ii. 9.

  Churchill--Charles, ii. 148.

  Chute--Mr., ii. 225.

  Cicero--Orations of.
    Essay on, i. 144, 145.

  Clagenfurt in Carinthia.
    Hume's account of, i. 264.

  Clairaut--M., ii. 295.

  Clarendon--as a historian, i. 404.

  Clark--General, ii. 172, 195.

  Clarke--Dr. Staniers, ii. 179.

  Cleghorn--William.
    Appointed Professor of Moral Philosophy, i. 170.

  Clephane--Dr.
    Letters to, i. 314, 376, 379, 381, 384, 397, 408, 433; ii. 38, 443.

  Clow--Mr., Professor of logic in the University of Glasgow, i. 351;
      ii. 199.

  Club--The Poker.
    Its proceedings, ii. 456.

  Coblentz--Hume's account of, i. 249.

  Cockburn--Mrs.
    Letter from, ii. 230, 424, 449.

  Coke--Sir Edward, ii. 69.

  Colebroke--Sir George, ii. 460, 467.

  Coleridge--His charge against Hume, i. 286.
    How disproved, 287.

  Cologne--Hume's account of, i. 248.

  Condé--Prince of, ii. 92.

  Constitutional theories--Hume's, ii. 65, 67, 73.

  Conti--Prince of, ii. 90, 221, 246, 297, 307.

  ----, Princess of, ii. 245.

  Conway--Marshal, ii. 156-157, 283, 284, 305, 307, 324, 326, 351, 365,
      371, 374.

  ----, Appoints Hume under-secretary, ii. 382, 396, 407.

  Corby castle, i. 226.

  Corneille, ii. 196.

  Coutts--Provost, i. 165.

  ----, Thomas, ii. 476.

  ----, James, ii. 476.

  Cowley, ii. 90.

  Craigie--Professor, i. 350.

  Crawford--James, i. 233; ii. 149, 500.

  Crébillon--His "L'Ecumoire," i. 395; ii. 428.

  Crowle--Anecdote regarding, i. 306.

  Cudworth, i. 94.

  Cullen--Dr.
    Letter to, i. 350, 418.
    Notice of, 411; ii, 199.
    Letters from, ii. 488, 489, 515.

  Currency--Hume's views on, ii. 426.


  D'Angiviller--M., ii. 216.

  Dalrymple--Sir David, i. 395; ii. 415, 416.

  ----, Sir John, ii. 37, 467.

  Dauphin of France--His attentions to Hume, ii. 177-178.
    Notice of, 286.

  Davenport--Richard, ii. 313.
    Gives Rousseau a retreat at Wooton, 319.
    Notice of, 323, 327, 328.
    Letter from, 335, 336, 343, 345, 364, 367, 368, 370.
    Notice of, 374, 378, 379.

  Deffand--Madame du.
    Character of, ii. 214.
    Her quarrel with Mademoiselle de L'Espinasse, 215.

  De Lolme, i. 137.

  D'Epinay--Madame.
    Anecdote from, ii. 224.

  Dettingen--Battle-field of, i. 252.

  Deyverdun, ii. 410.

  Dialogues concerning Natural Religion--Their characteristics, i.
      328-330.
    Account of them in a letter to Sir Gilbert Elliot, 332; ii. 490.

  Dickson--David, ii. 383.

  Diderot, ii. 181, 220.

  D'Ivernois--M., ii. 325.

  Divine right--Hume's opinions on, i. 123-124.

  Dodwell--Mr., ii. 386.

  Donaldson--Alexander, i. 431; ii. 4, 82.

  Douglas--Mr., ii. 204.

  ----, Dr., afterwards Bishop of Carlisle, ii. 78, 87.

  ---- cause, ii. 150, 163, 203, 421, 423.

  ---- of Cavers, ii. 407.

  ----, Duchess of, ii. 232.

  ----, Lady Jane, ii. 424.

  ----, Tragedy of. Hume's criticism on, i. 419.
    Rehearsal of, 420.

  Dow--Colonel, ii. 461.

  Duclos, ii. 181, 347.

  Dupré de St. Maur--Madame, ii. 168, 347.

  Durand--M., ii, 378.

  Dysart--Mrs., of Eccles.
    Hume's correspondence with, i. 337.

  Dyson--Mr., ii. 132, 408.


  Earthquakes--Fears regarding, i. 298.

  Economy--Political.
    See Political Economy.

  Edmondstoune--Colonel, i. 212, 397, 409.
    Letter to, ii. 182.
    Letter from, to Hume, 185.
    Letters to, 187, 473.
    Letter from, 474, 508.

  Education--On the influences of, i. 85.

  ----, State of, in Scotland, in 17th and 18th centuries, i. 151.

  Egmont--Countess of, ii. 299.

  Election--Westminster, in 1749, i. 305.

  Elibank--Lord, letters to, i. 192, 387; ii. 167, 252, 256, 257, 260.

  Elliot--Sir Gilbert, of Minto.
    Hume's intercourse with, i. 320.
    Letters to, 321, 324.
    His criticism on Hume's Dialogue, 323.
    Hume's reply to, 324.
    Account of the "Epigoniad" to, ii. 25.
    Letter to, 32.
    Letters to, 144, 159, 189.
    Letter from, 233.
    Reply, 235.
    Letters to, 240, 244, 261, 270, 273, 280, 406, 407, 414.
    Letter from, 415.
    Letters to, 432, 434.

  ----, Gilbert, younger of Minto, afterwards Governor-general of India,
      ii. 233, 262, 271, 273, 281.

  Elliot--Sir John, of Stobs, ii. 407.

  ----, Anne, ii. 345.

  ----, Hugh, ii. 262, 271, 273, 281.

  ----, Lady, ii. 415, 446.

  ----, Miss, ii. 62, 90.

  ----, Peggy, ii. 62

  "Emile"--Criticism on, ii. 114.

  England--History of.
    Rapidity with which it was composed and printed, i. 381; ii. 121.

  "English Malady," by Dr. Cheyne--Extracts from, i. 43-46.

  Entails--Device for breaking, ii. 32.

  Epicurean--The.
    Remarks on, i. 142.

  Epicurus, i. 142.

  "Epigoniad."
    Some account of, ii. 25.
    Hume's partiality to, 31.
    Its rejection by the public, 34, 37.

  Eriot--Professor, ii. 241.

  Erskine--Sir Harry, i. 212.
    Letter to, 219.
    His illness, 264, 397, 409; ii. 159.

  Erskine--John, ii. 453.

  Essay--Historical, on chivalry and modern honour, i. 18, 25.

  Essays--Moral and Political, when published, and how, i. 136.
    Their success, 143.
    Third edition of, 289.

  ---- on Suicide and the Immortality of the Soul, ii. 13.

  ---- on Political Economy, i. 354, 363.

  Eugene--Prince.
    His palace, i. 262; ii. 501


  Fairholms--Bankruptcy of, ii. 195.

  Falconer--Sir David, of Newton, i. 1.

  Farquhar--John, ii. 154.

  Ferguson--Sir Adam, ii. 451, 457.

  ----, Professor Adam.
    Hume's commendation of, ii. 32.
    Notice of, 34.
    Appointed Professor of Natural Philosophy, 45.
    Notice of, 56.
    "Sister Peg" attributed to him, 83.
    Hume's mystification on the subject, 88.
    Letter to, 172.
    Letter from, 175.
    His Essay on the History of Civil Society, 385, 409, 440, 461.

  ----, a painter, ii. 409.

  Fitzmaurice--Mr., ii. 163, 171.

  Fitzroy--Charles, ii. 407.

  Fléche--La.
    Hume's residence in, i. 57.
    Jesuit's College of, ib.

  Fleury--Cardinal, 498.

  Fontaine--La, Les Contes de, removed from the Advocates' Library, i.
      395.

  Forester--Colonel James.
    His connexion with the Marquis of Annandale, i. 174.
    Verses on his traveling to the Highlands of Scotland, ib.

  Fourqueux, ii, 348.

  France--State of morality in, during Hume's time, ii. 91.

  ----, Manners in, i. 53-54, 55-56; ii. 208.

  Frankfort--Hume's account of, i. 251, 252.

  Franklin--Benjamin, ii. 426, 427, 471, 476.

  Fraser--James, i. 305.
    Hume's character of, 308.

  Free Trade--Hume as the founder of the principles of, ii. 520.

  French literature.
    Its licentious features, i. 395.


  Galliani--Abbé, ii. 428.

  Garden--Francis, ii. 204.

  Garrick--David, ii. 141, 309, 421.

  Gascoigne--Chief-justice, ii. 69.

  Genlis--Madame de, ii. 221, 301.

  Geoffrin--Madame.
    Her position in Paris, ii. 210.
    Specimen of her handwriting, 211.
    Character of, 212, 471.

  Geometry and Natural Philosophy--Dissertation on, i. 421.

  Gerard--Alexander, ii. 55, 154, 155.

  Gibbon--Edward, ii. 409.
    Letter from, 410.
    Letter to, 411, 484.

  Gillies--Adam, ii. 138.

  Glamorgan--Lord, ii. 77, 78.

  Glanvill--Joseph, i. 83.

  Glover--Richard, ii. 141.

  Goodall--Walter, i. 374.
    Anecdote regarding him, ib.; ii. 254.

  Gordon--Father, ii. 201.

  Government--Monarchical.
    Hume's partiality for, i. 140.

  Gower--Earl, i. 305.

  Graffigny--M., ii. 390.

  ----, Madame de, ii. 391.

  Grafton--Duke of, ii. 284, 397, 407, 432.

  Grammont--Madame de, ii. 206.

  Gregory--Dr., ii. 154, 155.

  Grenville--George, ii. 191, 226, 265, 272, 274, 282.

  Greville--Mrs.
    Her Ode to Indifference, i. 228.

  Grimm--Baron de, ii. 168, 223.

  Guerchy--M. de, ii. 290, 373.

  Guichiardin, i. 113.
    His character of Alexander VI. 113-114.

  Guigne--M. de, ii. 446.

  Gustard--Doctor, ii. 504.


  Hague--The.
    Hume's account of, i. 243.

  Hamilton--Duke of, i. 417.

  ----, Sir William, i. 288; ii. 153.

  Halifax--Lord, ii. 160, 277.

  Hall--Edward, ii. 72.

  Hallam--Henry, ii. 66.

  Hardwicke--Lord, ii. 465.

  Harrington--Hume's opinion of, i. 361; ii. 481.

  Hawke--Admiral, ii. 63.

  Hay--Secretary to Prince Charles Edward, ii. 203.

  Helvétius--His "De l'Esprit," i. 121; ii. 52.
    Proposes Hume to translate it, 52.
    Hume excuses himself, 53.
    Notice of, 54, 57, 168, 131, 387.
    His intercourse with Prince Charles Edward, ii. 464.

  Henault--President, ii. 181, 266, 269.

  Henry--Robert.
    His History of Britain, ii. 469.
    Hume's review of it, 470.

  Hepburn--Rev. Thomas, ii. 472.

  Herbert--Mr., ii. 162.

  Hertford--Marquis of.
    His appointment to the French Embassy, ii. 156.
    Invitation to Hume, 156, 158.
    Notice of, 159, 161, 164, 171, 172, 181.
    Hume's opinion of, 183, 188, 197, 205, 232, 258, 269, 272, 274, 278.
    Appointed lord-lieutenant of Ireland, 282, 284, 388.

  ----, Marchioness of, ii. 92, 161, 171, 280.

  Hervey--Lady, ii. 225.

  Historians--Benefit to, from being familiar with military service, i.
      218, 221.

  ----, Knowledge requisite in, ii. 123-127.

  History--Essay on, ii. 123, 126.

  ---- of England--Hume's.
    Preparation of, i. 378.
    Rapidity of composition, 381.
    Its reception, 414.

  Hobbes--Hume's remarks regarding, i. 77, 94.

  Holbach--Baron d', ii. 346, 353, 357.

  Holderness--Lord, ii. 194, 386, 463.

  Holingshed--Raphael, ii. 73.

  Holland--Lord, i. 403; ii. 239.

  Home--Alexander, Solicitor General, i. 208.

  ----, Alexander, of Whitfield.
    Letter to, i. 2-3.

  ----, Lord.
    His relationship to the Humes, i. 3.

  ----, Henry.
    Letters to, i. 62, 105, 144.
    Letter from, 204.
    His Essays, 426.
    Anderson's writings against, 428.
    Attacked in the General Assembly, 429.
    His Law Tracts, ii. 56, 131, 195, 454.

  ----, John.
    His "Douglas" noticed, i. 316, 392, 411; ii. 17.
    Hume's interest in him, i. 418.
    Hume's opinion of his "Douglas," i. 419; ii. 32.
    Suppressed dedication to, 16.
    His "Siege of Aquileia," 81, 159, 166, 188, 191, 199, 383, 444, 456,
        475, 482.
    His diary of a journey with Hume, 495.
    Bequest of port wine to, 506, 507.

  ---- of Ninewells.
    _See_ Hume.

  ----, Mrs., ii. 404.

  ----, Sir James, of Blackadder, i. 3.

  Hope--Lord, ii. 56.

  Human Nature, treatise of, i. 66.
    Character of the work, 66, 97.
    Its Style, 91.

  ----, Understanding, Philosophical Essays concerning, i. 271.
    Inquiry concerning, 271.

  Human Actions, as the object of inductive philosophy, i. 275.
    Application of this theory to history, 276.

  Hume--David, his birth and parentage, i. 2-3.
    Account of his family, 2-7.
    His opinions on the philosophy of family pride, 5.
    Scenes of his boyhood, 8-9.
    Account of his early years, 10-11.
    Education, ib.
    Early correspondence, 12-16.
    Ambitious projects, 17.
    Early writings, 18-19.
    Essay on chivalry, 18-25.
    Deserts the law, 26.
    Letter to a physician, 30-39.
    Goes to Bristol, 39.
    Leaves Bristol for France, 48.
    Visit to Paris, 49.
    Residence at Rheims, 51-56.
    Residence at La Fléche, 57.
    Correspondence with Home, 62-65.
    Preparing his treatise for press, 65.
    Treatise of Human Nature, 66.
    Treatise on the Passions, 99.
    Review of Treatise in "Works of the Learned," 109.
    Anecdote on the subject, 110.
    Intercourse with Hutcheson, 112.
    Application for a situation, 115.
    Treatise on Morals, 120.
    Extracts from memorandum book, 127-135.
    Moral and Political Essays, their publication, 136.
      Their character, 137-143.
    His partiality for monarchical government, 140.
    Opinions on the liberty of the press, 137-139.
    Criticism on Cicero, 144-146.
    Correspondence with Hutcheson, 146.
    Correspondence with Mure, 153, 158.
    Thoughts on religion, 162.
      On prayer, 163.
    Endeavours to obtain the professorship of moral philosophy, 165.
      Opposition, 168-169.
      Unsuccessful, 170.
    Residence with the Marquis of Annandale, ib.
      Dissension there, 182-190.
      Its effect on Hume, 191.
      He resigns the appointment, 193.
      Different views of his resignation, 194.
      State of society in Scotland at that time, 196.
    Difficulty of means of subsistence, 196-197.
    Position of the poor scholar, 199.
    Offer from General St. Clair of the Secretaryship accepted, 208.
    Expedition to the coast of France, 210.
    One of the historians who have been familiar with military service,
        218.
    Letter to Sir Harry Erskine, 219.
      To Henry Home, 220.
      To Col. Abercrombie, 222.
    Desponding remarks on public affairs, 224.
    Returns to Ninewells, 225.
    Supposed character of himself, found amongst his papers, 226.
    His poetical attempts, 227-229.
    Question whether he was ever in love, 231.
    Poetic epistle to John Medina, 234.
    Appointment as secretary to the mission to the court of Turin, 235.
    Letter to James Oswald, 236.
    Views regarding history, ib.
    Disinclination to leave his studies, 239.
    New edition of his Essays, ib.
    Philosophical Essays, ib.
    His position with General St. Clair, 240.
    Extracts from the Journal of his journey to Italy, 240-271.
      Hague, 242.
      Breda, 244.
      Nimeguen, 247.
      Bonne, 249.
      Coblentz, ib.
      Frankfurt, 251.
      Wurtzburg, 252.
      Ratisbon, 255.
      Vienna, 257.
      Knittlefeldt, 262.
      Trent, 264.
      Mantua, 265.
      Turin, 266.
    Publication of his Philosophical Essays, 271.
    Inquiry concerning Human Understanding, 272.
    Doctrine of Necessity, 275.
    Doctrines on Miracles, 279-285.
      His mode of treating the subject, 281.
      Leading principle of his theory concerning, 282.
    Third edition of Essays, Moral and Political, 289.
    His mother's death, 291.
    Silliman's story, 292.
      Disproved, 293.
    Correspondence with Dr. Clephane, 296.
    Westminster election, 305.
    Document regarding James Fraser, 308.
    Letters to Col. Abercrombie, 311, 312.
      To Dr. Clephane, 314.
    Bellman's Petition, 315, 317.
    Correspondence with Sir Gilbert Elliot, 324.
    Dissertation on the Populousness of Antiquity, 326.
    Dialogues concerning Natural Religion, 328.
      Their character and tendency, 330.
      Writes to Elliot regarding them, 331.
    His brother's marriage, 337.
    Letter to Mrs. Dysart, ib.
    The independence of his mind, and moderation of his wishes, 340.
    Letter to Michael Ramsay, 342.
    His domestic arrangements, 344.
    His theory of morals, 346.
    Utilitarian system, 344.
      Limited extent to which Hume carried it, 347.
      Charge against it, 349.
    Publication of Political Discourses, 350.
    Is unsuccessful in his application for the chair of logic in
        Glasgow, 350.
    Letter to Dr. Cullen, 350.
    Unfitness to be a teacher of youth, 352.
    Political Discourses, 354.
    Political economy, 355, 366.
    Appointment, as keeper of the Advocates' Library, 367.
    Letter to Dr. Clephane, 369, 376.
    Account of domestic arrangements, 377.
    Preparation of the History, 378.
    Letter to Dr. Clephane, 379, 381.
    Absorbing nature of his studies, 382.
    Kindness to Blacklock, 385.
    Letter to Joseph Spence, 388.
      To Adam Smith, 393.
    Gives Blacklock his salary as librarian, 393.
    History of the Stuarts, 397.
    Letter to Dr. Clephane, 397.
    Conflicting opinions regarding the History of the Stuarts, 400.
    Misapprehension regarding state of constitution, 403.
    Inconsistencies between his philosophical and historical works, 405.
    Letter to the Abbé le Blanc, 406.
      To Dr. Clephane, 408.
      To William Mure of Caldwell, 409.
      To Mrs. Dysart, 410.
      To Andrew Millar, 415.
      To Adam Smith, 417.
    Criticism on Home's "Douglas," 419.
    _Edinburgh Review_, 422.
    Attacked by Anderson, 429.
    By the church courts, 430.
    The second volume of the History of the Stuarts, ii. 5.
      Its reception, ib.
      Apologies for his treatment of religion, 10.
      Unpublished preface, 11.
    Essay on Suicide, 13.
    Natural History of Religion, ib.
    The suppressed Essays, ib.
    Resigns the office of librarian, 18.
    Dedication to Home, 21.
    Third volume of the History, 22.
    "Epigoniad," 25.
    Warburton's attack, 35.
    Goes to London, 47.
    Correspondence with Dr. Robertson, 48.
    Returns to Scotland, 65.
    History of the Tudors, ib.
    His constitutional theories, 67.
    Alterations of the History in the direction of despotic principles,
        73.
    Specimens of alterations, 74-77.
    Specimens of alteration in style, 79, 80.
    Letter to Millar, 81.
      To Robertson, 83.
    Macpherson's "Ossian," 85.
    Letter to Dr. Carlyle, 88.
      To Adam Smith, 89.
    Madame de Boufflers, 90.
    Correspondence with Madame de Boufflers, 94-98, 102.
      Rousseau, 102.
    Letters from Earl Marischal, 104.
    Criticism on "Emile," 114.
    Publication of the History anterior to the accession of the Tudors,
        120.
    Intention to write an Ecclesiastical History, 130.
    Correspondence with Millar, 132.
    Residence in James's Court, 136.
    Corrections of his works, 144.
    His projects, 144-146.
    Douglas cause, 150.
    Criticisms on Reid's "Inquiry into the Human Mind," 153.
    Accepts the office of secretary to the French embassy, 157.
      Correspondence on the occasion, 157-160.
    His celebrity in Paris, 167.
      Feelings on the occasion, 171-172.
    Attentions of the dauphin, 177.
    Memoirs of James II., 179.
    Advice to a clergyman, 185.
    Secretaryship of the embassy, 188.
    His pension, 191.
    Letters from Paris, 193.
    Madame de Boufflers, 205.
    Social position in France, 207.
    Notices by H. Walpole, 225.
    Takes charge of Elliot's sons, 235.
      Settles them in Paris, 244.
    Liability to anger, 251.
    Letter to Lord Elibank, 252.
    Care of Elliot's sons, 273.
    Secretaryship of legation, 278-281.
      Is appointed to it, and to receive the salary, 284.
      Expects to be secretary to Lord Hertford, as Lord-lieutenant of
          Ireland, 287.
        Is disappointed, 289.
    Rousseau, 293.
      Hume's first opinion of him, 299.
      Brings him to England, 303.
      Settles him at Wooton, 319.
    Rousseau's quarrel, 326-330.
      Publication of it, 354-360.
    Walpole, 361.
    Kindness to Rousseau, 381.
    Appointed under secretary of state, 382.
    His amiability of character, 390.
    Compared with his nephew, Baron Hume, 402.
    His interest in the education of his nephews, 403.
    Influence in church patronage, 406.
    His picture, 408.
    Criticism of Robertson's Charles V., 412.
    Views on currency, 426.
    Returns to Edinburgh, 429.
    Education of his nephews, 430.
    His dislike of the English, 433.
    His social character, 437.
    Temper and disposition, 441.
    His own account of his character, 442.
    His conversation, 451.
    Traditional anecdotes, 457.
    Incidents regarding Prince Charles Edward, 462.
    Review of Henry's History, 469.
    Political opinions, 479.
    Impatient for Smith's "Wealth of Nations," 483.
    His last illness, 487, _et seq._
    His will, 489.
    Disposal of his manuscripts, 490.
    Publication of the "Dialogues on Natural Religion," 491-493.
    Negotiations with Smith on the subject, ib.
    His journey to Bath, 495, _et seq._
    John Home's account of their journey, ib.
    His return, 506.
    Party to bid him farewell, 507.
    Correspondence, ib.
    Smith's account of his latter days, 514.
    Account of his death by Dr. Black and Dr. Cullen, 515.
    His funeral and monument, 517-518.
    Influence of his works on the opinions of the world, 519.

  Hume, or Home of Ninewells--Anecdote of, i. 6, 7.

  ----, John of Ninewells, brother to Hume, i. 213.
    Narrative of the Expedition to the coast of France, addressed to,
        213-217.
    His marriage, 337.
    Letters to, ii. 290, 308, 396.
    His character, 398.

  ----, David, afterwards Baron, ii. 400.
    Compared with his uncle, 402, 405, 425, 474, 479, 480.

  ----, Joseph, of Ninewells, i. 1.

  ----, Joseph, younger.
    His education, ii. 174, 175, 292, 398, 403, 404.

  ----, Director, i. 387.

  ----, John.
    _See_ Home--John.

  ----, Mrs., verses by, i. 295.

  ----, Frank, ii. 199.

  Huntingdon--Lady, ii. 506.

  Hurd--Warburton's letter to, ii. 35.
    Notice of, 50.

  Hutcheson--Francis, i. 111.
    Hume's correspondence with, 112.
    His reflexions on Hume's papers, 112.
    Letter to, 117, 146.


  Ideas--Hume's theory of, i, 70.

  Impressions--Hume's theory of, i. 73.

  Inquiry concerning the Principles of Morals, i. 344.
    Its tendency, ib.

  ---- concerning Human Understanding, its publication, 273.
    Views developed in it, 274.

  Irvine--Colonel, ii. 160.


  James II.--Memoirs of, ii. 179, 200.

  James's Court--Hume's residence in, description of, ii. 136.

  Jardine--Dr., ii. 197, 230, 286.
    His death, 317, 318.

  Jeffrey--Lord, i. 403.

  Jenyns--Soame, ii. 55, 59.

  Johnson--Dr., ii. 122.
    Anecdote of, 138, 420.

  Johnstone of Hilton--Anecdote of, i. 6, 7.

  ----, Colonel John, i. 185.

  ----, Sir James--of Westerhall, i. 175, 176.
    Letters to, 182, 184, 192.
    Letter to, from Henry Home, 204.

  Johnstone--Sir William, ii. 168.

  Journal--Hume's, of his journey to Italy, i. 240, 271.

  Judge Advocate--Hume appointed, i. 212.
    Claim for half-pay, 222.

  Justice Clerk--The, ii. 47.


  Kames--Lord.
    _See_ Home--Henry.

  Kant--Effect of Hume's Theory of Cause and Effect on, i. 79.
    His justification of Hume, 88.

  Keith--Mr., ii. 431.

  Keith--General, ii. 498.

  Kenrick--William Shakspere, editor of _The London Review_, i. 110.

  Kincaid--Alexander, i. 431; ii. 4, 81, 82.

  Kirkpatrick--James, i. 387.

  Knittlefeldt in Styria, Hume's account of it, i. 262.

  Knox--John, ii. 58.


  La Chapelle, ii. 270.

  La Harpe, ii. 468.

  Lansdowne--Lord, ii. 146.

  Larpent--Mr., ii. 245, 271.

  Law and government--first principles of, Hume's remarks on, i. 122.

  Leechman--Dr., i. 160.
    Hume's criticism on his sermon, 161, 411.

  Legge, H. B., ii. 54.

  Leslie--Sir John.
    His professorship, i. 89.

  L'Espinasse--Mademoiselle de.
    Her position with Madame du Deffand, ii. 215.
    D'Alembert's attachment to her, ib.
    Notice of, 237.

  Lestock--Admiral Richard, i. 210.

  Leyden--University of, i. 151.

  Lindsay--Lord, i. 413.

  ----, Lady Anne.
    Her remembrances of Hume, ii. 445.

  Liston--Mr., afterwards Sir Robert, ii. 245, 270, 271, 273, 280, 414.

  Literature, French--State of, ii. 166.

  Locke, i. 94; ii. 68.

  Logic--chair of, in Glasgow, i. 350.

  L'Orient--Port of, i. 211.
    Expedition against, i. 211.

  Loughborough--Lord, ii. 425.

  Louis XV--Anecdotes of, 499.

  Lounds--Mr., ii. 368.

  Lyttelton--George Lord, i. 391, 433; ii. 55, 58, 79, 82, 226, 345.

  Luze--M. de, ii. 303-305.


  Macdonald--Sir James, ii. 228, 229, 257, 267, 272, 349.

  Mackenzie--Henry, i. 58.
    His ideas of Hume, ii. 438, 444.

  Mackenzie, Stuart, ii. 258, 259.

  Mackintosh--Sir James, i. 287.

  Macpherson--James, i. 462; ii. 85, 461.

  Malesherbes, ii. 219.

  Maletête--M., ii. 428.

  Mallet--David, ii. 3, 79, 82, 131, 140, 141.
    Letter from, to Hume, 142.
    Notice of, 144, 187, 232.
    His death, 273.

  ----, Mrs., ii. 62, 141, 200, 232.

  Malthus, i. 364.

  Mansfield--Lord, ii. 163, 386, 415, 424, 466.

  Mantua--Hume's account of, i. 265.

  March--Lord, ii. 240, 241, 242, 245.

  Marchmont--Lord, extraordinary adventure of, i. 237.

  Marischal--Lord, ii. 103.
    Letters from, 104, 105.
    Notice of, 113, 139, 175, 179, 182, 217, 293, 295, 306, 313, 354,
        464, 465.

  Markham--Sir George, ii. 146.

  Marlborough--Duke of, ii. 141.

  ----, Duchess of, ii. 141.

  Marmontel, ii. 181, 196.

  Martigny, ii. 52.

  Masserane--Prince, ii. 428.

  Mathematics.
    Hume's application of, i. 73.

  Mauvillon--Eléazar, i. 365.

  Maxwell--Sir John, ii. 455.

  Mead--Dr., i. 316.

  Medina--John, poetic epistle to, by Hume, i. 234.

  Memorandum book--Hume's.
    Extracts from, i. 126-135.

  Mesnieres--President, ii. 177.

  Metaphysics.
    Theories purely such not dangerous to religion, i. 86, 88.

  Millar--Andrew, i. 415.
    His views for Hume, ib.
    Correspondence with, 421; ii. 2, 22, 34.
    Notice of, 57, 64, 81.
    Letters to, 130, 134, 135, 136, 138, 143, 147, 179, 199, 200, 231,
        263, 264, 272, 393, 408.

  ----, Mrs., ii. 180, 200, 232.

  ----, Professor, ii. 474, 479, 480, 481.

  Milton--Lord, ii. 46, 199.

  Minto--Lord, i. 320; ii. 233.

  Mirabeau, the elder, i. 365, 366.

  Miracles--Doctrines on, i. 279-286.

  Mirepoix--Madame de, ii. 244, 245.

  Monarchical character--sacredness of, Hume's ideas on, ii. 70.

  Monboddo--Lord, ii. 467.
    _See_ Burnet.

  Moncrief--David, ii. 431.

  Money--Letter on the value of, i. 301.

  ----, Elements of the value of, according to Hume, i. 358-360.

  Montesquieu, i. 92, 139.
    His Esprit des Loix, i. 304.
    His appreciation of Hume's critical works, 305, 365, 387.
    Letters from, to Hume, 426.

  Montigny--Trudaine de, letter from, ii. 167, 352.

  ----, Madame, ii. 348.

  Moore--Mr., ii. 436.

  Moral and Political Essays, their publication, i. 136.

  ---- Sentiments--Theory of, by Adam Smith, ii. 55.
    Hume's appreciation of it, ib.

  Morals--Treatise on, i. 120.
    Principles of, inquiry concerning, 344.
    The utilitarian, limited extent to which it was carried by Hume,
        347.
    Charge against it, 349.

  Morellet--The Abbé, ii. 276, 337, 425.
    Letter to, 426.

  Morrice--Corbyn, ii. 147.

  Mount Stuart--Lord, ii. 184.

  Muirhead--Mr., i. 411.

  Mure--William, of Caldwell, i. 380.
    Letters to, i. 153, 158, 162, 165; ii. 19, 158, 165, 199, 200, 390,
        391, 436, 478.

  Murray--Lady Elliot, letter from, ii. 446.

  ----, Alexander, i. 306; ii. 93, 101, 168, 258, 259.

  ----, Mrs., ii. 281.

  ----, of Broughton, i. 167.

  Musset Pathay, ii. 322, 325, 329, 330.


  Nairne--Mr., ii. 456.

  National characters--Essay on, i. 290.

  Nationality--Hume's spirit of, ii. 31.

  Natural Philosophy--Hume's notes on, i. 95-96.

  Natural Religion--Dialogues concerning, i. 328, 330.
    Arrangements regarding their publication, ii. 490-493.

  Necessity--Doctrine of, i. 275.

  Necker, ii. 487.

  Neville--Mr., ii. 171.

  Nicholas--Sir Harris.
    His chronology of history, ii. 123.

  Nicol--Miss, ii. 361.

  Niebuhr, i. 218.

  Nimeguen--Hume's account of, i. 247.

  Ninewells, family residence of the Humes, i. 1, 8.

  Nivernois--Duc de, ii. 286, 431, 449.

  Nominalism--Hume's, a system of, i. 73.

  North--Lord, ii. 479.

  Norwich--Bishop of, ii. 54.

  Note-book--Hume's, extracts from, i. 126-135.


  Obedience--Passive, Hume's opinions on, ii. 70.

  Orange--Prince of.
    His popularity, i. 242.

  Ord--Baron, ii. 436.

  ----, Miss, ii. 436, 494.

  Original Contract--Essay of the, i. 290.

  Orleans--Duke of, ii. 269.

  ----, Duchess of, ii. 269.

  Ormond--James Butler, Duke of, ii. 77.

  Ossian's Poems, ii. 85.
    Essay on the authenticity of, 86.
    Notice of, 180.

  ----, Papers regarding, i. 462.

  Ossory--Lord, ii. 322.

  Oswald--Sir Harry, ii. 188, 191.

  ----, James, of Dunnikier, i. 156, 222.
    Letter to, 236, 301, 380.
    Notice of, ii. 58.
    Letter to, 149.
    Notice of, 188.
    Letter to, 275.


  Page du Boccage--Madame de, ii. 213.

  Paley--William, i. 152.

  Palgrave--Sir Francis, ii. 122.

  Paoli, King of Corsica, ii. 307.

  Paris--Abbé, miracles at his tomb, i. 49-50.

  ----, Hume's first visit to, i. 49-51.

  ----, University of, i. 151.

  Passions--Treatise on, i. 99.
    Some account of, 104.
    Dissertation on, 421.

  Passive obedience--Essay of, i. 220.

  Percy--Bishop, ii. 385.

  Peyrou, du, ii. 335.

  Philosophical Essays concerning the Human Understanding.
    When published, i. 271.

  Philosophy--System of, in the Treatise of Human Nature, i. 66, 97.
    Its characteristic, 97.

  Physician--Letter to, i. 30-39, 41, 42.

  Piozzi--Mrs., ii. 139.

  Pitcairne--Dr., ii. 390.

  Pitfour--Lord, ii. 480.

  Pitt--William, i. 392; ii. 63, 159, 160, 162, 163.

  Platonist--The, i. 141.

  Pluche--The Abbé, i. 52.

  Plutarch--Hume's project of translating, i. 415, 417.

  Poetry by Hume, i. 228.

  ---- by Mrs. Home of Ninewells, i. 295.

  ---- By Miss A. B., to Mrs. H----, by her Black Boy, i. 296.

  Political Discourses--Publication of, i. 350.
    Their character, 354.

  ---- Economy. Hume's ideas on, i. 355.
    How received, 356.
    State of opinion on, in the time of Hume, i. 355-356.
    Effect of the French Revolution on, 357.

  Political Doctrines--Hume's, i. 123.
    Their inconsistency with his historical works, 405.

  Pompadour--Madame de, ii. 169.

  Populousness of Ancient Nations--Essay on, i. 326, 363.

  Praslin--Duc de, ii. 172, 283, 290.

  ----, Duchess de, ii. 173.

  Press--Liberty of, i. 137-138.

  Prevôt--Abbé, i. 408; ii. 52.

  Primrose--Lady, ii. 462.

  Pringle--Sir John, president of the Royal Society of London, i. 165.
    Letter to, ii. 162.
    Letter from, 465, 476.

  Protestant Succession--Essay on, i. 365.

  Provence--Comte de, ii. 178.

  Prussia--King of, ii. 306, 309, 363.

  Prynne--William, i. 405.

  Puysieuls--Mons. de, ii. 204, 266.


  Quesnay, i. 365.


  Rabutin--Bussy, i. 306.

  Ralph--Mr., ii. 148.

  Ramsay--Allan, i. 421; ii. 135.

  ----, The Chevalier, i. 12, 53.

  ----, Michael, an early correspondent of Hume's, i. 11, 51, 107, 116.
    Letter to, ii. 342.

  Ratisbon--Hume's account of, i. 255.

  Raynal--The Abbé, i. 365.

  Record Commission.
    Works prepared by, ii. 121.

  Reid--Dr. Thomas; his "Inquiry into the Human Mind," ii. 151.
    Intercourse with Hume, 153.
    Letter from, 154.

  Religion--Hume's thoughts regarding, i. 162-164, 279.
    His treatment of, ii. 5.
    Tone in speaking of the Roman Catholic religion, ii. 6.

  ----, Hume's apologies for his treatment of, ii. 10.

  ----, Natural.
    Dialogues concerning, i. 328; ii. 490.
    Their character and tendency, i. 330.

  Republicanism--Hume's estimate of, ii. 481.

  _Review_--The original _Edinburgh_.
    Its origin, i. 422.

  Rheims--Hume's residence in, i. 51-56.

  Rianecourt--Madame, ii. 351.

  Riccoboni--Madame, ii. 350.

  Richmond--Duke of, ii. 282, 290, 326.

  Rivière, i. 365.

  Robertson--Dr. William.
    Hume's commendations of, ii. 32, 43.
    Letter to, regarding Queen Mary, 48.
    Correspondence with Hume, 49-55.
    Notice of, 58.
    Correspondence and notices, 83, 100, 176, 229, 252, 266, 270, 286,
        383.
    Remarks by Hume on his History of Charles Fifth, 412, 445, 453, 470.

  Robinson--Sir Thomas, i. 257.

  Roche--La.
    Story of, i. 58.

  Rockingham--Lord, ii. 282, 395, 396.

  Rodney--Admiral, ii. 61.

  Rohan--Louis, Prince de, ii. 221.

  Rollin, ii. 50.

  Romilly--Sir Samuel, ii. 220.

  Rougemont--M., ii. 330.

  Rousseau--Jean Jacques, ii. 102, 110, 112-113, 114, 187.
    Takes up his abode at Motier Travers, 293.
    Removes to St. Pierre, 294.
    Goes to Strasburg, 296.
      To Paris, ib.
    The enthusiasm for him at Paris, 299.
    Goes to England, 303, 308, 311, 312.
    Hume's account of him, 315.
    His judgment on his own works, 316.
    Settlement at Wooton, 319.
    Walpole's letter, 321.
    Pension from the King of England, 324.
    Quarrel with Hume, 326-380.

  Ruat--Professor, ii. 56, 62.

  Ruddiman--Thomas, i. 367; ii. 19.

  Russel--J., ii. 192.

  Rutherford--Dr., ii. 199.


  Saducismus Triumphatus, i. 83.

  Sandwich--Lord, ii. 160.

  Sarsfield--Count, ii. 388.

  Saurin, ii. 387.

  Sceptic--The, i. 141.
    Character of, 143.

  Scholar--The poor.
    His position in Hume's time, i. 199.

  Scott of Scotstarvet, i. 416.

  ----, Sir Walter.
    His remarks on Hume's poetical attempts, i. 226, 227; ii. 137.

  Selwin--George, ii. 240.

  Shaftesbury--Lord, i. 384.

  Sharp--Matthew, of Hoddam.
    Letter to, i. 178-180, 386.

  Sheffield--Lord, ii. 409.

  Shelburne--Lord, ii. 405, 406.

  Short--Mr., ii. 64.

  Silliman--the American traveller.
    His story regarding Hume, i. 291-293.

  Smellie--William, ii. 469.

  Smith--Adam.
    His first introduction to Hume, i. 117.
    His appointment to the chair of Moral Philosophy, 350.
    The method of his political economy, 361.
    Letters to, and notices of, 375, 393.
    His correspondence with Hume, 417.
    Letter to, ii. 16.
    Hume's commendation of, 32.
    Notice of, 58, 59.
    Correspondence with, 89, 148, 150, 157, 160, 168, 227, 228, 348,
        349, 353, 388, 390, 395, 426, 429, 432, 433, 459, 461, 466, 471.
    Letter to, on his "Wealth of Nations," 486.
    Appointed Hume's literary executor, 490.
    Letters to, 491.
    Revocation of the nomination, 494.
    His account of Hume's last moments, 509.

  Smollett--Tobias, ii. 53.
    Hume's interest in, 405.
    Letter from, 418.
    Letter to, 419.

  Solitude--Hume's opinion on, i. 99.

  Spence--Joseph.
    Letter to, i. 388.
    Notice of, 435.

  Spinoza, i. 89.

  St. Clair--General.
    His invitation to Hume, to act as secretary to the expedition to the
        Coast of France, i. 208.
    His expedition, ib. 440.
    Appoints Hume secretary to the mission to the Court of Turin, 235,
        372.

  Stanislaus Augustus, King of Poland, ii. 91.

  Stevenson--John, ii. 46.

  Stewart--Dugald, i. 88, 89.

  ----, John, ii. 168, 180, 311, 321.

  Stobo--Captain Robert, ii. 418.

  Stoic--The, i. 141.

  Strahan--William, ii. 82-83, 412.
    Hume's papers left to the charge of, 494.
    Letters from, 477, 512.

  Stuart--Andrew, ii. 168, 175, 203, 423, 424, 466.

  ----, Dr., ii. 454.

  ---- Mackenzie, Mr., ii. 258.

  ----, Gilbert, ii. 414, 416, 456, 467.
    His opinion of himself, 468.
    Anecdotes regarding, 469.
    His malignity, ib. 470.

  Stuarts--History of the, i. 399.
    Character of the work, ib.
    Conflicting opinions regarding, 400.
    Charge brought against, 401.
    Tendency, 402.
    Its reception, 414.
    Second volume, ii. 2.

  Suard--M.
    Letter to, ii. 357.

  Suicide--Hume's ideas on, ii. 15.

  Sympathy--Criticism on Smith's ideas on, ii. 60.


  Tate--Christopher, ii. 432.

  Tavistock--Lord, ii. 239.

  Teacher of youth--Hume's unfitness for, i. 352.
    Qualifications requisite, ib.

  Temple--Lord, ii. 163.

  Tessé--Countess of, ii. 206.

  Thomson--Dr. John, i. 351, 353.

  Torbay, ii. 63.

  Townsend--Lord, ii. 407.

  ----, Charles, ii. 58, 132, 133, 134, 304, 305.

  ----, Mrs., ii. 305.

  Trade--Free.
    _See_ Free Trade.

  Tragedy--Dissertation on, i. 421.

  Trail--Dr., ii. 204, 245, 456.

  Treatise of Human Nature, when published, i. 66.
    Character of the work, 66-97.
    Its service to philosophy, 90.
    Characteristics of the system, 97.
    Hume's condition during its composition, 96.
    Its reception, 107-109.
    Treatise on the Passions, some account of, 99.
    Treatise on Morals, its character, 120-123.

  Trent--Hume's account of, i. 264.

  Trentham--Lord, i. 305.

  Tronchin, ii. 186, 338, 345.

  Tucker.
    His Light of Nature, i. 150.

  ----, Dr., ii. 428.

  Turgot, i. 365.
    Hume's friendship with, ii. 219, 351, 354.
    Letters from, 352, 381, 428.

  Tweeddale--Marquis of, ii. 383.


  Understanding--The Treatise on, i. 99.

  Universities--foreign.
    The resort of Scottish youth, i. 150.

  Utilitarian system--Hume's development of, i. 121, 344.
    Limited extent to which he carried it, 347.


  Vain man--Hume's character of, i. 104.

  Vallière--Duc de, ii. 268.

  Vandeput--Sir George, i. 105.

  Vauban, i. 365.

  Vasseur--Thérèse le, ii. 294, 299, 305, 307, 323, 352, 366, 370.

  Verdelin--Madame de, ii. 295.

  Vienna.
    Hume's account of the court there, and his introduction, i. 257-259.

  Vincent--Captain Philip, i. 177, 180.
    His position with the Marquis of Annandale, 181, 186-189.
    Letter from, 189.
    Terms specified by, of Hume's engagement with the Marquis of
        Annandale, 201, 203.

  Voltaire, i. 219; ii. 57, 126, 166, 184, 195, 323, 348, 358.
    His "Henriade," Hume's opinion of, 440.


  Walker--Professor, ii. 334.

  Wallace--Dr. Robert, i. 364, 387; ii. 193.

  Walpole, Lady, ii. 138.

  ----, Sir Robert.
    Hume's character of, i. 289.

  ----, Horace.
    Anecdote from, i. 197; ii. 54, 55, 159.
    His notices of Hume, 226.
    Account of his own reception in Paris, 226.
    His letter in the name of the King of Prussia, 306, 321.
    His Memoirs of George III., 282, 345, 351.
    Letter to, 355, 361.

  Warburton--Bishop.
    His letter to Hurd, i. 285.
    Notice of, ii. 35.
    His letter against Hume, ib.
    His Remarks on Hume's essays, ib.
    Notice of, 38, 64, 454.

  Warton--Thomas, ii. 51.

  Wealth of Nations--Hume's opinion of the, ii. 486.

  Wedderburn--Alexander, i. 379; ii. 471.

  Westminster election, in 1749, i. 305.

  Weymouth--Lord, ii. 384.

  Wilkie--William.
    His "Epigoniad," ii. 25, 29.
    His education, 26.

  Wilkes--John, ii. 148, 202, 282, 422.

  Wilson--Mr., type-founder, ii. 59.

  Wood--Mr., ii. 63, 182.

  Worcester--Marquis of.
    _See_ Glamorgan--Lord.

  Wray--Mr., ii. 465.

  Wroughton--Mr., ii. 272.

  Wurtzburg--Hume's account of, i. 252.


  York--Archbishop of, ii. 386.

  ----, Duke of, ii. 310.

  Yorke--Mr., ii. 59.




ERRATA.


Vol. i. p. 361, for _Harrison_ read _Harrington_.

Vol. ii. p. 14, in the reference in the note, p. 246, read p. 216.

---- p. 215, for _protégé_ read _protégée_.




TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:


The following explanation of the different kinds of blockquotes used in
this volume can be found on page xiv of Vol. I of this series:

     "It may be right to explain, that the two sizes of type, used
     in this work, were first adopted with the design of presenting
     all letters addressed to Hume, all extracts, and all letters
     from him with which the public is already familiar, in the
     smaller type, in order that the reader coming to a document
     with which he is already acquainted, might see at once where
     it ends. This arrangement was accidentally broken through,
     several letters having been printed in the larger that should
     have appeared in the smaller type."[A]

          [A] Burton, John Hill. Life and Correspondence of
          David Hume.</cite>  Vol. I. Edinburgh: William Tait,
          1847.

The following words use an oe ligature in the original:

     coelo
     coeur
     diarrhoea
     Foedera
     Phoenix

Text in French has been preserved as printed.

Corrections listed in the Errata have been made. The Errata is included
for completeness.

The following corrections have been made to the text:

     Page 1: Nationalism--Warburton--Colonel Edmondstoune[original
     has "Edmonstoune"]

     Page 44: and that a man cannot[original has "connot"] employ
     himself

     Page 57: more decisive than he used[original has "uses"] to be
     in its favour

     Page 58: he would put the Duke of Buccleuch[original has
     "Buccleugh"]

     Page 58: conclude with--Your humble servant.[original has
     extraneous quotation mark]

     Page 84: once entertained thoughts of attempting.[84:1]
     [Footnote anchor added by transcriber]

     Page 150: the enclosed to Colonel Barré[original has "Barrè"]

     Page 160: Some[original has "some"] pretend that the present

     Page 167: Madame Dupré de St.[period missing in original] Maur
     writes

     Page 178: by express order from the D.[178:1][Footnote anchor
     added by transcriber]

     Page 178: the Comte d'Artois, afterwards Charles[original has
     "Charle"] X.

     Page 192: any civilities you show the Colonel."[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     Page 197: point vous êtes chéri en France.'[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     Page 199: Literary classes of the university[original has
     "unversity"]

     Page 202: imprudent for me to lend them to him.[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     Page 207: Aristocracy--Madame Geoffrin[original has
     "Geofrin"]--Madame Du Page

     Page 213: Madame le Page du Boccage[original has "Bocage"]

     Page 223: "[quotation mark missing in original]From what has
     been already said of him

     Page 239: no new ground of attachment to England."[quotation
     mark missing in original]

     Page 243: every body, by which you desire . . . ."[quotation
     mark missing in original]

     Page 249: without withdrawing from a friendship[original has
     "frendship"]

     Page 275: sir, your most obedient servant."[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     Page 282: with whom he and his connexions[original has
     "connexious"] were not

     Pages 308-9: and came to Strasburg,[original has a period]
     with an intention

     Page 312: [original has extraneous quotation mark]Lisle
     Street, Leicester Fields

     Page 312: [original has extraneous quotation mark]DEAR
     DOCTOR,--I had asked M. Rousseau

     Page 325: [original has extraneous quotation mark]_June 16,
     1766_

     Page 369: de faciliter mon retour d'ici chez vous.[transcriber
     removed extraneous footnote anchor]

     Page 375: assured that Davenport would receive him.[original
     has a comma]

     Page 407: I am, dear Sir Gilbert, yours sincerely."[quotation
     mark missing in original]

     Page 421: HUME _to_ DR.[period missing in original] BLAIR.

     Page 426: otherwise it would be multiplied[original has
     "mutiplied"] without

     Page 429: "[quotation mark missing in original]_Minto, 11th
     July, 1768._

     Page 429: "[quotation mark missing in original]I am sorry, my
     dear sir

     Page 444: Mr.[original has "Hr."] Hume bore with perfect good
     nature

     Page 446: adding, 'Oh, what an idiot I had nearly proved
     myself to be, to leave such a document in the hands of a
     parcel of women!'"[both single quotes missing in original]

     Page 468: proprietor--it might[original has "it ght"] almost
     be said

     Page 477: for coercive methods with those obstinate[original
     has "ohstinate"] madmen

     Page 484: would have given me[original has "given m"] some
     surprise

     Page 485: I am, with regard,[original has extraneous quotation
     mark] &c.

     Page 506: may have spirits to humour this folly."[quotation
     mark missing in original]

     Page 507: the Doctor to make one of the number."[quotation
     mark missing in original]

     Page 512: about any thing that shall happen[original has
     "hoppen"]

     Page 523: Aiguillon[original has "Aguillon"]--Duchesse de, ii.
     175.

     Page 523, under "Alembert--D'": Hume's friendship with, 218,
     270, 323, 345, 348, 350, 354, 355, 377, 489[original has
     "589"].

     Page 524: Calton Hill--Hume's monument on, ii.[volume number
     missing in original] 518.

     Page 525: Conti[original has extraneous comma]--Prince of, ii.
     90, 221, 246, 297, 307.

     Page 525: Crébillon[original has "Crebillon"]--His
     "L'Ecumoire," i. 395; ii. 428.

     Page 525: under "Cullen&mdash;Dr.", Letters from, ii. 488,
     489, 515[original reads "489, 515; ii. 488"].

     Page 526: under "Eugene&mdash;Prince" His palace, i. 262;
     ii.["ii." missing in original] 501.

     Page 526: Fitzroy[original has "Fitz-roy"]--Charles, ii. 407.

     Page 526: Gower--Earl[original has "Lerd"], i. 305.

     Page 528: under "Hume--David", "Extracts from the Journal of
     his journey to Italy", Wurtzburg[original has "Wurtzburgh"],
     252

     Page 528: under "Hume--David", Letters from Earl
     Marischal[original has "Marishal"], 104.

     Page 530: Keith&mdash;General, ii.[original has "i."] 498.

     Page 530: Mesnieres[original has "Mesnières"]--President, ii.
     177.

     Page 531: Musset Pathay, ii. 322, 325[original has
     "322,-325"], 329, 330.

     Page 533: Vasseur--Thérèse[original has "Therèse"] le, ii.
     294, 299, 305, 307, 323, 352, 366, 370.

     [5:2] written by Daniel Macqueen, D.D.,[comma missing in
     original] the chief object

     [6:1] "[quotation mark missing in original]_By one who
     personally knew him._

     [141:1] I desire to be known by that appellation.'[quotation
     mark missing in original]

     [187:2] Sic[original has extraneous period] in MS.

     [216:1] Maître Janotus de ses chausses."[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     [221:2] He makes great account of his works[original has
     "vorks"]

     [226:1] (Ib. 130-131.)[closing parenthesis missing in
     original]

     [226:1] self-satisfied account of the distinctions
     conferred[original has "conerred"]

     [238:1] interest taken by the Comtesse de Boufflers[original
     has "Boufilers"]

     [239:1] methods often hostile, always indelicate[original has
     "indolicate"]

     [301:1] "[quotation mark missing in original]C'est un des
     malheurs de ma vie," says Rousseau

     [301:1] having been exhibited as a wild beast![original has
     extraneous quotation mark]

     [309:1] mark of interrogation is in the MS.[original has
     "M.S."]

     [329:1] expect to meet with a work of the nineteenth[original
     has "nineteeth"] century

     [329:1] one letter from M. Rougemont[original has "Rougement"]
     among the MSS.

     [329:1] "[quotation mark missing in original]L'opinion que
     vous avez de M. Rousseau

     [331:1] degree little short of madness."[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     [421:2] Dr.[period missing in original] Robertson

     [421:2] piddling still about my Lectures."[quotation mark
     missing in original]

     [452:2] _Gentleman's Magazine_, N.S. i. 142.[period missing in
     original]

     [472:1] aimed at the historian himself."[quotation mark
     missing in original]

Punctuation has been standardized in the Index.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Life and Correspondence of David Hume,
Volume II (of 2), by John Hill Burton

