CHAPTER XIV.

1765-1766. Æt. 54-55.

     Hume's Sentiments as to the Popularity of his works--A letter
     to the Scottish Clergy--Correspondence with Elliot continued--
     Sir Robert Liston--Mallet--Hume appointed Secretary of
     Legation--Chargé d'Affaires at Paris--Proposal to appoint him
     Secretary for Ireland--Reasons of the Failure of the Project--
     Lord Hertford--Resumption of Communication with Rousseau--
     Rousseau in Paris--Notices of his History and Character--
     Hume's solicitude for his welfare--Return to Britain--Disposal
     of Rousseau--Death of Jardine.


Allusion has occasionally been made to the difficulty of satisfying Hume
with any amount of literary success. His correspondence with Millar is a
long grumble about the prejudices he has had to encounter, and their
influence on the circulation of his works; while the bookseller, by the
most glowing pictures of their popularity, is only able to elicit a
partial gleam of content. The success of the History made worthy Mr.
Millar very anxious that it should be continued, and Hume for a time
acquiesced in the proposal. There is a letter from Millar on the 26th
October, enlarging on the great and rapid sales: about 2500 complete
sets of the quarto edition, and upwards of 3000 of the "History of the
Stuarts," had been sold, along with near 2000 of the 8vo. edition. In
continuation he says:

     The Essays, 8vo, were only published in May; what has been
     sold of them, of all the different editions, I cannot
     recollect. I was asked that question at St. James's the other
     day, when I said, I considered your works as classics, that I
     never numbered the editions, as I did in books we wished to
     puff. This I said before many clergy. I am not a little
     surprised to see one of your excellent understanding and merit
     so anxious about the sale, when the booksellers entirely
     concerned never complained, but on the contrary would be ready
     to give you to your utmost wish any encouragement to proceed
     in your History; and in truth, considering the number of
     enemies, some particular Essays have risen from _interest_,
     bigotry, folly, and knavery, not less than a one hundred
     thousand, it is rather astonishing your works have sold so
     much. While _men_ are _men_ this is to be expected, and you
     are the last man I should ever thought could paid the least
     attention to such things.[264:1]

On this Hume says:


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

"_Paris, 14th January, 1765._

"DEAR SIR,--I am much obliged to you for your last letter, which is very
friendly, and I shall not fail to pay the proper attention to it. The
truth is, as I intend to continue my History, I could not possibly have
taken a more proper step than to pay a visit to this country, and to
make acquaintance here; for as France and England are so intermixed in
all transactions since the Revolution, the history of one country must
throw light upon the other; and I am now in a situation to have access
to all the families which have papers relative to public affairs
transacted in the end of the last and beginning of this century. The
reason why I was anxious to know the sale of my History, was, that I
might judge whether I could expect equal access and information in
England. The rage and prejudice of parties frighten me; and above all,
this rage against the Scots, which is so dishonourable, and indeed so
infamous to the English nation. We hear that it increases every day
without the least appearance of provocation on our part. It has
frequently made me resolve never in my life to set foot on English
ground. I dread, if I should undertake a more modern history, the
impertinence and ill manners to which it would expose me; and I was
willing to know from you whether former prejudices had so far subsided
as to ensure me of a good reception."[265:1]


The following very characteristic paper, which appears to have been
enclosed to Dr. Blair, needs no introduction.


"DEAR DOCTOR,--I am in debt to all my friends in letters, and shall ever
be so. But what strikes me chiefly with remorse, are my great and
enormous debts to the clergy. By this my neglect of my Protestant
pastors, you will begin to suspect that I am turning Papist. But to
acquit myself at once, allow me to write you a common letter, and to
address a few words to every one of you.


DR. ROBERTSON.

"Your History has been very very well translated here, better than mine,
as I am told. Its success has given me occasion to promise your
acquaintance to several persons of distinction; the Duc de Nivernois,
the Marquis de Puysieuls, President Hénault, Baron D'Holbach, &c. I wish
you could speak French tolerably; you would find this place agreeable.
The Marechal Broglio spoke of you to me with esteem the other day.


DR. CARLYLE.

"I consulted with the Chevalier Macdonald, (who, by the bye, is here in
great vogue, not for his gallantries, like some others who shall be
nameless, but for his parts and knowledge;) I say I consulted with the
Chevalier about writing a common letter to Eglinton in favour of Wilson.
He told me it would be quite useless. Eglinton would give that kirk and
every thing else to the tenth cousin of the tenth cousin of a voter in
the shire of Ayr, rather than to the most intimate friend he has in the
world. Je baise les mains de Madame Carlyle avec tout l'empressement
possible.


DR. FERGUSON.

"Who, by the bye, I believe is not a doctor, though highly worthy from
his piety and learning to be one; then Mr. Ferguson, I think I have
nothing in particular to say to you, except that I am glad of the change
of your class, because you desired it, and because it fitted Russell.
For otherwise I should have liked better the other science. The news of
your great success in teaching has reached me in Paris, and has given me
pleasure; but I fear for your health from all these sudden and violent
applications. Ah, that you could learn something, dear Ferguson, of the
courteous, and caressing, and open manners of this country. I should not
then have been to learn for the first time, (as I did lately from
General Clark,) that you have not been altogether ungrateful to me, and
that you bear me some good will, and that you sometimes regret my
absence. Why should your method of living with me have borne so little
the appearance of those sentiments?


DR. BLAIR.

"Many people who read English have got your dissertation on Fingal,
which they admire extremely: a very good critic told me lately that it
was incomparably the best piece of criticism in the English language; a
self-evident truth to me. I met also with many admirers of Fingal; but
many also doubt of its authenticity. The Chevalier Macdonald is of use
to me in supporting the argument, from his personal knowledge of facts.
I cannot, however, but allow that the whole is strange, passing strange.

"You seem to wish that I should give you some general accounts of this
country. Shall I begin with the points in which it most differs from
England, viz., the general regard paid to genius and learning; the
universal and professed, though decent, gallantry to the fair sex; or
the almost universal contempt of all religion among both sexes, and
among all ranks of men? Or shall I mention the points in which the
French begin to concur with the English,--their love of liberty, for
instance? Or shall I give you some remarkable anecdotes of the great men
who, at present, adorn French literature? Perhaps you would wish me to
run over all these topics successively. Alas! there is not one that
would not fill several sheets of paper with curious circumstances, and I
am the most lazy writer of letters in the world: however, I must say
something on these heads; and, first, of the first:--

"There is a very remarkable difference between London and Paris; of
which I gave warning to Helvétius, when he went over lately to England,
and of which he told me, on his return, he was fully sensible. If a man
have the misfortune, in the former place, to attach himself to letters,
even if he succeeds, I know not with whom he is to live, nor how he is
to pass his time in a suitable society. The little company there that is
worth conversing with, are cold and unsociable; or are warmed only by
faction and cabal; so that a man who plays no part in public affairs
becomes altogether insignificant; and, if he is not rich, he becomes
even contemptible. Hence that nation are relapsing fast into the deepest
stupidity and ignorance. But, in Paris, a man that distinguishes himself
in letters, meets immediately with regard and attention. I found,
immediately on my landing here, the effects of this disposition. Lord
Beauchamp told me that I must go instantly with him to the Duchess de la
Valieres.[268:1] When I excused myself, on account of dress, he told me
that he had her orders, though I were in boots. I accordingly went with
him in a travelling frock, where I saw a very fine lady reclining on a
sofa, who made me speeches and compliments without bounds. The style of
panegyric was then taken up by a fat gentleman, whom I cast my eyes
upon, and observed him to wear a star of the richest diamonds;--it was
the Duke of Orleans. The Duchess told me she was engaged to sup in
President Hénault's, but that she would not part with me;--I must go
along with her. The good president received me with open arms; and told
me, among other fine things, that, a few days before, the Dauphin said
to him, &c. &c. &c. Such instances of attention I found very frequent,
and even daily. You ask me, if they were not very agreeable? I
answer--no; neither in expectation, possession, nor recollection. I left
that fireside, where you probably sit at present, with the greatest
reluctance. After I came to London, my uneasiness, as I heard more of
the prepossessions of the French nation in my favour, increased; and
nothing would have given me greater joy than any accident that would
have broke off my engagements. When I came to Paris, I repented heartily
of having entered, at my years, on such a scene; and, as I found that
Lord Hertford had entertained a good opinion and good will for Andrew
Stuart, I spoke to Wedderburn, in order to contrive expedients for
substituting him in my place. Lord Hertford thought, for some time, that
I would lose all patience and would run away from him. But the faculty
of speaking French returned gradually to me. I formed many acquaintance
and some friendships. All the learned seemed to conspire in showing me
instances of regard. The great ladies were not wanting to a man so
highly in fashion: and, having now contracted the circle of my
acquaintance, I live tolerably at my ease. I have even thoughts of
settling at Paris for the rest of my life; but I am sometimes frightened
with the idea that it is not a scene suited to the languor of old age. I
then think of retiring to a provincial town, or returning to Edinburgh,
or ---- but it is not worth while to form projects about the matter.
D'Alembert and I talk very seriously of taking a journey to Italy
together; and, if Lord Hertford leave France soon, this journey may
probably have place.

"I began this letter about two months ago; but so monstrously indolent
am I that I have not had time to finish it. I believe I had better send
it off as it is. Tell Robertson that La Chapelle, his translator, is
very much out of humour, and with reason, for never hearing from him. I
suppose some letter has miscarried. I am, &c.[270:1]

"_Paris, 6th April, 1765._"


Mr. Elliot had expressed to Hume a fear lest the longer residence of his
sons in France might "render them too much Frenchmen," while, speaking
of their tutor, Mr. Liston,[270:2] he says, "I own I am more
apprehensive of the consequences of a Paris life upon a young man of his
age than upon the boys, who are too young to enter into the full
dissipation of a country, where, not to be dissipated, is hardly to have
any existence." On this Hume writes:


HUME _to_ GILBERT ELLIOT _of Minto_.

"_Paris, 14th April, 1765._

"MY DEAR SIR,--I have always had the pleasure of conversing, from time
to time, with your sons, with Mr. Liston, and with the Abbé Choquart,
and never found the least reason to alter the good opinion, which I had
at first conceived of that academy, and of the conduct of every one
concerned: but the tenor of your last letter made me apprehend, that you
had discovered some ground of suspicion; and the more so as Mr. Larpent
told me, that you had spoke to his father, to desire him to request of
his son, that he should keep a watchful eye over the conduct of your
sons, and of Mr. Liston, and inform him of all particulars. This it is
impossible for Larpent to do, and, indeed, impossible for me to do,
otherwise than by conversing with the Abbé Choquart and with your sons
apart. I have done this very carefully, and find Mr. Liston's conduct
not only irreproachable, but laudable. The Abbé tells me, that for the
first three or four months, he scarce ever stirred out of the house, but
conversed with him alone, and with the other masters, till he came to
such perfection in the language, as to be taken for a Languedocian, or a
Frenchman of some province. Since that time the Abbé tells me, he has
made a few acquaintances among his countrymen, and goes out sometimes;
but he uses this liberty with great moderation; and on the whole, the
Abbé praises him (and with great reason as appears to me) for his
reserve, his modesty, his good sense, his sobriety, and his virtue. As
to your sons, he assures me, that though he has been employed nineteen
years in instructing youth, he never knew any more happily formed, and
they are the favourites of the whole school. The boys themselves seem to
be extremely happy in their present situation. Gilbert speaks French
almost like a Parisian, and Hugh follows fast after him. This is an
advantage they have acquired, without interrupting the course of their
other studies. The sociableness of their disposition has been called
forth, by living among companions in a public school; and as they praise
very much the civility and good humour of their fellow students, they
may themselves be the more confirmed in their habits. But, pray, come
hither yourself and judge of the matter.

"Two or three days ago, Lord Hertford wrote a very earnest letter to Mr.
Grenville in my favour. I know well that, if you find an opportunity,
you will second his application. The Saxon minister at the court, told
my lord, that Mr. Wroughton was soon to leave Dresden. My lord has
proposed that Bunbury be sent thither: if he refuses, it will be a proof
that he is resolved to undertake no public service, but scandalously to
live at home, and enjoy a large salary, which should belong to another.
Surely if Mr. Grenville bore me never so little good-will, as a supposed
Tory, he must allow this reasoning to be unanswerable.

"You have now with you Sir James Macdonald, who is too good for you, for
I am afraid you will not know to value him. He leaves an universal
regret behind him at Paris, among all who were acquainted with him, and
in none more than myself. I am, dear sir, your faithful humble
servant."[272:1]


In the following letter to Millar, we find Mallet and the Life of
Marlborough, that had been promised and paid for, again the subject of
speculation. Hume, though he had at one time been induced to believe
that part of the work was written, seems to have on the whole indulged
himself in scepticism, which, in this case at least, was well founded.
The letter is dated 4th May.


"MY DEAR SIR,--As soon as I heard of poor Mallet's death,[273:1] my
curiosity was excited to know, whether he had really proceeded any
length in his work, or whether, as many people imagine, and as is
somewhat my opinion, he had never wrote a line nor taken a note with
regard to it. I beg you would make some inquiry upon that subject. The
widow will be able to inform you. I should be glad to know whether any
lights could be got from that quarter for the continuance of my
work."[273:2]


HUME _to_ GILBERT ELLIOT _of Minto_.

"_Paris, 12th May, 1765._

"DEAR SIR,--I went, on Wednesday last, to be present at the examination
of the Abbé Choquart's school, with which I was very well satisfied;
especially for the part your young folks had in it. There were several
people present who came to hear their children and relations; and when
Gilbert was going through some demonstrations of geometry, with a very
good grace, I asked some who sat next me, whether they could perceive
him to be a foreigner? They all declared that they could not; and were
very much surprised when I told them that he had not yet been in the
country six months. Hugh retains still a little of a foreign accent, but
it is wearing out gradually. Mr. Liston speaks so well as to be able to
pass himself for a Gascon!

"There was also one circumstance of your young gentlemen's behaviour
with which I was much pleased; but whether you will take the praise of
it to yourself, or ascribe it partly to the imitation of French manners,
I cannot determine. I arrived a little before the commencement of the
examination; and, walking into the garden, I took shelter, from the
heat, under some trees. Your young gentlemen, as soon as they saw me,
ran and brought me a chair, which they placed carefully in the most
shady spot they could find. I doubt this attention would not be very
common among mere English schoolboys.

"Lord Hertford has received, from George Grenville, a final answer to a
very earnest, and very pressing letter he had wrote in my favour. Never
was any refusal so decisive, so cold, so positive, so determined; not
the least circumstance of apology, of good manners, or of regard: he
even gives it as a reason why I cannot be appointed, because Sir Charles
Bunbury has never yet desired to change his situation. In short, the
