CHAPTER XV.

1766-1767. Æt. 55-56.

     Rousseau at Wooton--Mr. Davenport--Negotiations as to
     Rousseau's pension--Origin and rise of his excitement against
     Hume--Proper method of viewing the dispute--Incidents
     illustrative of Rousseau's state of mind--His charges against
     Hume--Smith's opinion--Opinion of the French friends--Hume's
     conduct in the publication of the papers--Voltaire--Rousseau's
     flight and wanderings--Hume's subsequent conduct to him.


The place where Rousseau found a retreat, was the mansion of Wooton in
Derbyshire, surrounded by scenery, not unlike that which he had left
behind him in the Jura. It was a late addition to the extensive
ancestral estates of its proprietor, Mr. Davenport of Davenport. How
successful Hume had been, in finding a man of generous, warm, kindly
nature, to be the protector of his exiled friend, some letters from Mr.
Davenport, printed in the course of this narrative will attest.[319:1]

That Rousseau might be induced to live in his house, it was necessary
that Mr. Davenport should agree to accept of a sum of money in the shape
of board, and he good-humouredly conceded to Hume, that the amount
should be fixed at £30 a-year. "If it be possible," says Hume, "for a
man to live without occupation, without books, without society, and
without sleep, he will not quit this wild and solitary place; where all
the circumstances which he ever required, seem to concur for the
purpose of making him happy. But I dread the weakness and inquietude
natural to every man, and, above all, to a man of his character. I
should not be surprised that he had soon quitted this retreat."[320:1]
It appears that Mr. Davenport intended, if Rousseau became attached to
Wooton, to leave him a life lease of the house.[320:2]

Rousseau reached Wooton about the middle of March. On the 22d he wrote
to his _cher Patron_ Hume, informing him that his new place of residence
was in every way delightful; and that its charms were enhanced by the
reflection, that he owed all the happiness of his new position to his
dear friend.[320:3] Doubtless Hume, who must now have been a little
tired of the caprices which had so constantly baffled his friendly
exertions, felt this acknowledgment to be very gratifying. On the 29th
he received a letter, still friendly and grateful, but not quite so
warm, in which Rousseau, while he complains of the inconvenience of not
being understood by the servants, congratulates himself on his ignorance
of the English language, as saving him from the annoyance of
communication with his neighbours.[320:4]

While all seemed thus serene, dark thoughts were gathering in the
exile's mind: and if Hume, relieved of his troublesome duties, and
probably satisfied with his own conduct, had known the nicer tests of
the state of that variable and tempestuous temper, he might have
calculated, by some indications, that the storm was about to burst. The
letter of Horace Walpole had, for some time, been lying at the bottom of
Rousseau's mind, not forgotten, though hidden from view; and it seems to
have formed the nucleus round which his diseased imaginations gathered,
and put themselves into shape.[321:1] On the 7th of April, Rousseau
sent a letter to the editor of the _St. James's Chronicle_, in which it
had appeared, denouncing it as a forgery concocted in Paris, and saying
that it rent and afflicted his heart to say, that the impostor had his
accomplices in England. That it was not then, or for many weeks before,
that he first became acquainted with this _jeu d'esprit_, is clear from
a letter to Madame de Boufflers, of 18th January, in which he states,
that Hume had just informed him of its existence.[323:1] He appears to
have then attributed it to Voltaire. He afterwards imputed it, with
great confidence, to D'Alembert; and the ultimate discovery, that it was
not written by any literary rival and conspirator, but by an English
gentleman partial to such wicked amusements, appears to have been the
most galling circumstance connected with it.

It seems to have been believed, by some of those who knew Rousseau's
character, that his brooding over Walpole's letter would have been
insufficient to cause the commotions that followed, without the
malicious assistance of Mademoiselle Le Vasseur.[323:2] This woman, who
seems to have possessed all the vices to which her sex is liable,
without one of its virtues,--who had just enough of intellect to assist
the cunning of her depraved heart,--is said to have had an influence
over the philosopher of education, of which it is certainly difficult to
credit the extent. It will be seen, in the letters of Mr. Davenport,
that she had a dispute with his venerable housekeeper, concerning a
kettle and cinders! What was the exact nature of the dispute, is now, it
may be feared, buried in eternal oblivion; and we are left to conjecture
whither an influential cause in a literary quarrel, which interested all
Europe, may possibly have been a kettle and cinders. On the 12th of
May, Rousseau wrote to General Conway, acknowledging the king's goodness
in bestowing on him a pension; saying he thought himself armed against
all disasters, but that a new and unimagined one had arisen, which so
troubled his spirit, that he had not the necessary presence of mind to
decide on the conduct he ought to adopt as to the pension. He expressed,
at the same time, sorrow that he could not publicly acknowledge his
obligations. This appeared to Hume and Conway to be an intimation, that
the pension would not be accepted if it were to be secret.[324:1]

While his mind was thus blackening within, he preserved a cheerful
exterior; and Mr. Davenport wrote to Hume, on 14th May, from Wooton: "I
came on Friday, and had the satisfaction of finding M. Rousseau in
perfect health. He seems to like the place; amuses himself with walking
when the weather is fair; if raining, he plays upon the harpsichord and
writes: is very sociable, and an excellent companion."[325:1] There is
evidence, however, that he had entertained all his evil thoughts of Hume
at a much earlier period. His second letter to him, in the capacity of
_Cher Patron_, is dated, as we have mentioned, 29th March. On the 31st
he wrote to M. D'Ivernois, saying that he found Hume allied with his
most dangerous enemies, and if he were not a rascal, he himself would
owe him many reparations for unjust suspicions entertained of
him.[325:2]

Resolved to bring the matter of the pension to a conclusion, Hume wrote
to Rousseau thus:--


"_Lisle Street, Leicester Fields_, _June 16, 1766_.

"As I have not received any answer from you, sir, I conclude that you
persevere in the resolution of refusing all marks of his majesty's
goodness, as long as they must remain a secret. I have, therefore,
applied to General Conway to have this condition removed; and I have
been so fortunate as to obtain his promise, that he would speak to the
king for that purpose. It will only be requisite, said he, that we know
previously from M. Rousseau, whether he would accept of a pension
publicly granted him, that his majesty may not be exposed to a second
refusal. He gave me authority to write to you on the subject; and I beg
to hear your resolution as soon as possible. If you give your consent,
which I earnestly entreat you to do, I know that I can depend on the
good offices of the Duke of Richmond to second General Conway's
application; so that I have no doubt of success. I am, my dear sir,
yours, with great sincerity."[326:1]


This brought on the first gust of the storm. On 23d June, Rousseau wrote
his celebrated letter, beginning with the observation, that his silence,
interpreted by Hume's conscience, must have convinced the latter that
the whole of his horrible designs were discovered. In this letter
nothing is more remarkable than the contrast between the frantic
bitterness of the language, and the elaborate neatness of the
penmanship, which, if handwriting conveyed a notion of character, would
represent a calm, contented mind, gratifying itself by the exercise of
the petty art of caligraphy. A fac-simile of the concluding paragraph is
given, that the reader may have an opportunity of marking this singular
contrast.

[Illustration]

Hume, now thoroughly angry, wrote as follows:--


HUME _to_ ROUSSEAU.

"_June 26, 1766._

"As I am conscious of having ever acted towards you the most friendly
part, of having always given you the most tender and the most active
proofs of sincere affection, you may judge of my extreme surprise on
perusing your epistle. Such violent accusations, confined altogether to
generalities, it is as impossible to answer, as it is impossible to
comprehend them. But affairs cannot, must not, remain on that footing. I
shall charitably suppose that some infamous calumniator has belied me to
you. But, in that case, it is your duty, and, I am persuaded, it will be
your inclination, to give me an opportunity of detecting him, and of
justifying myself; which can only be done by your mentioning the
particulars of which I am accused. You say, that I myself know that I
have been false to you; but I say it loudly, and will say it to the
whole world, that I know the contrary; that I know my friendship towards
you has been unbounded and uninterrupted; and that though I have given
you instances of it, which have been universally remarked both in France
and England, the public as yet are acquainted only with the smallest
part of it. I demand, that you name to me the man who dares assert the
contrary; and, above all, I demand, that he shall mention any one
particular in which I have been wanting to you. You owe this to me; you
owe it to yourself; you owe it to truth, and honour, and justice, and to
every thing deemed sacred among men. As an innocent man--for I will not
say, as your friend; I will not say, as your benefactor; but I repeat
it, as an innocent man, I claim the privilege of proving my innocence,
and of refuting any scandalous falsehood which may have been invented
against me. Mr. Davenport, to whom I have sent a copy of your letter,
and who will read this before he delivers it, will, I am confident,
second my demand, and tell you that nothing can be more equitable.
Happily I have preserved the letter you wrote me after your arrival at
Wooton; and you there express, in the strongest terms, in terms indeed
too strong, your satisfaction in my poor endeavours to serve you. The
little epistolary intercourse, which afterwards passed between us, has
been all employed on my side to the most friendly purposes. Tell me,
then, what has since given you offence. Tell me, of what I am accused.
Tell me the man who accuses me. Even after you have fulfilled all these
conditions to my satisfaction, and to that of Mr. Davenport, you will
still have great difficulty to justify your employing such outrageous
terms towards a man, with whom you have been so intimately connected,
and who was entitled, on many accounts, to have been treated by you with
more regard and decency.

"Mr. Davenport knows the whole transaction about your pension, because I
thought it necessary that the person who had undertaken your settlement
should be fully acquainted with your circumstances; lest he should be
tempted to perform towards you concealed acts of generosity, which, if
they accidentally came to your knowledge, might give you some grounds of
offence. I am, sir," &c.[328:1]


In here exhibiting a few of the prominent features of the quarrel
between Hume and Rousseau, there is no intention of entering on a
defence of Hume, or a full examination of the conduct of the parties.
Viewing it as a picturesque incident in literary history, the reader
will probably feel an interest in such new light as may be thrown upon
it on the present occasion; but, it is presumed that few who have made
themselves acquainted with the material circumstances of the dispute, as
they have been already made known, will expect any thing to be said that
can alter their appreciation of the conduct of the parties. Where there
are personal disputes, there is no cause so hopelessly bad as to be
without partisans; and when no other motive comes into action, a feeling
of generosity towards one who seems to have forfeited the good opinion
of his kind, calls forth a few vindicators and supporters. It was
natural that Rousseau, a man of great genius, whose writings had
produced a prodigious influence on his age,--one who had shown, in many
instances, the outward manifestations of a kind unselfish disposition,
and who had discarded, with an air of magnanimous scorn, all the
grovelling ties that bind the human creature to the earth on which he
crawls,--should have champions and supporters in any dispute in which he
might be involved, be his conduct what it might. Thus he had a few
vindicators, chiefly of the female sex, while he lived: but gradually,
when feelings of personal sympathy had died away, the conduct of the
disputants ceased to be weighed against each other in the same scales.
People did not inquire which of them had acted more fairly and justly
than the other; but, putting Rousseau's conduct out of the question as a
criterion, they asked, whether that of Hume was kind and magnanimous
towards the unfortunate monomaniac?[329:1] Although this view is plainly
to be traced in the sentiments of those who have fugitively touched on
the dispute, it is to be gathered more from the general tone of their
remarks, than from any direct avowal of belief, that Rousseau was a
monomaniac.[331:1] There is a majesty in genius, that makes us reluctant
thus to ally it with the debasement of the human intellect. Yet, too
often, some portion of the most brilliant mind is thus eclipsed, though
the brightness of what is clear prevents our seeing easily the blackened
spot. In Rousseau's case, there has been, perhaps, a disinclination to
admit the "plea of insanity," on account of the wonderful practical
sagacity that accompanied his aberrations. Though apparently surveying
the world with a sick and careless eye, he occasionally penetrated into
the depths of the human heart, and marked its secrets, with an accuracy
that made the practised and systematic observer's survey seem but a
superficial glance. He had a mind at times eminently practical,[332:1]
and suited to estimate men's conduct and character: and thus appearing
before the world, there has been much hesitation to pronounce, that the
sincerity of insanity accompanied all his vile charges against a man
whose heart could not have been for one moment visited by the atrocities
of which he is accused.

It is clear, that whatever had been Hume's conduct in the affair,
Rousseau's rage was a storm predestined to burst upon him. Its elements
were in the mind of "the self-torturing sophist," not in the conduct of
any other person; and whoever was the object nearest to his thoughts at
the moment, as being most associated with the circumstances in which he
was placed, had to stand the shock. In this view, Hume's conduct is no
more to be tested by that of Rousseau, than the keeper's by that of his
patient. We are thus rid of the unpleasant employment of comparing
things which cannot bear comparison; and of the sickening task of
enumerating instances of kindness, attachment, persevering good offices,
and charitable interpretations of conduct on the one side, met by black
ingratitude, contempt, and deadly injury on the other.

If we look for that over-excited propensity which may have caused this
mental disease, it appears, beyond doubt, that it was vanity.[333:1]
All Rousseau's avowed misfortunes are the calamities of celebrity. At
one time he is the victim of princes and prime ministers; at another, of
an assembled clergy; at another, of half the learned men of Europe. That
he is neglected and forgotten is never among his ostensible complaints;
though there is good reason to believe that it was at the bottom of his
most conspicuous fits of fury. The English people, though they were at
first somewhat curious about the remarkable stranger, did not incommode
themselves about him, and obstinately abstained from following him into
the wilderness. In his long letter of charges, he cannot help bitterly
remarking the apathy of the public; but he states it as an accusation
against Hume,[333:2] whom he supposes to have said, like Flavius,

                               I'll about
     And drive away the vulgar from the streets:
     So do you too, where you perceive them thick.
     These growing feathers, pluck'd from Cæsar's wing,
     Will make him fly an ordinary pitch,
     Who else would soar above the view of men,
     And keep us all in servile fearfulness.

Had the solitudes of Wooton been peopled by multitudes anxious to catch
a passing glance of the "apostle of affliction," he would doubtless have
let loose his half-appeased discontent in some querulous letters about
the impossibility of his finding repose and solitude; but he would not
have courted such a conflict as he rushed into in the bitterness of his
solitude. Although his character stands without parallel in its own vast
proportions, it is not without abundance of exemplifications on a
smaller scale. There are few who have not, in their journey through
life, encountered one or more small Rousseaus, in men of ravenous and
insatiable vanity, who, unlike the ordinary good-natured vain men, are
perpetually rejecting the incense offered to their appetite, and
demanding some new form of worship. In these, as in the chimney-piece
models of celebrated statues, may we view the proportions of the great
self-tormenter's mind; and when it is found that the peculiarity is
generally accompanied with some observable amount of intellectual
acquirements, which place the individual a degree above those who
surround him, the resemblance is the more complete. Vanity being its
source, the shape assumed by his monomania was a dread of conspiracies
in all shapes; and he was as sincere a believer in their existence, as
any unfortunate inhabitant of bedlam has ever been in the creations of
his diseased mind.[334:1]

Hume had difficulty in extracting an answer to his letter of 26th June;
and probably it would not have been opened without the intervention of
Mr. Davenport. It was one of Rousseau's whims for some time not to
receive any letters; he said they were one of the methods by which his
enemies had persecuted him. On his first arrival he was to open none but
those which passed through the hands of his _Cher Patron_;[335:1] a
convenient arrangement, as it afterwards enabled him to accuse Hume of
tampering with his correspondence.

Two letters were received from Mr. Davenport, before Rousseau drew up
his charge.


MR. DAVENPORT _to_ HUME.

     _Davenport, June 30, 1766._

     DEAR SIR,--The receipt of your two last gave me much
     uneasiness, which was augmented by some letters received
     yesterday from Rousseau, along with yours, directed for me at
     Wooton. Surely there must have been some excessive great
     mistakes. It appears to me a heap of confusion, of which I can
     make neither head nor tail. His letter to you is perfectly
     astonishing: never any thing was so furious; so--I protest I
     don't know what to call it! I long to see him: he certainly
     will tell some reason or other that could induce him to write
     in that manner. Till I have seen him I can give no sort of
     answer to your queries, as he never spoke one syllable to me
     about any difference at all. I can't, possibly, before
     Saturday's post; as in this part of the country we have only
     three days in a week to send letters to town. You desired me
     to burn the duplicate after reading. That signifies nothing,
     for I can send you the other which I received yesterday from
     Wooton. Good God, he must be most excessively out of the way
     about this pension! In short, I have not patience to add one
     word more, till I hear what he can possibly have to say; and
     then I'll immediately acquaint you.

     I can't help being troubled at seeing your uneasiness, and
     will with great pleasure do all in my power to assist in
     freeing you from it; at least I'll do my best endeavours. I
     am, your most obedient humble servant,

                                               R. DAVENPORT.


     _6th July, 1766._

     DEAR SIR,--I went over to Wooton on Tuesday: had a long
     conference with Mr. Rousseau on the subject of your last
     letters; gave into his hands yours addressed to him, (which he
     had not read before:) showed him those I received from you;
     and in the most earnest manner insisted upon his giving you an
     open answer to all your questions, which I told him you had
     certainly a right to ask, and he could not have any pretence
     whatever to refuse. His spirits seemed vastly fluttered.
     However, he told me a long history of the whole affair. I
     said, that as my knowledge of the French language was very
     imperfect, I might easily misrepresent things, so begged him
     to write down the whole matter. Before he began his discourse,
     I could not help speaking a deal to him on the subject of the
     pension, and expressed my astonishment at his even ever having
     had the least thought of refusing the favours of the greatest
     king in the world. To my infinite surprise, he directly
     returned this answer, That he never had refused, or any thing
     like it; spoke with the greatest respect and veneration of his
     majesty, and with all sort of acknowledgments of gratitude to
     General Conway, &c. You may well imagine my surprise
     increased. He then began his story: but that I entirely leave
     to his pen, as he has faithfully promised to perform. I am
     really sorry for him; he's uneasy, frets perpetually, and
     looks terribly. 'Tis almost impossible to conceive the oddness
     of his extreme sensibility; so that I conclude, when he's
     guilty of an error, his nerves are more in fault than his
     heart. Things vex him to the utmost extent of vexation, which
     would not even move such a dull soul as mine is. In short, I
     perceive his disorder is jealousy: he thinks you are fond of
     some _savans hommes_, whom he unfortunately calls his enemies.
     It will give me the greatest satisfaction to hear that you
     have received a satisfactory answer, and that every thing is
     set right again.[337:1]

At last came the full outpouring of the long-treasured wrath, in a
