letter is so different from all letters usually wrote on such occasions,
and so different from those which Mr. Grenville was accustomed to write
to Lord Hertford, that my lord concludes there is some particular reason
of coldness, though he cannot conjecture what it is. But there are also,
in the letter, some expressions which mark extreme animosity against me.
Lord Hertford thinks, they will admit of another sense; and desires me
to write to you, in order to ask whether you have ever perceived such
sentiments in that gentleman. I know that I have affirmed, and, what is
worse, have proved, that Queen Elizabeth's maxims of government were
full as arbitrary as those of the Stuarts. I know that this proposition,
though now an undoubted and acknowledged truth, is contrary to the
principles of sound Whiggery. I know also, that Mr. Grenville, as a
sound Whig, bore me no good will on that account; but I did not really
think that his quarrel could have gone to such an extremity.[275:1] You
are sensible of the consequences which I apprehended, and which you did
not, last summer, think so dangerous as I imagined. I have now, for the
first time, explained to my lord the nature of my situation, which
somewhat surprised him, being so contrary to the assurances given him by
Mr. Grenville: but he told me that my interest was secure; for that he
thought himself obliged to make me reparation from his private fortune,
for any breach of faith which I might apprehend from the public. If this
point were fixed, it would probably stop the malignity of my enemies,
who will see that they can only do a small ill to Lord Hertford, instead
of a great one which they might intend against me. However, my lord
being desirous to know, from you, Mr. Grenville's sentiments, as far as
you can discover them, I am engaged to enter into this detail, which
otherwise I might have desired to avoid. I am, with great sincerity, my
dear sir, your most obedient servant."[275:2]


HUME _to_ MR. OSWALD.

"_Paris, 2d June, 1765._

"MY DEAR SIR,--There is a gentleman here, an Abbé, and a man of
letters, who is willing to enter into a commerce, or mutual exchange
with me, on every point of political and commercial knowledge.[276:1] He
has a great deal of very exact information, with regard to every thing
that concerns these subjects; has great freedom of thought and speech,
and has no connexions with any minister. As a sample, he has sent me the
enclosed questions, which I could not exactly answer, and is willing to
answer any of a like kind, which I could propose to him. I thought I
could not do better than transmit them to you; and as I know you will
also have questions to ask, I shall also transmit them to him, and you
may depend on his answer as just and solid. I have left the margin large
enough, to save you trouble. I know you are the most industrious and the
most indolent man of my acquaintance; the former in business, the latter
in ceremony. The present task I propose to you is of the former kind.

"You will hear that Sir Charles Bunbury is appointed Secretary for
Ireland. Lord Hertford thinks it absolutely certain, that I am to
succeed him; and I, too, think it very probable. My lord throws up
immediately, if this demand is not complied with; yet, notwithstanding
these favourable circumstances, I shall not be wonderfully surprised, in
case of a disappointment. I know that I can depend on your good offices
with Lord Halifax, and with every other person on whom you have
influence. Lord Hertford writes this post to that noble lord. The
present advantages I possess are so great, that it seems almost
extravagant to doubt of success; and yet, in general, it appears to me
almost incomprehensible how it should happen, that I, a philosopher, a
man of letters, nowise a courtier, of the most independent spirit, who
has given offence to every sect and every party, that I, I say, such as
I have described myself, should obtain an employment of dignity, and a
thousand a-year. This event is in general so strange, that I fancy, in
the issue, it will not have place. I am, dear sir, yours
sincerely."[277:1]


Hume had come to the conclusion, and certainly justly, that as he
performed the functions of secretary of the embassy in France, he ought
to possess the rank and emoluments of that office. He appears, however,
to have been reluctant to take any steps personally for the
accomplishment of this object; and his correspondence with his friends
shows that some urgency was necessary to overcome his scruples.[278:1]
Having, however, finally decided on his course, he appears to have
pursued it with great energy and perseverance, and to have moved every
influence through which he was likely to accomplish his end.

On 24th June, 1765, Hume writes to his brother that he "has now been
appointed secretary to the embassy, with the usual salary of £1200
a-year." He says, "The English ministry had intended not to appoint
another secretary of the embassy, who they knew could not be received,
but to suppress that office altogether from views of frugality." For the
continuance of the office, and its bestowal on himself, he seems to have
relied very much on the intervention of a foreign lady, his friend
Madame de Boufflers; and, strange as it may seem to find such an
influence effective in the councils of a British cabinet, he appears to
have been convinced that, had the matter not been previously settled in
his favour, her application would have brought it to a conclusion.
Continuing his letter to his brother, he says, "Nobody can do more
justice to the merit of my friend the Comtesse de Boufflers, than the
Duke and Duchess of Bedford, who have indeed been essentially obliged to
her in their family concerns. She wrote the duke about a fortnight ago,
that the time was now come, and the only time that probably would ever
come, of his showing his friendship to her, by assisting me in my
applications; and she would rest on this sole circumstance all his
professions of regard to her. He received her letter while in the
country, but he wrote her back, that he would immediately hasten to
town, and if he had any credit with the king or ministry, her
solicitations should be complied with. He is not a man that ever makes
vain professions, nor does he ever take a refusal. He would find the
matter finished when he came to London; but it is a sensible pleasure to
me, that I owe so great an obligation, to a person whom I love and
esteem so sincerely as that lady."[279:1]

In a letter to the Marquise de Barbantane, he gives the same account of
the matter.


"Have you heard of the share which Madame de Boufflers had in this
event? As soon as she heard that there was a vacancy, by means of the
promotion of Sir Charles Bunbury, my predecessor, she wrote to the Duke
of Bedford, entreating him, in the most earnest terms, to befriend me in
my pretensions, and setting all my claims in the most favourable light.
The duke answered her, that he would soon be in London; and if he had
any credit or authority with the ministry, her friend should not fail of
success. The duke is not a man that ever promises in vain, nor is he a
man that is ever to be refused; so that, from this interest alone, I was
sure to have prevailed. But happily the same post brought intelligence
to the ambassador, that the affair was already finished. But do you not
think, that I owe the same obligations to our friend? or will you tell
me, that I seek only a pretence for indulging my inclinations?"[280:1]


The statement is repeated in the following letter to Elliot.


HUME _to_ GILBERT ELLIOT _of Minto_.

"_Paris, 3d June, 1765._

"MY DEAR SIR,--Not finding your young gentlemen in church last Sunday, I
went to see them, when I found them both confined to the house with a
light fever, which has since turned out the measles in form, but with
all the most favourable symptoms. I find Mr. Liston very attentive and
very careful; the young gentlemen are attended by the physician of the
academy. I use the freedom to tell Lady Hertford the way in which they
are governed; she tells me she would not act otherwise in the case of
her own children; so that Mrs. Murray,[281:1] if you please to
communicate to her this intelligence, can have no reason for anxiety.
Gilbert has a greater quantity than Hugh, and greater strength to bear
them.

"You know, I suppose, that I am appointed secretary to the embassy,
though I have not yet received my credential letter: the present
confusions in the court may perhaps retard them for some time; but Mr.
Grenville has informed the ambassador that the matter is concluded, and
the king has given his consent; so that in spite of Atheism and Deism,
of Whiggism and Toryism, of Scoticism and Philosophy, I am now possessed
of an office of credit, and of £1200 a-year: without dedication or
application, from the favour alone of a person, whom I can perfectly
love and respect. I find it has cost my lord a very hard pull; and when
I consider the matter alone, without viewing the steps that led to it, I
am sometimes inclined to be surprised how it has happened.

"Shall I tell you another circumstance that is not disagreeable to me; a
certain lady, who is at present in London, hearing there was some delay,
wrote in the most earnest terms to the Duke of Bedford, desiring his
interest in my favour; he answered her he would soon be in London, and
if he then possessed any credit or authority, she might depend upon the
success of her friend. You know that he is not a man that makes vain
professions, nor is he a man easy to be refused. If you guess the lady,
you will conclude that it will not cost me a great effort to be
grateful. The share you have also been pleased to take is not forgot,
and strengthens our ancient friendship. I am, my dear sir, yours
sincerely."[282:1]


It is probable that this appointment was impeded by more difficulties
than Hume himself could see, or his friends make him aware of. His being
a Scotsman of itself made it then unpopular, and in his case there were
other reasons likely to weigh with statesmen who looked in the direction
of popularity. We are told that "the printers of the _London Evening
Post and Gazetteer_, were called before the House of Lords, on a
complaint made by the Earl of Marchmont, for printing a letter (written
by Wilkes,) reflecting on the Earl of Hertford, ambassador at Paris, for
employing David Hume the historian as his secretary, and representing
the embassy as totally of Scotch complexion."[282:2]

No sooner had this appointment been completed, than Lord Hertford was
recalled, and Hume was left for a time chargé d'affaires at Paris.

The ambassador had been appointed by Lord Bute, but had chiefly acted
during the administration of Grenville, with whom he and his connexions
were not, as Hume's correspondence has shown, on very friendly terms. In
July, 1765, the Rockingham administration was formed, in connexion with
which Lord Hertford became lord-lieutenant of Ireland, and his brother
secretary of state with the leadership of the House of Commons. Hume had
thus to perform the functions of British representative until the Duke
of Richmond arrived as ambassador in October. Of the manner in which he
performed the duties of his office, Lord Brougham says:

     By Lord Aberdeen's kindness I have been allowed to examine the
     correspondence of the embassy with Marshal Conway during these
     four months; and it is highly creditable to the philosopher's
     business-like talents, and his capacity for affairs. The
     negotiations of which he had the sole conduct related to the
     important and interesting discussions of Canada; matters
     arising out of the cession by the peace of Paris; and to the
     demolition of the works at Dunkirk, also stipulated by that
     treaty. His despatches, some of them of great length, most of
     them in his own hand, are clearly and ably written. The course
     which he describes himself as pursuing with the very slippery
     and evasive ministers against whom he had to contend,
     particularly the Duc de Praslin, appears to have been marked
     by firmness and temper, as well as by quickness and sagacity.
     His memorials, of which two or three are given, show a perfect
     familiarity with diplomatic modes and habits, and they are
     both well written and ably reasoned. His information must have
     been correct; for he obtained a knowledge of the secret
     proceedings of the assembly of clergy, which, though convoked
     for the purpose of obtaining the usual _don gratuit_, chose to
     enter upon the discussion of all the clerical grievances;
     while they kept their deliberations carefully secret, and were
     opposed by the parliament of Paris as soon as their
     proceedings became known. Mr. Hume obtained a very early,
     though somewhat exaggerated account of these things, through
     two of the foreign ambassadors; and when he communicated it to
     the Bishop of Senlis, he was treated with contempt, as if
     nothing could be so wild, and as if some enemy of the church
     had invented the fable to discredit her. Marshal Conway
     appears by his despatches (which are also excellent) to have
     rested his hopes of these differences passing off, on the
     prevailing irreligious spirit in France, where "the Dauphin
     alone," he says, "has any care for such matters; and he has of
     late taken a military turn." In a short time the whole ferment
     was allayed by the prudent and able conduct of Brienne,
     Archbishop of Toulouse; the _don gratuit_ was voted; and the
     assembly was prorogued to the following May. Mr. Hume praises
     Brienne very highly on this, as indeed he did on all
     occasions.[284:1]

Hume's familiar letters make us fully acquainted with the feelings he
experienced at this juncture.


HUME _to his Brother_.

"_Compiègne, 14th July, 1765._

"DEAR BROTHER,--There arrived yesterday a messenger from England with my
commission under the great seal. My appointments, as I told you, are
£1200 a-year. I have also £300 for my equipage, and three hundred ounces
of plate for my table. This is the fair side of the picture. The
misfortune is, that General Conway, the ambassador's brother, is
secretary of state. The Duke of Grafton, his nephew,[284:2] is the other
secretary. You still say, better and better. Not at all. My Lord
Hertford goes for England in a few days, and leaves the burden of the
embassy upon me. Still you say, where is the harm of all this? You are
come to years of discretion, and can govern yourself. Wait a little,
dear brother. Lord Hertford goes lord-lieutenant to Ireland, and there
is an end of the ambassador, and probably of the secretary.

"It is true I can count upon Lord Hertford's friendship as much as any
man's in the world. One day last spring, he came into my room, and told
me that he heard of many people who endeavoured by their caresses to
persuade me that I ought to remain in France. But he hoped that I would
embrace no scheme of life which would ever separate him and me. He now
loved me as much as ever he esteemed me, and wished we might pass our
lives together. He had resolved several times to have opened his breast
so far to me; but being a man of few words and no professions, he had
still delayed it, and he now felt himself much relieved by this
declaration of his desires and intentions. I know that Lord Hertford
will not go to Ireland unless he be allowed to name the secretary for
that kingdom. Perhaps he may think his son, Lord Beauchamp, too young
for that office; in which case I may very probably expect it, and it is
an office of between £3000 and £4000 a-year, and stands next in dignity
to all the great offices of the state. In all cases the lord-lieutenant
for Ireland has many and great things to give, of which I should
certainly expect one.

"Still you say, this is all better and better: Not at all! You know the
fluctuation of English politics. Perhaps, before you receive this, the
whole present system is overturned. Lord Hertford, who, while he
remained here, was a man of no party, is involved with his friends. All
is turned topsy-turvy: and before next winter, perhaps, I am at your
fireside without office or employment! Here, indeed, I allow you to say,
so much the better; for I never had much ambition, I mean for power and
dignities, and I am heartily cured of the little I had. I believe a
fireside and a book the best things in the world for my age and
disposition. I write in some hurry, therefore can only add, that if the
old ministry return, I can look upon the Duke of Bedford alone as my
friend, by means of the lady I mentioned to you. If the ministry stand,
I have, by Lord Hertford's means, many and great friends; and the king,
I have been well assured, honours me particularly with his good opinion.
In all cases it is a great point for me to have obtained this commission
to a place of so much trust and credit and silences all objections
against me, whether they arose from religion or politics. Direct your
letters to me as _Secrétaire d'Ambassade d'Angleterre à Paris_. I hate
any thing that disturbs so agreeable a settlement as I had obtained
before these great events. My compliments to Mrs. Home and to Katy. Keep
this letter to yourself, but write part of it to our sister."[286:1]


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

"_Compiègne, 20th July, 1765._

"Tell Dr. Robertson that the Dauphin asked Mr. Hume several questions
the other day, about him and his History. That prince seems a reasonable
man, but would be the better of being _roasted_ sometimes in _The
Poker_.[286:2] If they will elect him a member, Mr. Hume will propose it
to him.[286:3] What does the doctor say at present to these great
folding doors opened to all the chimeras of ambition? Alas! they may be
thrown open much wider, if possible; none of these chimeras will enter.
Philosophy, with her severe brows, guards the passage; while Indolence,
in affright, is ready to throw herself out at the window. Mr. Hume
recommends himself to Ferguson and Jardine, and John Adams and Mrs.
Adams, and to all the Poker, and desires the prayers of the faithful
for him on this occasion."


Hume had now actually before him the prospect of filling the high office
of secretary to the lord-lieutenant of Ireland. Writing to his brother
on 4th August, 1765, he again states that Lord Hertford, before his
departure, had assured him that he would not accept of the
lord-lieutenancy, unless he were allowed the naming of the secretary;
and now adds, that the office is destined for himself, in conjunction
with Lord Hertford's son, Lord Beauchamp; and that his own salary is to
be about £2000 a-year. He continues:

"Thus you see a splendid fortune awaits me: Yet you cannot imagine with
what regret I leave this country. It is like stepping out of light into
darkness, to exchange Paris for Dublin. The most agreeable circumstance
is the friendship and confidence of the lord-lieutenant; and if the
present credit of that family continue, as it is likely to do, I shall
probably have it in my power to do service to my friends--particularly
to your young folks; for as to you and myself, it is long since we
thought our fortunes entirely made."[287:1]

He was not, however, destined to fill this office; and neither he
himself, nor his best friends, appear to have regretted the
circumstance; the fact being that he was but slenderly endowed with
either of the qualifications then indispensable to an Irish
statesman,--a capacity for hard drinking, and adroitness in bold
political intrigues. The exercise of an official function, among a
people where one sect of Christians enjoyed all offices, emoluments, and
honours, while another, following the national religion, were scarcely
allowed to live, must have shocked his sense of political justice;
while it may be questioned if he was a sufficiently bold politician to
have attempted any reform of this abuse. The project of his appointment,
however, was brought so near its consummation, as to elicit certain
applications for ecclesiastical preferment, in order that the reputation
he had achieved, in other places, for influence in this department of
patronage, might not be unacknowledged in Ireland.[288:1]

In his letters to his friends, at this time, he describes these
vicissitudes of fortune; and indulges in a feeling to which he was very
prone,--an uncertainty as to his future projects, and an indolent
disinclination to make up his mind how to act.


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

"_Paris, 23d August, 1765._

"All the literati of my friends, who understand English, think your
Dissertation one of the finest performances in our language. A
gentleman, of my acquaintance, has translated it for his own
satisfaction. He could not publish it without publishing "Ossian" at the
same time. My scepticism extends no farther, nor ever did, than with
regard to the extreme antiquity of those poems; and it is no more than
scepticism.

"You may, perhaps, have heard of the rapid whirl of my fortune
backwards and forwards of late. I had scarce received my commission, as
secretary to the embassy, when I knew that that situation, the most
agreeable in which I could have been placed, was not to last. Lord
Hertford must go to Ireland, and resolved to carry me over as secretary
to that kingdom, in conjoint commission with his son. On his arrival at
London, he found the cry so loud against the promotion of Scotsmen, that
he was obliged to give it up; which he did the more easily, as he knew
my great reluctance to that office and scene of life. He has now got a
pension of £400 a-year settled on me; and as he has prepared an
apartment for me in the castle of Dublin, I shall hurry thither as soon
as I leave France, and shall be afterwards free for the rest of my
life.[289:1] I have not determined where I shall pass my latter days.
This place should be the most agreeable to me; but a man who came late
thither, and who is not supported by family connexions, may, perhaps,
find himself misplaced, even in this centre of letters and good society.
I have a reluctance to think of living among the factious barbarians of
London; who will hate me because I am a Scotsman, and am not a Whig, and
despise me because I am a man of letters. My attachment to Edinburgh
revives as I turn my face towards it."[290:1]


HUME _to his Brother_.

"DEAR BROTHER,--I am now to inform you of another pretty rapid change in
my fortune. Lord Hertford, on his arrival in London, found great
difficulty of executing his intentions in my favour. The cry is loud
against the Scots; and the present ministry are unwilling to support any
of our countrymen, lest they bear the reproach of being connected with
Lord Bute. For this reason, Lord Hertford departed from his project;
which he did the more readily, as he knew I had a great reluctance to
the office of secretary for Ireland; which requires a talent for
speaking in public, to which I was never accustomed. I must also have
kept a kind of open house, and have drunk and caroused with the Irish, a
course of living to which I am as little accustomed. The Duke of
Bedford, to whom I mentioned these objections, thought them very solid.
I think myself, at present, much better provided for, by a pension of
£400 a-year for life, which Lord Hertford has procured me. He also
writes me, that an apartment is fitting up for me in the castle of
Dublin. I shall go thither as soon as I can leave France; which will not
be till the end of October or beginning of November, on the arrival of
the Duke of Richmond. Meanwhile, I am _Chargé des affaires d'Angleterre
à la cour de France_, which is the title under which you must write to
me, if you favour me with a letter.

"Lord Hertford had another additional project for my advantage, in
Ireland. The keeper of the black rod is a very genteel office, which
yields about £900 during the session. He proposed, as I cannot be
present on the opening of the parliament, to give that office to
another, who would officiate, and would be content with £300. But I
declined this offer; not as unjust, but as savouring of greediness and
rapacity.[291:1]

"Please to write all these particulars to Katty, except the last, and
seal and send her the enclosed. I am charmed with the accounts I hear of
Josey, from all hands. Yours sincerely.

"There was a kind of fray in London, as I am told, upon Lord Hertford's
declaring his intentions in my favour. The Princess Amelia said, that
she thought the affair might be easily accommodated: why may not Lord
Hertford give a bishopric to Mr. Hume?"[292:1]


Writing an account of these transactions to Smith, in nearly the same
words, on 5th November, he commences his letter with the observation, "I
have been whirled about lately in a strange manner; but, besides that
none of the revolutions have ever threatened me much, or been able to
give me a moment's anxiety, all has ended very happily, and to my mind."
He concludes thus:--

"As a new vexation to temper my good fortune, I am much in perplexity
about fixing the place of my future abode for life. Paris is the most
agreeable town in Europe, and suits me best; but it is a foreign
country. London is the capital of my own country; but it never pleased
me much. Letters are there held in no honour: Scotsmen are hated:
superstition and ignorance gain ground daily. Edinburgh has many
objections, and many allurements. My present mind, this forenoon, the
5th of September, is to return to France. I am much pressed here to
accept of offers, which would contribute to my agreeable living; but
might encroach on my independence, by making me enter into engagements
with princes, and great lords, and ladies. Pray give me your judgment.

"I regret much I shall not see you. I have been looking for you every
day these three months. Your satisfaction in your pupil gives me equal
satisfaction."[293:1]


He writes to Blair, on 28th December:--


"DEAR DOCTOR,--After great wavering and uncertainty, between Paris and
Edinburgh, (for I never allowed London to enter into the question,) I
have, at last, fixed my resolution to remain some time longer in Paris.
Perhaps I may take a trip to Rome next autumn. Had I returned to
Edinburgh, I was sensible that I shut myself up, in a manner, for life;
and I imagine that I am, even yet, too young and healthy, and in too
good spirits, to come to that determination. If you please, therefore,
you may continue in my house, which I am glad pleases you. If you leave
it, as you thought you would, Nairne may have it for £35, as we
agreed."[293:2]


We have now to return to Jean Jacques Rousseau, whom we left, in 1762,
seeking protection from the Earl Marischal at Neufchâtel. He finally
took up his abode at Motiers Travers, a village on one of the passes of
the Jura; where, now that some offensive associations connected with his
character and writings have died away, the fame of his genius still
lives, and has been no unprofitable commodity to the inhabitants. Here
he had a wild rocky district to wander over, where he was not liable to
encounter those dangerous impediments which beset the sojourners in the
Alps. He had, at the same time, what was more to his purpose, a zealous
priesthood and an intolerant populace surrounding him. That the outward
manifestations of a morality, odious to his new neighbours, might not be
wanting, he sent for his celebrated mistress, Thérèse la Vasseur, with
whom he continued openly to live; and that the populace, thus
exasperated, might be under no mistake as to the proper person to throw
stones at, he adopted the garb of an Armenian.

It is much disputed whether he was really subjected to the attacks of
which he afterwards complained; and it is said, that whatever tangible
evidence of them was perceptible to other eyes than his own, was the
doing of Mademoiselle la Vasseur, to drive him from a neighbourhood
which she disliked. It will be found, however, that his story, as
reported by Hume in the letters which follow, substantially coincides
with the narrative in the "Confessions." This is in some measure a
testimony to the sincerity of Rousseau's own conviction, that those
hostile efforts were made against him; and indeed it would be useless to
question the sincerity of his belief in any thing indicative of the
malevolence of his fellow-beings. Having fled from Motiers, he lived for
some time on the island of St. Pierre, in the lake of Bienne; and,
driven from that asylum, he seems to have hesitated between England and
Prussia as a place of refuge. He left the State of Bienne at the date at
which his "Confessions" terminate, 29th October, 1765. He proceeded to
Strasburg, where, by wearing his Armenian dress in the country where he
had been proscribed, he certainly excited a considerable sensation. He
appears to have held a sort of levée during his residence in that city,
where his daily and hourly proceedings have been recorded with the
precision of a court journal.[295:1]

It was here that he received Hume's letter, agreeing to aid him in
finding an asylum in England. The negotiation between them had been
brought to a conclusion by Madame de Verdelin, who had spent some time
with Rousseau at Motiers, and persuaded him to take advantage of the
impression which the Earl Marischal and Madame de Boufflers had made in
his favour.[295:2]

Hume's heart was farther softened by a letter, full of miseries, which
Rousseau had written to M. Clairaut. "I must own," says Hume, "I felt on
this occasion an emotion of pity, mixed with indignation, to think a man
of letters of such eminent merit, should be reduced, in spite of the
simplicity of his manner of living, to such extreme indigence; and that
this unhappy state should be rendered more intolerable by sickness, by
the approach of old age, and the implacable rage of persecution." He was
inclined even to sympathize with Rousseau's petulant rejection of
proferred kindness; conceiving "that a noble pride, even though carried
to excess, merited some indulgence in a man of genius, who, borne up by
a sense of his own superiority, and a love of independence, should have
braved the storms of fortune and the insults of mankind."[296:1]

Leaving Strasburg, the wanderer proceeded to Paris, where he went about
in his Armenian dress; was mobbed and stared at to his heart's content,
wrote to his friends, complaining with bitter eloquence that people
would allow him neither solitude nor rest, shut himself up, and went
forth again to the world. Before he could have ventured to appear so
publicly, in the capital where a writ had been issued for the seizure of
his person, he must have received very strong assurances of protection.
The arrêt of the Parliament, however, was not recalled; and his friends
must have felt somewhat provoked by his pertinacious courtship of
popular notice, accompanied by the pretence of a desire to avoid it, by
adopting only what was simple and natural--by wearing, for instance, so
simple a dress as the fur cap, caaftan, and vest of an Armenian, in the
streets of Paris! Hume, who seems really to have had faith in his
modesty, must still have felt it awkward that the representative of
Britain should be closely allied with a person so conducting himself;
and was anxious, whenever the state of public business might permit him,
to see his charge safely across the Channel. It was thought, in the
meantime, expedient to find for Rousseau an asylum within the
privileged area of the Temple, of which his friend, the Prince of
Conti, was Grand Prior. We must now allow Hume himself to describe his
new companion, and their intercourse.

In continuation of the letter to Blair, of 20th December, above cited,
he says:


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

"I must, however, be in London very soon, in order to give an account of
my commission; to thank the King for his goodness to me, and to settle
the celebrated Rousseau, who has rejected invitations from half of the
kings and princes of Europe, in order to put himself under my
protection. He has been at Paris about twelve days; and lives in an
apartment prepared for him by the Prince of Conti, which, he says, gives
him uneasiness, by reason of its magnificence. As he was outlawed by the
Parliament, it behoved him to have the King's passport, which was at
first offered him under a feigned name; but his friends refused it,
because they knew that he would not submit even to that falsehood. You
have heard that he was banished from Neufchâtel by preachers, who
excited the mob to stone him.

"He told me that a trap was laid for him, with as much art as ever was
employed against a fox or a polecat. In the night-time a great enormous
stone was suspended above the door, in such a manner, that on opening it
in the morning, the stone must have fallen and have crushed him to
death.[297:1] A man passing by early, perceived it, and called in to him
at the window to be on his guard. He also told me, that last spring,
when he went about the mountains amusing himself with botany, he came to
a village at some distance from his own: a woman met him, who, surprised
at his Armenian dress--for he wears, and is resolved to wear that habit
during life--asked him what he was, and what was his name. On hearing it
she exclaimed, 'Are you that impious rascal, Rousseau? Had I known it, I
should have waited for you at the end of the wood, with a pistol, in
order to blow out your brains.' He added, that all the women in
Switzerland were in the same disposition, because the preachers had told
them that he had wrote books to prove that women had no souls. He then
turned to Madame de Boufflers, who was present, and said,--Is it not
strange that I, who have wrote so much to decry the morals and conduct
of the Parisian ladies, should yet be beloved by them; while the Swiss
women, whom I have so much extolled, would willingly cut my throat? 'We
are fond of you,' replied she, 'because we know that, however you might
rail, you are at bottom fond _of us_ to distraction. But the Swiss women
hate you, because they are conscious that they have not merit to deserve
your attention.'

"On leaving Neufchâtel, he took shelter in a little island about half a
league in circumference, in the midst of a lake near Berne. There lived
in it only one German peasant, with his wife and sister. The council of
Berne, frightened for his neighbourhood, on account of his democratic
more than his religious principles, ordered him immediately to withdraw
from their state. He wrote the letter of which I send you a copy, as it
is very curious. The council, in answer, reiterated their orders for him
to begone. He then applied to me. I have made an agreement with a
French gardener in Fulham for boarding him. We set out together in a few
days.

"It is impossible to express or imagine the enthusiasm of this nation in
his favour. As I am supposed to have him in my custody, all the world,
especially the great ladies, tease me to be introduced to him. I have
had rouleaus thrust into my hand, with earnest applications that I would
prevail on him to accept of them. I am persuaded that, were I to open
here a subscription with his consent, I should receive £50,000 in a
fortnight. The second day after his arrival, he slipped out early in the
morning to take a walk in the Luxembourg gardens. The thing was known
soon after. I am strongly solicited to prevail on him to take another
walk, and then to give warning to my friends. Were the public to be
informed, he could not fail to have many thousand spectators. People may
talk of ancient Greece as they please; but no nation was ever so fond of
genius as this, and no person ever so much engaged their attention as
Rousseau. Voltaire and every body else are quite eclipsed by him.

"I am sensible that my connexions with him add to my importance at
present. Even his maid La Vasseur, who is very homely and very awkward,
is more talked of than the Princess of Morocco or the Countess of
Egmont, on account of her fidelity and attachment towards him. His very
dog, who is no better than a collie, has a name and reputation in the
world. As to my intercourse with him, I find him mild, and gentle, and
modest, and good humoured; and he has more the behaviour of a man of the
world, than any of the learned here, except M. de Buffon; who, in his
figure, and air, and deportment, answers your idea of a marechal of
France, rather than that of a philosopher. M. Rousseau is of a small
stature, and would rather be ugly, had he not the finest physiognomy in
the world: I mean the most expressive countenance. His modesty seems not
to be good manners, but ignorance of his own excellence. As he writes,
and speaks, and acts, from the impulse of genius, more than from the use
of his ordinary faculties, it is very likely that he forgets its force
whenever it is laid asleep. I am well assured that at times he believes
he has inspirations from an immediate communication with the Divinity.
He falls sometimes into ecstasies, which retain him in the same posture
for hours together. Does not this example solve the difficulty of
Socrates' genius, and of his ecstasies? I think Rousseau in many things
very much resembles Socrates. The philosopher of Geneva seems only to
have more genius than he of Athens, who never wrote any thing, and less
sociableness and temper. Both of them were of very amorous complexions;
but a comparison in this particular, turns out much to the advantage of
my friend. I call him such, for I hear, from all hands, that his
judgment and affections are as strongly biassed in my favour as mine are
in his. I shall much regret leaving him in England; but even if a pardon
could be procured for him here, he is resolved, as he tells me, never to
return; because he never will again be in the power of any man. I wish
he may live unmolested in England. I dread the bigotry and barbarism
which prevail there.

"When he came to Paris, he seemed resolved to stay till the 6th or 7th
of next month. But at present the concourse about him gives him so much
uneasiness that he expresses the utmost impatience to be gone. Many
people here will have it that this solitary humour is all affectation,
in order to be more sought after; but I am sure that it is natural and
unsurmountable:[301:1] I know that two very agreeable ladies breaking in
upon him, discomposed him so much that he was not able to eat his dinner
afterwards. He is short-sighted; and I have often observed, that while
he was conversing with me in the utmost good-humour, (for he is
naturally gay,) if he heard the door open, the greatest agony appeared
on his countenance, from the apprehension of a visit; and his distress
did not leave him, unless the person was a particular friend. His
Armenian dress is not affectation. He has had an infirmity from his
infancy, which makes breeches inconvenient for him; and he told me, that
when he was chased into the mountains of Switzerland, he took up this
new dress, as it seemed indifferent what habit he there wore. I could
fill a volume with curious anecdotes regarding him, as I live in the
same society which he frequented while in Paris. But I must not exhaust
your patience. My kind compliments to Ferguson, Robertson, and all the
brethren. I am," &c.

"_Paris, 28th Dec. 1765._"

"P.S.--Be not surprised that I am going to say in my postscript, the
direct contrary to what I said in my letter. There are four days of
interval between my writing the one and the other; and on this subject
of my future abode, I have not these four months risen and gone to bed
in the same mind. When I meet with proofs of regard and affection from
those I love and esteem here, I swear to myself that I shall never quit
this place. An hour after, it occurs to me that I have then for ever
renounced my native country and all my ancient friends, and I start with
affright. I never yet left any place but with regret: judge what it is
natural for me to feel on leaving Paris, and so many amiable people with
whom I am intimately connected, while it is in my power to pass my life
in the midst of them. Were I not indispensably obliged to go to London,
I know that it would be impossible for me to leave this place. But it is
very probable that being once there, and fairly escaped from the cave of
Circe, I may reconcile myself again to the abode of Ithaca. I left
Edinburgh with great reluctance. To return to it, after having tripled
my revenue in less than three years, can be no hardship. I must,
therefore, fairly warn you to remove from my house at Whitsunday. I have
taken a house at Paris; but I will have one also in Edinburgh, and shall
deliberate in London which of them I shall occupy. I shall not go to
Ireland. The arrival of the Duke of Richmond was late; and this
engagement with M. Rousseau protracts my return so long, that it will
not be worth while to go to Dublin. Lord Hertford has been so good as to
excuse me. You have heard of the great fortune of Trail, who is, I
believe, your acquaintance, and a very honest fellow. Nothing is so
agreeable to an irresolute man, says the Cardinal de Retz, as a measure
which dispenses him from taking an immediate resolution. I am exactly in
the case. I hope your resigning my house will be no hardship to
you."[303:1]


Hume, Rousseau, and M. de Luze of Geneva, a friend of the fugitive, left
France early in January 1766. We have no account of their arrival,
except Rousseau's statement in a letter to Malesherbes, that whenever he
set foot on the land of liberty, he leaped on his illustrious friend's
neck, embraced him without uttering a word, and covered his face with
kisses and tears; a ceremony with which Hume would probably have
dispensed, in the presence of "the barbarians who inhabit the banks of
the Thames." The first notice of their sojourn in Britain, is in a
bulletin by Hume to Madame de Boufflers, dated London, 19th January,
1766. He says,--

     My companion is very amiable, always polite, gay often,
     commonly sociable. He does not know himself when he thinks he
     is made for entire solitude. I exhorted him on the road to
     write his memoirs. He told me, that he had already done it
     with an intention of publishing them.

     At present, says he, it may be affirmed, that nobody knows me
     perfectly, any more than himself; but I shall describe myself
     in such plain colours, that henceforth every one may boast
     that he knows himself, and Jean Jacques Rousseau. I believe,
     that he intends seriously to draw his own picture in its true
     colours: but I believe, at the same time, that nobody knows
     himself less. For instance, even with regard to his health, a
     point in which few people can be mistaken, he is very
     fanciful. He imagines himself very infirm. He is one of the
     most robust men I have ever known. He passed ten hours in the
     night-time, above deck, during the most severe weather, when
     all the seamen were almost frozen to death, and he caught no
     harm. He says that his infirmity always increases upon a
     journey; yet was it almost imperceptible on the road from
     Paris to London.

     His wearing the Armenian dress is a pure whim; which, however,
     he is resolved never to abandon. He has an excellent warm
     heart; and, in conversation, kindles often to a degree of heat
     which looks like inspiration. I love him much, and hope that I
     have some share in his affections.

     I find that we shall have many ways of settling him to his
     satisfaction; and as he is learning the English very
     fast,[304:1] he will afterwards be able to choose for himself.
     There is a gentleman of the name of Townsend, a man of four or
     five thousand a-year, who lives very privately, within fifteen
     miles of London, and is a great admirer of our philosopher, as
     is also his wife. He has desired him to live with him, and
     offers to take any board he pleases. M. Rousseau was much
     pleased with this proposal, and is inclined to accept of it.
     The only difficulty is, that he insists positively on his
     gouvernante's sitting at table,--a proposal which is not to be
     made to Mr. and Mrs. Townsend.

     This woman forms the chief encumbrance to his settlement. M.
     de Luze, our companion, says, that she passes for wicked and
     quarrelsome, and tattling; and is thought to be the chief
     cause of his quitting Neufchâtel. He himself owns her to be so
     dull, that she never knows in what year of the Lord she is,
     nor in what month of the year, nor in what day of the month or
     week; and that she can never learn the different value of the
     pieces of money in any country. Yet she governs him as
     absolutely as a nurse does a child. In her absence his dog has
     acquired that ascendant. His affection for that creature is
     beyond all expression or conception.

     I have as yet scarce seen any body except Mr. Conway and Lady
     Aylesbury.[305:1] Both of them told me, they would visit Jean
     Jacques, if I thought their company would not be disagreeable.
     I encouraged them to show him that mark of distinction.[305:2]
     Here I must also tell you of a good action which I did; not
     but that it is better to conceal our good actions. But I
     consider not my seeking _your_ approbation as an effect of
     vanity: your suffrage is to me something like the satisfaction
     of my own conscience. While we were at Calais, I asked him
     whether, in case the King of England thought proper to gratify
     him with a pension, he would accept of it. I told him, that
     the case was widely different from that of the King of
     Prussia; and I endeavoured to point out to him the difference,
     particularly in this circumstance, that a gratuity from the
     King of England could never in the least endanger his
     independence. He replied: "But would it not be using ill the
     King of Prussia, to whom I have since been much obliged?
     However, on this head (added he,) in case the offer be made
     me, I shall consult my father;" meaning Lord Marischal.[306:1]
     I told this story to General Conway, who seemed to embrace
     with zeal the notion of giving him a pension, as honourable
     both to the king and nation. I shall suggest the same idea to
     other men in power whom I may meet with, and I do not despair
     of succeeding.

     P. S.--Since I wrote the above, I have received your obliging
     letter, directed to Calais. M. Rousseau says, the letter of
     the King of Prussia is a forgery; and he suspects it to come
     from M. de Voltaire.[306:2]

     The project of Mr. Townsend, to my great mortification, has
     totally vanished, on account of Mademoiselle Le Vasseur. Send
     all his letters under my cover.[307:1]

Hume writes again on the 12th, to state that he has succeeded in
obtaining the promise of a pension from the king: "You know," he says,
"that our sovereign is extremely prudent and decent, and careful not to
give offence. For which reason, he requires that this act of generosity
may be an entire secret." He states, that this information must be kept
to herself and the Prince of Conti: and she in her answer, admires
Hume's generous and delicate conduct, and promises to keep the secret.
In his postscript Hume announces the important fact, that Mademoiselle
le Vasseur had arrived, and had found a companion to whom such a rag of
celebrity was no small acquisition.


"P.S.--Since I wrote the above, I have seen General Conway, who tells me
that the king has spoke to him on the same subject, and that the sum
intended is a hundred pounds a-year: a mighty accession to our friend's
slender revenue.

"A letter has also come to me open from Guy the bookseller, by which I
learn that Mademoiselle sets out post, in company with a friend of mine,
a young gentleman, very good-humoured, very agreeable--and very mad! He
visited Rousseau in his mountains, who gave him a recommendation to
Paoli, the King of Corsica; where this gentleman, whose name is Boswell,
went last summer, in search of adventures. He has such a rage for
literature, that I dread some event fatal to our friend's honour. You
remember the story of Terentia, who was first married to Cicero, then to
Sallust, and at last, in her old age, married a young nobleman, who
imagined that she must possess some secret, which would convey to him
eloquence and genius."[308:1]


Soon after, we find Hume writing as follows:--


HUME _to his Brother_.

"_London, 2d February, 1766._

"As you know that I never left any place without regret, you may imagine
that I did not leave Paris altogether willingly, after having been so
long accustomed to it. I do not find this new scene near so much to my
taste; and I shall be long ere I am reconciled to it. Perhaps Edinburgh
may please me better; I promise myself at least some satisfaction in my
nephews, of whom I hear a very good account; and it is surely more
suitable to one of my years to seek a retreat in my native country, than
to pass the dregs of life among the great, and among people who, though
they seem to have a friendship for me, are still strangers. I accustom
myself, therefore, to this idea without reluctance; and since I have
crossed the seas, I find my regret for the good company I left behind
me, less pungent and uneasy. . . . .

"You will have heard by this time, that I have brought over with me the
famous Rousseau, the most singular man, surely, in the world. He applied
to me last summer to take him under my protection in England, as he
called it; but in the meanwhile, he was chased out of Switzerland, and
came to Strasburg, with an intention of going to the King of Prussia,
who pressed him earnestly to live with him. At Strasburg my letter
reached him, making him an offer of all my services; upon which he
turned short, and having obtained the King of France's passport, came
and joined me at Paris. I have lived with him ever since. He is a very
modest, mild, well-bred, gentle-spirited, and warm-hearted man, as ever
I knew in my life. He is also to appearance very sociable. I never saw a
man who seems better calculated for good company, nor who seems to take
more pleasure in it. Yet is he absolutely determined to retire and board
himself in a farmer's house among the mountains of Wales, for the sake
of solitude. He has refused a pension from the King of Prussia, and
presents from hundreds. I have been offered great sums for him, if I
could have prevailed on him to accept of them. Yet, till within these
three months, he was in absolute beggary. He has now about £70
a-year?[309:1] which he has acquired by a bargain for his works. It is
incredible the enthusiasm for him in Paris, and the curiosity in London.
I prevailed on him to go to the play-house in order to see Garrick, who
placed him in a box opposite the king and queen. I observed their
majesties to look at him more than at the players.[309:2] I should
desire no better fortune than to have the privilege of showing him to
all I please. The hereditary prince paid him a visit a few days ago; and
I imagine the Duke of York called on him one evening when he was abroad.
I love him much, and shall separate from him with much regret."[310:1]


Hume writes to Dr. Blair on 11th February:--

"You have seen in the newspapers enow of particulars concerning my
pupil, who has now left me and retired to Chiswick. He is impatient to
get into the mountains of Wales. He is a very agreeable amiable man, but
a great humorist.[310:2] The philosophers of Paris foretold to me that I
could not conduct him to Calais without a quarrel; but I think I could
live with him all my life in mutual friendship and esteem. I am very
sorry that the matter is not likely to be put to a trial! I believe one
great source of our concord is, that neither he nor I are disputatious,
which is not the case with any of them. They are also displeased with
him because they think he overabounds in religion; and it is indeed
remarkable, that the philosopher of this age who has been most
persecuted, is by far the most devout. I do not comprehend such
philosophers as are invested with the sacerdotal character. I am, dear
doctor, yours _usque ad aras_."[310:3]

The first attempt to find a settlement for Rousseau, was with the
French gardener at Fulham, already alluded to. The arrangement proposed
by Hume was, that the gardener was to receive from fifty to sixty pounds
a-year, as the consideration for boarding Rousseau and Mademoiselle, but
that he was only to draw twenty-five pounds from Rousseau, from whom he
was to keep the arrangement secret.[311:1] Rousseau rejected this
arrangement with disgust; and various other efforts to find him a
suitable home were equally unsuccessful. Hume, who, as Rousseau himself
tells Madame de Boufflers, was more anxious about his welfare than he
was himself, appears to have spent week after week, in the vain pursuit
of a resting place for the wanderer--no sooner framing a hopeful scheme
than it was contemptuously rejected. It does not appear, however, that
the inquiries were conducted precisely in the sphere in which Rousseau
liked to act. It is clear that he had not come to Britain to negotiate
with farmers at Chiswick, or French gardeners at Fulham. He undoubtedly
expected much more distinguished titles to be mixed up with his
arrangements; and we find that it was not till a rich man's well kept
country mansion was put at his disposal, that he deigned to be for a
moment satisfied. A letter to Blair, contains a very full narrative of
the subsequent proceedings.


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.[312:1]

     _Lisle Street, Leicester Fields,
     25th March, 1766._

     DEAR DOCTOR,--I had asked M. Rousseau the question you propose
     to me: He answered, that the story of his "Héloise" had some
     general and distant resemblance to reality; such as was
     sufficient to warm his imagination and assist his invention:
     but that all the chief circumstances were fictitious. I have
     heard in France, that he had been employed to teach music to a
     young lady, a boarder in a convent at Lyons; and that the
     master and scholar fell mutually in love with each other; but
     the affair was not attended with any consequences. I think
     this work his masterpiece; though he himself told me, that he
     valued most his _Contrat Social_; which is as preposterous a
     judgment as that of Milton, who preferred the Paradise
     Regained to all his other performances.

     This man, the most singular of all human beings, has at last
     left me; and I have very little hopes of ever being able, for
     the future, to enjoy much of his company, though he says, that
     if I settle either in London or Edinburgh, he will take a
     journey on foot every year to visit me. Mr. Davenport, a
     gentleman of £5000 or £6000 a-year, in the north of England,
     and a man of great humanity and of a good understanding, has
     taken the charge of him. He has a house called Wooton, in the
     Peake of Derby, situated amidst mountains and rocks and
     streams and forests, which pleases the wild imagination and
     solitary humour of Rousseau; and as the master seldom
     inhabited it, and only kept there a plain table for some
     servants, he offered me to give it up to my friend. I
     accepted, on condition that he would take from him £30 a-year
     of board for himself and his gouvernante, which he was so
     good-natured as to agree to. Rousseau has about £80 a-year,
     which he has acquired by contracts with his booksellers, and
     by a liferent annuity of £25 a-year, which he accepted from
     Lord Marischal. This is the only man who has yet been able to
     make him accept of money.

     He was desperately resolved to rush into this solitude,
     notwithstanding all my remonstrances; and I foresee, that he
     will be unhappy in that situation, as he has indeed been
     always in all situations. He will be entirely without
     occupation, without company, and almost without amusement of
     any kind. He has read very little during the course of his
     life, and has now totally renounced all reading: He has seen
     very little; and has no manner of curiosity to see or remark:
     He has reflected, properly speaking, and studied very little;
     and has not indeed much knowledge: He has only _felt_, during
     the whole course of his life; and in this respect, his
     sensibility rises to a pitch beyond what I have seen any
     example of: but it still gives him a more acute feeling of
     pain than of pleasure. He is like a man who were stript not
     only of his clothes, but of his skin, and turned out in that
     situation to combat with the rude and boisterous elements,
     such as perpetually disturb this lower world. I shall give you
     a remarkable instance of his turn of character in this
     respect: It passed in my room, the evening before his
     departure.

     He had resolved to set out with his gouvernante in a
     post-chaise; but Davenport, willing to cheat him and save him
     some money, told him that he had found a retour chaise for the
     place, which he might have for a trifle, and that luckily it
     set out the very day in which Rousseau intended to depart. His
     purpose was to hire a chaise, and make him believe this story.
     He succeeded at first, but Rousseau afterwards ruminating on
     the circumstances, began to entertain a suspicion of the
     trick. He communicated his doubts to me, complaining that he
     was treated like a child; that though he was poor, he chose
     rather to conform himself to his circumstances, than live like
     a beggar on alms; and that he was very unhappy in not speaking
     the language familiarly, so as to guard himself against these
     impositions. I told him that I was ignorant of the matter, and
     knew nothing more of it, than I was told by Mr. Davenport, but
     if he pleased I should make inquiry about it. "Never tell me
     that," replied he, "if this be really a contrivance of
     Davenport's, you are acquainted with it, and consenting to it;
     and you could not possibly have done me a greater
     displeasure." Upon which he sat down very sullen and silent;
     and all my attempts were in vain to revive the conversation,
     and to turn it on other subjects; he still answered me very
     drily and coldly. At last, after passing near an hour in this
     ill-humour, he rose up and took a turn about the room. But
     judge of my surprise, when he sat down suddenly on my knee,
     threw his hands about my neck, kissed me with the greatest
     warmth, and bedewing all my face with tears, exclaimed, "Is it
     possible you can ever forgive me, my dear friend? After all
     the testimonies of affection I have received from you, I
     reward you at last with this folly and ill behaviour: but I
     have notwithstanding a heart worthy of your friendship; I love
     you, I esteem you, and not an instance of your kindness is
     thrown away upon me." I hope you have not so bad an opinion of
     me as to think I was not melted on this occasion; I assure you
     I kissed him and embraced him twenty times, with a plentiful
     effusion of tears. I think no scene of my life was ever more
     affecting.[315:1]

     I now understand perfectly his aversion to company; which
     appears so surprising in a man well qualified for the
     entertainment of company, and which the greater part of the
     world takes for affectation. He has frequent and long fits of
     the spleen, from the state of his mind or body, call it which
     you please; and from his extreme sensibility of temper, during
     that disposition, company is a torment to him. When his
     spirits and health and good humour return, his fancy affords
     him so much and such agreeable occupation, that to call him
     off from it gives him uneasiness; and even the writing of
     books, he tells me, as it limits and restrains his fancy to
     one subject, is not an agreeable entertainment. He never will
     write any more; and never should have wrote at all, could he
     have slept a-nights. But he lies awake commonly; and to keep
     himself from tiring, he usually composed something, which he
     wrote down when he arose. He assures me, that he composes very
     slowly, and with great labour and difficulty.

     He is naturally very modest, and even ignorant of his own
     superiority. His fire, which frequently rises in conversation,
     is gentle and temperate; he is never in the least arrogant and
     domineering, and is, indeed, one of the best bred men I ever
     knew. I shall give you such an instance of his modesty as must
     necessarily be sincere. When we were on the road, I
     recommended to him the learning of English, without which, I
     told him, he would never enjoy entire liberty, nor be fully
     independent, and at his own disposal. He was sensible I was in
     the right, and said, that he heard there were two English
     translations of his "Emile, or Treatise on Education;" he
     would get them as soon as he arrived in London; and as he knew
     the subject, he would have no other trouble, than to learn or
     guess the words: this would save him some pains in consulting
     the dictionary; and as he improved, it would amuse him to
     compare the translations and judge which was the best.
     Accordingly, soon after our arrival, I procured him the books,
     but he returned them in a few days, saying that they could be
     of no use to him. "What is the matter?" replied I. "I cannot
     endure them," said he, "they are my own work; and ever since I
     delivered my books to the press, I never could open them, or
     read a page of them without disgust." "That is strange," said
     I, "I wonder the good reception they have met with from the
     world has not put you more in conceit with them." "Why," said
     he, "if I were to count suffrages, there are perhaps more
     against them than for them." "But," rejoined I, "it is
     impossible but the style, and eloquence, and ornaments must
     please you." "To tell the truth," said he, "I am not
     displeased with myself in that particular: but I still dread,
     that my writings are good for nothing at the bottom, and that
     all my theories are full of extravagance. Je crains toujours
     que je pèche par le fond, et que tous mes systèmes ne sont que
     des extravagances." You see that this is judging of himself
     with the utmost severity, and censuring his writings on the
     side where they are most exposed to criticism. No feigned
     modesty is ever capable of this courage. I never heard ----
     reproach himself with the ----: nobody ever heard you express
     any remorse, for having put Ossian on the same footing with
     Homer!

     Have I tired you, or will you have any more anecdotes of this
     singular personage? I think I hear you desire me to go on. He
     attempted once to justify to me the moral of his New Heloisa,
     which, he knew, was blamed, as instructing young people in the
     art of gratifying their passions, under the cover of virtue,
     and noble refined sentiments. "You may observe," said he
     "that my Julia is faithful to her husband's bed, though she is
     seduced from her duty during her single state; but this last
     circumstance can be of no consequence in France, where all the
     young ladies are shut up in convents, and have it not in their
     power to transgress: it might, indeed, have a bad effect in a
     Protestant country." But notwithstanding this reflection, he
     told me, that he has wrote a continuation of his "Emilius,"
     which may soon be published. He there attempts to show the
     effect of his plan of education, by representing Emilius in
     all the most trying situations, and still extricating himself
     with courage and virtue. Among the rest, he discovers that
     Sophia, the amiable, the virtuous, the estimable Sophia, is
     unfaithful to his bed, which fatal accident he bears with a
     manly superior spirit. "In this work," added he, "I have
     endeavoured to represent Sophia in such a light that she will
     appear equally amiable, equally virtuous, and equally
     estimable, as if she had no such frailty." "You take a
     pleasure, I see," said I, "to combat with difficulties in all
     your works." "Yes," said he, "I hate marvellous and
     supernatural _events_ in novels. The only thing that can give
     pleasure in such performances is to place the personages in
     situations difficult and singular." Thus, you see, nothing
     remains for him but to write a book for the instruction of
     widows! unless perhaps he imagines that they can learn their
     lesson without instruction. Adieu, dear doctor; you say that
     you sometimes read my letters to our common friends; but you
     must read this only to the initiated.[317:1]

Almost the only other matter which appears conspicuously in Hume's
correspondence during his intercourse with Rousseau, is the death of a
dear friend, often mentioned in his previous letters--Dr. Jardine. He
was a man of strong judgment, and much sarcastic wit; but his articles
in _The Edinburgh Review_ of 1755, are almost the only specimens of his
ability which he has left to posterity. He was born in Dumfries-shire
on 3d January, 1716, and he was minister of the Tron Church parish when
he died. The death was sudden; and Hume, overlooking the calamitous
consequences of such events to surviving relatives, and in harmony with
the opinions he had expressed on death in a still more appalling form,
seems to have considered its suddenness as fortunate. He thus writes to
Blair, on 5th June.

"I cannot begin my letter without lamenting most sincerely the death of
our friend Dr. Jardine. I do not aggravate it by the circumstance of its
being sudden, for that is very desirable. But surely we shall ever
regret the loss of a very pleasant companion, and of a very friendly
honest man. It makes a blank which you must all feel, and which I in
particular will sensibly feel, when I come amongst you. I need not ask
you whether the miscreants of the opposite party do not rejoice, for I
take it for granted they do."[318:1]


FOOTNOTES:

[264:1] MS. R.S.E.

[265:1] MS. R.S.E. In answer, Millar tells him that the prejudice is not
against the Scots, but against Lord Bute; that matters have now,
however, been all put right, for "it is generally believed that Mr.
_Greenville_ is a good manager of the finances, and in general means
well: as a proof of it, our stocks have been creeping up daily, and it
is now generally believed that 3 per cent will soon come to par if
affairs continue peaceable!" One possessed of better opportunities of
judging, and more capable of using them, joins in these anticipations of
success with which Grenville's disastrous career as a financier opened.
Elliot says, on 25th March, 1765: "To-morrow Mr. Grenville opens the
budget, as it is usually called, and I believe our revenue will appear
to be on a better footing than is usually believed. I hope we shall have
discharged as much debt without breach of faith as you have done in a
politer way. Not that I pretend to censure your method. You borrow at a
high interest during time of war, and it is understood you are to take
your own method in peace. Our mode of proceeding is the very reverse of
this. . . . Your negotiation with regard to the French prisoners you
must have heard, met with all the approbation it so well deserved." (MS.
R.S.E.)

[268:1] Probably Vallière. The Duc de Vallière was supposed to be the
author of some anonymous theatrical pieces.

[270:1] MS. R.S.E.

[270:2] This gentleman is the same who afterwards distinguished himself
as a diplomatist, and who was so well known by the title of Sir Robert
Liston.

[272:1] Minto MSS.

[273:1] Mallet died on 21st April, 1765.

[273:2] MS. R.S.E.

[275:1] On account of his taxation system having caused the American
Revolution, Grenville is now generally ranked with statesmen of despotic
principles. He was, however, an avowed admirer of the democratic
portions of the constitution; and it was in truth his ill-directed
advocacy of popular rights, not an intentional departure from his avowed
principles, that made his administration so disastrous. His zeal for the
independent authority of Parliament, and for the curtailment of the
prerogatives of the Crown, induced him to struggle for the exercise by
parliament, in the colonies, of a power with which the crown could not
compete,--that of taxation.

[275:2] Minto MSS.

[276:1] Evidently the Abbé Morellet, who afterwards corresponded with
Hume on these subjects. He was born in 1727, and died in 1819. From his
great age and the cheerful social habits of his latter years, he was one
of the few members of the school of the Encyclopædiasts, whom men of the
present generation have been accustomed to meet in general society.
Morellet possessed two distinct titles to fame. He had written some
grave and valuable books on political economy and statistics; while in
lighter literature, and in Madame Geoffrin's circle, he enjoyed a high
reputation for playful and pungent wit. His friends likened him to
Swift; but as he sought to avoid malice in his sarcasms, and to make
them subservient to good principles in morals and religion, he might, in
this part of his character, be more aptly compared with Sydney Smith. He
had a great partiality for Scottish music; but it may be doubted if this
taste was either created or fostered by his intercourse with Hume. In
his very amusing Memoires, he describes a dinner with a musical party
near Plymouth, in the open air. Some young ladies, with their father and
mother, approached near enough to hear the music. The Abbé gallantly
carried them a basket of cherries. "Je les prie en même temps de vouloir
bien chanter _some Scotish song_, dont, moi Français, j'étais _very
fond_. Elles se regardent un moment: et dès que nous fûmes retournés à
nos places, comme si notre plus grand éloignement les eût rassurées,
elles se mettent à chanter toutes les trois à l'unisson, avec des voix
d'une extrême douceur, _The lass of Peatie's Mill_. Le temps, le lieu,
la singularité de la rencontre ajoutèrent quelques charmes à ce petit
concert." Vol. i. p. 209.

[277:1] Memorials of Oswald, p. 81.

[278:1] Mr. Elliot, in answer to the letter printed above, (p. 189,)
says, "So, my dear sir, you have at last, with no small reluctance, and
after many struggles, prevailed with yourself to acquaint some of your
friends that Lord Hertford means to desire that government would be
graciously pleased to bestow the character and emoluments of the
secretaryship upon the person who actually performs the functions of it.
At your time of life, with so much independency about you, and so unlike
all your former conduct, indeed I am not at all surprised that it cost
you near two pages of apology and explanation before you would even
intrust me with the secret. Were you less deep in the study of human
nature, and somewhat more an adept in the ways of men, I am apt to think
you would rather have filled your letter with excuses for not having
sooner made this application."

He goes on to state, that he has been exerting himself in the matter,
but that on all occasions he had found himself anticipated by Lord
Hertford. He continues:

"As to _ingrata patria ne ossa quidem habebis_, don't be at all uneasy.
Here I can speak more peremptorily; and notwithstanding all your errors,
mistakes, and heresies in religion, morals, and government, I undertake
you shall have at least Christian burial, and perhaps we may find for
you a niche in Westminster Abbey besides. Your Lockes, Newtons, and
Bacons had no great matter to boast of during their lives; and yet they
were the most orthodox of men; they required no godfather to answer for
them; while, on the other hand, did not Lord Hertford spread his
sevenfold shield over all your transgressions? Pray, what pretensions
have you, either in church or state; for you well know you have offended
both?"--MS. R.S.E.

[279:1] MS. R.S.E.

[280:1] Private Correspondence, p. 121.

[281:1] Mrs. Elliot, who as an heiress preserved the name of Murray
Kynynmond.

[282:1] Minto MSS.

[282:2] Walpole, Memoirs of George III. i. 391. Walpole pretends that
Conway's dismissal was partly caused by revenge against Lord Hertford
for his conduct on this occasion, (ib. 402.) But from his own account of
it, the resolution to dismiss Conway had been taken before Hume's
appointment.

[284:1] Lives of Men of Letters, &c. p. 225.

[284:2] He was Lady Hertford's nephew.

[286:1] MS. R.S.E.

[286:2] See above, p. 172.

[286:3] The Dauphin was then far advanced in the disease of which he
died. According to the ordinary French historians, he was at the same
time so completely subjected to the priestly influence of the Molinists,
as to justify the supposition, that the decay of his mind kept pace with
that of his body. Others give a totally different account of him, and
Walpole says, "To please his family, the prince went through all the
ceremonies of the church, but showed to his attendants after they were
over, how vain and ridiculous he thought them. Many expressions he
dropped in his last hours that spoke the freedom of his opinions; and to
the Duc de Nivernois he said, he was glad to leave behind him such a
book as 'Hume's Essays.'" Memoirs of George III. vol. ii. p. 242. The
Dauphin died on 20th December, 1765.

[287:1] MS. R.S.E.

[288:1] A general officer of reputation, making such an application, on
behalf of a friend, says:--

"The divine in question has a very good living, but in a quarter of the
world where he has not a creature to converse with. If his excellency
would enrol him among that million of the tribe of Levi, that attend at
the Castle of Dublin, who are called his chaplains, it would excuse his
attendance at quarters: And his general,--I mean, his bishop, would be
under the necessity of permitting him to be absent whilst he had the
honour to be about the commander-in-chief at headquarters."--MS. R.S.E.

[289:1] Lord Hertford, writing to Hume, on 5th August, says:--

"DEAR SIR,--You will see, in the papers, that Barré is to be my
secretary; but it has no other foundation. If I had been at liberty, I
should have desired to continue with him whose abilities and ease in
business I have so long experienced; but the world will have it
otherwise, and it must be my son. He is popular in Ireland; and I am
invited, on all hands, to name him; at the same time that I am told the
great danger of indulging my own inclinations, that if I named you, with
the particular additional prejudice that prevails, at present, against
the Scotch, that I should condemn my own administration. I have,
therefore, made it the condition of my acceptance of the lieutenancy,
that you are immediately provided for in a manner less likely to subject
you to the inconvenience of party changes. I have explained, both to the
King and the ministers, how essential I thought it to my honour and ease
of mind; and it is resolved. I flatter myself I shall soon be able to
acquaint you, that I have been a good solicitor; and, as my private
friend, I beg leave to assure you that I shall always be most happy in
receiving you in Dublin, and every other part of the world, let the
prejudices and follies of mankind be what they will. I hope you will
consider me as your friend; and I will desire no other return for all
the services I may be able to do you, than such a portion of your time
as you can bestow upon me, consistently with your inclination. The Duke
of Richmond goes to France: I do not yet know upon what plan, having not
seen him. He is a pretty figure; is easy in his behaviour; and does not
want parts. I wish he may have temper, experience, and knowledge of men
for that place. I have talked to my brother, as it became a wellwisher
to peace, upon this occasion. You will receive, by the messenger which
carries this letter to France, an official one from my brother, drawn by
himself, by which you will be able to judge of his style. I need not add
any thing to it. Every thing which passed, in a very long conference we
had together with Guerchy, is fully stated in it; but, when you talk to
the Duke of Praslin upon it, you will, if you please, take an
opportunity of recommending from me, in a particular manner, the
indulgence required for the holders of the Canada bills. This point may
be essential to the good understanding between the two courts."--MS.
R.S.E.

[290:1] MS. R.S.E.

[291:1] Lord Hertford writes Hume, on 16th August;--

"The usher of the black rod, in Ireland, is in my disposal. It produces,
in the course of a session, from £800 to £900, as I am informed. If you
approve it, my intention is to give it to a gentleman who will be
extremely satisfied to accept of £300 a-year for his trouble, at most,
and the rest will be placed to your account, without interrupting the
benefit of the pension."

And again, on September 5, after Hume's refusal:--

"The black rod you will give me leave to dispose of as I intended. You
shall, at the end of the session, refuse the emoluments I propose to
reserve out of it, if you see sufficient reason. £300 for doing the duty
of it should satisfy the person to whom I will give it."--MS. R.S.E.

[292:1] _Lit. Gazette_, 1822, p. 711. Corrected from original in MSS.
R.S.E.

[293:1] _Lit. Gazette_, 1822, p. 722. Corrected from original in MSS.
R.S.E.

[293:2] MS. R.S.E.

[295:1] We are told (vie de Rousseau par Musset Pathay, i. 102,) that a
certain M. Augar, having been here presented to the apostle of
education, said he was bringing up his son after the model of "Emile."
"So much the worse both for you and your son;" _tant pis pour vous et
pour votre fils_, said Rousseau. This must have been highly
satisfactory. Of all the theories to reconcile Rousseau's
contradictions,--to discover on what principle he preached up parental
care, and sent his own children to the foundling hospital, the best is
supplied by himself in a single sentence in the Heloise: "L'on sait bien
que tout homme qui pose des maximes générales, entend qu'elles obligent
tout le monde, excepté lui." This is certainly more intelligible than
the mystical theory of his eulogist, D'Escherny: "Il n'y a que les sots
qui ne se contredisent point, parce que leur esprit borné ne voit jamais
qu'un côté de l'objet."

[295:2] He states, in the "Confessions," that when Wallace's work on the
Number of Mankind was passing through the press, Hume undertook the
revision of the proof sheets, though the work was written against
himself. I am not aware of any other authority for this anecdote.
Rousseau said he was charmed with it, because the conduct was so much
like his own!

[296:1] Account of the Controversy between Hume and Rousseau.

[297:1] "Un banc très-massif, qui étoit dans la rue à côté de ma porte
et fortement attaché, fut détaché, enlevé, et posé debout contre la
porte; de sorte que, si l'on ne s'en fût aperçu, le premier qui pour
sortir auroit ouvert la porte d'entrée, devoit naturellement être
assommé."--_Confessions_, Liv. 12.

[301:1] Hume, though habitually sceptical, was far from being
suspicious; and in his kindness to his new companion, he took every
thing in sincerity. "C'est un des malheurs de ma vie," says Rousseau,
"qu'avec un si grand désir d'être oublié, je sois contraint de parler de
moi sans cesse;" but those who knew him better than Hume did at so early
a period of their intercourse, do not give him credit for desiring to be
either neglected or forgotten. Madame de Genlis professes to have been
much vexed and perplexed by having acted on a reliance similar to
Hume's. Rousseau had promised to accompany her to the Comédie Françoise,
on the condition that they were to occupy a _loge grillée_. When they
entered, madame flew to shut the grating; Rousseau opposed her; he was
sure _she_ would not like it to be closed, and he would be sufficiently
hidden, by sitting behind her. In the scuffle he was recognised; madame,
vexed and terrified, insisted that the grating should be closed; but he
was inexorable. The commencement of a popular piece soon relieved them
from notice, and when the eyes of the audience were averted from him,
Rousseau grew gloomy and rude. He afterwards professed himself deeply
offended at having been exhibited as a wild beast! _Mémoires_, ii. 12.

The same lady gives a more pleasing instance of his characteristics at
that time, in describing her first introduction to him. A friend told
her, that her husband intended to play a trick on her: to employ the
celebrated mimic Preville, the Foote of the French stage, to personate
Rousseau at his table. The expected guest appeared. His dress and
appearance were so unlike other people's, yet so like what would have
been expected in Rousseau--his conversation was so brilliant--that it
certainly must be a piece of wonderful acting. Thoroughly at her ease,
she laughed, and talked, and sang the airs of the Devin du village. It
was Rousseau himself! and not accustomed, in this the full blaze of his
reputation, to be received with so much freedom, by a young and
accomplished woman, he pronounced her to be the most lively and
unaffected of her sex.

[303:1] MS. R.S.E.

[304:1] It does not appear that Rousseau made any progress in English.
In a letter to Hume, from Wooton, he says, "J'ai eu hier la visite de M.
le Ministre, qui, voyant que je ne lui parlois que François, n'a pas
voulu me parler Anglois, de sorte que l'entrevue s'est passée à peu près
sans mot dire. J'ai pris goût à l'expédient; je m'en servirai avec tous
mes voisins, si j'en ai; et dussé-je apprendre l'Anglois, je ne leur
parlerai que François, sur-tout si j'ai le bonheur qu'ils n'en sachent
pas un mot."

[305:1] General Conway's wife.

[305:2] Rousseau writes to Hume:--

     _Le Lundi Soir._

     Je vous supplie, mon très cher patron, de vouloir bien
     m'excuser auprès de Myladi Ailesbury et de Mr. Le Général
     Conway. Je suis malade, et hors d'état de me présenter, et
     Mademoiselle Le Vasseur, très bonne, et très estimable
     personne, n'est point faite pour paroître dans les grandes
     compagnies. Trouvez bon, mon très cher patron, que nous nous
     en tenions au premier arrangement et que j'attende dans
     l'après midi le carrosse que M. Davenport veut bien envoyer.
     J'arrive suant et fatigué d'une longue promenade: c'est
     pourquoi je ne prolonge pas ma lettre: vous m'avez si bien
     acquis et je suis à vous de tant de manières que cela même ne
     doit plus être dit. Je vous embrasse de toute la tendresse de
     mon cœur.

                                             J. J. ROUSSEAU.

Had Lady Aylesbury requested the honour of Mademoiselle le Vasseur's
company along with that of her keeper? Rousseau tells us what pleasure
it gave him to see Madame la Marechale de Luxembourg embrace her in
public. But if any English lady of rank and character offered to extend
her hospitality to such a person, there could be no stronger evidence of
the general consent to suspend all social laws in favour of Rousseau.

[306:1] Of Lord Marischal he always spoke with respect. In the
Confessions, he says, "O bon Milord! ô mon digne père! que mon cœur
s'émeut encore en pensant à vous! Ah les barbares! quel coup ils m'ont
porté en vous détachant de moi! Mais non, non, grand homme, vous êtes et
serez toujours le même pour moi, qui suis le même toujours."

[306:2] Madame de Boufflers seems to have early apprehended mischief
from Walpole's letter. In the letter referred to, she says, "Je voudrois
savoir si une lettre du Roy de Prusse qui court Paris est vraie ou
fausse. On dit qu'elle est pleine d'ironie." She then proceeds to
describe the letter. Hume in answer says, "I suppose, that by this time
you have learned it was Horace Walpole who wrote the Prussian letter you
mentioned to me. It is a strange inclination we have to be wits,
preferably to every thing else. He is a very worthy man; he esteems and
even admires Rousseau; yet he could not forbear, for the sake of a very
indifferent joke, the turning him into ridicule, and saying harsh things
against him. I am a little angry with him; and I hear you are a great
deal: but the matter ought to be treated only as a piece of
levity."--_Private Correspondence_, p. 130.

[307:1] Private Correspondence, p. 125-128.

[308:1] Private Correspondence, p. 131-132.

[309:1] The mark of interrogation is in the MS.

[309:2] Writing to the Marquise de Barbantane, he makes the following
addition to this anecdote:--

"When the hour came, he told me, that he had changed his resolution, and
would not go: 'for--what shall I do with Sultan?' That is the name of
his dog. 'You must leave him behind,' said I. 'But the first person,'
replied he, 'who opens the door, Sultan will run into the streets in
search of me, and will be lost.' 'You must then,' said I, 'lock him up
in your room, and put the key in your pocket.' This was accordingly
done: but as we went down stairs, the dog howled and made a noise; his
master turned back, and said he had not resolution to leave him in that
condition; but I caught him in my arms and told him, that Mrs. Garrick
had dismissed another company in order to make room for him; that the
King and Queen were expecting to see him; and without a better reason
than Sultan's impatience, it would be ridiculous to disappoint them.
Partly by these reasons, and partly by force, I engaged him to
proceed."--_Private Correspondence_, p. 144.

[310:1] MS. R.S.E.

[310:2] The word appears not to be used in its modern popular sense, but
as meaning a person full of caprice.

[310:3] MS. R.S.E.

[311:1] In his narrative of the controversy, Hume says, "I wrote
immediately to my friend Mr. John Stewart of Buckingham Street, that I
had an affair to communicate to him, of so secret and delicate a nature,
that I should not venture even to commit it to paper, but that he might
learn the particulars of Mr. Elliot. . . . . Mr. Stewart was to look out
for some honest and discreet farmer in his neighbourhood, who might be
willing to lodge and board M. Rousseau and his gouvernante. . . . . It
was not long before Mr. Stewart wrote me word he had found a situation,
which he conceived might be agreeable," &c.

In confirmation of this narrative, there is the following letter in the
MSS. R.S.E. Mr. Stewart is probably the "Jack Stewart," frequently
alluded to in Hume's letters.

     "MY DEAR SIR,--Mr. Elliot told me the affair you recommended
     to him. Since his arrival I have tried every farmer in our
     side of the country, and can find no proper place. Some have
     not room, some hate foreigners, some don't chuse boarders, and
     the major part of all are such beings as he could not live
     with in any comfortable manner. There is an old Frenchman who
     has been here since a child, and has a sort of a garden farm
     at Fulham. To him I proposed the thing without mentioning
     names, and to oblige me he will take such a boarder: but still
     I could wish to find a place where he would be more agreeably
     situated, for this man keeps only a single maid, eats very
     plain, and his house is as dirty as a Frenchman's in France.
     The farmer himself is about sixty years old, unmarried, a
     cheerful honest creature, of a very obliging disposition.
     Consider whether this will suit your purpose, or if I should
     try in other counties. Adieu, my worthy good sir. Believe me
     eternally, your devoted servant,

                                               "J. STEWART."

[312:1] Blair had written on 24th February,--

"I received both your letters; and am exceedingly indebted to you for
the many curious and entertaining anecdotes you gave me concerning
Rousseau. They bestowed upon me somewhat of the same importance which
you say your connexion with Rousseau himself bestowed upon you in Paris,
by having so much information to give my friends from you concerning so
extraordinary a personage. Your accounts pleased me the more, that they
coincided very much with the idea I had always formed of the
man--amiable but whimsical. Strong sensibilities joined with an oddly
arranged understanding. He is a proof of what I always thought to be a
possible mixture in human nature, one being a sceptic from the turn of
their mind, and yet an enthusiast from the turn of their heart; for this
I take to be his real character--a man floating betwixt doubts and
feelings--betwixt scepticism and enthusiasm: leaning more to the latter
than the former; his understanding strangely tinctured by both." He
desires Hume to ask Rousseau, whether the principal scenes in his
"Héloise" were not founded on real events.--MS. R.S.E.

[315:1] This anecdote is told in substantially the same manner to Madame
de Boufflers, to whom its spirit would be doubtless far less
incomprehensible than to Dr. Blair.--_See Private Correspondence_, p.
150.

[317:1] _Literary Gazette_, 1822, p. 731, corrected from original, MS.
R.S.E.

[318:1] MS. R.S.E. Blair writes on 12th June:--

"Poor Jardine--I knew you would join with us in dropping very cordial
tears over his memory. What pleasant hours have I passed with you and
him. We have lost a most agreeable companion, as it was possible for any
man to be, and a very useful man to us here, in all public affairs. I
thought of you at the very first as one who would sensibly feel the
blank he will make in our society, when you come again to join it. But
when are you to come?"--MS. R.S.E.




