CHAPTER XVI.

1766-1770. Æt. 55-59.

     Hume Under Secretary of State--Church Politics--Official
     abilities--Conduct as to Ferguson's book--Quarrel with
     Oswald--Baron Mure's sons--Project of continuing the History--
     Ministerial convulsions--Hume's conduct to his Family--His
     Brother--His Nephews--Baron Hume--Blacklock--Smollett--Church
     Patronage--Gibbon--Robertson--Elliot--Gilbert Stuart--The
     Douglas Cause--Andrew Stewart--Morellet--Return to Scotland.


The quarrel with Rousseau seems to have so fully occupied the attention
of Hume, during its continuance, that he scarcely alluded to any other
subject in his correspondence; and thus, though the preceding chapter is
devoted entirely to that event, a very slight retrospect from the point
of time reached at its conclusion, will suffice for whatever else,
worthy of notice in his life or correspondence, has been preserved.

In the summer of 1766, he made a short visit to Scotland. "I returned,"
he says, in his "own life," "to that place, not richer, but with much
more money, and a much larger income, by means of Lord Hertford's
friendship, than I left it; and I was desirous of trying what
superfluity could produce, as I had formerly made an experiment of a
competency. But, in 1767, I received, from Mr. Conway, an invitation to
be under-secretary; and this invitation, both the character of the
person, and my connexions with Lord Hertford, prevented me from
declining."

He was thus solicited to undertake the very responsible duties of this
office, by one who had good opportunities of knowing his capacity for
public business; and the simple fact of the appointment is a testimony
to the ability with which he had performed the analogous functions of
his office in France. He was indeed at all times a man of punctual
habits, and his unwearied industry had not yet begun to slacken. He had
a mind of that clear systematic order which was well fitted for the
composition of official documents; and his triumphs in philosophical and
historical literature never inflated him with the ambition of
considering any business which he consented to undertake too
insignificant to deserve his full attention. Some official documents,
connected with the successive offices which he held, have been
preserved, by collectors, as autographs of so celebrated a man: and they
generally arrest the attention of every one who examines them, by the
clearness and precision of the language, and not a little by the
neatness of the handwriting.

After the resignation of the Marquis of Tweeddale, in 1746, there was no
longer a principal secretary of state for Scotland; and it became usual
to consult the Lord Advocate, or any other ministerial officer, locally
connected with the north, as to the policy to be pursued in Scottish
affairs. None of the principal members of the Grafton ministry were
Scotsmen; and there can be little doubt that Hume must then have
exercised a large influence in all affairs connected with his native
country.[383:1] He held his office until the 20th of July 1768, when
General Conway was superseded by Lord Weymouth.

The following letter contains a brief sketch of the general current of
his official life.


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

"_1st April, 1767._

"My way of life here is very uniform, and by no means disagreeable. I
pass all the forenoon in the secretary's house, from ten till three,
where there arrive, from time to time, messengers, that bring me all
the secrets of the kingdom, and, indeed, of Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America. I am seldom hurried; but have leisure, at intervals, to take up
a book, or write a private letter, or converse with any friend that may
call for me; and from dinner to bed-time is all my own. If you add to
this, that the person with whom I have the chief, if not only
transactions, is the most reasonable, equal tempered, and gentleman-like
man imaginable, and Lady Aylesbury the same, you will certainly think I
have no reason to complain; and I am far from complaining. I only shall
not regret when my duty is over; because, to me, the situation can lead
to nothing, at least in all probability; and reading, and sauntering,
and lounging, and dosing, which I call thinking, is my supreme
happiness. I mean my full contentment.

"I thank you for the acquaintance you offer me of Mr. Percy; but it
would be impracticable for me to cultivate his friendship, as men of
letters have here no place of rendezvous; and are, indeed, sunk and
forgot in the general torrent of the world. If you can therefore
decline, without hardship, any letter of recommendation, it would save
trouble both to him and me."[385:1]


In the beginning of the year 1767, Ferguson published his "Essay on the
History of Civil Society," a work which speedily acquired a wide
reputation through Europe. The allusions which Hume has been found
making to some work of a similar character, so early as 1759,[385:2]
probably refer to a particular portion of this book. Immediately before
its publication, he recommended Ferguson's friends to prevail on him to
suppress the work, as likely to be injurious to its author's literary
reputation: one of the few instances, if it be not the only one, in
which he discouraged a fellow-countryman, desirous of casting his lot
into the competition for literary distinction. He ultimately found that
his advice was erroneous, as the book soon obtained a high character.
But, had his own opinion of its merits coincided with the suffrages of
the public, it would not have been so honourable to his memory, as the
satisfaction he expressed on the discovery that the verdict of the
reading world was against him. Writing to Blair on 24th February, 1767,
he says:--

"I happened yesterday to visit a person three hours after a copy of
Ferguson's performance was opened, for the first time, in London. It was
by Lord Mansfield. I accept this omen of its future success. He was
extremely pleased with it; said it was very agreeable, and perfectly
well wrote; assured me that he would not stop a moment till he had
finished it; and recommended it strongly to the perusal of the
Archbishop of York, who was present. I have wrote the same article of
intelligence to Ferguson himself; but as he is the likeliest person in
the world to suppress it, I thought it safest to put it into your hands,
in order to circulate it."[386:1]

Again:--

"I hear good things said of Ferguson's book every day. Lord Holderness
showed me a letter from the Archbishop of York, where his Grace says,
that in many things it surpasses Montesquieu. My friend, Mr. Dodwell,
says that it is an admirable book, elegantly wrote, and with great
purity of language. Pray, tell to Ferguson and to others all these
things."[386:2]

Again, writing to the same correspondent, on 1st April, he says:--

"The success of the book, dear Doctor, which you mention, gives me great
satisfaction, on account of my sincere friendship for the author; and so
much the rather, as the success was to me unexpected. I have since begun
to hope, and even to believe, that I was mistaken; and in this
persuasion have several times taken it up and read chapters of it. But,
to my great mortification and sorrow, I have not been able to change my
sentiments. We shall see, by the duration of its fame, whether or not I
am mistaken. Helvétius and Saurin both told me at Paris, that they had
been consulted by Montesquieu about his 'Esprit des Loix.' They used the
freedom to tell him, as their fixed opinion, that he ought to suppress
the book; which they foresaw would very much injure his reputation. They
said to me that, no doubt, I thought they had reason to be ashamed of
their judgment. But still, added they, you may observe that the public
are very much returned from their first admiration of that book; and we
are persuaded that they will daily return still more.

"I hope that I shall be found a false prophet as much as these
gentlemen; for though the 'Esprit des Loix,' be considerably sunk in
vogue, and will probably still sink farther, it maintains a high
reputation, and probably will never be totally neglected. It has
considerable merit, notwithstanding the glare of its pointed wit, and
notwithstanding its false refinements, and its rash and crude positions.
Helvétius and Saurin assured me, that this freedom of theirs never lost
them any thing of Montesquieu's friendship. I believe the like would be
my case; but it is better not to put it to a trial. On that account, as
well as others, I recommend to you secrecy, towards every person except
Robertson."[388:1]

A letter from Adam Smith, desiring that his friend, Count Sarsfield,
might be introduced to Hume's circle of acquaintance, called forth the
following narrative of a very amusing incident:--


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_London, 13th June, 1767._

"DEAR SMITH,--The Count de Sarsfield is a good acquaintance of mine,
from the time I saw him at Paris; and as he is really a man of merit, I
have great pleasure whenever I meet him here. My occupations keep me
from cultivating his friendship as much as I should incline. I did not
introduce him to Elliot, because I knew that this gentleman's reserve
and indolence would make him neglect the acquaintance; and I did not
introduce him to Oswald, because I fear that he and I are broke for
ever; at least he does not seem inclined to take any steps towards an
accommodation with me.

"I am to tell you the strangest story you ever heard of. I was dining
with him, above two months ago, where, among other company, was the
Bishop of Raphoe.[388:2] After dinner we were disposed to be merry. I
said to the company, that I had been very ill used by Lord Hertford; for
that I always expected to be made a bishop by him during his
lieutenancy! but he had given away two sees from me, to my great
vexation and disappointment. The right reverend, without any farther
provocation, burst out into the most furious, and indecent, and
orthodox rage that ever was seen: told me that I was most impertinent;
that if he did not wear a gown, I durst not, no, I durst not, have used
him so; that none but a coward would treat a clergyman in that manner;
that henceforth he must either abstain from his brother's house, or I
must; and that this was not the first time he had heard the stupid joke
from my mouth. With the utmost tranquillity and temper I asked his
pardon; assured him, upon my honour, that I did not mean him the least
offence: if I had imagined he could possibly have been displeased, I
never should have mentioned the subject; but the joke was not in the
least against him, but entirely against myself, as if I were capable of
such an expectation as that of being a bishop! my regard for himself,
and still more for his brother, with whom I had long been more
particularly connected, would certainly restrain me from either joke or
earnest, which could be offensive to him; and that, if I had ever
touched on the same topic before, I had entirely forgot it, and it must
have been above a twelvemonth ago. He was nowise appeased; raved on in
the same style for a long time. At last I got the discourse diverted,
and took my leave, seemingly with great indifference and even good
humour. I was nowise surprised nor concerned about his lordship; because
I had, on other occasions, observed the same orthodox zeal swell within
him, and it was often difficult for him to converse with temper when I
was in the company.

"But what really surprised and vexed me was, that his brother kept
silence all the time. I met him in the passage when I went away, and he
made me no apology. He has never since called on me; and though he sees
that I never come near his house, though formerly I used to be three or
four times a-week with him, he never takes the least notice of it. I own
this gives me vexation, because I have a sincere value and affection for
him. It is only some satisfaction to me to find, that I am so palpably
in the right as not to leave the least room for doubt or ambiguity. Dr.
Pitcairne, who was in the company, says that he never saw such a scene
in his lifetime. If I were sure, dear Smith, that you and I should not
some day quarrel in some such manner, I should tell you that I am, yours
very affectionately and sincerely."[390:1]


The world levies certain penalties on the enjoyment of a character for
good nature and kindness, and Hume seems to have paid them to their most
ample extent, in the shape of executing commissions, and performing
general petty services for his friends. We have witnessed the zeal with
which he attended to the education of Mr. Elliot's two sons. A teacher
of languages, possessing the distinguished name of Graffigny, and
professing to be in the confidence of celebrated literary people in
Paris, appears to have excited the suspicion of Baron Mure, whose sons
he was employed to instruct. Hume undertook to make some inquiries
regarding him; and his brief reports, from time to time, have some
interest from their containing a few of his opinions on education.


HUME _to_ BARON MURE.

"_London, 1st July, 1767._

"DEAR BARON,--I believe I told you, that D'Alembert disclaimed all sort
of acquaintance with him. I have this moment received a letter from
Helvétius, doing the same. It was in answer to one I wrote him at Lord
Hertford's desire. I know not from what quarter we had heard that he had
given to Lord Harcourt, or Lord Newnam, a good character of Graffigny:
but it must have been a mistake; for to me he says, that he knows no
such man; that his wife, who was niece to the famous Ma{me} de
Graffigny, and educated with her, never saw or heard of such a man: nor
can they imagine who he may be. After this second imposture, it is
certain that Lord Hertford will not put his sons to him; nor do I think
it fit yours should longer remain. He is an empty, conceited fellow,
full of chimeras and pretensions; and I think you are at no great loss
for parting with him. The question [is,] what to do next?"


(_Undated._)

"DEAR BARON,--He is indeed a conceited man, full of whimseys and
affectations, reasoning always in the clouds about the most obvious
things, and hunting after novelties and singularities of which his
genius is incapable. What, for instance, can be more whimsical than his
method of teaching Latin? He gives his boys a long list of words, which
they are to get by heart, like the muster-roll of a regiment, and a
great heap of grammar rules, which are to them unintelligible. After he
has laid this foundation of a language, as he imagines, he begins them
with the most difficult of all the Latin poets; and for this plan of
education, he will give you a galimatias of reasons, clothed in the
smoothest language, and delivered with the softest accent."


(_Undated._)

"DEAR BARON,--In my conversation with your young folks yesterday, I
endeavoured to inform myself concerning their progress in Latin. I find
that they are not taught any Latin grammar; they are only instructed in
the sense of single detached words, which they learn, both in Greek and
Latin, at once. Accordingly they told me water, aqua, and υδωρ; but
though I tried them in about half a dozen more words, I could not find
their learning extended so far. All this appears to me very whimsical;
and I doubt a dead language can never be learned in this manner without
grammar. In a living language, the continual application of the words
and phrases teaches at the same time the sense of the words, and their
reference to each other; but a list of words got by heart, without any
connected sense, easily escapes the memory, and is but a small part of
the language."[392:1]


There are several indications that Hume still retained the half-formed
intention of continuing his History through a portion of the period
succeeding the Revolution. In a brief undated letter, written to Smith
in Paris, he says:--

"Some push me to continue my History. Millar offers me any price. All
the Marlborough papers are offered me: and I believe nobody would
venture to refuse me. But _cui bono_? Why should I forego idleness, and
sauntering, and society, and expose myself again to the clamours of a
stupid factious public? I am not yet tired of doing nothing; and am
become too wise either to mind censure or applause. By and bye I shall
be too old to undergo so much labour. Adieu."[392:2]

Smith's opinion is thus reported by Andrew Millar, on 22d November,
1766.

"He is of opinion, with many more of your very good sensible friends,
that the History of this country, from the Revolution, is not to be met
with in books yet printed; but from MSS. in this country, to which he is
sure you will have ready access, from all accounts he hears from the
great here; and therefore you should lay the ground-work here, after
your perusal of the MSS. you may have access to, and doing it below will
be laying the wrong foundation. I think it my duty to inform you the
opinion of your most judicious friends, and I think he and Sir John
Pringle may be reckoned amongst that number."[393:1]

Millar, indeed, seems to have scarcely ever relaxed from urging this
project; and perhaps it was his perseverance, and not any
self-originating desire to pursue the task, that kept the design alive
in Hume's mind. He had written to his worthy publisher on 8th October,
1766:--

"I shall probably do as you advise, and sketch out the outlines of the
two or three subsequent reigns, which I may finish at London, after I
find that there remains no farther obstacles to this work, and that it
is favoured, I do not say by every body, (for that is impossible,) but
by the generality of the world."

At a later date he thus expressed his views:--


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

"_London, 17th July, 1767._

"DEAR SIR,--We are still in as unsettled a condition as when you left
us. There will certainly be a considerable alteration in the ministry;
and I do not at present reckon my principal's situation more precarious
than that of any other minister. He speaks, however, like a man who is
to be out of office in a few days. I have also taken the precaution to
desire him to request of the king, in my name, the liberty, after my
dismission, of inspecting all the public records, and all the papers in
the Paper-office. His majesty was pleased to say, that he very willingly
complied with my request, and was glad to hear of my intentions. But my
chief view is to run over such papers as belong to the period which I
have already wrote, in order to render that part of my History as little
imperfect as possible. It would be folly to think of writing any more;
and even as to correcting, were it not an amusement, to what purpose
would it serve, since I shall certainly never live to see a new
edition?"[394:1]


On the same subject, and in the same tone, he writes to his brother, on
6th October:--

"As to myself, I pass my time, as I told you, in an agreeable enough
kind of business, and not too much of it. My income, also, is at present
very considerable--above £1100 a-year, of which I shall not spend much
above the half. Notwithstanding, I sometimes wish to be out of
employment, in order to prosecute my History, to which every body urges
me. When Mr. Conway was on the point of resigning, I desired him to
propose to the king that I might afterwards have the liberty of
inspecting all the public offices for such papers as might serve to my
purpose. His majesty said, that he was glad that I had that object in my
eye; and I should certainly have all the assistance in his power. He was
also pleased, some time after, to send to me the Baron Behr, minister
for Hanover, to tell me that he had ordered over some papers from
Hanover, to be put into my hands, because he believed they would be of
use to me. I believe I have told you that the use of the Marlborough
papers had been promised me by Lord and Lady Spencer; but Marchmont, who
had some pretence of authority over them, as trustee, delayed giving
them up, suspecting, I suppose, the use they intended to make of
them."[395:1]

Though it was as part of Lord Rockingham's administration that Conway
became secretary of state, and his political connexions attached him to
that leader, he had been prevailed on to retain office on the formation
of the Grafton and Chatham cabinet, in August 1766. In the summer of
1767, that ministry seemed likely to be formidably assailed by the
united efforts of the Rockingham and Bedford parties, whose meetings and
resolutions at Newcastle House are matters well known in history.
General Conway's resignation would have terminated Hume's tenure of
office; and we find, in his correspondence, a few indications of
interest in the political movements of the time; yet so calm and
modified, that even the possession of office seems scarcely to have
affected the stoic philosophy with which he contemplated ministerial
revolutions.

He says to his friend Blair, on the 18th of June:--

"We are all again in confusion. Negotiations for a new ministry; the
fatal month of July approaching; a new settlement to be made, which will
be no settlement. I fancy I return, in a few weeks, to my former
situation."[395:2]

And to Smith, on 14th July:--

"DEAR SMITH,--I send you the enclosed, with a large packet for Count
Sarsfield. This is the last ministerial act which I shall probably
perform; and with this exertion I finish my functions. I shall not
leave this country presently. Perhaps I may go over to France. Our
resignation is a very extraordinary incident, and will probably occasion
a total change of ministry. Are you busy?"[396:1]

His official life, however, was not so near a conclusion as he thought
it was. The following letter is more full and explicit, in regard to
these matters:--

_London, 28th July, 1767._

"DEAR BROTHER,--Were my present situation any object of anxiety, I
should have been very unhappy of late: so uncertain has my continuance
appeared every moment, and so near did my ministerial functions seem to
draw towards their conclusion. But as the matter was very nearly
indifferent to me, I neither felt anxiety for my past danger, nor do I
experience any joy from my present establishment; for we are now
established, for some time at least, and all apprehensions of a change
are removed to a distance. The history of our late transactions is, in
short, as follows: About this time twelvemonth, when the last revolution
of ministry took place, Mr. Conway staid in, though Lord Rockingham, and
most of his friends, were turned out: But it was with reluctance, and
only on the earnest entreaties of the king and Lord Chatham, and on
their giving him a promise that several of his friends and party should
still continue to hold their places. This engagement was broke last
winter. Some of these gentlemen were turned out; and Mr. Conway, after
protesting against this usage, declared, that though he would keep his
office during the session, not to disturb the king's business, he would
resign as soon as the parliament should rise. He accordingly desired the
king, about six weeks ago, to provide him a successor, and was
entreated only to keep the seals till a proper person should be thought
of. When the matter came to be discussed, it was found very difficult.
The Duke of Grafton declared, that being deprived of Lord Chatham's
support, he could not continue to serve without Mr. Conway: and a total
dissolution of the ministry seemed to be the effect of the incident.
Negotiations were accordingly set on foot with the leaders of the
opposition, and a great meeting of them was held last week, at Bedford
House. It was found that they could not, by any means, agree in their
demands; and they separated in mutual discontent. Every body thinks that
Mr. Conway has now satisfied, to the full, the point of honour, in which
he is very scrupulous, and that he will cordially resume his functions,
especially as he stands so well with the king and his fellow ministers,
and has brought it within the choice of his old friends to accept of the
ministry, if they had thought proper. I was beginning to wish for our
dissolution; but upon this turn of affairs, I resume my occupations with
cheerfulness."[397:1]

The remainder of this letter is devoted to a matter in which we have
already frequently found him taking interest--the education of his
nephews. From his earliest to his latest days, his connexion with his
elder brother was cordial and affectionate. On the 6th of October we
find him writing, in a tone which indicates a sympathy with some
domestic calamity which his brother must have suffered:--

"The time of your going to Edinburgh approaches, which makes a great
change in your way of life, and will naturally make yourself, as well as
all your friends, anxious about the issue of it. However, I cannot but
think that you will there live more cheerfully, with all your children
about you, than in the country, during the winter, when your boys were
absent. At first only, as your spirits are not very strong at present,
you may feel uneasy at the alteration, as you are at present somewhat
apprehensive about it."[398:1]

There was apparently but one point in which the two brothers differed;
and it was a subject on which Hume seems to have been at war with all
his clan. The Laird of Ninewells, notwithstanding all the lustre that
had now gathered round the name of _Hume_, would not adopt it in place
of that of _Home_, which his father had borne. He was a simple,
single-hearted man, moderate in all his views and wishes, and neither
ambitious of distinction nor of wealth. He passed his life as a retired
country gentleman; and while Europe was full of his brother's name, he
was so averse to notoriety, that he is known to have objected to the
domestic events of births, marriages, and deaths, in his family,
obtaining the usual publicity through the newspapers.[398:2] His eldest
son, Joseph, frequently mentioned in the following correspondence,
succeeded him in his estate and retired habits, but not entirely in his
disposition; for he indulged in many of the eccentricities and
peculiarities so often exhibited by the Scottish gentry,--a
characteristic they seem to derive from the circumstance, that, in the
British empire, there is no person less liable to encounter an equal,
and to be thwarted in his small exercise of absolute power, than a
Scottish laird. It is evident from his uncle's letters, that Joseph
obtained an excellent education. He was for some time placed under the
charge of poor Blacklock,--an arrangement by which Hume sought to
perform a double act of beneficence.[399:1] Joseph died unmarried, on
14th February, 1832, and was succeeded by his brother David, whose
career was more public and distinguished. He was born on 27th February,
1757,[401:1] and died on 27th July, 1838. He was successively sheriff of
the counties of Berwick and Linlithgow. He was professor of Scots law in
the university of Edinburgh, and a principal clerk of Session. He
subsequently resigned these offices, on his being appointed a Baron of
the Scottish Exchequer. His works are of great authority in the
practical departments of the law. While he taught in the university, his
students zealously collected notes of his lectures; and, as he refused
to permit any version of them to be published, the well preserved
collections of these notes have been considered valuable treasuries of
legal wisdom. In 1790, he published "Commentaries on the law of
Scotland, respecting trials for crimes;" and, in 1797, "Commentaries on
the law of Scotland respecting the description and punishment of
crimes," forming, in four quarto volumes, a comprehensive treatise on
all the departments of the criminal law of Scotland, which has now
passed through three editions. It has been justly remarked, that lawyers
of the present generation, can, with difficulty, appreciate the merit
of this work, because, from its having converted the whole subject it
embraces into a system, the chaotic mass, from which the present
comparatively orderly criminal code of Scotland was constructed, has
disappeared.[402:1]

Few literary reputations have been more unlike each other than those of
the two David Humes, uncle and nephew. The former hated legal details
and the jargon of technical phraseology; to the latter they were the
breath of his literary life. The one, as a philosopher, saw, throughout
a wide circumference of vision, the relations to each other of the most
distant objects of human knowledge; the latter saw nothing beyond the
bounds of the professional details before him; but these he noted with
an unrivalled accuracy. The strength, clearness, and beauty of the
philosopher's language have been a lasting object of admiration; the
lawyer's diction was clumsy, rude, and ponderous, without being either
strong or clear. On one point only did they agree--their political
opinions; and yet, on this subject, they seem not always to have been in
unison. From a very curious letter, which will be found a few pages
farther on, it appears that Hume thought it necessary seriously to warn
his nephew against republican principles. Few, who are only acquainted
with the opinions of Baron Hume's later life, will be inclined to
believe that this danger could ever have been serious. He was a
supporter of all those parts of the criminal law of Scotland,--in his
day not a few,--which put the subject at the mercy of the crown and of
the judges; and a warm admirer of his sagacity and learning, as a
lawyer, cannot quit this subject without regretting that these qualities
should have been brought to aid the promulgation of arbitrary
principles.

The education of his nephews, occupies, as has been already stated, the
remainder of the letter by Hume to his brother above cited.

"My present situation revives those reflections which have frequently
occurred to me concerning the education of your sons, particularly of
Josey, whose age now advances, and seems to approach towards a crisis.
The question is, whether he had better continue his education in
Scotland or in England. There are several advantages of a Scots
education; but the question is, whether that of the language does not
counterbalance them, and determine the preference to the English. He is
now of an age to learn it perfectly; but if a few years elapse, he may
acquire such an accent, as he will never be able to cure of. It is not
yet determined what profession he shall be of: but it must always be of
great advantage to speak properly: especially if it should prove, as we
have reason to hope, that his good parts will open him the road of
ambition. The only inconvenience is, that few Scotsmen, that have had an
English education, have ever settled cordially in their own country; and
they have been commonly lost ever after to their friends. However, as
this consequence is not necessary, the superior recommendations of an
English education ought not to be neglected. I have been making
inquiries for some time, and on the whole I find Eton the best place for
the education of youth. He would there be able to form connexions with
many young people of distinction; though the whole expense would
scarcely exceed £70 a-year, which I fancy is little more than he costs
you at present. I suggest, therefore, this idea to you that you may
weigh it at leisure, and determine upon it. I know you do not like to be
hurried, and therefore the more time for reflection the better. His
friend and companion, young Adam, is coming up soon, but is going to
Westminster school, which is a place that I find some objections to.

"I hope Mrs. Home is perfectly recovered. I am glad to hear such good
news of Jock. I had a letter from Davie last week, which gave me
pleasure. I am, dear brother, yours sincerely."[404:1]

On 13th October, in a letter of which a portion has been cited above,
Hume writes further on the same subject:

"DEAR BROTHER,--I never prognosticated well of Josey's genius for the
mathematics, from his great slowness in learning arithmetic: and I am
not surprised to find that his progress in Euclid has not been so great
as might have been expected from his quickness and his capacity in other
particulars. There is indeed something very unaccountable in his turn;
so childish in many cases, and yet so manly, and quick, and sensible in
others. The presence of strangers, above all, seems to make him
recollect himself, and he is exceedingly taking among them. His address
in particular, is remarkably good, and he seems to have a turn for the
world and for company. However, I do not think him by any means
deficient in his talents for literature. It appeared to me that he
always read his books with a very good taste, Latin as well as French
and English; and I imagine that he will make at least a very
gentlemanlike scholar. I wish therefore he had a further trial of the
Greek; and if that will not do, I think with you that the Italian is an
easy and genteel acquisition, which will furnish him with occupation for
this winter."[405:1]

Hume expressed no high respect for the historical abilities of Dr.
Smollett, nor could he have well expected credit for sincerity if he had
done so. With the works in which the novelist let loose his native
genius, it is not likely that the philosopher could have had much
sympathy. But two letters addressed by him to Smollett, show that the
successful and affluent man of letters was substantially kind and
friendly to his less fortunate countryman.


HUME _to_ TOBIAS SMOLLETT.

"_London, July 18, 1767._

"DEAR SIR,--I have had a conversation with Lord Shelburne concerning
your affairs: he told me that he had long been pre-engaged for the
consulship of Nice to the Spanish ambassador, and could not possibly get
free of that obligation. I then mentioned the consulship of Leghorn; but
he said he was already engaged for that office to a friend of Mr.
Dunning, the lawyer. On the whole, I cannot flatter you with any hopes
of success from that quarter; even supposing his lordship were to remain
in office, which is very uncertain, considering the present state of our
ministry. For of all our annual confusions, the present seems to be the
most violent, and to threaten the most entire revolution, and the most
important events. As Lord Chatham's state of health appears totally
desperate, and as Lord Shelburne's connexion is supposed to be chiefly,
if not solely, with him, many people foretell a short duration to the
greatness of the last named minister. Every thing is uncertain: there is
a mighty combination to overpower the king. The force of the crown is
great; but is not employed with that steadiness which its friends would
wish. I pretend not to foresee, much less to foretell, the consequences.
I am, dear sir, your most obedient, and most humble servant," &c.[406:1]


It has been a matter of speculation, if not of dispute among
ecclesiastical politicians, how far Hume had an influence in the
dispensation of church patronage in Scotland. The following letters,
having however a more immediate reference to state politics, may be held
to afford some light on this question.


HUME _to_ SIR GILBERT ELLIOT.[406:2]

"_London, 13th August, 1767._

"DEAR SIR GILBERT,--I am told that the minister of Kirkton, in the
Presbytery of Jedburgh, is either dying, or is to be removed, and that
the living is in the gift of the crown. I have spoke to General Conway
desiring that, in case no unexpected difficulties occur, he may give it
to my nephew's tutor; and he has agreed to it. I have since heard, that
the living, though it stands in our list as a crown presentation, is
alternately in the gift of Sir John Elliot of Stobs, and Cavers Douglas.
I shall be much obliged to you, if, without mentioning the reason, you
could make inquiries, and give me information.

"You have heard, no doubt, that all our negotiations have vanished, and
that our present ministry is settled on a firmer basis than ever. Mr.
Conway's delicacy of honour was satisfied, by bringing his old friends
the Rockinghams to have an offer; and as it was impossible for them to
concert a ministry, he has agreed to act cordially with the Duke of
Grafton: the king is very happy that no changes are to have place. I do
not reckon the change in Ireland for any thing, because Lord Bristol
goes out at his own earnest and repeated desire. I am told that Lord
Townsend openly ascribes his own promotion entirely to the friendship of
Lord Bute. Charles Fitzroy lately, in a great meeting, proposed Lord
Bute's health in a bumper. It will be a surprise to you certainly, if
that noble lord should again come into fashion, and openly avow his
share of influence, and be openly courted by all the world. I am, dear
Sir Gilbert, yours sincerely."[407:1]


"_10th Sept. 1767._

"DEAR SIR GILBERT,--Lord North has refused the office of Chancellor
of the Exchequer; though it was earnestly pressed upon him, and
though he professed an entire satisfaction with every person in the
administration. He dreads the labour of the office, especially as it
obliges him to take so great a part in the business of the House of
Commons. It will not probably be offered to any Scotsman, for fear of
popular reflections concerning the influence of the Thane. The same
objection, as well as others, lie against Dyson, who has been thought
of. I see the ministry in some perplexity; perhaps this incident may
draw on new resignations and negotiations, and cabals. I think one
defect of the present situation of our government is, that nobody
desires much to have any share in the administration, except
adventurers, of whom the public is naturally distrustful. The pecuniary
emoluments are of no consideration to men of rank and fortune. You have
often more personal regard from being in the opposition. The protection
of the law is at all times sufficient for your security; and by
acquiring authority you are exposed to insults, instead of gaining the
power to revenge them.[408:1] Why, then, should a man of birth, fortune,
and parts, sacrifice his fame and peace to an ungrateful public? Such is
the defect that arises from the perfection of the most perfect
government."[408:2]

The next in the chronological order of Hume's letters, reverts to the
prospect of his continuing his History.


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

"_19th October, 1767._

"DEAR SIR,--The picture which Donaldson has done for me is a drawing;
and, in every body's opinion, as well as my own, is the likest that has
been done for me, as well as the best likeness. Since you still insist
that an engraving should be made from it, we are [thus] more likely to
have a good engraving made than by any other means. I shall, however, be
glad to sit to Ferguson.[409:1] I intend to give up all my leisure time
to the correction of my History, and to contrive more leisure than I
have possessed since I came into public office. I had run over four
volumes; but I shall give them a second perusal, and employ the same, or
greater accuracy in correcting the other four. I shall read carefully
all the records in the Paper Office, as far back as they go, and shall
leave nothing untried that may bestow the greatest exactness upon it.
For this reason, as well as many others, I would not have you
precipitate this edition, which is probably the last that I may have
occasion to make. I would wish to leave that work as little imperfect as
possible to posterity. I am," &c.[409:2]


Gibbon tells us, in his amusing autobiography, that with the assistance
of his friend Deyverdun, he had written in French a portion of a history
of Switzerland, and that the opinions he heard expressed when a fragment
of it was anonymously read before a society in London, prompted him to
abandon the work, and burn the portion he had written. "I delivered," he
says, "my imperfect sketches to the flames." Yet, singularly enough, he
seems to have confounded the intention with the fulfilment, for they
were discovered after his death, but were not thought worthy of being
published by his literary executor, Lord Sheffield.[409:3] Gibbon had
endeavoured to find for his friend Deyverdun some employment in
England, picturesquely observing, that his own "purse was always open,
but it was often empty." They wrote in company some numbers of a
periodical, now very rare, called "Mémoires Littéraires de La Grande
Bretagne," and Gibbon informs us that these specimens of their labours
introduced them to the notice of Hume,[410:1] in whose office Deyverdun
held an appointment at the date of the following letter:--


GIBBON _to_ HUME.

     _Baiton, 4th October, 1767._

     SIR,--A six years' residence in Switzerland inspired me with
     the design of writing a general history of that brave and free
     people, so little known to the rest of Europe, but whom I had
     studied with some attention. This design was dropt almost as
     soon as conceived, from the almost insurmountable difficulty
     of procuring proper materials, as they were mostly in German,
     a language I am totally unacquainted with. A Swiss gentleman,
     and intimate friend of mine, has removed that difficulty. Mr.
     Deyverdun, who passed the summer with me in the country two
     years ago, approved very much my design, and offered to assist
     me by translating what was most difficult, himself, and by
     superintending a German translator, as to the remainder. He is
     now returning to London after a much shorter visit than I
     desired; and as he has the happiness of supporting some
     connexion with you, I flattered myself that you might indulge
     a wish, perhaps presumptuous, that I had conceived, and that
     you would condescend to glance your eye over the sheets of
     this History, which I had already drawn up in a language
     indeed foreign to an Englishman, but which the favourable
     reception of a former essay engaged me to make use of.

     Give me leave, sir, to add, that I must beg you to consider
     this liberty as a proof of my respect; and that I shall
     consider your severity as a mark of your esteem. If you
     advise me to burn what I have already wrote, I shall
     immediately execute your sentence, with a full persuasion that
     it is just. Let me say, however, I have perhaps vanity enough
     to make so unlimited a sacrifice to no man in Europe but to
     Mr. Hume. I am, sir, with the greatest esteem, your most
     obedient humble servant,

                                   E. GIBBON, Junior.[411:1]


HUME _to_ GIBBON.

"_London, 24th October, 1767._

"SIR,--It is but a few days since Mr. Deyverdun put your manuscript into
my hands; and I have perused it with great pleasure and satisfaction. I
have only one objection, derived from the language in which it is
written. Why do you compose in French, and carry fagots into the wood,
as Horace says, with regard to the Romans who wrote in Greek? I grant,
that you have a like motive to those Romans, and adopt a language much
more generally diffused than your native tongue: but have you not
remarked the fate of those two ancient languages in following ages? The
Latin, though then less celebrated, and confined to more narrow limits,
has, in some measure, outlived the Greek, and is now more generally
understood by men of letters. Let the French, therefore, triumph in the
present diffusion of their tongue. Our solid and increasing
establishments in America, where we need less dread the inundation of
barbarians, promise a superior stability and duration to the English
language.

"Your use of the French tongue has also led you into a style more
poetical and figurative, and more highly coloured, than our language
seems to admit of in historical productions: for such is the practice of
French writers, particularly the more recent ones, who illuminate their
pictures more than custom will permit us. On the whole, your History, in
my opinion, is written with spirit and judgment; and I exhort you very
earnestly to continue it. The objections that occurred to me on reading
it were so frivolous, that I shall not trouble you with them, and
should, I believe, have a difficulty to collect them. I am, with great
esteem," &c.[412:1]


Some remarks communicated to Dr. Robertson, on his "History of Charles
V." while that work was passing through the press, have deservedly
attracted notice by their unconstrained and natural playfulness.


HUME _to_ DR. ROBERTSON.

     I got yesterday from Strahan about thirty sheets of your
     History to be sent over to Suard, and last night and this
     morning have run them over with great avidity. I could not
     deny myself the satisfaction (which I hope also will not
     displease you) of expressing presently my extreme approbation
     of them. To say only that they are very well written, is by
     far too faint an expression, and much inferior to the
     sentiments I feel. They are composed with nobleness, with
     dignity, with elegance, and with judgment, to which there are
     few equals. They even excel, and, I think, in a sensible
     degree, your "History of Scotland." I propose to myself great
     pleasure in being the only man in England, during some months,
     who will be in the situation of doing you justice,--after
     which you may certainly expect that my voice will be drowned
     in that of the public.

     You know that you and I have always been on the footing of
     finding in each other's productions _something to blame, and
     something to commend_; and therefore you may perhaps expect
     also some seasoning of the former kind; but really neither my
     leisure nor inclination allowed me to make such remarks; and I
     sincerely believe you have afforded me very small materials
     for them. However, such particulars as occur to my memory, I
     shall mention. _Maltreat_ is a Scoticism which occurs once.
     What the devil had you to do with that old fashioned dangling
     word _wherewith_? I should as soon take back _whereupon_,
     _whereunto_, and _wherewithal_. I think the only tolerable
     decent gentleman of the family is _wherein_; and I should not
     choose to be often seen in his company. But I know your
     affection for _wherewith_ proceeds from your partiality to
     Dean Swift, whom I can often laugh with, whose style I can
     even approve, but surely can never admire. It has no harmony,
     no eloquence, no ornament; and not much correctness, whatever
     the English may imagine. Were not their literature still in a
     somewhat barbarous state, that author's place would not be so
     high among their classics. But what a fancy is this you have
     taken of saying always _an hand_, _an heart_, _an head_? Have
     you _an ear_? Do you not know that this (n) is added before
     vowels to prevent the cacophony, and ought never to take place
     before (h) when that letter is sounded? It is never pronounced
     in these words; why should it be wrote? Thus, I should say, _a
     history_, and _an historian_; and so would you too, if you had
     any sense. But you tell me that Swift does otherwise. To be
     sure there is no reply to that; and we must swallow your
     _hath_ too upon the same authority. I will see you d----d
     sooner. But I will endeavour to keep my temper.

     I do not like this sentence in page 149: _This step was taken
     in consequence of the treaty Wolsey had concluded with the
     Emperor at Brussels, and which had hitherto been kept secret._
     Si sic omnia dixisses, I should never have been plagued with
     hearing your praises so often sounded, and that fools
     preferred your style to mine. Certainly it had been better to
     have said, _which_ Wolsey, &c. That relative ought very seldom
     to be omitted; and is here particularly requisite to preserve
     a symmetry between the two members of the sentence. You omit
     the relative too often, which is a colloquial barbarism, as Mr
     Johnson calls it.

     Your periods are sometimes, though not often, too long. Suard
     will be embarrassed with them, as the modish French style runs
     into the other extreme.[413:1]

Turgot, at the instigation of some Italian friends, had applied to Hume
to recommend a scholar, who would undertake to teach the English
language and literature at Parma. He selected Robert Liston; but he had
overlooked an objection which the enlightened promoters of the scheme in
Italy appear to have considered too obvious to require preliminary
explanation, that Liston was a Protestant! In returning thanks to Hume
for the unavailing recommendation, Liston discovers the bent of his
genius, by desiring that, if an opportunity should occur, Hume would
recommend him as secretary of legation to any of the secondary
embassies. The fate of the Parma scheme was thus communicated to Elliot.


HUME _to_ SIR GILBERT ELLIOT.

"_London, 5th July, 1768._

"DEAR SIR GILBERT,--I beg of you to direct the enclosed to poor Liston,
who will be disappointed in the scheme for Parma: they will have nothing
but a Papist. Such fools! Let the Pope excommunicate them on the one
hand: I will do so on the other.

"I have seen a book newly printed at Edinburgh, called 'Philosophical
Essays:' it has no manner of sense in it, but is wrote with tolerable
neatness of style: whence I conjecture it to be our friend, Sir
David's.[414:1] I am obliged to him for the treatment which he destines
me, to be locked up for five years in a dungeon, and then to be hanged,
and my carcass to be thrown out of Scotland. He supports himself,
indeed, by the authority of Plato, whom I own to be truly divine. Pray,
have you seen the book? Is it Sir David's? I think it has not so many
attempts at humour, as that pious gentleman would employ.

"We are all very quiet here; as quiet as you are at Minto, though
perhaps not so busy. No more noise of Wilkes and Liberty. Lord Mansfield
said to me, that it was impossible for him to condemn him to the
pillory, because the attorney-general did not demand it. Yesterday he
represented to the Spanish ambassador, that moderate sentence, as a
refinement in politics, which reduced the scoundrel the sooner to
obscurity. It would be a strange cause, which he could not find
plausible reasons to justify.

"I beg to be remembered to Lady Elliot, and to any of your family who
may be at Minto. I ever am, dear Sir Gilbert, yours sincerely."[415:1]


SIR GILBERT ELLIOT _to_ HUME.

     "_Minto, 11th July, 1768._

     "I am sorry, my dear sir, for poor Liston's disappointment. I
     am told he thought himself secure. I have seen the book you
     mention; but you do injustice to our friend Sir David. He is
     not the author; but a very moral and worthy man, who, I
     believe, once had the honour to attend you in some of your
     writings before,--his name James Balfour--at least I am told
     so. The young feudal author, Gilbert Stewart, is just now in
     my neighbourhood; and, his father tells me, impatient, to a
     great degree, for your letter. It seems he is much your
     admirer. However, I hope my criticisms, on some parts of his
     work, may keep him from carrying his admiration, on some
     points, too far. Not that I mean to close with my friend, Mr.
     Balfour, in his candid proposition for treating you after the
     manner of the divine Plato. I rest entirely on you for
     politics, changes of ministry, foreign politics, and domestic
     occurrences. I have now no correspondents; and I did not think
     it prudent to engage with any ministerial men; as I might be
     led, in such a correspondence, to commit mistakes, which may
     be inconvenient next winter. Farming, I find, is very
     expensive--days' wages now at a shilling; but our fields are
     green, and the hedges thrive. I hope to see your brother this
     autumn. He is very orthodox, I am told, so far as husbandry
     goes. I hope to hear your love affair, and your King William,
     are in a good way. My wife not yet arrived. Yours," &c.[416:1]

Gilbert Stuart, then unknown to fame, whether good or bad, and still
possessed of any small portion of modesty he had ever been endowed with,
was about to publish his little work on the British constitution, the
temporary celebrity of which had so prejudicial an effect on his
subsequent career. We shall afterwards have an opportunity of noticing
him on an occasion when he seems to have thought that the relation which
Hume and he bore to each other, in 1768, of humble admirer and
distinguished patron, was reversed in his favour.


HUME _to_ SIR GILBERT ELLIOT.

"_22d July, 1768._

"DEAR SIR GILBERT,--I send you my letter enclosed to Mr. Stewart; which
I hope is calculated to encourage a young man of merit. Without
overstraining the compliment, it were better, however, for him, and for
every body, to pursue, in preference to the idle trade of writing, some
other lawful occupation, such as cheating like an attorney; quacking
like a physician; canting and hypocrising like a parson, &c. &c. &c. It
is for very little purpose to go out of the common track. Does he
expect to make men wiser? a very pretty expectation truly!

"I fancy the ministry will remain; though surely their late remissness,
or ignorance, or pusillanimity, ought to make them ashamed to show their
faces, were it even at Newmarket. There are fine doings in America. O!
how I long to see America and the East Indies revolted, totally and
finally,--the revenue reduced to half,--public credit fully discredited
by bankruptcy,--the third of London in ruins, and the rascally mob
subdued! I think I am not too old to despair of being witness to all
these blessings. I approve of your farming scheme, notwithstanding the
expense; though your situation, as well for markets as means of
improvement, is not advantageous. My brother's advice may be of use to
you; but you are always to remember that he is of the sect of the
_médecin tant pis_; had he possessed enterprise, proportioned to his
industry and skill, he might have gone far in that way.[417:1]

"I continue my parasitical practices; that is, of dining at all the
great tables that remain in London. We are likely to be plagued with
this King of Denmark; though not so much as formerly with Canute the
Great. I have some thoughts of paying a visit to France this autumn;
that is, if I can collect enough of resolution to leave the present
place of abode.

"When I wrote last, I did not know that Lady ---- had eloped; that
practice continues very fashionable here; and it is to be hoped will
spread itself more and more every day!

"I thought Sir David had been the only Christian that could write
English on the other side of the Tweed. I did not think of Balfour. It
is very true he would fain, I see, be candid, and civil, as in his other
book; if his zeal for the house of the Lord would permit him.

"Lord Bute certainly sets out this day se'ennight, and, it is said, is
in a very bad state of health.

"Lord Chatham is a greater paradox than ever:--is seen at home by no
human creature;--absolutely by none! rides twenty miles every day,--is
seen on the road, and appears in perfect good health; but will now speak
to no creature he meets. I am much persuaded, all is quackery;--he is
not mad; that is, no madder than usual."[418:1]


Towards the end of the year 1768, poor Smollett, with his spirit crushed
by the united calamities of a broken constitution and ruined fortunes,
sought to retrieve his health, by travelling in Italy. Before commencing
his journey, he wrote the following letter; in which the too apparent
tone of despondency is yet insufficient to damp the kindly warmth of his
feelings:--


TOBIAS SMOLLETT _to_ HUME.

     _London, 31st August, 1768._

     DEAR SIR,--Perhaps I overrate my own consequence when I
     presume to recommend to your acquaintance and good offices,
     the bearer, Captain Robert Stobo; a man whose very
     extraordinary services and sufferings in America, have
     merited, and obtained the most ample and honourable
     testimonials, which he will gladly submit to your perusal. I
     can safely say from my own knowledge, that he is not less
     modest and sensible in the conversation and occurrences of
     civil life, than enterprising and indefatigable in his
     military capacity. All these good qualities, united to an
     extensive knowledge of our American concerns, cannot fail to
     engage the friendship and regard of Mr. David Hume, from what
     quarter so ever they may come recommended.

     With respect to myself, I am sorry I cannot have the pleasure
     of taking leave of you in person, before I go into perpetual
     exile. I sincerely wish you all health and happiness. In
     whatever part of the earth it may be my fate to reside, I
     shall always remember with pleasure, and recapitulate with
     pride, the friendly intercourse I have maintained with one of
     the best men, and undoubtedly the best writer of the age; if
     any judgment in distinguishing either character or capacity
     may be allowed to, dear sir, your very humble servant,

                                             T{S} SMOLLETT.

          Nos patriam fugimus: tu, Tityre, lentus in umbra,
          Formosam resonare doces Amaryllida silvas.[419:1]


HUME _to_ TOBIAS SMOLLETT.

"_Ragley,[419:2] September 21, 1768._

"MY DEAR SIR,--I did not see your friend, Captain Stobo, till the day
before I left Cirencester, and only for a little time; but he seemed to
be a man of good sense, and has surely had the most extraordinary
adventures in the world. He has promised to call on me when he comes to
London, and I shall always see him with pleasure.

"But what is this you tell me of your perpetual exile, and of your never
returning to this country? I hope that as this idea arose from the bad
state of your health, it will vanish on your recovery; which, from your
past experience, you may expect from those happier climates to which you
are retiring; after which the desire of revisiting your native country
will probably return upon you, unless the superior cheapness of foreign
countries prove an obstacle, and detain you there. I could wish that
means had been fallen on to remove this objection; and that at least it
might be equal to you to live any where, except where the consideration
of your health gave the preference to one climate above another. But the
indifference of ministers towards literature, which has been long, and
indeed always, the case in England, gives little prospect of any
alteration in this particular.

"I am sensible of your great partiality, in the good opinion you express
towards me; but it gives me no less pleasure than if it were founded on
the greatest truth, for I accept it as a pledge of your good will and
friendship. I wish an opportunity of showing my sense of it may present
itself during your absence. I assure you I should embrace it with great
alacrity, and you need have no scruple, on every occasion, of having
recourse to me. I am, my dear sir, with great esteem and sincerity, your
most obedient, and most humble servant," &c.[420:1]


Of the following remarkable letter, the first paragraph, relating to the
success of John Home's new play, has already been published.[420:2] The
remainder will probably be as surprising to the reader as it is new. It
is very evident that Hume exercised towards the great Chatham, Dr.
Johnson's virtue of honest hatred. There was indeed little love lost
between these great contemporaries; for Chatham fiercely attacked the
constitutional doctrines of the History of England, and Hume looked upon
the national idol as an unprincipled demagogue. The words with which
the observations on the Douglas cause conclude, are evidence of the
contempt which, amidst all his Tory prepossessions, Hume preserved for
merely hereditary rank, and indeed for all nominal and outward marks of
distinction, which were not allied to intellectual superiority.


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

"_Park Place, London, 28th March, 1769._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--'The Fatal Discovery' succeeded, and deserved it. It has
feeling, though not equal to 'Douglas,' in my opinion. The versification
of it is not enough finished. Our friend escaped by lying concealed; but
the success of all plays in this age is very feeble; and people now heed
the theatre almost as little as the pulpit.[421:1] History now is the
favourite reading, and our other friend[421:2] the favourite historian.
Nothing can be more successful than his last production; nor more
deservedly. I agree with you, it is beyond his first performance, as was
indeed natural to be expected. I hope, for a certain reason, which I
keep to myself, that he does not intend, in his third work, to go beyond
his second, though I am damnably afraid he will, for the subject is much
more interesting. Neither the character of Charles V., nor the incidents
of his life, are very interesting; and, were it not for the first
volume, the success of this work, though perfectly well writ, would not
have been so shining.

"This madness about Wilkes excited first indignation, then apprehension;
but has gone to such a height that all other sentiments with me are
buried in ridicule. This exceeds the absurdity of Titus Gates and the
Popish plot: and is so much more disgraceful to the nation, as the
former folly, being derived from religion, flowed from a source which
has from uniform prescription acquired a right to impose nonsense on all
nations and all ages. But the present extravagance is peculiar to
ourselves, and quite risible. However, I am afraid my mirth will soon be
spoilt, and affairs become quite serious; for I am well assured that
Lord Chatham will, after the holidays, creep out from his retreat and
appear on the scene.

     Depositis novus exuviis, nitidusque juventâ,
     Volvitur ad solem et linguis micat ore trisulcis.

"I know not if I cite Virgil exactly,[422:1] but I am sure I apply him
right. This villain is to thunder against the violation of the Bill of
Rights in not allowing the county of Middlesex the choice of its
member! Think of the impudence of that fellow,[423:1] and his
quackery--and his cunning--and his audaciousness: and judge of the
influence he will have over such a deluded multitude.

"I was struck with a very sensible indignation at the decision of the
Douglas cause,[423:2] though I foresaw it for some time. It was
abominable with regard to poor Andrew Stuart, who had conducted that
cause with singular ability and integrity; and was at last exposed to
reproach, which unfortunately never can be wiped off. For the cause,
though not in the least intricate, is so complicated, that it never will
be reviewed by the public, who are besides perfectly pleased with the
sentence; being swayed by compassion and a few popular topics. To one
who understands the cause as I do, nothing could appear more scandalous
than the pleadings of the two law lords. Such gross misrepresentation,
such impudent assertions, such groundless imputations, never came from
that place. But all was good enough for their audience; who, bating
their quality, are most of them little better than their brethren the
Wilkites in the streets.

"I am very much obliged to you for giving me the acquaintance of your
cousin, Mr. Blair,[423:3] who seems, indeed, to me, a very accomplished
young man. The death of your brother-in-law is a great loss to you, and
even to us all. I comprehend myself; for I intend to visit you soon, and
for good and all. Indeed, I know not what detains me here, except that
it is so much a matter of indifference where I live; and I am amused
with looking on the scene, which really begins to be interesting. I had
taken one of Allan Ramsay's houses;[424:1] but gave it up again, on the
representation of some of my friends in Edinburgh, who said that a
house, on the north side of a high hill, in the 56th degree of latitude,
could not be healthful. But I now repent it, though I have my old house
to retreat to till I get a better. I am glad you like my nephew. He is,
indeed, clever, though, I am afraid, a little giddy.[424:2]"


Andrew Stuart, who is noticed in the preceding letter, and has
frequently been referred to in Hume's correspondence, was a man of great
talent. His letters to Lord Mansfield, on the Douglas cause, remarkable
for their solemn asperity, belong to a species of literature, of which
the English language scarcely boasts of any other instance,--a
systematic and serious arraignment of the conduct of a Judge in the
highest court in the realm, by the law agent of a litigant! Stuart
conducted the investigations in France, on which the evidence that the
children said to be born to Lady Jane Douglas were spurious, was
founded; and from the strange circumstances brought forward in the
evidence, we can imagine that, if Stuart had left a diary of his
adventures and inquiries, few works of fiction could be more
interesting. His arraignment of the judge was accompanied by an act
almost equally anomalous: his challenging the counsel on the other
side--who was Mr. Wedderburn, afterwards Lord Loughborough--on account
of the manner in which his conduct had been spoken of in the appeal
case. The challenge was accepted; but neither party was wounded. From
occasional allusions, in Hume's correspondence, he and Stuart appear to
have been early friends; and many of the letters, which he preserved,
within a few years of his death, are from Stuart, who, occasionally,
appears to write in acknowledgment of pecuniary advances. Among Hume's
papers, there is a letter, of which the address has not been preserved,
but in which there is a note, in Baron Hume's handwriting, that it was,
"respecting his friend Stuart--Andrew, I suppose." The letter has a
sufficient interest in itself. It is as follows:--


"MY DEAR SIR,--Nothing can be more just than the sentiment you have
expressed in your letter. I am to be envied for having had it in my
power to contribute to the happiness of the best man, and the most
intimate friend I have ever had in the world. There is nothing else in
the possession of a fortune that deserves the least envy or the least
consideration. Every man is independent who thinks himself so. But every
man has not been blessed with such a friend, or with the power of
showing, in some small degree, the value he puts upon worth, delicacy,
attachment, and ability like his. It adds to my happiness not a little,
that your sentiments coincide so entirely with mine. You have known
Stuart enough to value him as much as I do; and he has too much
discernment not to put the same high value upon you, which you have
commanded from every one of your friends."


Hume received a letter from the Abbé Morellet, dated 15th May
1769,[426:1] requesting him to accept of a copy of his forthcoming
"Prospectus d'un Nouveau Dictionnaire de Commerce;" and to distribute
some others among a list of names, including those of Adam Smith and
Benjamin Franklin. The comprehensive work of which the Abbé thus
developed what he considered the proper principles, was never written by
him. He was too much occupied with fugitive literature, and the
absorbing politics of the time, to be able seriously to pursue a project
involving so much steady industry. Hume answered as follows:--


HUME _to the_ ABBÉ MORELLET.

     _London, 10th July, 1769._

     That part of your prospectus, in which you endeavour to prove
     that there enters nothing of human convention in the
     establishment of money, is certainly very curious, and very
     elaborately composed; and yet I cannot forbear thinking that
     the common opinion has some foundation. It is true, money must
     always be made of some materials, which have intrinsic value,
     otherwise it would be multiplied without end, and would sink
     to nothing. But, when I take a shilling, I consider it not as
     a useful metal, but as something which another will take from
     me; and the person who shall convert it into metal is,
     probably, several millions of removes distant. You know that
     all states have made it criminal to melt their coin; and,
     though this is a law which cannot well be executed, it is not
     to be supposed that, if it could, it would entirely destroy
     the value of the money, according to your hypothesis. You have
     a base coin, called billon, in France, composed of silver and
     copper, which has a ready currency, though the separation of
     the two metals, and the reduction of them to their primitive
     state, would, I am told, be both expensive and troublesome.
     Our shillings and sixpences, which are almost our only silver
     coin, are so much worn by use, that they are twenty, thirty,
     or forty per cent. below their original value; yet they pass
     currently; which can arise only from a tacit convention. Our
     colonies in America, for want of specie, used to coin a paper
     currency; which were not bank notes, because there was no
     place appointed to give money in exchange: yet this paper
     currency passed in all payments, by convention; and might have
     gone on, had it not been abused by the several assemblies, who
     issued paper without end, and thereby discredited the
     currency.

     You mention several kinds of money, sheep, oxen, fish,
     employed as measures of exchange, or as money, in different
     parts of the world. You have overlooked that, in our colony of
     Pennsylvania, the land itself, which is the chief commodity,
     is coined, and passes in circulation. The manner of conducting
     this affair is as follows:--A planter, immediately after he
     purchases any land, can go to a public office and receive
     notes to the amount of half the value of his land; which notes
     he employs in all payments, and they circulate through the
     whole colony, by convention. To prevent the public from being
     overwhelmed by this fictitious money, there are two means
     employed--first, the notes issued to any one planter, must not
     exceed a certain sum, whatever may be the value of his land:
     secondly, every planter is obliged to pay back into the public
     office every year one-tenth part of his notes; the whole, of
     course, is annihilated in ten years; after which, it is again
     allowed him to take out new notes to half the value of his
     land. An account of this curious operation would enrich your
     dictionary; and you may have a more particular detail of it,
     if you please, from Dr. Franklin, who will be in Paris about
     this time, and will be glad to see you. I conveyed to him your
     prospectus, and he expressed to me a great esteem of it.

     I see that, in your prospectus, you take care not to disoblige
     your economists, by any declaration of your sentiments; in
     which I commend your prudence. But I hope that in your work
     you will thunder them, and crush them, and pound them, and
     reduce them to dust and ashes! They are, indeed, the set of
     men the most chimerical and most arrogant that now exist,
     since the annihilation of the Sorbonne. I ask your pardon for
     saying so, as I know you belong to that venerable body. I
     wonder what could engage our friend, M. Turgot, to herd among
     them; I mean, among the economists; though I believe he was
     also a Sorbonnist.

     I sent your prospectus to Dr. Tucker, but have not heard from
     him since. I shall myself deliver copies to Dr. Robertson and
     Mr. Smith, as I go to Scotland this autumn.

     And now, my dear Abbé, what remains to me but to wish you
     success in your judicious labours? to embrace you, and through
     you, to embrace all our common friends, D'Alembert, Helvétius,
     Buffon, Baron d'Holbach, Suard, Mlle. L'Espinasse? Poor Abbé
     Le Bon is dead, I hear. The Abbé Galliani goes to Naples: he
     does well to leave Paris before I come thither; for I should
     certainly put him to death for all the ill he has spoken of
     England. But it has happened, as was foretold by his friend,
     Caraccioli; who said that the Abbé would remain two months in
     this country, would speak all himself, would not allow an
     Englishman to utter a syllable; and after returning would give
     the character of the nation during the rest of his life, as if
     he were perfectly well acquainted with them.

     Pray make my compliments to M. Maletête. Tell him, that Prince
     Masserane says, that he has saved much effusion of blood to
     this country. It is certain that M. Maletête had a great
     curiosity to see a riot here, and yet was resolved to keep his
     person in safety. For this purpose, he hired a window; and
     proposed to be present at one of the mad elections of Wilkes,
     and to divert himself with the fray. Somebody got a hint of
     it, and put it into the newspapers; asking the freeholders if
     they were so degenerate as to make themselves a laughing
     stock, even to the French, their enemies, whom they despised.
     Prince Masserane alleges that this incident made that election
     so remarkably peaceable!

     Are you acquainted with Crébillon? I am ashamed to mention his
     name. He sent me over his last work, with a very obliging
     letter: but as I must write to him in French, I have never
     answered him. If all the English were as impertinent as I am,
     the Abbé Galliani would have reason to abuse us.--I am, dear
     Abbé, after asking your blessing, yours sincerely.[428:1]

"I returned to Edinburgh in 1769," says Hume in his "own Life," "very
opulent, (for I possessed a revenue of £1000 a-year) healthy, and though
somewhat stricken in years, with the prospect of enjoying long my ease,
and of seeing the increase of my reputation." He had thus finally
triumphed over the temptations which assailed him abroad, and resolved
to spend the remainder of his days among the friends of his youth. He
had received very strong solicitations from Madame de Boufflers and
others, to take up his abode at Paris. In one letter she informs him
that there is a house prepared for him in the Temple, and another with a
large garden near the Bois de Boulogne.[429:1] To these pressing offers
he seems not to have trusted himself with rendering a direct answer,
leaving his projects undefined, until, by returning to Edinburgh, he
rendered the acceptance of such invitations impracticable. Fairly
re-established in his old house in James's Court, and enjoying its
magnificent prospect, we find him thus writing to Smith:--


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_James's Court, 20th August, 1769._

"DEAR SMITH,--I am glad to have come within sight of you, and to have a
view of Kirkaldy from my windows: but as I wish also to be within
speaking terms of you, I wish we could concert measures for that
purpose. I am mortally sick at sea, and regard with horror, and a kind
of hydrophobia, the great gulf[429:2] that lies between us. I am also
tired of travelling; as much as you ought naturally to be of staying at
home. I therefore propose to you to come hither, and pass some days with
me in this solitude. I want to know what you have been doing; and
propose to exact a rigorous account of the method in which you have
employed yourself during your retreat. I am positive you are in the
wrong in many of your speculations, especially where you have the
misfortune to differ from me. All these are reasons for our meeting, and
I wish you would make me some reasonable proposal for that purpose.
There is no habitation on the island of Inchkeith, otherwise I should
challenge you to meet me on that spot, and neither of us ever to leave
the place, till we were fully agreed on all points of controversy. I
expect General Conway here to morrow, whom I shall attend to Roseneath,
and I shall remain there a few days. On my return, I expect to find a
letter from you, containing a bold acceptance of this defiance. I am,
dear Smith, yours sincerely."[430:1]


The letters addressed to Hume at this time, show that he had made
inquiries with the view of continuing the education of his nephews at
one of the English universities. The following letter explains the
reason why this plan was not adopted.


HUME _to_ SIR GILBERT ELLIOT.

"_Edinburgh, 16th October, 1769._

"DEAR SIR GILBERT,--I am very much obliged to you for the pains you have
taken to give me an account of your sons' expenses and management at
Oxford. I found my brother undetermined, or rather averse, to the
project. He thinks his son rather inclines to be dissipated and idle;
and believes that a year or two at Oxford would confirm him thoroughly
in that habit, without any other advantage than the acquiring of a
little better pronunciation; for this reason he seems rather inclined to
try him a year in the Law College here, before he makes him so much his
own master.

"I have been settled here two months, and am here body and soul, without
casting the least thought of regret to London, or even to Paris. I think
it improbable that I shall ever in my life cross the Tweed, except
perhaps a jaunt to the north of England, for health or amusement. I live
still, and must for a twelvemonth, in my old house in James's Court,
which is very cheerful, and even elegant, but too small to display my
great talent for cookery, the science to which I intend to addict the
remaining years of my life! I have just now lying on the table before
me, a receipt for making _soupe à la reine_, copied with my own hand:
for beef and cabbage, (a charming dish,) and old mutton, and old claret,
nobody excels me. I make also sheep-head broth, in a manner that Mr.
Keith speaks of it for eight days after; and the Duc de Nivernois would
bind himself apprentice to my lass to learn it. I have already sent a
challenge to David Moncreif: you will see that in a twelvemonth he will
take to the writing of history, the field I have deserted; for as to the
giving of dinners, he can now have no further pretensions. I should have
made a very bad use of my abode in Paris, if I could not get the better
of a mere provincial like him. All my friends encourage me in this
ambition; as thinking it will redound very much to my honour.

"I am delighted to see the daily and hourly progress of madness, and
folly, and wickedness in England. The consummation of these qualities
are the true ingredients for making a fine narrative in history,
especially if followed by some signal and ruinous convulsion,--as I
hope will soon be the case with that pernicious people! He must be a
very bad cook indeed, who cannot make a palatable dish from the whole.
You see in my reflexions and allusions, I shall mix my old and new
professions together. I am, dear Sir Gilbert, your most obedient humble
servant," &c.[432:1]


HUME _to_ SIR GILBERT ELLIOT.

"_Edinburgh, 5th February, 1770._

"DEAR SIR GILBERT,--I do not know whether you be good for any thing, or
at all worth the applying to; I rather suspect not: but in case you are,
I make you the following application in favour of Christopher Tate,
probationer, who was tutor to my nephews. You know I resigned my
pretensions on the presentation of Humbie to your nephew's tutor; but
under promise, that you would assist me in a like case. This kirk is a
king's presentation; it is within your county, and I very earnestly
desire success in this application, and trust much to your friendship in
it.

"The last unexpected incident strikes us mute with astonishment; either
the Duke of Grafton is much to blame for leaving us so abruptly in so
very critical a time, or a greater than he, if he got any just cause for
it. I carry my view to very dismal consequences, especially as I suspect
the last to be the case. I fancy we shall have curious scenes, worthy
the pen of the greatest historian. I am tired and disgusted with
conjecture. My compliments to Lady Elliot. Believe me to be very
sincerely, your affectionate humble servant," &c.[432:2]


To Smith, whose "Wealth of Nations" was now supposed to be nearly ready
for the press, we find the following letter:--


"_6th February, 1770._

"What is the meaning of this, dear Smith, which we hear, that you are
not to be here above a day or two, on your passage to London? How can
you so much as entertain a thought of publishing a book full of reason,
sense, and learning, to those wicked abandoned madmen?

"I suppose you have not yet got over your astonishment at this most
astonishing resignation. For my part, I knew not at first whether to
throw the blame on the Duke or the King; but I now find it is entirely
and completely the Duke's own; and I think him dishonoured for ever."


This refers to the Duke of Grafton's resignation, of which he proceeds
to quote an account from "a very good hand," prophesying tranquillity
and the restoration of confidence.

"So far my friend--whose prophecy I hope will be fulfilled; though, for
my part, I am rather inclined to give myself up to despair. Nothing but
a rebellion and bloodshed will open the eyes of that deluded people;
though, were they alone concerned, I think it is no matter what becomes
of them."[433:1]

In the following letter, we have a farther, and a very strong instance
of Hume's dislike of the English as a people. We find him again busy in
sifting his History of all remains of popular principles; and there is a
tone throughout the letter, as if it were satisfactory to him to be able
to overturn the objects of popular idolatry, which a people he so
heartily disliked had endeavoured to set up, in the alleged antiquity of
their constitution.


HUME _to_ SIR GILBERT ELLIOT.

"_Edinburgh, 21st February, 1770._

"DEAR SIR GILBERT,--I am glad of your victories; though I look upon them
all as temporary and imperfect, like the fallacious recoveries of a
hectic person, who is hastening to his dissolution. Our government has
become a chimera, and is too perfect, in point of liberty, for so rude a
beast as an Englishman; who is a man, a bad animal too, corrupted by
above a century of licentiousness. The misfortune is, that this liberty
can scarcely be retrenched without danger of being entirely lost; at
least the fatal effects of licentiousness must first be made palpable,
by some extreme mischief resulting from it. I may wish that the
catastrophe should rather fall on our posterity; but it hastens on with
such large strides, as leave little room for this hope.

"I am running over again the last edition of my History, in order to
correct it still further. I either soften or expunge many villanous,
seditious Whig strokes, which had crept into it. I wish that my
indignation at the present madness, encouraged by lies, calumnies,
imposture, and every infamous act usual among popular leaders, may not
throw me into the opposite extreme. I am, however, sensible that the
first editions were too full of those foolish English prejudices, which
all nations and all ages disavow.

"The present firm conduct of the king, and his manly resentment, afford
some glimpse of hope. We, at a distance, are not acquainted with these
matters; and few even at London; but there still appears something
mysterious in the Duke of Grafton's resignation. I hope it proceeded
only from his discontents with Bedford House.

"But I detain you too long. I shall only conclude, that, though I reckon
myself among the _sepoliti_, I cannot forbear expressing my hearty good
wishes to your cause and you. I am, very sincerely, dear Sir Gilbert,
your obliged humble servant."[435:1]


"_Edinburgh, 5th April, 1770._

"I am sorry to inform you, that all we statesmen in this town condemn
loudly the conduct of you statesmen in London, especially in allowing
those insolent rascals, the mayor and sheriffs, to escape with impunity.
We were much disappointed not to find them impeached, and a bill of
pains and penalties passed upon them. The tumults which might have
ensued in London, we thought rather an advantage; as it would give
government an opportunity of chastising that abominable rabble. But you
have thought otherwise; and it is pretended that these lenient maxims
are succeeding; that faction abates, the tide turns, and the heroes of
opposition are in despair. I am heartily glad of it: but this is a new
experiment to reconcile such extreme license with government; and if, in
a case where popular complaints had not the smallest shadow of pretence,
the king and parliament have prevailed, after a long struggle, and with
much difficulty, what must it be, where there is some plausible
appearance, and perhaps some real ground of complaint, such as it is
natural to expect in all governments? However, I repeat it, I am glad of
the present appearance of tranquillity; and, indeed, distant dangers are
not to be too anxiously provided against. I am," &c.


Hume seems to have now commenced the building of the house, in the New
Town of Edinburgh, in which he died. It was the commencement of the
street leading southward from St. Andrew's Square, now called St. David
Street.[436:1]


HUME _to_ BARON MURE.

"_Edinburgh, 2d October, 1770._

"DEAR BARON,--I am sorry that I should correspond so ill to your very
obliging letter, by telling you, that I cannot propose to see you till
you come to town next winter. I am engaged in the building a house,
which is the second great operation of human life: for the taking a wife
is the first, which I hope will come in time; and by being present, I
have already prevented two capital mistakes, which the mason was falling
into; and I shall be apprehensive of his falling into more, were I to be
at a distance. I must therefore renounce the hopes of seeing you at your
own house this autumn, which, I assure [you,] I do with much regret. My
compliments to Mrs. Mure and the young ladies. Please tell Miss Kitty,
that my coat is much admired, even before I tell that it is her livery.
For her sake I shall be careful that it never meet with any such
accident, as the last. I am, dear Baron, yours very sincerely.[436:2]

"P.S.--Mr. Moore's verses are really very elegant."


FOOTNOTES:

[383:1] In the conclusion of Hume's letter to Dr. Blair, of 27th May,
1767, cited above, there is the following paragraph:--

"Pray, how has the General Assembly passed? I have had a long letter
from Mass David Dickson, complaining of your injustice. Has John Home
any thoughts of coming up? Tell Robertson that the compliment, at the
end of General Conway's letter to him, was of my composing, without any
orders from him. He smiled when he read it, but said it was very proper,
and signed it. These are not bad puffs from ministers of state, as the
silly world goes." I inferred from this that the letter in question was
the King's letter to the General Assembly of 1767; but I find no
allusion to Robertson in that document, and am not aware of any letter,
generally known at the period, which answers the above description. It
is clear that Hume refers to some official communication from the
secretary of state. The letter from Dickson is a long complaint about
the conduct of some judicatories as to a forgotten church dispute. It
begins with the statement;--"I am informed that His Majesty's letter to
the General Assembly, of this year, is issued from the secretary's
office, under your direction." As it is pretty generally believed that
the policy of the Home-office, in its communications with the Church of
Scotland, was directed by Hume, during the period when he was under
secretary, the following extract from the King's letter to the General
Assembly, in 1767, is given, that the reader may judge for himself
whether the style and matter are characteristic of Hume's pen:--

"Convinced, as we are, of your prudence and firm resolution to concur in
whatever may promote the happiness of our subjects, it is unnecessary
for us to recommend to you to avoid contentious and unedifying debates;
as well as to avoid every thing that may tend to disturb that harmony
and tranquillity which is so essential in councils solely calculated for
the suppression of every species of licentiousness, irreligion, and
vice. And, as we have the firmest reliance on your zeal in the support
of the Christian faith, as well as in the wisdom and prudence of your
councils, we are thoroughly assured that they will be directed to such
purposes as may best tend to enforce a conscientious observance of all
those duties which the true religion, and laws of this kingdom require,
and on which the felicity of every individual so essentially
depends."[383:A]

     [383:A] MS. R.S.E.

[385:1] MS. R.S.E.

[385:2] See above, p. 56.

[386:1] MS. R.S.E.

[386:2] MS. R.S.E.

[388:1] MS. R.S.E.

[388:2] John Oswald, brother of Mr. Oswald of Dunnikier, who was
translated from the see of Dromore to that of Raphoe in 1763.

[390:1] MS. R.S.E.

[392:1] Copies in R.S.E. The originals are in possession of Colonel
Mure.

[392:2] _Literary Gazette_, 1822, p. 666. Original, MS. R.S.E.

[393:1] MS. R.S.E.

[394:1] MS. R.S.E.

[395:1] MS. R.S.E.

[395:2] MS. R.S.E.

[396:1] _Literary Gazette_. MS. R.S.E.

[397:1] MS. R.S.E.

[398:1] MS. R.S.E.

[398:2] An early acquaintance with this characteristic, might have saved
the present writer some fruitless investigations.

[399:1] There are two letters from Blacklock to Hume, remarkably
characteristic of the timid and excitable character of the blind genius.
After an exordium on the tone which he hopes their intercourse will
maintain, full of nervous susceptibility; the fear of being too profuse
in correspondence alternating with the dread that he may be thought
cold, negligent, or ungrateful; he gives an account of the education of
his pupil, Joseph, and then turns towards his own dark prospects.

"It was not indeed without some fear that I undertook the office. The
vivacity of his disposition, and even the quickness of his genius,
inspired me with terror that I should not be able to manage the one, or
make any lasting impression upon the other. But how agreeable was my
disappointment to find his temper, though lively, extremely amiable and
flexible, and his apprehension, though quick, yet distinct and
retentive. He applies with a diligence not often found in people of his
age and character. As during this winter we had a pretty numerous
family, most of whom were gentlemen of parts and spirit, I have seen
numberless instances in which his passions, though warm and sensible,
were governed with a discretion worthy of mature age and experience, yet
in such a manner as to preserve his dignity, and betray no degree of
complaisance unworthy of his spirit, or inconsistent with his ingenuity.
You cannot imagine but such an object must pre-engage every susceptible
heart. He is really admired by all the young gentlemen of our family who
know him. I love him, and Mrs. Blacklock doats on him; yet there are
not, perhaps, two in the human species who have it in their power to vex
me in the same degree, if at any time he should be more remiss and
careless than usual. He is now reading French with Mons{r} Cauvin, and
the Satires of Horace, and Homer's Iliad, with me.

"Mr. Alexander's account of my situation, in general, was right. I have
indeed got clear of a parish where I could have never been happy, even
though their malice had been less implacable than I found it. But when I
left that vindictive place, my poetical vanity was not quite
extinguished; and it is natural for those who have felt the oppressive
hand of unprovoked injury, to expect a kinder and more human reception,
where civility, politeness, and gentler manners prevail. These
sentiments, too sanguinely indulged, might perhaps have raised my hopes
too high, and taught me to anticipate a greater degree of notice from
the people of taste and learning in this place, than I have either
obtained or deserved. Be that as it will, I am at present almost an
absolute recluse; and when I meet with any of the virtuosi in public
places, (where, indeed, I do not commonly appear,) their behaviour seems
more cool and reserved than I could have thought. Not that all my
self-importance can flatter me with any degree of merit in this way; but
surely it was not unnatural to hope the enterprises which I attempted in
the circumstances in which I was involved, might have attracted some
degree of attention, and impressed some faint prepossessions in my
favour, when not opposed by any vice or immorality in my character. For
these reasons, as well as the private and disinterested attachment of my
heart, you will naturally imagine the pleasure I feel from the prospect
of your arrival in Edinburgh, and from my promised intercourse with one,
who, though he might do honour to the republic of letters in any period,
yet descends to honour me with the name of a FRIEND."

In the other letter, dated 2d May, 1767, he states that he has been
overworking himself; and says, "My old nervous complaints have been like
to return, and unhinge all our schemes; but, thank God, they are a
little better again." He then details, with some minuteness, the reasons
for feeling that his pecuniary prospects are precarious; and ascribes
his exertions to his wish "to do something, if possible, for these
approaching contingencies," which, he says, "the natural gloom" of his
mind has made "not very distant." He continues:--

"You was so kind as hint your friendly intention towards a church
settlement. That, I begin to think, I am unfit to encounter with again;
for the ten thousand hardships and disagreeable things which I met with
in my short but dear-bought experience of that kind of life, brought me
a great way on in my journey down hill; so that if any one of them
should again occur in another trial, I would certainly soon reach the
foot of the precipice. This event is matter of no great thought to
myself, but as it may concern one not undeservedly dear to me."

These letters are written with great precision, in a small, neat,
regular hand; and, though duly signed, "Thos. Blacklock," it is clear
that they cannot be the penmanship of their sightless author.

Appended to the second, and in a bolder and more masculine looking hand,
is the following:--

"Mrs. Blacklock begs leave to offer her compliments to Mr. Hume,
herself; and to supplicate some easy thing, if it can be procured,
(without giving Mr. Hume much trouble,) for her friend, whom she has
been a good deal apprehensive for this spring, by reason of his close
study. Our college has acquired a new professor for natural history. Do
you think one for poetry could be added, with a moderate salary to
it?"--MSS. R.S.E.

[401:1] The dates of the births of John Home's children, as entered in
the Kirk-session Record of Chirnside, are:--Joseph, 24th June, 1752;
John, 21st April, 1754; Helen, 22d August, 1755; David, 27th February,
1757; John, 29th April, 1758; Catherine, 9th November, 1760; Agnes, 7th
October, 1763; Agatha, 31st December, 1764. His wife was Agnes Carre,
daughter of Robert Carre of Cavers, in Roxburghshire.

[402:1] "Hume carried the torch into all the recesses of actual
practice. He not only made himself familiar with all the scattered
matter that had been published, though much of it had been hid in places
not commonly explored; but he was the very first who went systematically
to the records, and filtered these fountain heads."--_Ed. Rev._, January
1846, p. 197.

[404:1] MS. R.S.E.

[405:1] A comparison of the two brothers, Joseph and David, is thus made
by their father in a letter to his brother of 21st November, 1768. He
begins with David: "He still shows the same talents and temper, and an
attention and keenness for what he is employed about, and might go very
far in any profession if he was properly directed, and quite in a
different manner from any of the rest, particularly from Josey, whose
trifling superficial talents makes him never apply to any thing
thoroughly, nor do I ever expect he will. He this winter is at Mr.
Ferguson and Blair's classes, and the Italian, which completes his
university education. I am totally at a loss what to do with him after.
Law will never do with him. The army he inclines not to, though that, as
he has address and behaviour, is best calculated for him."--MS. R.S.E.

[406:1] _Scots Magazine_, 1807, p. 247.

[406:2] Sir Gilbert had succeeded to the baronetcy on the death of his
father, in 1766.

[407:1] Minto MSS.

[408:1] This is probably in allusion to Wilkes having obtained his
verdict of £1000 damages against the Secretary of State for the seizure
of his papers.

[408:2] Minto MSS.

[409:1] A Scottish artist, whose productions are known to collectors,
but who has not been handed down to posterity by the critics and
biographers.

[409:2] MS. R.S.E.

[409:3] Milman's edition of Gibbon's Life, p. 216.

[410:1] Deyverdun had (in a letter, MS. R.S.E.) acknowledged himself to
be the author of an attack on Rousseau, which the latter attributed to
Hume.

[411:1] MS. R.S.E.

[412:1] Life of Gibbon.

[413:1] Stewart's Life of Robertson.

[414:1] The "Philosophical Essays" were not written by Sir David
Dalrymple, as here hinted, but as Sir Gilbert explains, by James
Balfour, who has already been mentioned, (see vol. i. p. 160, 345.) The
Essays were mainly directed against Kaimes' "Essays on Morality and
Natural Religion."

[415:1] Minto MSS.

[416:1] MS. R.S.E. I can find no light on the meaning of the words "love
affair."

[417:1] Mr. Home was a very cautious farmer, and carried his dislike of
novelties and innovations to the unprecedented extent of declining the
higher rents he might have obtained from enterprising tenants.

[418:1] Minto MSS.

[419:1] MS. R.S.E.

[419:2] Perhaps a false transcript for Hagley, the seat of Lord
Lyttelton.

[420:1] _Scots Mag._, 1807, p. 248.

[420:2] In Mackenzie's Account of Home.

[421:1] Blair, writing on 11th March, says,--

"I long exceedingly to hear of the success of 'The Fatal Discovery,' and
am much pleased with what I have already heard. I read it a twelvemonth
ago, and thought highly of it. I will not pronounce it quite equal to
'Douglas,' but inferior only to it. Mr. Garrick told me, when last in
London, that he approved highly of it, and sent a message to the author
by me, advising him to take measures for bringing it on. I am infinitely
diverted with the trick which our friend has played to John concerning
it. How foolish will he look when he finds how he has been imposed on. I
beseech you write me how it goes on with the public."

[421:2] Dr. Robertson, of whom Blair says in the letter above cited:

"What an excellent performance has Robertson given us. What a treasure
of curious and instructive historical information! I think it much
superior to his former work. He is a little deaf at present, which I
have told him is a thorn in the flesh wisely sent him, that he may not
be too much lifted up with hearing the voice of applause. Your History
of England, and his as an introduction to the History of Europe, form a
perfect historical library. I congratulate myself on living in an age,
when our own country and our friends have done such honour to
literature. For myself I continue piddling still about my Lectures."

[422:1] Not very. The lines he intended to cite are:

     Cum positis novus exuviis, nitidusque juventâ
     Volvitur, aut catulos tectis aut ova relinquens
     Arduus ad solem, et linguis micat ore trisulcis.

[423:1] It is possible that the words "that fellow," apply to Wilkes,
but the context makes it more likely that they are intended for Chatham.

[423:2] The decision was given on 27th February, 1769.

[423:3] Apparently Robert Blair, afterwards Lord President of the Court
of Session. Dr. Blair, in his letter of introduction, says:--

"He is one of the most accomplished and most promising young men who,
for some time, have appeared at the bar; and will certainly go very high
in his profession. His reputation, in that line, is already far
advanced; and he has, besides this, many great virtues, both as a man
and a scholar. As he is my near relation, he has been, all along, my
pupil; and I have great credit in him."

[424:1] The line of houses, near the castle of Edinburgh, called Ramsay
Gardens. His friend, Mrs. Cockburn, strongly dissuaded him from living
in this part of the town.

[424:2] MS. R.S.E.

[426:1] MS. R.S.E.

[428:1] _New Monthly Magazine_, original series, No. 72.

[429:1] MS. R.S.E.

[429:2] The Firth of Forth.

[430:1] _Literary Gazette_, 1822, p. 691. Collated with original MS.
R.S.E.

[432:1] Minto MSS.

[432:2] Minto MSS.

[433:1] MS. R.S.E.

[435:1] Minto MSS.

[436:1] When the house was built, and inhabited by Hume, but while yet
the street, of which it was the commencement, had no name, a witty young
lady, daughter of Baron Ord, chalked on the wall, the words "ST. DAVID
STREET." The allusion was very obvious. Hume's "lass," judging that it
was not meant in honour or reverence, ran into the house much excited,
to tell her master how he was made game of. "Never mind, lassie," he
said; "many a better man has been made a saint of before."

[436:2] MS. R.S.E.




