CHAPTER XIII.

1763-1764. Æt. 52-53.

     Lord Hertford's appointment to the French Embassy, and
     invitation to Hume to accompany him--Correspondence on the
     occasion--Residence in London, and remarks on the Political
     Movements of 1763--State of his reputation in France--His
     Arrival--Letters to friends at home about his flattering
     reception--The young French princes--Observations on eminent
     French people--His recommendations to a Clergyman--
     Introductions of Fellow Countrymen.


On the conclusion of the treaty of 1763, the Marquis of Hertford was
appointed ambassador to the court of France. He invited Hume to attend
him as secretary; and there is no reason to believe that the selection
was owing to any other motive than the desire to place an able and
honest man in office. The Marquis was a man of high moral character, and
his religious opinions appear to have been considered by some of his
contemporaries as too zealous and exclusive. The intercourse thus
occasioned, was the commencement of a lasting friendship, in which the
English Marquis and the Scottish philosopher, however separated by
nominal difference of rank, had too genuine a respect for each other to
be affected by such inequalities. The intimacy extended to General
Seymour Conway, the brother of the Marquis; and Hume's intercourse with
them both, tends to confirm the impression which the portraits of the
two brothers convey to the present generation, of dispositions open,
kind, and artless. In reference to this event, Hume says, in his "own
life," "I retired to my native country of Scotland, determined never
more to set my foot out of it; and retaining the satisfaction of never
having preferred a request to one great man, or even making advances of
friendship to any of them. As I was now turned of fifty, I thought of
passing all the rest of my life in this philosophical manner, when I
received, in 1763, an invitation from the Earl of Hertford, with whom I
was not in the least acquainted, to attend him on his embassy to Paris,
with a near prospect of being appointed secretary to the embassy, and,
in the meanwhile, of performing the functions of that office. This
offer, however inviting, I at first declined, both because I was
reluctant to begin connexions with the great, and because I was afraid
that the civilities and gay company of Paris, would prove disagreeable
to a person of my age and humour: but on his lordship's repeating the
invitation, I accepted of it. I have every reason, both of pleasure and
interest, to think myself happy in my connexions with that nobleman, as
well as afterwards with his brother, General Conway."

We have, in his familiar correspondence, a fuller account of his
feelings on the occasion.


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Edinburgh, 9th August, 1763._

"MY DEAR FRIEND,--I have got an invitation, accompanied with great
prospects and expectations, from Lord Hertford, if I would accompany
him, though at first without any character, in his embassy to Paris. I
hesitated much on the acceptance of this offer, though in appearance
very inviting: and I thought it ridiculous at my years, to be entering
on a new scene, and to put myself in the lists as a candidate of
fortune. But I reflected that I had in a manner abjured all literary
occupations; that I resolved to give up my future life entirely to
amusements; that there could not be a better pastime than such a
journey, especially with a man of Lord Hertford's character; and that it
would be easy to prevent my acceptance from having the least appearance
of dependance. For these reasons, and by the advice of every friend whom
I consulted, I at last agreed to accompany his lordship, and I set out
to-morrow for London. I am a little hurried in my preparations; but I
could not depart without bidding you adieu, my good friend, and without
acquainting you with the reasons of so sudden a movement. I have not
great expectations of revisiting this country soon; but I hope it will
not be impossible but we may meet abroad, which will be a great
satisfaction to me. I am," &c.[158:1]


HUME _to_ BARON MURE.

"_Lisle St. 1st Sept. 1763._

"MY DEAR BARON,--As I am not sure where you are, nor whether this
direction be right, I am obliged to speak to you with reserve, both of
public affairs and of my own. Of the latter, I shall only say, that
notwithstanding of my first reluctance, I am entirely reconciled to my
present situation, and have a great prepossession, or rather, indeed, a
great esteem and affection for the person and family whom I am to
accompany to France. The prospect of my being secretary to the embassy
is neither very distant nor is it immediate; but Lord Hertford will
certainly, before our departure, obtain a settlement for me for life;
which at any events will improve my fortune, and is a great pledge of
his friendship and regard.

"I have insulted [consulted] Elliot, Sir Harry, Oswald, and all our
friends of that administration. The former said to me, that my situation
was, taking all its circumstances, the most wonderful event in the
world. I was now a person clean and white as the driven snow; and that
were I to be proposed for the see of Lambeth, no objection could
henceforth be made to me. What makes the matter more extraordinary, is,
that the idea first came into my patron's head, without the suggestion
of any one mortal.[159:1]

"You must have heard of the late most astonishing events with regard to
public affairs.[159:2] Yesterday Lord Bute had a pretty large company
dining with him, to whom he gave an account of the whole transactions,
and desired them to publish it.

"One of them, a friend of mine, as soon as he went home, took it down in
writing, of which he gave me a copy, and which I transmit to you. He is
a military man, and his style is not elegant; but I am sure, from
another certain authority, that the account is in the main just; only I
have reason to think that Lord Halifax was proscribed along with the
rest; at least he said so yesterday to a friend of mine. I wish this
high spirit of his M. may be supported. But _femme qui écoute et ville
qui parle sont bientôt rendues_. Lord Bute goes abroad very soon. Some
pretend that the present administration is more enraged against him than
is the opposition, on account of his taking this important step without
consulting them. Never in any history was there so curious a scene; nor
was there ever so formidable a demagogue as this man. Lord Sandwich, it
is said, will be secretary for some weeks; our friend Wood is so at
present. Many of the leading men in the opposition were left out on Mr.
Pitt's plan; which, it is thought, will breed dissensions among them.

"I dined yesterday with Lord Chesterfield, along with Colonel Irvine.
The Colonel made an apology for our arriving so late, on account of his
being detained at court. 'At court?' said my lord: 'I should be glad to
know what place that is.' Dear Mure, yours."[160:1]


In an earlier part of this work, we have found Hume narrating events of
contemporary military history. In the following, as in the preceding
letter, he gives his version of a celebrated ministerial revolution, of
which the public is as yet possessed of no account which is not liable
to doubt.


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Lisle St. 13th Sept. 1763._

"MY DEAR SMITH,--The settlement which I had made in Scotland was so much
to my mind, I had indeed struck root so heartily, that it was with the
utmost reluctance I could think of transplanting myself, and I began to
approach towards that age in which these experiments became no longer
practicable with safety. I own that, on my arrival in London, I found
every circumstance more inviting than I had reason to expect;
particularly the characters of Lord and Lady Hertford, who are allowed
to be the two persons the most unexceptionable among all the English
nobility. Even that circumstance of Lord Hertford's character, his great
piety, ought to make my connexions with him more agreeable, both because
it is not attended with any thing sour and rigid, and because I draw the
more honour from his choice, while he overlooked so many seeming
objections which lay against me on that head. My fortune also receives a
great addition during life from this connexion; besides many openings to
ambition, were I so simple as to be exposed to temptation from that
passion.

"But, notwithstanding all these considerations, shall I tell you the
truth? I repine at my loss of ease and leisure, and retirement and
independence; and it is not without a sigh I look backwards, nor without
reluctance that I cast my eye forwards. Is this sentiment an instinct
which admonishes me of the situation most proper and suitable to me? Or
is it a momentary disgust, the effect of low spirits, which company and
amusement, and a better state of health, will soon dissipate and remove?
I must wait with patience till I see the decision of this question.

"I find that one view of Lord Hertford in engaging me to go along with
him is, that he thinks I may be useful to Lord Beauchamp in his studies.
That young nobleman is generally spoke of as very amiable and very
promising; but I remember, though faintly, to have heard from you
something to the contrary, which you had heard from that severe critic,
Mr. Herbert: I should be obliged to you for informing me of it. I have
not yet seen my Lord Beauchamp, who is at this time in Paris. We shall
not leave London these three weeks.

"You have, no doubt, heard of the strange jumble among our ministers,
and of the negotiation opened with Mr. Pitt. Never story was told with
such contrary circumstances as that of his secret conference with the
king, and of the terms demanded by that popular leader. The general
outlines of the whole story seem to be these:

"Lord Bute, disgusted with the ministers, who had almost universally
conspired to neglect him, and suspecting their bottom to be too narrow,
had, before Lord Egremont's death, opened a negotiation with Mr. Pitt,
by means of Lord Shelburne, who employed Calcraft the agent. Mr. Pitt
says, that he always declared it highly improper that he should be
brought to the king, before all terms were settled on such a footing as
to render it impossible for them to separate without agreeing. He
accordingly thought they were settled. His first conference with the
king confirmed him in that opinion, and he wrote to the Duke of
Devonshire to come to town, in order to place himself at the head of the
treasury. The Duke of Newcastle said, at his table on Sunday was a
fortnight, that the ministry was settled. But when Mr. Pitt came to the
king that afternoon, he found him entirely changed, and every thing was
retracted that had been agreed on. This is his story. The other party
says, that he rose in his terms, and wanted to impose the most
exorbitant conditions on his sovereign. I suppose that the first
conference passed chiefly in generals, and that Mr. Pitt would then be
extremely humble, and submissive, and polite, and dutiful in his
expressions. But when he came to particulars, they did not seem to
correspond with these appearances. At least, this is the best account I
can devise of the matter, consistent with the honour of both parties.

"You would see the present ministry by the papers. It is pretended that
they are enraged against Lord Bute, for negotiating without their
knowledge or consent; and that the other party are no less displeased
with him for not finishing the treaty with them. That nobleman declared
his resolution of going abroad a week or two ago. Now he is determined
to pass the winter in London. Our countrymen are visibly hurt in this
justle of parties, which I believe to be far from the intentions of Lord
Bute. Lord Shelburne resigned, because he found himself obnoxious on
account of his share in the negotiation. I see you are much displeased
with that nobleman, but he always speaks of you with regard. I hear that
your pupil, Mr. Fitzmaurice, makes a very good figure at Paris.

"It is generally thought that Mr. Pitt has gained credit and force by
this negotiation. It turns the eyes of the public towards him. It shows
that the king can overlook personal resentment against him and Lord
Temple. It gains him the confidence of his own party, who see that he
was negotiating for the whole of them; and puts people in mind of the
French rhyme,--_ville qui parle et femme qui écoute_.

"You would hear that the case of the Douglas is now made clear, even in
the eyes the most blinded and most prejudiced, which I am glad of on
account of our friends. I am," &c.[163:1]


The following notice, by one who has unfortunately left nothing behind
to show posterity the grounds on which his reputation rested, the Rev.
Dr. Carlyle, will be read with interest.

     Robertson has managed with great address: he is principal,
     chaplain, minister, historiographer, and historian; that is to
     say, he has £50 a-year and a house, certain, besides what he
     can make by his books. It was taken for granted that he was to
     resign his charge on being appointed historiographer with £200
     salary; but that he will do at his leisure. It is also
     supposed by his patrons, that he is to write the History of
     Britain in ten volumes quarto; that also, I presume, (dreadful
     task,) he will execute at his leisure.

     Honest David Home, [Hume,] with the heart of all others that
     rejoices most at the prosperity of his friends, was certainly
     a little hurt with this last honour conferred on Robertson. A
     lucky accident has given him relief. The Earl of Hertford is
     appointed ambassador to France: not very capable himself, they
     have loaded him with an insignificant secretary, one Charles
     Bunbury, who, for the sake of pleasure, more than the thousand
     a-year, solicited for the office. Hertford knew David, and
     some good genius prompted him to ask him to go along and
     manage the business. It is an honourable character: he will
     see his friends in France. If he tires, he can return when he
     pleases. Bunbury will probably tire first, and then David will
     become secretary.[164:1]

The following letter, without address, appears to have been written to
Dr. Carlyle.


"_Lisle Street, 15th Sept. 1763._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--The case of poor Blacklock gives me great distress; and
so much the more, as I am afraid it is not in the power of any human
being to relieve him.[165:1] His unhappiness seems to proceed from the
infirmity of his body, and the delicacy, not to say weakness, of his
mind. He has wrote to me letters full of the bitterest anguish, on
account of the treatment he meets with from his parishioners. I believe
it is not good; but it is impossible not to think it exaggerated by his
imagination: and I am of your opinion that the same persecution, partly
real, partly imaginary, would follow him in every other settlement. I
had concerted with Baron Mure a very likely scheme for his removal; but
to what purpose would this serve, if the same complaints must return in
his new situation? I agree with you, that a small pension, could it be
obtained, might bestow on him some degree of tranquillity; but how to
obtain it I profess I do not know, as I suppose you will readily
believe. That door was never very wide for men of letters; and is become
still narrower than ever."


He proceeds, in terms similar to those already recorded, to state his
satisfaction in the connexion with Lord Hertford, and continues:--


"I go to a place of the world which I have always admired the most; and
it is not easy to imagine a reception better than I have reason to
expect. What, then, can be wanting to my happiness? I hope, nothing; or
if any thing, it will only be an age and temper better adapted to vanity
and dissipation. I beg of you to embrace Mrs. Carlisle in my name, and
to assure her of my sincere respects.

"I write no politics, having now become a politician. Please address
yourself to John Hume for information on that head. Let him explain to
you his patron's situation!!!! Pray, is there any body such an idiot at
present as to be a partisan of the Douglas?"


To obtain literary distinction in France at that time, was to be
received at court. The star of Germany had not yet risen in the horizon
of literature, and the great monarch and warrior of the Teutonic tribes
treated his native tongue as the speech of boors, tried to distinguish
himself in French literature, and was ambitious of being received into
equal companionship with the popular authors of France. Britain,
notwithstanding her series of illustrious names, had not yet quite
shaken off an air of provincialism. Shakspere was a strange wild genius,
full of barbarisms and abominable galimatias: Voltaire had said it, and
it was a judgment, not an opinion. Some discontented Frerons or Arnauds,
might cavil against it: but this was rebellion, not controversy. The
greatness of our masters in science and philosophy was fully admitted;
but they were viewed as citizens of the great world of letters,
accidentally born in one of its more barren districts; and they were
scarcely more closely identified with the national literature of their
country, than Linnæus might be with that of Sweden, or Tycho Brahe with
that of Denmark. In truth, the apparent interregnum, following the
decline of the Latin as the literary language of the world, appeared
likely to end in the establishment of the French as its successor. Such
expectations gave to the literature of France a metropolitan air, with
which no other could cope; and communicated to those natives of other
places, whose name was honoured in the French circles of letters, a
corresponding elevation.[167:1] Hume would have been impervious to the
most conclusive evidence on the subject, if he had failed to know how
greatly he was honoured among all the literary circles of the continent,
and particularly in those of the metropolis of literature. Lord Elibank,
writing from Paris, on 11th May, 1763, says to him, "No author ever yet
attained to that degree of reputation in his own lifetime that you are
now in possession of at Paris;"[167:2] and the extent of his fame was
abundantly attested by others.[167:3]

Hume arrived in France on the 14th day of October, 1763. Of his
reception, his own letters will give the best account.


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Fontainbleau, 26th Oct. 1763._

"MY DEAR SMITH,--I have been three days at Paris, and two at
Fontainbleau, and have every where met with the most extraordinary
honours, which the most exorbitant vanity could wish or desire. The
compliments of dukes and marischals of France, and foreign ambassadors,
go for nothing with me at present: I retain a relish for no kind of
flattery but that which comes from the ladies. All the courtiers, who
stood around when I was introduced to Madame de Pompadour, assured me
that she was never heard to say so much to any man; and her brother, to
whom she introduced me,----[169:1] But I forget already, that I am to
scorn all the civilities of men. However, even Madame Pompadour's
civilities were, if possible, exceeded by those of the Duchesse de
Choiseul, the wife of the favourite and Prime Minister, and one of the
ladies of the most distinguished merit in France. Not contented with the
many obliging things she said to me on my first introduction, she sent
to call me from the other end of the room, in order to repeat them, and
to enter into a short conversation with me: and not contented with that,
she sent the Danish ambassador after me, to assure me, that what she
said was not from politeness, but that she seriously desired to be in
friendship and correspondence with me. There is not a courtier in
France, who would not have been transported with joy, to have had the
half of these obliging things said to him by either of these great
ladies; but what may appear more extraordinary, both of them, as far as
I could conjecture, have read with some care all my writings that have
been translated into French,--that is, almost all my writings. The king
said nothing particular to me, when I was introduced to him; and (can
you imagine it) I was become so silly, as to be a little mortified by
it, till they told me, that he never says any thing to any body the
first time he sees them. The Dauphin, as I am told from all hands,
declares himself on every occasion very strongly in my favour; and many
people assure me, that I have reason to be proud of his judgment, even
were he an individual. I have scarce seen any of the geniuses of Paris,
who, I think, have in general great merit, as men of letters. But every
body is forward to tell me the high panegyrics I receive from them; and
you may believe that ----[170:1] approbation which has procured me all
these civilities from the courtiers.

"I know you are ready to ask me, my dear friend, if all this does not
make me very happy: No, I feel little or no difference. As this is the
first letter I write to my friends at home, I have amused myself, (and I
hope I have amused you,) by giving you a very abridged account of these
transactions. But can I ever forget, that it is the very same species,
that would scarce show me common civilities a very few years ago at
Edinburgh, who now receive me with such applauses at Paris? I assure
you, I reap more internal satisfaction from the very amiable manners
and character of the family in which I live, (I mean Lord and Lady
Hertford, and Lord Beauchamp,) than from all these external vanities;
and it is that domestic enjoyment which must be considered as the
agreeable circumstance in my situation. During the two last days, in
particular, that I have been at Fontainbleau I have _suffered_ (the
expression is not improper) as much flattery as almost any man has ever
done in the same time. But there are few days in my life, when I have
been in good health, that I would not rather pass over again. Mr.
Neville, our minister, an honest, worthy English gentleman, who carried
me about, was astonished at the civilities I met with; and has assured
me, that on his return, he will not fail to inform the king of England
and the English ministry of all these particulars. But enough of all
these follies. You see I trust to your friendship, that you will forgive
me; and to your discretion, that you will keep my secret.

"I had almost forgot, in these effusions, shall I say of my misanthropy
or my vanity, to mention the subject which first put my pen in my hand.
The Baron d'Holbach, whom I saw at Paris, told me, that there was one
under his eye that was translating your 'Theory of Moral Sentiments;'
and desired me to inform you of it.[171:1] Mr. Fitzmaurice, your old
friend, interests himself strongly in this undertaking. Both of them
wish to know, if you propose to make any alterations on the work, and
desire you to inform me of your intentions in that particular. Please
direct to me under cover to the Earl of Hertford at Northumberland
House, London. Letters so directed will be sent to us at Paris. I desire
my compliments to all friends. I am, my dear Smith, yours
sincerely."[172:1]


HUME _to_ PROFESSOR FERGUSON.

"_Fontainbleau, 9th Nov. 1763._

"DEAR FERGUSON,--I have now passed four days at Paris, and about a
fortnight in the court at Fontainbleau, amidst a people who, from the
royal family downwards, seem to have it much at heart to persuade me, by
every expression of esteem, that they consider me as one of the greatest
geniuses in the world. I am convinced that Louis XIV. never, in any
three weeks of his life, suffered so much flattery: I say suffered, for
it really confounds and embarrasses me, and makes me look sheepish. Lord
Hertford has told them they will chase me out of France, _à coup de
complimens et de louanges_. Our friend, General Clerk, came to this
place after I had passed a week in it; and the first thing he said to me
was, that he was sure I had never passed so many days with so little
satisfaction. I asked him how he had happened to guess so well. He said,
because he knew me, and knew the French. I really wish often for the
plain roughness of the _Poker_,[172:2] and particularly the sharpness of
Dr. Jardine, to correct and qualify so much lusciousness. However, I
meet sometimes with incidents that please me, because they contain no
mixture of French complaisance or exaggeration. Yesterday I dined at the
Duc de Praslin's, the secretary of state. After we had risen from
dinner, I went into a corner to converse with somebody; when I saw
enter the room, a tall gentleman, a little elderly, with a riband and
star, who immediately called out to the Duchesse de Praslin, 'Hé, Madame
la Duchesse, que je suis content, j'ai vu Monsieur Hume à la cour
aujourd'hui.' Upon inquiry, I was told he was a man of quality, esteemed
one of the cleverest and most sensible about the court.

"In two or three days we return to Paris, where I hope to live more at
my ease, and shall pass my time with really great men; for there are
such at present amongst the literati of France. Certainly there is
something perverse, either in the structure of our mind, or in the
incidents of life. My present situation ought naturally to appear an
object of envy; for besides those circumstances of an universal good
reception from all ranks of people, nothing can be more amiable than the
character of the family with whom I live, and nothing can be more
friendly than their behaviour to me. My fortune has already received a
considerable increase by a pension procured me by Lord Hertford, and
settled as they tell me for life. Mr. Bunbury has been told that he must
not go to Paris, which my lord considers as a sure prelude to my being
soon secretary to the embassy; an office which will expose me to little
expense, and bring me a thousand a-year increase of revenue, and puts me
in the road to all the great foreign employments. Yet I am sensible that
I set out too late, and that I am misplaced; and I wish, twice or thrice
a-day, for my easy chair and my retreat in James's Court! Never think,
dear Ferguson, that as long as you are master of your own fireside and
your own time, you can be unhappy, or that any other circumstance can
make an addition to your enjoyment.

"When I think of my own house, you may believe I often reflect on
Josey, who I am afraid will be more a loser by my absence, than ever I
shall be a gainer by it; I mean in point of his education. I beg of you
to have some inspection over him, and as often as my sister shall send
to you to ask your advice, that you will be sure to give it. I am afraid
that there occurs a difficulty at present about entering him to the
Greek. He is too far advanced by his learning for the class in the High
School to which he is put, and yet he is too young to go to the college:
for this reason I thought that he might learn something of the Greek
before he finished his Latin course, as is the practice in England; and,
accordingly, Murray in Musselburgh gave him some lessons in that
language. I propose that he should continue on the same footing in
Edinburgh; but I am at a loss how it may be done. A master to himself
alone, would not give him any emulation; and were he put to any other
school for this purpose, the hours would interfere with those of the
High School. Be so good as speak to Mathison, and then give your opinion
to my sister.

"Please remember me to Mr. and Mrs. Adams.[174:1] I saw Willie a moment
at Fontainbleau: he had arrived a quarter of an hour after Jemmy left
it, whom I did not see. These two brothers have been hunting one another
in vain through all France; but I hope they have met at last in Paris.

"When you favour me with a letter, put it under cover to the Earl of
Hertford, and direct it to him at Northumberland House, in the Strand;
letters so directed come to us with the greatest safety. Make my
compliments to Baron Mure, and Mrs. Mure, and all that family. I shall
write to the Baron soon. Tell Dr. Blair that I have conversed here twice
or thrice with the Duchesse D'Aiguillon, who has been amusing herself
with translating passages of Ossian; and I have assured her that the
authenticity of those poems is to be proved soon beyond all
contradiction. Andrew Stuart is here at present: I meet with nobody here
that doubts of the justice of his cause. I hope your fine judges will at
last be ashamed of their scandalous partiality. I should be glad to hear
of all friends. I am, dear Ferguson, with great sincerity and without
flattery, your affectionate friend and servant.

"P.S.--I beg you to keep the follies of the above letter to yourself. I
had a letter from Lord Marischal to-day, who tells me that he is to pass
the winter at Edinburgh. Wait often on him; you will like him extremely:
carry all our friends to him, and endeavour to make him pass his time as
agreeably as possible."[175:1]


We shall have farther opportunities of observing the affectionate
anxiety with which Hume watched over the education of his nephews. Adam
Ferguson appears to have undertaken the task of noticing the progress of
Joseph, the elder nephew, during Hume's absence, to whom he writes, in
answer to the above:--

     _Edinburgh, 26th Nov. 1763._

     At present his journal, as he tells me, begins with getting up
     at eight, taking his breakfast and going to school, where he
     remains to eleven. Then to the High School Yard to play at
     Englishman and Scotsman, or the hare and the dogs; of which I
     take the merit, as I saved him from the writing-school at that
     hour. He returns to school at twelve, and continues till two:
     goes to writing between three and four; and spends his
     evenings, as he tells me, in getting his school tasks, or in
     reading amusing books,--such as his uncle's history. In short,
     he is a very amiable boy, with quick parts, in my opinion as
     well as yours; and there is no doubt but he will do well. I am
     very glad of every thing that gives you pleasure,--even of
     some things that give you pain. From all accounts, both before
     and since you went to Paris, it might be foreseen that your
     reception, even from sincere as well as affected admirers,
     would amount to a degree of teasing. But all for the best, as
     my fellow philosopher, Pangloss, says. I don't care if you are
     "chassé de France à coups de complimens, et accablé en
     Angleterre à coups de richesse," so as not to find any rest to
     the soles of your feet out of Scotland. I would fain consider
     every accession to your fortune as so many dishes added to the
     future dinners in James's Court; and your eclat in France, as
     the forerunner of much variety of chosen and excellent wines
     from every quarter of that great kingdom. Meantime, though I
     like to lounge at firesides in practice, I have not, in
     speculation, that opinion you mention. I know nothing that is
     necessary to happiness but cordiality and the talent of
     finding diversion in all places. I remember, somewhere, a
     man's being told that he was too nice, because he could not
     dine on a ragout, and must have cold mutton. But I should not,
     perhaps, contradict you so flatly, nor rub so hard,
     considering how tender your sensibility will be grown after so
     many lenient applications.[176:1]


HUME _to_ DR. ROBERTSON.

     _Paris, Dec. 1, 1763._

     DEAR ROBERTSON,--Among other agreeable circumstances which
     attend me at Paris, I must mention that of having a lady for a
     translator; a woman of merit, the widow of an advocate.[176:2]
     She was, before, very poor, and known but to few; but this
     work has got her reputation, and procured her a pension from
     the court, which sets her at ease. She tells me that she has
     got a habit of industry; and would continue, if I could point
     out to her any other English book she could undertake, without
     running the risk of being anticipated by any other translator.
     Your "History of Scotland" is translated, and is in the press;
     but I recommended to her your "History of Charles V.," and
     promised to write to you, in order to know when it would be
     printed, and to desire you to send over the sheets from
     London, as they come from the press; I should put them into
     her hands, and she would, by that means, have the start of
     every other translator.[177:1] My two volumes last published,
     are, at present, in the press. She has a very easy natural
     style: sometimes she mistakes the sense; but I now correct her
     manuscript, and should be happy to render you the same
     service, if my leisure permit me, as I hope it will.

     Do you ask me about my course of life? I can only say, that I
     eat nothing but ambrosia, drink nothing but nectar, breathe
     nothing but incense, and tread on nothing but flowers! Every
     man I meet, and, still more, every lady, would think they were
     wanting in the most indispensable duty, if they did not make a
     long and elaborate harangue in my praise. What happened last
     week, when I had the honour of being presented to the D----n's
     children, at Versailles, is one of the most curious scenes I
     have yet passed through. The Duc de B., the eldest, a boy of
     ten years old, stepped forth, and told me how many friends
     and admirers I had in this country, and that he reckoned
     himself in the number, from the pleasure he had received from
     the reading of many passages in my works. When he had
     finished, his brother, the Count de P., who is two years
     younger, began his discourse, and informed me, that I had been
     long and impatiently expected in France; and that he himself
     expected soon to have great satisfaction from the reading of
     my fine History. But what is more curious; when I was carried
     thence to the Count D'A., who is but four years of age, I
     heard him mumble something which, though he had forgot in the
     way, I conjectured, from some scattered words, to have been
     also a panegyric dictated to him. Nothing could more surprise
     my friends, the Parisian philosophers, than this incident.

            *       *       *       *       *

     It is conjectured that this honour was paid me by express
     order from the D.[178:1], who, indeed, is not on any occasion
     sparing in my praise.

     All this attention and panegyric was at first oppressive to
     me; but now it sits more easy. I have recovered, in some
     measure, the use of the language, and am falling into
     friendships which are very agreeable; much more so than silly,
     distant admiration. They now begin to banter me, and tell
     droll stories of me, which they have either observed
     themselves, or have heard from others; so that you see I am
     beginning to be at home. It is probable that this place will
     be long my home. I feel little inclination to the factious
     barbarians of London; and have ever desired to remain in the
     place where I am planted. How much more so, when it is the
     best place in the world? I could here live in great abundance
     on the half of my income; for there is no place where money is
     so little requisite to a man who is distinguished, either by
     his birth or by personal qualities. I could run out, you see,
     in a panegyric on the people; but you would suspect that this
     was a mutual convention between us. However, I cannot forbear
     observing on what a different footing learning and the learned
     are here, from what they are among the factious barbarians
     abovementioned.

     I have here met with a prodigious historical curiosity, the
     "Memoirs of King James II." in fourteen volumes, all wrote
     with his own hand, and kept in the Scots College. I have
     looked into it; and have made great discoveries.[179:1] It
     will be all communicated to me: and I have had an offer of
     access to the Secretary of State's office, if I want to know
     the despatches of any French minister that resided in London.
     But these matters are much out of my head. I beg of you to
     visit Lord Marischal, who will be pleased with your company. I
     have little paper remaining, and less time; and therefore
     conclude abruptly by assuring you that I am, dear Doctor,
     yours sincerely, &c.[179:2]


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

     _Paris, 1st Dec. 1763._

     DEAR SIR,--I have here fallen upon a great treasure, as I
     believe, of historical knowledge; which is, fifteen volumes of
     the late King James's Memoirs, wrote all with his own hand. I
     shall be able to make use of them for improving and
     correcting many passages of my History, in case of a new
     edition; which, however, I fancy will not be soon. I am glad
     to see public affairs likely to settle in favour of
     government. Nobody ever led a more dissipated life than I do
     here. Please send to Mr. Stewart, in Buckingham Street, six
     copies of the new edition of my History; and two of the last
     large paper quarto, all in sheets. Make them carefully up in a
     parcel: he is to send them to me. I shall be your debtor for
     the quartos. I should be glad to hear from you. My direction
     is at the English ambassador's. Excuse my hurry. I beg my
     compliments to Mrs. Millar. I am, very sincerely, dear sir,
     your most humble servant.


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.[180:1]

     DEAR DOCTOR,--I write every thing in haste, except on public
     affairs, which are the only serious matters I have leisure to
     mind: so, excuse this letter, if it prove a scrawl. I approve
     very much of your plan for ascertaining the authenticity of
     Ossian's Poems; and I doubt not of your success. I do not
     think you can publish all the letters you receive, which
     nobody would read: a summary of them will do better; but
     endeavour to be as particular as you can with regard to names
     of persons and passages: for the force of your argument will
     be there. I have met here with enthusiasts for Ossian's
     poetry; but there are also several critics who are of my
     opinion, that, though great beauties, they are also great
     curiosities, and that they are a little tedious by reason of
     their uniformity.

     You desire to know the particulars of my reception here, and
     my course of life. I own I write little upon this subject, and
     always with some degree of secrecy, both because I wish to
     have such intelligence conveyed by others rather than myself,
     and because I am somewhat indifferent whether it be conveyed
     or not. However, I wrote some circumstances to Robertson,
     which I allow him to communicate to you. I suppose this, like
     all other violent modes, will pass; and, in the meanwhile, the
     hurry and dissipation attending it, gives me more pain than
     pleasure. Never was there a stronger instance of the vanity
     of human wishes. But this embarrassment proceeds chiefly from
     my own fault, and from a vain anxiety to give no offence nor
     displeasure to any body.

     The men of letters here are really very agreeable: all of them
     men of the world, living in entire, or almost entire harmony
     among themselves, and quite irreproachable in their morals. It
     would give you, and Jardine, and Robertson, great satisfaction
     to find that there is not a single deist among them. Those
     whose persons and conversation I like best, are D'Alembert,
     Buffon, Marmontel, Diderot, Duclos, Helvetius, and old
     President Henault, who, though now decaying, retains that
     amiable character which made him once the delight of all
     France. He had always the best cook and the best company in
     Paris. But though I know you will laugh at me, as they do, I
     must confess that I am more carried away from their society
     than I should be, by the great ladies, with whom I became
     acquainted at my first introduction to court, and whom my
     connexions with the English ambassador will not allow me
     entirely to drop.

     Nothing can be more easy and agreeable than my situation with
     Lord Hertford, who is a man of strict honour, an amiable
     temper, a good understanding, and an elegant person and
     behaviour. He takes very much in this place. He has got an
     opinion very well founded, that the more acquaintance I make,
     and the greater intimacies I form with the French, the more I
     am enabled to be of service to him: so he exacts no attendance
     from me; and is well pleased to find me carried into all kinds
     of company. He tells me, that if he did not meet me by chance
     in third places, we should go out of acquaintance. Thus you
     see my present plan of life sketched out; but it is unsuitable
     to my age and temper; and I am determined to retrench and to
     abandon the fine folks, before they abandon me.[181:1]

During his absence, Hume's house was let to Blair. In this letter he
gives pretty minute instructions as to the most advantageous
distribution of the occupation of the apartments, which incidentally
illustrate his own domestic habits. Thus--

     Never put a fire in the south room with the red paper. It is
     so warm of itself, that all last winter, which was a very
     severe one, I lay with a single blanket; and frequently upon
     coming in at midnight, starving with cold, have sat down and
     read for an hour, as if I had had a stove in the room.

     You think it inconvenient to take the house only for an
     interval. Alas! my prospects of being home are very distant
     and very uncertain: I am afraid I might say worse. My
     connexions with Lord Hertford must probably last for some
     years; after which, I shall be rich enough to live in Paris or
     London as I please, or to retire to a provincial town in
     France, or to Bath, or God knows whither. I like to keep my
     house in case of accidents, and therefore neither choose to
     sell it, nor let a lease of it; but there is no great chance
     of your being disturbed in it for some time. I am, &c.

     P.S.--Pray, do you not all pay court to the Lord
     Marischal?[182:1] Do you imagine that you ever saw so
     excellent a man? or that you have any chance for seeing his
     equal if he were gone?


HUME _to_ COLONEL EDMONDSTOUNE.

     _Paris, 9th January, 1764._

     DEAR EDMONDSTOUNE,--I was fully settled, and, as I thought,
     for life at Edinburgh; had bought a very pretty little house,
     which I had repaired and furnished to my fancy; had purchased
     a chaise, and fixed every thing about my family on such a
     footing as to continue there the rest of my days. But while I
     was in this situation, which was far from disagreeable, I
     received a letter from my friend Mr. Wood, wrote by directions
     from Lord Hertford, by which I was invited to attend his
     lordship in his embassy to Paris, and to perform the
     functions of secretary to the embassy. I had never seen Lord
     Hertford, though I had heard an excellent character of him;
     but as I thought myself too old to enter on a new scene of
     life, and found myself settled to my mind, I at first refused
     the invitation; but on its being urged more home to me, I came
     up to London, where I found that Mr. Bunbury, a gentleman of
     considerable fortune, and married to the Duke of Richmond's
     sister, had already been appointed secretary; but was so
     disagreeable to the ambassador, that he was resolved never to
     see, or do business with his secretary, and therefore desired
     I should attend him, in order to perform the functions. He
     also thought himself certain that Bunbury could not possibly
     continue in the situation; but in order to make me more
     secure, he procured me a pension of £200 a-year for life, from
     the king. As I became every day better acquainted with my
     lord, I liked him every day better; and I do not believe there
     is in the world a man of more probity or humanity, endowed
     with a very good understanding, and adorned with very elegant
     manners and behaviour. My lady is also a person of great
     merit; and nothing can be more amiable than my Lord Beauchamp:
     so that you see I have every domestic means of happiness; and
     the good reception I have met with at Paris, particularly, as
     you observe, by the ladies, renders my present course of life,
     though somewhat too hurried and dissipated, as amusing as I
     could wish. My lord appears zealously my friend, and has urged
     the matter so home, in my favour, to the king and the
     ministers, that he has obtained a promise, that I shall soon
     have the appointments and commission of secretary to the
     embassy, which is about £1000 a-year, added to what I already
     possess: so that you see, dear Edmondstoune, I am in the high
     road to riches; and as there is no instance of a secretary to
     the embassy at Paris, that has not been advanced to the most
     considerable employments, I am at the same time in the high
     road to dignities. You must know, that Lord Hertford has so
     high a character for piety, that his taking me by the hand is
     a kind of regeneration to me, and all past offences are now
     wiped off. But all these views are trifling to one of my age
     and temper. The material point is (if any thing can be
     material,) that I keep my health and humour as entire as I
     possessed them at five and-twenty. I am sorry to hear, dear
     Edmondstoune, that the case is not the same with you, at least
     with regard to the former; and perhaps somewhat with regard to
     the latter. Your situation is no doubt tiresome, and somewhat
     disagreeable. What is the fancy of sending one of the first
     noblemen in the kingdom to pass years in a country
     town?[184:1] why do you not go forward to Italy, or back to
     Paris? When I arrived here, all M. Voltaire's friends told me
     of the regard he always expressed for me; that some advances
     on my part were due to his age, and would be well taken. I
     accordingly wrote him a letter, in which I expressed the
     esteem which are[184:2] undoubtedly due to his talents; and
     among other things I said, that if I were not confined to
     Paris by public business, I should have a great ambition to
     pay him a visit at Geneva. This is the foundation of the
     report you mention; but I am absolutely confined to Paris and
     the court, and cannot on any account leave them so much as for
     three days.

Some advice, given at this time by Hume to a young man who, though in
holy orders, had a tendency to scepticism, has already been before the
public, and has been severely criticised. His view, that there are
certain secrets which may be circulated among the learned in published
books, without any risk that the vulgar, to whom a knowledge of them
would be dangerous, should ever become acquainted with them, is one of
the most incomprehensible features of his character.[184:3] The
application of his own ethical system to the circumstances, might have
taught him that no good thing can connect itself with a lie; and that,
independently of all more sacred considerations, nothing can be more
desolating to human morality, than the discovery, that those who are
professing to teach solemn truths, do not themselves believe in the
opinions they promulgate. If, on the other hand, his counsel be a
legitimate deduction from his ethical principles, it is right that the
world should possess this test of their nature.

The following is the correspondence on both sides. For obvious reasons
the name of the young clergyman is suppressed. It may be observed, that
Hume's letter has been made a ground for attributing infidel opinions to
the ministers of the Presbyterian Church of Scotland. But justice
requires it to be kept in view, that it appears from the immediately
ensuing letter, that this individual belonged to the Church of
_England_.


COLONEL EDMONDSTOUNE _to_ HUME.

     _Geneva, 26th March._

     MY DEAR SECRETARY,--I have delayed for some time answering
     your letter, in expectation of being able to tell you what is
     to become of me; whether I am to return home, or remain abroad
     some years longer. Though I believe the latter will happen, I
     cannot speak of it with certainty, as I left it to Lord B. to
     determine for me; and he has not, as yet, given me any answer.
     I write to you at present to consult you about an acquaintance
     of yours, Mr. V----, who is here with Lord Abingdon, and who
     thinks of returning to England, May next. You'll be so good as
     to determine for him what character he is to assume on his
     arrival, whether that of a clergyman or a layman. I suppose
     you know he is in orders, but he is very very low church. To
     speak plain language, I believe him to be a sort of disciple
     of your own; and, though he does not carry matters quite so
     far as you, yet you have given him notions not very consistent
     with his priestly character; so that you see you are somewhat
     bound to give him your best advice. V---- is a very
     good-natured, sensible, honest follow, without any fortune. My
     young man has a great liking for him, and has all the
     inclination in the world to serve him; but he neither knows
     what to ask for him, and is not sure if his father would ask
     any thing at present. We are as much in the dark as to what
     passes in England, as if we lived in Siberia. As you know
     probably something of the matter, without entering into
     politics, you may give us some hints to direct us in what
     manner to act, and whether we may not be of more use to our
     friend in acting as auxiliaries than principals. You'll
     determine whether a man of probity can accept of a living, a
     bishoprick, that does not believe all the Thirty-nine
     Articles; for you only can fix him: he has been hitherto
     irresolute. If [I am not] mistaken, he seems rather inclined
     not to be a clergyman; but you know as well, and better than I
     do, how difficult it is to get any tolerable civil employment.
     I mean any patent place; while as soon as you can
     conveniently, and if you should determine for his being a
     clergyman, throw in something consolatory on his being obliged
     to renounce white stockings the rest of his life. I wait with
     impatience to hear of your being made secretary to the
     embassy. Shall a descendant of Gospatrick, Earl of
     Northumberland, remain in the character of under-secretary? I
     hope not; though I am afraid our cursed politics at home will
     occasion some delay. Lord Mount Stuart offers his compliments
     to you, and thanks you for the pleasure your History gave him.
     You scrub, do you think we have so little taste or curiosity
     as not to have your History complete? We have two copies, one
     to lend, and another for our own use; they were sent us
     immediately on the publication; it is almost the only book he
     takes pleasure in reading. He has read it once, and has got
     through four volumes the second time. By the bye, what is this
     M{c}Caulay history? I saw in the newspapers an extract of a
     preface that seemed to me to be the rhapsody of a crazy head.
     I hear it is in opposition to your History. We have her sister
     here, who seems to be a good sort of woman, a Mrs. Buckingham.
     I wish your time would allow you to come here: you have a
     great many friends; among the rest a Madame Tronchin, wife to
     the procureur-general, a virtuous, generous, charitable, good
     woman. She has learned English since I have been here, and can
     read your History with as much ease as her own language. Her
     husband is a man of merit, a man of genius; but knows you only
     by the translations of your works. Mallet, Professor
     Bertrand, and many others, even ministers, are your friends;
     even the Christians acknowledge your merit as an historian.
     The Christians here are the friends of Rousseau: those that
     are not, have been his persecutors; but it was not for his
     religious principles. They were afraid of his breeding
     disturbance in their state. I wish you could do something for
     Rousseau without his knowing it. Print his works in England
     for his benefit. You did not, I suppose, receive my letter on
     that subject. I never received that from you, which you say
     you enclosed to Sir Harry Erskine. Adieu, yours,

                                                J. E.[187:1]


HUME _to_ COLONEL EDMONDSTOUNE.

"DEAR EDMONDSTOUNE,--I was just projecting to write a long letter to
you, and another to Mr. V----, when your last obliging epistle came to
hand. I immediately put pen to paper, to assure you that the report is
entirely groundless, and that I have not lost, nor ever could have lost,
a shilling by Fairholm's bankruptcy. Poor John Adams is very deeply
engaged with him; but I had a letter last post from Dr. Blair, which
informs me that he will yet be able to save fifteen or sixteen thousand
pounds. I am glad to give you also this piece of intelligence.

"What! do you know that Lord Bute is again all-powerful, or rather that
he was always so, but is now acknowledged for such by all the world? Let
this be a new motive for Mr. V---- to adhere to the ecclesiastical
profession, in which he may have so good a patron; for civil employments
for men of letters can scarcely be found: all is occupied by men of
business, or by parliamentary interest.[187:2]

"It is putting too great a respect on the vulgar, and on their
superstitions, to pique one's self on sincerity with regard to them.
Did ever one make it a point of honour to speak truth to children or
madmen. If the thing were worthy being treated gravely, I should tell
him, that the Pythian oracle, with the approbation of Xenophon, advised
every one to worship the gods--νομω πολεως. I wish it were still in my
power to be a hypocrite in this particular. The common duties of society
usually require it; and the ecclesiastical profession only adds a little
more to an innocent dissimulation, or rather simulation, without which
it is impossible to pass through the world. Am I a liar, because I order
my servant to say, I am not at home, when I do not desire to see
company?

"How could you imagine that I was under-secretary to Lord Hertford, or
that I could ever be prevailed on to accept of such a character? I am
not secretary at all, but do the business of secretary to the embassy
without any character. Bunbury has the commission and appointments: a
young man of three or four and twenty, somewhat vain and ignorant, whom
Lord Hertford refused to accept of, as thinking he would be of no use to
him. The king gave me a pension of £200 a-year for life, to engage me to
attend his lordship. My lord is very impatient to have me secretary to
the embassy; and writes very earnest letters to that purpose to the
ministers, and, among the rest, to Lord Bute. He engaged me, somewhat
against my will, to write also to such of my friends as had credit with
that favourite, Oswald, Elliot, Sir Harry, and John Hume. The king has
promised that my Lord Hertford shall soon be satisfied in this
particular; and yet, I know not how, I suspect that some obstacle will
yet interpose; though nothing can be more scandalous, than for a man to
enjoy the revenue of an office, which is exercised by another. Mr.
Bunbury has great interest, being married to a sister of the Duke of
Richmond, and sister-in-law to Lord Holland. The appointments of this
office are above £1000 a-year, and the expense attending it nothing; and
it leads to all the great employments. I wait the issue with patience,
and even with indifference. At my years, and with my fortune, a man with
a little common sense, without philosophy, may be indifferent about what
happens. I am, dear Edmondstoune, yours sincerely."[189:1]


HUME _to_ GILBERT ELLIOT _of Minto_.

"_Paris, 27th March, 1764._

"MY DEAR SIR,--I believe I need not inform you how little I have been
inclined to solicit the great, or even my own friends, for any thing
that regards my own fortune. I may venture to say, that, hitherto, I
have never once made any application of this nature: and you may wonder
that now, at my years, when the greatest part of life is past, and I may
esteem myself, in other respects, pretty much at my ease, I should
submit to prefer requests which I declined at an age when ambition ought
naturally to be stronger, and when my circumstances much more powerfully
called for assistance. But the step I take at present is at Lord
Hertford's desire; who, being determined to make it a point that I
should have the credentials and appointments of secretary to the
embassy, expressed his wish that I should apply to all my own friends on
the same subject. My obligations to him are so great, that, even were I
more reluctant, I could not have declined compliance; and surely I can
have but small reluctance to apply to you, one of my best friends, with
whom I have long lived in a course of intimacy and good correspondence.

"I remember that the last time I had the pleasure of seeing you, you
said, that I no doubt wondered how it happened, that while the prime
minister and favourite, who inclined to be a Mæcenas, and who bore me no
ill will, was surrounded by all my most particular friends, I should
never have experienced any good effects from their credit. I own that I
never was surprised; not from any diffidence in them, but from some
obvious objections. Now all these objections are removed by Lord
Hertford's friendship. Nobody, henceforth, need be afraid to patronize
me, either as a Scotchman or a Deist. This circumstance encourages me in
my present application to my friends.

"Surely it is impossible to give them a juster and more plausible cause
to support than mine. I do the functions here of secretary to the
embassy: Is it not scandalous that another should live in London and
draw the salary?

"Is it for the credit of government, that such abuses should appear to
foreign nations? Is it good policy to send an ambassador to the most
important of all foreign employments, and yet declare that he has so
little credit at home, as not to have the choice of his own secretary.

"I shall not say that the partiality I meet with here will make these
abuses more remarked, than if another person, less known, were
concerned. But surely the government puts me in a situation which ought
to render me entirely useless to my Lord Hertford, by refusing me a
character which should have appeared necessary, in order to gain me
admittance into company.

"Allow me to inform you of another circumstance, which renders my
prevailing on this point the most material step to my future fortune.
When I came to London, and found, contrary to Lord Hertford's opinion,
that Mr. Bunbury was likely to keep his appointments, I declined going
abroad, unless something certain was fixed in my favour. My lord said,
that he would obtain me, from the public, a settlement of £200 a-year
for life, or would give me as much from his private fortune. He applied
to the king, who agreed; to Mr. Grenville, who also consented, two days
before we came off. My pension was fixed on the most precarious footing
of all pensions, by a simple order from the treasury to their secretary.
Yet Mr. Grenville told my lord, that this was equivalent to a settlement
for life. My lord believes so still; though I said nothing, perhaps from
a foolish delicacy, as the time of our departure so near approached, and
it was difficult then to correct the blunder. Were I to return to
England, on my present footing, I should regard this pension as
absolutely insignificant--not worth two years' purchase; and never could
form any plan on the supposition of its duration. But had I obtained the
rank and character of secretary to the embassy, there are certain
pensions annexed, by custom, to certain employments; and I believe I
might more depend upon it.

"You see how materially my interests are concerned. I have wrote to
others of my friends, Sir Harry, Oswald, and John Hume, in the same
style, that an effort may be made, all at once, in my favour. I own
that, notwithstanding all the plausible appearances, my hopes of success
are but moderate. I have been accustomed to meet with nothing but
insults and indignities from my native country; but if it continue so,
'ingrata patria, ne ossa quidem habebis.' I am, my dear sir, yours
sincerely."[192:1]


When the fame of Hume's reception in Paris had reached Scotland, some of
his countrymen, who had not previously been very solicitous to court his
notice, discovered that an introduction to him would be a valuable
acquisition. The correspondence shows that the expectations of such
persons were very large, and that if their names connected them with the
aristocracy of Scotland, it could not fail that they should be at once
put at their ease in the midst of the brilliant circle in which Hume was
moving. The following may be taken as an instance of these attempts. On
the 6th April, 1764, Blair writes:

"This letter will be presented to you by Colonel L----, brother to the
Earl of L----; who, going on a trip to Paris, is very ambitious of being
introduced to your acquaintance. You will find him a very honourable,
good-natured, well-behaved young man, of an amiable disposition and
character. As I have been much connected with the L---- family, who were
my first patrons in the ecclesiastical way, I was very glad to have it
in my power to do them this favour at their desire; and will reckon
myself much obliged to you for any civilities you show the
Colonel."[192:2]

Blair was not the sole medium through whom this gentleman was
recommended. Wallace writes, on 3d April, with all due ceremony: "The
occasion of my writing at present this short letter, is a desire from
the friends of the family of L---- here, asking me to write you by this
night's post, and acquaint you that the Honourable Alexander L----,
Esquire, son to the late Earl of L----, lieutenant-colonel of Colonel
Carey's regiment of foot, is going to Paris, and will probably be in it
before this reaches you, and wishes you may be acquainted, before he
comes, who he is." Taking the effect of these imposing denominations for
granted, Mr. Wallace continues:--"I dare say you will introduce him to
the good company where you are, and will be ready to put him on the best
methods of enjoying and improving himself at Paris."

In Hume's answer to this application, we may trace some desire to
reprove any notion that he was a person so insignificant as to feel
highly honoured by an acquaintance with an Honourable, and bound as a
matter of simple etiquette to receive his proffers with grateful
eagerness.


HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

"_Paris, 26th April, 1764._

"MY DEAR SIR,--Before I was favoured with yours, I had seen Colonel
L----, who waited on me, as is usual with the British who come to Paris.
I returned his visit, and introduced him to the ambassador, who asked
him to dinner among seven or eight of his countrymen. You will be
surprised, perhaps, when I tell you that this is the utmost of the
civilities which it will ever be possible for me to show Mr. L----. For
as to the ridiculous idea of foreigners, that I might introduce him to
the good company of Paris, nothing can be more impracticable. I know not
one family to which I could present such a man, silent, grave, awkward,
speaking ill the language, not distinguished by any exploit, or science,
or art. Were the French houses open to such people as these, they would
be very little agreeable, considering the immense concourse of strangers
to this place. But it is quite otherwise. The people are more scrupulous
of receiving persons unknown, and I should soon lose all credit with
them, were I to prostitute my recommendations of this nature. Your
recommendations have great weight with me; but if I am not mistaken, I
have often seen Colonel L----'s face in Edinburgh. It is a little late
he has bethought himself of being _ambitious_, as you say, of being
introduced to my acquaintance. The only favour I can do him, is to
advise him, as soon as he has seen Paris, to go to a provincial town
where people are less shy of admitting new acquaintance, and are less
delicate judges of behaviour. It is almost out of the memory of man,
that any British has been here on a footing of familiarity with the good
company except my Lord Holderness, who had a good stock of acquaintance
to begin with, speaks the language like a native, has very insinuating
manners, was presented under the character of an old secretary of state,
and spent, as is said, £10,000 this winter, to obtain that object of
vanity. Him, indeed, I met every where in the best company: but as to
others--lords, earls, marquises, and dukes--they went about to plays,
operas, and ----. Nobody minded them; they kept company with one
another; and it would have been ridiculous to think of bringing them
into French company. I may add General Clarke, who was liked and
esteemed by several people of merit, which he owed to his great
cleverness and ingenuity, and to his surprising courage in introducing
himself. I enter into this detail with you, that people with whom I am
much more connected than with the L. family, may not, at any time, be
surprised that I am able to do so little for them in this way, and may
not form false ideas of the hospitality of the French nation. But I
fancy there will not arrive at Paris many people who will have great
claims of past civilities to plead with me.

"What you tell me of John Adams gives me great consolation. I had heard
of the alarming news of his connexions with Fairholm, and things were
put in the worst light. I was just ready to write to Ferguson to get
from him a just state of the case; but if he has £15,000, or £18,000
remaining, his industry will recover him, and he may go on in his usual
way of beneficence and generosity. That family is one of the few to
whose civilities I have been much beholden, and I retain a lively sense
of them.

"Our friend, I mean your friend, Lord Kames, had much provoked Voltaire,
who never forgives, and never thinks any enemy below his notice. He has
accordingly sent to the _Gazette Literaire_, an article with regard to
the 'Elements of Criticism,' which turns that book extremely into
ridicule, with a good deal of wit.[195:1] I tried to have it suppressed
before it was printed; but the authors of that Gazette told me, that
they durst neither suppress nor alter any thing that came from Voltaire.
I suppose his lordship holds that satiric wit as cheap, as he does all
the rest of the human race; and will not be in the least mortified by
his censure.

"The taste for literature is neither decayed nor depraved here, as with
the barbarians who inhabit the banks of the Thames. Some people, who had
read your dissertation, affirmed to me, that it was the finest piece of
criticism, incomparably, to be found in the English tongue. I know not
if you have read the 'Poetique de Marmontel:' it is worth your perusal.
Voltaire has published an edition of Corneille, and his notes and
dissertations contain many fine things. There is a book published in
Holland, in two volumes octavo, called 'De la Nature.' It is prolix, and
in many parts whimsical; but contains some of the boldest reasonings to
be found in print. There is a miscellany in three volumes duodecimo
published here, where there are many good pieces. It is perhaps more
amusing to me, than it will be to you; as there is scarce a poem in it
whose author I do not know, or the person to whom it is addressed.

"It is very silly to form distant schemes: but I am fixed at Paris for
some time, and, to judge by probabilities, for life. My income would
suffice me to live at ease, and a younger brother of the best family
would not think himself ill provided for, if he had such a revenue.
Lodgings, a coach, and clothes, are all I need; and though I have
entered late into this scene of life, I am almost as much at my ease, as
if I had been educated in it from my infancy. However, sickness, or the
infirmities of age, which I may soon expect, may probably make me think
of a retreat: But whether that will be better found in Paris or
elsewhere, time must determine. I forbid myself all resolution on that
head.

"I shall indulge myself in a folly, which I hope you will make a
discreet use of: it is the telling you of an incident which may appear
silly, but which gave more pleasure than perhaps any other I had ever
met with. I was carried, about six weeks ago, to a masquerade, by Lord
Hertford. We went both unmasked; and we had scarce entered the room when
a lady, in mask, came up to me and exclaimed:--'_Ha! Monsr. Hume, vous
faites bien de venir ici a visage découvert. Que vous serez bien comblé
ce soir d'honnêtetés et de politesses! Vous verrez, par des preuves peu
équivoques, jusqu'à quel point vous êtes chéri en France._' This
prologue was not a little encouraging; but, as we advanced through the
hall, it is difficult to imagine the caresses, civilities, and
panegyrics which poured on me from all sides. You would have thought
that every one had taken advantage of his mask to speak his mind with
impunity. I could observe that the ladies were rather the most liberal
on this occasion. But what gave me chief pleasure was to find that most
of the eulogiums bestowed on me, turned on my personal character, my
naïvéte, and simplicity of manners, the candour and mildness of my
disposition, &c.--_Non sunt mihi cornea fibra._ I shall not deny that my
heart felt a sensible satisfaction from this general effusion of good
will; and Lord Hertford was much pleased, and even surprised, though he
said, he thought that he had known before upon what footing I stood with
the good company of Paris.

"I allow you to communicate this story to Dr. Jardine. I hope it will
refute all his idle notions that I have no turn for gallantry and
gaiety,[197:1]--that I am on a bad footing with the ladies,--that my
turn of conversation can never be agreeable to them,--that I never can
have any pretensions to their favours, &c. &c. &c. A man in vogue will
always have something to pretend to with the fair sex.

"Do you not think it happy for me to retain such a taste for idleness
and follies at my years; especially since I have come into a country
where the follies are so much more agreeable than elsewhere? I could
only wish that some of my old friends were to participate with me of
these amusements; though I know none of them that can, on occasion, be
so thoroughly idle as myself.

"I am persuaded you will find great comfort in my house, which, in every
respect, is agreeable. I beg of you and Mrs. Blair, (to whom I desire my
compliments,) that you would sometimes pay some attention to my sister,
who is the person that suffers most by my absence. I am, dear sir, yours
very sincerely."[198:1]


Blair writes, on the 15th November, assuring Hume that he is fully
conscious of the unreasonableness of expecting him to introduce those
who are accredited to him, to the good company of Paris. He says, that
his own friend expressed himself as "very well satisfied" with Hume's
behaviour towards him; and perhaps he had a better reception than the
letter to Blair might seem to indicate. At all events, Blair seems not
to have been discouraged, for he immediately introduced the son of the
provost of Glasgow, travelling for his health, and Arthur Masson, a
teacher of languages, recommending them to such good offices as Hume
finds himself at liberty to bestow on them. It is clear, in short, that
he had not been successful in frightening his friends from requesting
him to perform offices of kindness and courtesy, or from trusting that
he would perform them. The following passage, in Blair's letter, is
evidence of the popularity of the Literary classes of the university of
Edinburgh, during the middle of last century.

     My class was, last season, in such reputation that I gave a
     second course in summer, at the desire of a body of the
     medical students. I am just about to open for this
     winter--with what success I cannot tell; for I tremble for it
     every season. Against next season I intend to print a synopsis
     of my lectures. In the medical school, a revolution is at a
     crisis, which is important to us. Dr. Rutherford wants to
     demit in favour of Frank Hume; a measure pushed by Lord
     Milton, Baron Mure, and John Home; the coalition of three
     formidable powers: but which we college people dread as boding
     us no good; and are much more inclined to another scheme, of
     placing Cullen in Rutherford's chair, and bringing Dr. Black,
     from Glasgow, into the chair of chemistry, which would greatly
     promote the reputation of our college, and which has all the
     popularity on its side at present.

     How unimportant these things seem to you now? I hear much,
     from time to time, of your continuing, nay, increasing
     celebrity and fame. You are just the high mode, they tell
     us--the very delice of all the good company at Paris.

In a letter to Millar, chiefly in reference to some English law books,
which Hume had engaged to obtain for a French lawyer, he recurs to the
Memoirs of King James. He seems to have indolently adopted the notion
that there were few chances of his having an opportunity of making
additions to his History of the Stuarts. He did live, however, to see
more than one new edition of it: but the references in them to the
treasure he had discovered at Paris, are extremely meagre. Another
