letter immediately follows, in which we find that his anticipations of
new editions are already outrun by the demands: and we find in his, as
in many other cases, where permanent fame has been reached, that the
excitement of expectant authorship has declined long before its visions
are realized; and that their fulfilment comes at last on minds sobered
down to indifference.


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

"_Paris, 18th March, 1764._

"I have lived such a life of dissipation as not to be able to think of
any serious occupation. But I begin to tire of that course of life. I
have, however, run over King James's Memoirs, and have picked up some
curious passages, which it is needless to speak of till we have occasion
for a new edition, which I suppose is very distant."


"_Paris, 18th April, 1764._

"DEAR SIR,--All the discoveries I made in King James's Memoirs, make
against himself and his brother; and he is surely a good enough witness
on that side: but I believe him also a man of veracity, and I should
have put trust in any matter of fact that he told from his own
knowledge. But this it is needless for us to talk any more about; since,
I suppose, you have got copies enough of my History, already printed, to
last for your lifetime and mine. I shall certainly never think of adding
another line to it. I am too much your friend to think of it. . . . I
beg my sincere compliments to Mrs. Millar. I saw a few days ago Mrs.
Mallet, who seems to be going upon a strange project, of living alone,
in a hermitage, in the midst of the forest of Fontainbleau. I pass my
time very agreeably here; though somewhat too much dissipated for one of
my years and humour."[201:1]


"_Paris, 23d April, 1764._

"I was very much surprised with what you tell me, that you had made a
new edition in quarto, of my History of the Tudors, and might probably
do the same with that of the Stuarts. I imagined that the octavo edition
would for a long time supersede the necessity of any quarto edition; and
I wonder that of the ancient history did not first become requisite. You
were in the wrong to make any edition without informing me; because I
left in Scotland a copy very fully corrected, with a few alterations,
which ought to have been followed. I shall write to my sister to send it
you, and I desire you may follow it in all future editions, if there be
any such. I shall send you from here the alterations, which my perusal
of King James's Memoirs has occasioned; they are not many, but some of
them, one in particular, is of importance. I have some scruple of
inserting it, on your account, till the sale of the other editions be
pretty considerably advanced. You have not yet informed me how many you
may have upon hand. I suppose a very considerable number. Father Gordon
of the Scots College, who has an exact memory of King James's Memoirs,
was so kind as to peruse anew my History during the Commonwealth, and
the reigns of the two brothers; and he marked all the passages of fact,
where they differed from the Memoirs. They were surprisingly few; which
gave me some satisfaction; because as I told you, I take that prince's
authority for a plain fact to be very good.

"I never see Mr. Wilkes here but at chapel, where he is a most regular,
and devout, and edifying, and pious attendant; I take him to be entirely
regenerate. He told me last Sunday, that you had given him a copy of my
Dissertations, with the two which I had suppressed;[202:1] and that he,
foreseeing danger, from the sale of his library, had wrote to you to
find out that copy, and to tear out the two obnoxious dissertations.
Pray how stands that fact? It was imprudent in you to intrust him with
that copy: it was very prudent in him to use that precaution. Yet I do
not naturally suspect you of imprudence, nor him of prudence. I must
hear a little farther before I pronounce."[202:2]


Millar, writing on 5th June, gives the following account of his conduct
as to the suppressed dissertations.

     "I take Mr. Wilkes to be the same man he was,--acting a part.
     He has forgot the story of the _two_ dissertations. The fact
     is, upon importunity, I lent to him the only copy I preserved,
     and for years never could recollect he had it, till his books
     came to be sold; upon this I went immediately to the gentleman
     that directed the sale, told him the fact, and reclaimed the
     two dissertations which were my property. Mr. Coates, who was
     the person, immediately delivered me the volume; and so soon
     as I got home, I tore them out and burnt them, that I might
     not lend them to any for the future. Two days after, Mr.
     Coates sent me a note for the volume, as Mr. Wilkes had
     desired it should be sent to him to Paris; I returned the
     volume, but told him the two dissertations, I had torn out of
     the volume and burnt, being my property. This is the truth of
     the matter, and nothing but the truth. It was certainly
     imprudent for me to lend them to him."

The interest taken by Hume, as by all his contemporary
fellow-countrymen, in the Douglas cause, has already been noticed. As
the inquiry which had taken place in France had not been long concluded,
and was the object of discussion in the Court of Session, the adherents
of the exiled royal house, and other Scottish families residing in
Paris, naturally took such a deep interest in the proceedings, as the
following letter explains.


HUME _to_ BARON MURE.

"_Paris, 22d June, 1764._

"MY DEAR BARON,--A few days ago I dined with the Duchess of Perth, which
was the first time I had seen that venerable old lady, who is really a
very sensible woman. Part of our conversation was upon the Douglas
affair.

"That lady, as well as all the company, as well as every body of common
sense here, shows her entire conviction of that imposture; and there was
present a gentleman, an old friend of yours, a person of very good
understanding and of undoubted honour, who laid open to us a scene of
such deliberate dishonesty on the part of her grace of Douglas and her
partisans, as was somewhat new and surprising. I suppose it is all known
to poor Andrew,[203:1] whom I heartily love and pity. 'Tis certain, that
the imposture is as well known to her grace and her friends, as to any
body; and Hay, the Pretender's old secretary, the only man of common
honesty among them, confessed to this gentleman, that he has frequently
been shocked with their practices, and has run away from them to keep
out of the way of such infamy; though he had afterwards the weakness to
yield to their solicitations. Carnegy knows the roguery as well as the
rest; though I did not hear any thing of his scruples. Lord Beauchamp
and Dr. Trail, our chaplain, passed four months last summer at Rheims,
where this affair was much the subject of conversation. Except one
curate, they did not meet with a person, that was not convinced of the
imposture. Mons. de Puysieuls,[204:1] whose country seat is in the
neighbourhood, told me the same thing. Can any thing be more scandalous
and more extraordinary than Frank Garden's behaviour?[204:2] Can any
thing be more scandalous and more ordinary than Burnet's. I am afraid,
that notwithstanding the palpable justice of your cause, it is yet
uncertain whether you will prevail.

"I continue to live here in a manner amusing enough, and which gives me
no time to be tired of any scene. What between public business, the
company of the learned and that of the great, especially of the ladies,
I find all my time filled up, and have no time to open a book, except it
be some books newly published, which may be the subject of conversation.
I am well enough pleased with this change of life, and a satiety of
study had beforehand prepared the way for it: however, time runs off in
one course of life as well as another, and all things appear so much
alike, that I am afraid of falling into total Stoicism and indifference
about every thing. For instance, I am every moment to be touching on the
time when I am to receive my credential letters of secretary to the
embassy, with a thousand a-year of appointments. The king has promised
it, all the members have promised it; Lord Hertford earnestly solicits
it; the plainest common sense and justice seem to require [it]: yet have
I been in this condition above six months; and I never trouble my head
about the matter, and have rather laid my account that there is to be no
such thing.

"Please to express my most profound respects to Mrs. Mure, and my sense
of the honour she did me. If I have leisure before the carrier goes off,
I shall write her, and give her some account of my adventures; but I
would not show her so little mark of my attention as to write her only
in a postscript. I am, dear Baron," &c.[205:1]


The correspondence with Madame de Boufflers was occasionally resumed,
when Hume or she was absent from Paris. How well the philosopher could
upon occasion accommodate himself to the taste of a French lady of the
court, the following may suffice to show.


HUME _to the_ COMTESSE DE BOUFFLERS.

     _Compiegne, 6th July, 1764._

     We live in a kind of solitude and retirement at Compiegne; at
     least I do, who, having nothing but a few general acquaintance
     at court, and not caring to make more, have given myself up
     almost entirely to study and retreat. You cannot imagine,
     madam, with what pleasure I return as it were to my natural
     element, and what satisfaction I enjoy in reading, and musing,
     and sauntering, amid the agreeable scenes that surround me.
     But yes, you can easily enough imagine it; you have yourself
     formed the same resolution; you are determined this summer to
     tie the broken thread of your studies and literary amusements.
     If you have been so happy as to execute your purpose, you are
     almost in the same state as myself, and are at present
     wandering along the banks of the same beautiful river, perhaps
     with the same books in your hand, a Racine, I suppose, or a
     Virgil, and despise all other pleasure and amusement. Alas!
     why am I not so near you, that I could see you for half an
     hour a day, and confer with you on these subjects?

     But this ejaculation, methinks, does not lead me directly in
     my purposed road, of forgetting you. It is a short digression,
     which is soon over: and that I may return to the right path, I
     shall give you some account of the state of the court; I mean
     the exterior face of it; for I know no more; and if I did, I
     am become so great a politician, that nothing should make me
     reveal it. The king divides his evenings every week after the
     following manner: one he gives to the public, when he sups at
     the grand convent;[206:1] two he passes with his own family;
     two in a society of men; and, to make himself amends, two he
     passes with ladies, Madame de Grammont, usually, Madame de
     Mirepoix, and Madame de Beauveau. This last princess passed
     three evenings in this manner at the Hermitage immediately
     before her departure, which was on Monday last. I think her
     absence a great loss to that society; I am so presumptuous as
     to think it one to myself. I found her as obliging and as
     friendly as if she had never conversed with kings, and never
     were a politician. I really doubt much of her talent for
     politics. Pray what is your opinion? Is she qualified,
     otherwise than by having great sense and an agreeable
     conversation, to make progress in the road to favour? and are
     not these qualities rather an encumbrance to her? I have met
     her once or twice, with another lady, in whose favour I am
     much prepossessed; she seems agreeable, well behaved,
     judicious, a great reader; speaks as if she had sentiment, and
     was superior to the vulgar train of amusements. I should have
     been willing, notwithstanding my present love of solitude, to
     have cultivated an acquaintance with her, but she did not say
     any thing so obliging to me as to give me encouragement. Would
     you conjecture that I mean the Countess of Tessé? I know not
     whether you are acquainted with that lady. But I shall never
     have done with this idle train of conversation; and therefore,
     to cut things short, I kiss your hands most humbly and
     devoutly, and bid you adieu.[207:1]


FOOTNOTES:

[158:1] MS. R.S.E.

[159:1] Walpole says, "The decorum and piety of Lord Hertford occasioned
men to wonder, when, in the room of Bunbury, he chose for his secretary
the celebrated freethinker, David Hume, totally unknown to him; but this
was the effect of recommendations from other Scots, who had much weight
with Lord and Lady Hertford." _Walpole's Memoirs of George III._ i. 264.

[159:2] The change of ministry on which Lord Bute ceased to be minister,
and negotiations were held with Pitt. Hume does not appear to have had
any intercourse with Lord Bute while he was in office. In a letter to
Blair, of 6th October, which will be found in the Appendix on the
"Ossian Controversy," he says, "John Hume [Home] went to the country
yesterday with Lord Bute. I was introduced the other day to that noble
lord at his desire. I believe him a very good man; a better man than a
politician."

[160:1] Copy R.S.E. The original is in possession of Colonel Mure.

[163:1] MS. R.S.E.

[164:1] Extract of a letter from Dr. Carlyle to the Rev. Thomas Hepburn,
dated 5th September, 1763, in Thorpe's Catalogue of Autographs, for
1833. It would be vain to inquire whither the original has now found its
way.

[165:1] In 1762, Blacklock had received a presentation, as minister to
the parish of Kirkcudbright. His induction was opposed on the ground of
his blindness; and a bitter litigation ensued in the church courts,
while the parishioners, having taken up the matter as vital in a
religious view, persecuted him with all the savage and relentless
cruelty of fanaticism. "No liberal and cultivated mind," he says, in
reference to this dispute, "can entertain the least hesitation in
concluding that there is nothing, either in the nature of things, or
even in the positive institutions of genuine religion, repugnant to the
idea of a blind clergyman. But the novelty of the phenomenon, while it
astonishes vulgar and contracted understandings, inflames their zeal to
rage and madness."

[167:1] Blair, writing to Hume on 29th September, says, "Horace need not
make you at all blush in your present expedition. If I mistake him not
very much, he paid more court to Mæcenas than ever you would have done
to any great man. His _principibus placuisse viris_ was a favourite
passion. Besides that, Horace understood human life too well to refuse
such an opening into high amusement as is now before you: and most
certainly, as you well observe, the farther we advance in life, we need
more to have the scene varied."--(MS. R.S.E.)

[167:2] MS. R.S.E.

[167:3] As a specimen of the flattering testimonials which Hume
occasionally received from France, the following letter from M. Trudaine
de Montigny, a young Frenchman who attained to considerable distinction,
is given:


(_Translation._)

     "_Paris, 16th May, 1759._

     "I pass my time, both in town and country, in a circle of
     gentlemen, of whom some are acquainted with English, others
     not. They had been highly pleased with some portions of your
     works, which had been translated; and among others with your
     'Political Discourses,' where they found the practical views
     of a citizen, united with the profound reflections of a
     politician, and the perspicacity of a philosopher. To put the
     whole circle in a position to judge for themselves of the
     merit of these works, I undertook, in the course of a country
     jaunt which we took all together, to translate your 'Natural
     History of Religion.' I chose this piece because it appeared
     to me to contain a complete exposition of philosophy on this
     subject. I was well rewarded for my pains, by the pleasure I
     found I gave to all the world. Madame Dupré de St. Maur, who
     has honoured me with the kindest friendship from my infancy,
     told me she wished much that you were made acquainted with
     this feeble effort. M. Steward, whom I met with M. Helvetius,
     and who wished much to hear the perusal, promised to send it
     to you."

Madame Dupré de St. Maur writes, on 16th May, 1759, that Montigny had
received Hume's acknowledgment, which produced more effect on him than
any piece of good fortune he had hitherto experienced. "I partook," she
says, "of his joy the more sensibly, as I had in a great measure
inspired him with confidence to send you his translation, in the
persuasion that great men are the most indulgent."--MS. R.S.E.

We find the tone of this letter frequently responded to in the
correspondence of Grimm with his German patrons, though the Baron does
not always coincide in the praises he has to record. Andrew Stuart,
known by his letters to Lord Mansfield, who before 1763 was much
employed in France in connexion with the Douglas cause, and appears to
have been admitted into the best company there, writes to Sir William
Johnstone on 16th December, 1762: "When you have occasion to see our
friend, David Hume, tell him that he is so much worshipped here, that he
must be void of all passions, if he does not immediately take post for
Paris. In most houses where I am acquainted here, one of the first
questions is, Do you know Mons{r}. Hume, whom we all admire so much?
I dined yesterday at Helvetius's, where this same Mons{r}. Hume
interrupted our conversation very much."--(MS. R.S.E.)

       *       *       *       *       *

The following note, from the impetuous Alexander Murray, responds to the
same strain:--

     "MY DEAR HUME,--The great desire that several French gentlemen
     of my acquaintance have of being known to you, which happiness
     I have promised to procure them, makes me ardently beg the
     favour of you to do me the honour to dine with me any day next
     week (Monday excepted,) that you please to appoint. Your
     rencounters with the men, my dear friend, give me no sort of
     pain; but I freely own to you I am under some uneasiness how
     you will acquit yourself with the fair sex, whose impatience
     of knowing you is not to be expressed. The day you dine with
     me you will meet some folks who admire your productions as
     much as any of your own countrymen, and perhaps comprehend
     your sublime ideas as well as they do. I beg leave to assure
     you that no body loves and admires you more than your most
     sincere friend and humble servant."--(MS. R.S.E.)

     "_Saturday Morning._"

[169:1] Some words obliterated.

[170:1] A word or two obliterated.

[171:1] A translation was published in 1764, by M. A. Eidous; there was
another in 1774, by Blavet.

[172:1] _Literary Gazette_, 1822, p. 648. Corrected from the original
MS. R.S.E.

[172:2] The Poker Club, which had then existed for some time, and was
continued for some years after Hume's death. Its name is supposed to
have been bestowed on it, on account of its services in stirring the
intellectual energies of the members.

[174:1] The name Adam used to be thus altered in the Scottish
vernacular. The person here alluded to is evidently John Adam the
architect, and the "Willie," his son William, who became Lord Chief
Commissioner of the Jury Court in Scotland, and died in 1839.

[175:1] _Literary Gazette_, 1828, p. 683.

[176:1] MS. R.S.E.

[176:2] Madame Belot, whose translation of the "History of the House of
Tudor," was published in 1763, as "Histoire de la Maison de Tudor, &c.
par Madam B * * *." She published a translation of the earlier period of
the History, in 1765. Grimm charges Madame Belot with preposterous
blunders as a translator; and gives, as an instance, her rendering
Hume's allusion to the _Polish aristocracy_, by the words, _une
aristocratie polie_. Of this lady, a curious periodical work, called
"Mémoires Secrets, pour servir a l'Histoire de la République des lettres
en France," says, of date 26th May, 1764, that, after having lived a
life of wretched poverty, scantily supported by the produce of her
translations from the English, she was then living with the President
Mesnieres, whose taste is considered singular as "cette dame est peu
jeune: elle est laide, seche et d'un esprit triste et mélancolique."
Such were then the rewards of female authorship in France!

[177:1] This hint was not adopted. Robertson's work was translated by
Suard.

[178:1] There can have been no reason for this abbreviation of the title
of the Dauphin and his children, but the circumstance that the letter
was liable to be seen in France, and a full statement might be
considered disrespectful. The first-named was the Duc de Berri,
afterwards Louis XVI.; he was then nine years old. The Count de P. was
the Comte de Provence, afterwards Louis XVIII., born in 1755. The Count
D'A, was the Comte d'Artois, afterwards Charles X., who died in 1836.
Hume has underrated his age, which was six; he was born in 1757. Thus
were these children, who made their little speeches to the historian of
Charles I., all destined to be, successively, kings of France, and to
experience a too intimate acquaintance with such scenes as they found
depicted in his "fine history!"

[179:1] These volumes were lost during the French Revolution. It is said
that an attempt was made to convey them to St. Omers; but having to be
committed, for some time, to the care of a Frenchman, his wife became
alarmed lest the regal emblems on the binding might expose the family to
danger from the Terrorists. The narrative proceeds to say, that she
first cut off the binding and buried the manuscripts, but that being
still haunted by fears, she exhumed and burned them. See the
introduction by Dr. Staniers Clarke, to "The Life of James II." believed
to be an abridgment of these manuscripts. Hume is not consistent as to
the number of volumes.

[179:2] Stewart's Life of Robertson.

[180:1] This letter is not dated.

[181:1] MS. R.S.E.

[182:1] Lord Marischal's attainder having been reversed, he had visited
Scotland, for the purpose of purchasing one of his estates. He thus
communicates the result to Hume in a letter of 23d February.

"I thank you for forwarding my cousin's letter. I wish, now that I am
Laird of Inverury, that he were my son, and of my name. I bought my
estate farthest north. There was no bidder against any one; and great
applause of the spectators." MS. R.S.E.

[184:1] Edmondstoune appears to have been residing at Geneva, as
guardian to Lord Mount-Stuart, Lord Bute's son.

[184:2] Sic in MS.

[184:3] See it noticed in vol. i. p. 405, in connexion with the right of
resistance.

[187:1] MS. R.S.E.

[187:2] Sic in MS.

[189:1] Original in possession of the Cambusmore family.

[192:1] Minto MSS.

[192:2] The letter proceeds to say, "Our little society here continues
much on the footing you left it; only that we find frequent occasions of
regretting the blank you make amongst us. In our college we are making a
great improvement. In consequence of a bargain made with J. Russel,
Bruce, the Professor of the Law of Nature and Nations, goes out; Balfour
of Pilrig moves into his place; Ferguson into the chair of Moral
Philosophy; and Russel into that of Natural. Is not this clever?" He
then states, that "The taste for French literature grows more and more
amongst us," and hopes he will send any new publication which has merit.
He concludes with mentioning the bankruptcy of the Fairholms, and the
circumstance of Mr. Adam's involvement in it.

[195:1] See Tytler's Life of Kames, vol. ii. p. 148.

[197:1] See Vol. I. p. 232.

[198:1] MS. R.S.E. The latter part of the letter is printed in the
_Literary Gazette_ for 1822, p. 712.

[201:1] MS. R.S.E.

[202:1] See above, p. 14.

[202:2] MS. R.S.E.

[203:1] Andrew Stuart, see above, p. 168.

[204:1] Puisieux?

[204:2] Francis Garden, afterwards a judge of the Court of Session, with
the title of Lord Gardenstone. He was senior, and James Burnet,
afterwards Lord Monboddo, was junior Scottish counsel for Mr. Douglas in
the Tournelle process in France.

[205:1] Copy in R.S.E. The original is in possession of Colonel Mure.

[206:1] Perhaps an error in transcribing _au grand couvert_?

[207:1] Private Correspondence, p. 83-85.




