letter its place to the right.

We have thus the following scheme, which represents the set of cubes of
column 1, fig. 101, page 165.

We begin with the remote lowest cube at the left hand, where the
asterisk is placed (this proves to be by far the most convenient origin
to take for the normal system).

Thus “nen” is a “null” cube, “ten” a red cube on it, and “len” a “null”
cube above “ten.”

By using a more extended sequence of consonants and vowels a larger set
of cubes can be named.

To name a four-dimensional block of tesseracts it is simply necessary
to prefix an “e,” an “a,” or an “i” to the cube names.

Thus the tesseract blocks schematically represented on page 165, fig.
101 are named as follows:—

[Illustration: 1 2 3]


2. DERIVATION OF POINT, LINE, FACE, ETC., NAMES.

[Illustration]

The principle of derivation can be shown as follows: Taking the square
of squares the number of squares in it can be enlarged and the whole
kept the same size.

[Illustration]

Compare fig. 79, p. 138, for instance, or the bottom layer of fig. 84.

Now use an initial “s” to denote the result of carrying this process on
to a great extent, and we obtain the limit names, that is the point,
line, area names for a square. “Sat” is the whole interior. The corners
are “sen,” “sel,” “sin,” “sil,” while the lines are “san,” “sal,”
“set,” “sit.”

[Illustration]

I find that by the use of the initial “s” these names come to be
practically entirely disconnected with the systematic names for the
square from which they are derived. They are easy to learn, and when
learned can be used readily with the axes running in any direction.

To derive the limit names for a four-dimensional rectangular figure,
like the tesseract, is a simple extension of this process. These point,
line, etc., names include those which apply to a cube, as will be
evident on inspection of the first cube of the diagrams which follow.

All that is necessary is to place an “s” before each of the names given
for a tesseract block. We then obtain apellatives which, like the
colour names on page 174, fig. 103, apply to all the points, lines,
faces, solids, and to the hyper-solid of the tesseract. These names
have the advantage over the colour marks that each point, line, etc.,
has its own individual name.

In the diagrams I give the names corresponding to the positions shown
in the coloured plate or described on p. 174. By comparing cubes 1, 2,
3 with the first row of cubes in the coloured plate, the systematic
names of each of the points, lines, faces, etc., can be determined. The
asterisk shows the origin from which the names run.

These point, line, face, etc., names should be used in connection with
the corresponding colours. The names should call up coloured images of
the parts named in their right connection.

[Illustration]

It is found that a certain abbreviation adds vividness of distinction
to these names. If the final “en” be dropped wherever it occurs the
system is improved. Thus instead of “senen,” “seten,” “selen,” it is
preferable to abbreviate to “sen,” “set,” “sel,” and also use “san,”
“sin” for “sanen,” “sinen.”

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

We can now name any section. Take _e.g._ the line in the first cube
from senin to senel, we should call the line running from senin to
senel, senin senat senel, a line light yellow in colour with null
points.

[Illustration]

Here senat is the name for all of the line except its ends. Using
“senat” in this way does not mean that the line is the whole of senat,
but what there is of it is senat. It is a part of the senat region.
Thus also the triangle, which has its three vertices in senin, senel,
selen, is named thus:

  Area: setat.
  Sides: setan, senat, setet.
  Vertices: senin, senel, sel.

The tetrahedron section of the tesseract can be thought of as a series
of plane sections in the successive sections of the tesseract shown in
fig. 114, p. 191. In b_{0} the section is the one written above. In
b_{1} the section is made by a plane which cuts the three edges from
sanen intermediate of their lengths and thus will be:

  Area: satat.
  Sides: satan, sanat, satet.
  Vertices: sanan, sanet, sat.

The sections in b_{2}, b_{3} will be like the section in b_{1} but
smaller.

Finally in b_{4} the section plane simply passes through the corner
named sin.

Hence, putting these sections together in their right relation, from
the face setat, surrounded by the lines and points mentioned above,
there run:

  3 faces: satan, sanat, satet
  3 lines: sanan, sanet, sat

and these faces and lines run to the point sin. Thus the tetrahedron is
completely named.

The octahedron section of the tesseract, which can be traced from fig.
72, p. 129 by extending the lines there drawn, is named:

Front triangle selin, selat, selel, setal, senil, setit, selin with
area setat.

The sections between the front and rear triangle, of which one is shown
in 1b, another in 2b, are thus named, points and lines, salan, salat,
salet, satet, satel, satal, sanal, sanat, sanit, satit, satin, satan,
salan.

The rear triangle found in 3b by producing lines is sil, sitet, sinel,
sinat, sinin, sitan, sil.

The assemblage of sections constitute the solid body of the octahedron
satat with triangular faces. The one from the line selat to the point
sil, for instance, is named selin, selat, selel, salet, salat, salan,
sil. The whole interior is salat.

Shapes can easily be cut out of cardboard which, when folded together,
form not only the tetrahedron and the octahedron, but also samples of
all the sections of the tesseract taken as it passes cornerwise through
our space. To name and visualise with appropriate colours a series of
these sections is an admirable exercise for obtaining familiarity with
the subject.


                EXTENSION AND CONNECTION WITH NUMBERS.

By extending the letter sequence it is of course possible to name a
larger field. By using the limit names the corners of each square can
be named.

Thus “en sen,” “an sen,” etc., will be the names of the points nearest
the origin in “en” and in “an.”

A field of points of which each one is indefinitely small is given by
the names written below.

[Illustration]

The squares are shown in dotted lines, the names denote the points.
These points are not mathematical points, but really minute areas.

Instead of starting with a set of squares and naming them, we can start
with a set of points.

By an easily remembered convention we can give names to such a region
of points.

Let the space names with a final “e” added denote the mathematical
points at the corner of each square nearest the origin. We have then
for the set of mathematical points indicated. This system is really
completely independent of the area system and is connected with it
merely for the purpose of facilitating the memory processes. The word
“ene” is pronounced like “eny,” with just sufficient attention to the
final vowel to distinguish it from the word “en.”

[Illustration]

Now, connecting the numbers 0, 1, 2 with the sequence e, a, i, and
also with the sequence n, t, l, we have a set of points named as with
numbers in a co-ordinate system. Thus “ene” is (0, 0) “ate” is (1,
1) “ite” is (2, 1). To pass to the area system the rule is that the
name of the square is formed from the name of its point nearest to the
origin by dropping the final e.

By using a notation analogous to the decimal system a larger field of
points can be named. It remains to assign a letter sequence to the
numbers from positive 0 to positive 9, and from negative 0 to negative
9, to obtain a system which can be used to denote both the usual
co-ordinate system of mapping and a system of named squares. The names
denoting the points all end with e. Those that denote squares end with
a consonant.

There are many considerations which must be attended to in extending
the sequences to be used, such as uniqueness in the meaning of the
words formed, ease of pronunciation, avoidance of awkward combinations.

I drop “s” altogether from the consonant series and short “u” from
the vowel series. It is convenient to have unsignificant letters at
disposal. A double consonant like “st” for instance can be referred to
without giving it a local significance by calling it “ust.” I increase
the number of vowels by considering a sound like “ra” to be a vowel,
using, that is, the letter “r” as forming a compound vowel.

The series is as follows:—

                           CONSONANTS.

              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
  positive    n   t   l   p   f   sh  k   ch  nt  st
  negative    z   d   th  b   v   m   g   j   nd  sp

                            VOWELS.

              0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9
  positive    e   a   i   ee  ae  ai  ar  ra  ri  ree
  negative    er  o   oo  io  oe  iu  or  ro  roo rio

_Pronunciation._—e as in men; a as in man; i as in in; ee as in
between; ae as ay in may; ai as i in mine; ar as in art; er as ear in
earth; o as in on; oo as oo in soon; io as in clarion; oe as oa in oat;
iu pronounced like yew.

To name a point such as (23, 41) it is considered as (3, 1) on from
(20, 40) and is called “ifeete.” It is the initial point of the square
ifeet of the area system.

The preceding amplification of a space language has been introduced
merely for the sake of completeness. As has already been said nine
words and their combinations, applied to a few simple models suffice
for the purposes of our present enquiry.


    _Printed by Hazell, Watson & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury._


