CHAPTER V.


“Yes: for ten years I lived the most revolting existence, while
dreaming of the noblest love, and even in the name of that love. Yes, I
want to tell you how I killed my wife, and for that I must tell you how
I debauched myself. I killed her before I knew her.

“I killed _the_ wife when I first tasted sensual joys without love, and
then it was that I killed _my_ wife. Yes, sir: it is only after having
suffered, after having tortured myself, that I have come to understand
the root of things, that I have come to understand my crimes. Thus you
will see where and how began the drama that has led me to misfortune.

“It is necessary to go back to my sixteenth year, when I was still at
school, and my elder brother a first-year student. I had not yet known
women but, like all the unfortunate children of our society, I was
already no longer innocent. I was tortured, as you were, I am sure, and
as are tortured ninety-nine one-hundredths of our boys. I lived in a
frightful dread, I prayed to God, and I prostrated myself.

“I was already perverted in imagination, but the last steps remained to
be taken. I could still escape, when a friend of my brother, a very gay
student, one of those who are called good fellows,—that is, the
greatest of scamps,—and who had taught us to drink and play cards, took
advantage of a night of intoxication to drag us THERE. We started. My
brother, as innocent as I, fell that night, and I, a mere lad of
sixteen, polluted myself and helped to pollute a sister-woman, without
understanding what I did. Never had I heard from my elders that what I
thus did was bad. It is true that there are the ten commandments of the
Bible; but the commandments are made only to be recited before the
priests at examinations, and even then are not as exacting as the
commandments in regard to the use of _ut_ in conditional propositions.

“Thus, from my elders, whose opinion I esteemed, I had never heard that
this was reprehensible. On the contrary, I had heard people whom I
respected say that it was good. I had heard that my struggles and my
sufferings would be appeased after this act. I had heard it and read
it. I had heard from my elders that it was excellent for the health,
and my friends have always seemed to believe that it contained I know
not what merit and valor. So nothing is seen in it but what is
praiseworthy. As for the danger of disease, it is a foreseen danger.
Does not the government guard against it? And even science corrupts
us.”

“How so, science?” I asked.

“Why, the doctors, the pontiffs of science. Who pervert young people by
laying down such rules of hygiene? Who pervert women by devising and
teaching them ways by which not to have children?

“Yes: if only a hundredth of the efforts spent in curing diseases were
spent in curing debauchery, disease would long ago have ceased to
exist, whereas now all efforts are employed, not in extirpating
debauchery, but in favoring it, by assuring the harmlessness of the
consequences. Besides, it is not a question of that. It is a question
of this frightful thing that has happened to me, as it happens to
nine-tenths, if not more, not only of the men of our society, but of
all societies, even peasants,—this frightful thing that I had fallen,
and not because I was subjected to the natural seduction of a certain
woman. No, no woman seduced me. I fell because the surroundings in
which I found myself saw in this degrading thing only a legitimate
function, useful to the health; because others saw in it simply a
natural amusement, not only excusable, but even innocent in a young
man. I did not understand that it was a fall, and I began to give
myself to those pleasures (partly from desire and partly from
necessity) which I was led to believe were characteristic of my age,
just as I had begun to drink and smoke.

“And yet there was in this first fall something peculiar and touching.
I remember that straightway I was filled with such a profound sadness
that I had a desire to weep, to weep over the loss forever of my
relations with woman. Yes, my relations with woman were lost forever.
Pure relations with women, from that time forward, I could no longer
have. I had become what is called a voluptuary; and to be a voluptuary
is a physical condition like the condition of a victim of the morphine
habit, of a drunkard, and of a smoker.

“Just as the victim of the morphine habit, the drunkard, the smoker, is
no longer a normal man, so the man who has known several women for his
pleasure is no longer normal? He is abnormal forever. He is a
voluptuary. Just as the drunkard and the victim of the morphine habit
may be recognized by their face and manner, so we may recognize a
voluptuary. He may repress himself and struggle, but nevermore will he
enjoy simple, pure, and fraternal relations toward woman. By his way of
glancing at a young woman one may at once recognize a voluptuary; and I
became a voluptuary, and I have remained one.”




CHAPTER VI.


“Yes, so it is; and that went farther and farther with all sorts of
variations. My God! when I remember all my cowardly acts and bad deeds,
I am frightened. And I remember that ‘me’ who, during that period, was
still the butt of his comrades’ ridicule on account of his innocence.

“And when I hear people talk of the gilded youth, of the officers, of
the Parisians, and all these gentlemen, and myself, living wild lives
at the age of thirty, and who have on our consciences hundreds of
crimes toward women, terrible and varied, when we enter a parlor or a
ball-room, washed, shaven, and perfumed, with very white linen, in
dress coats or in uniform, as emblems of purity, oh, the disgust! There
will surely come a time, an epoch, when all these lives and all this
cowardice will be unveiled!

“So, nevertheless, I lived, until the age of thirty, without abandoning
for a minute my intention of marrying, and building an elevated
conjugal life; and with this in view I watched all young girls who
might suit me. I was buried in rottenness, and at the same time I
looked for virgins, whose purity was worthy of me! Many of them were
rejected: they did not seem to me pure enough!

“Finally I found one that I considered on a level with myself. She was
one of two daughters of a landed proprietor of Penza, formerly very
rich and since ruined. To tell the truth, without false modesty, they
pursued me and finally captured me. The mother (the father was away)
laid all sorts of traps, and one of these, a trip in a boat, decided my
future.

“I made up my mind at the end of the aforesaid trip one night, by
moonlight, on our way home, while I was sitting beside her. I admired
her slender body, whose charming shape was moulded by a jersey, and her
curling hair, and I suddenly concluded that _this was she_. It seemed
to me on that beautiful evening that she understood all that I thought
and felt, and I thought and felt the most elevating things.

“Really, it was only the jersey that was so becoming to her, and her
curly hair, and also the fact that I had spent the day beside her, and
that I desired a more intimate relation.

“I returned home enthusiastic, and I persuaded myself that she realized
the highest perfection, and that for that reason she was worthy to be
my wife, and the next day I made to her a proposal of marriage.

“No, say what you will, we live in such an abyss of falsehood, that,
unless some event strikes us a blow on the head, as in my case, we
cannot awaken. What confusion! Out of the thousands of men who marry,
not only among us, but also among the people, scarcely will you find a
single one who has not previously married at least ten times. (It is
true that there now exist, at least so I have heard, pure young people
who feel and know that this is not a joke, but a serious matter. May
God come to their aid! But in my time there was not to be found one
such in a thousand.)

“And all know it, and pretend not to know it. In all the novels are
described down to the smallest details the feelings of the characters,
the lakes and brambles around which they walk; but, when it comes to
describing their _great_ love, not a word is breathed of what _He_, the
interesting character, has previously done, not a word about his
frequenting of disreputable houses, or his association with
nursery-maids, cooks, and the wives of others.

“And if anything is said of these things, such _improper_ novels are
not allowed in the hands of young girls. All men have the air of
believing, in presence of maidens, that these corrupt pleasures, in
which _everybody_ takes part, do not exist, or exist only to a very
small extent. They pretend it so carefully that they succeed in
convincing themselves of it. As for the poor young girls, they believe
it quite seriously, just as my poor wife believed it.

“I remember that, being already engaged, I showed her my ‘memoirs,’
from which she could learn more or less of my past, and especially my
last _liaison_ which she might perhaps have discovered through the
gossip of some third party. It was for this last reason, for that
matter, that I felt the necessity of communicating these memoirs to
her. I can still see her fright, her despair, her bewilderment, when
she had learned and understood it. She was on the point of breaking the
engagement. What a lucky thing it would have been for both of us!”

Posdnicheff was silent for a moment, and then resumed:—

“After all, no! It is better that things happened as they did, better!”
he cried. “It was a good thing for me. Besides, it makes no difference.
I was saying that in these cases it is the poor young girls who are
deceived. As for the mothers, the mothers especially, informed by their
husbands, they know all, and, while pretending to believe in the purity
of the young man, they act as if they did not believe in it.

“They know what bait must be held out to people for themselves and
their daughters. We men sin through ignorance, and a determination not
to learn. As for the women, they know very well that the noblest and
most poetic love, as we call it, depends, not on moral qualities, but
on the physical intimacy, and also on the manner of doing the hair, and
the color and shape.

“Ask an experienced coquette, who has undertaken to seduce a man, which
she would prefer,—to be convicted, in presence of the man whom she is
engaged in conquering, of falsehood, perversity, cruelty, or to appear
before him in an ill-fitting dress, or a dress of an unbecoming color.
She will prefer the first alternative. She knows very well that we
simply lie when we talk of our elevated sentiments, that we seek only
the possession of her body, and that because of that we will forgive
her every sort of baseness, but will not forgive her a costume of an
ugly shade, without taste or fit.

“And these things she knows by reason, where as the maiden knows them
only by instinct, like the animal. Hence these abominable jerseys,
these artificial humps on the back, these bare shoulders, arms, and
throats.

“Women, especially those who have passed through the school of
marriage, know very well that conversations upon elevated subjects are
only conversations, and that man seeks and desires the body and all
that ornaments the body. Consequently, they act accordingly? If we
reject conventional explanations, and view the life of our upper and
lower classes as it is, with all its shamelessness, it is only a vast
perversity. You do not share this opinion? Permit me, I am going to
prove it to you (said he, interrupting me).

“You say that the women of our society live for a different interest
from that which actuates fallen women. And I say no, and I am going to
prove it to you. If beings differ from one another according to the
purpose of their life, according to their _inner life_, this will
necessarily be reflected also in their _outer life_, and their exterior
will be very different. Well, then, compare the wretched, the despised,
with the women of the highest society: the same dresses, the same
fashions, the same perfumeries, the same passion for jewelry, for
brilliant and very expensive articles, the same amusements, dances,
music, and songs. The former attract by all possible means; so do the
latter. No difference, none whatever!

“Yes, and I, too, was captivated by jerseys, bustles, and curly hair.”




