CHAPTER VII.


“And it was very easy to capture me, since I was brought up under
artificial conditions, like cucumbers in a hothouse. Our too abundant
nourishment, together with complete physical idleness, is nothing but
systematic excitement of the imagination. The men of our society are
fed and kept like reproductive stallions. It is sufficient to close the
valve,—that is, for a young man to live a quiet life for some time,—to
produce as an immediate result a restlessness, which, becoming
exaggerated by reflection through the prism of our unnatural life,
provokes the illusion of love.

“All our idyls and marriage, all, are the result for the most part of
our eating. Does that astonish you? For my part, I am astonished that
we do not see it. Not far from my estate this spring some moujiks were
working on a railway embankment. You know what a peasant’s food
is,—bread, _kvass_,[*] onions. With this frugal nourishment he lives,
he is alert, he makes light work in the fields. But on the railway this
bill of fare becomes _cacha_ and a pound of meat. Only he restores this
meat by sixteen hours of labor pushing loads weighing twelve hundred
pounds.

[*] _Kvass_, a sort of cider.


“And we, who eat two pounds of meat and game, we who absorb all sorts
of heating drinks and food, how do we expend it? In sensual excesses.
If the valve is open, all goes well; but close it, as I had closed it
temporarily before my marriage, and immediately there will result an
excitement which, deformed by novels, verses, music, by our idle and
luxurious life, will give a love of the finest water. I, too, fell in
love, as everybody does, and there were transports, emotions, poesy;
but really all this passion was prepared by mamma and the dressmakers.
If there had been no trips in boats, no well-fitted garments, etc., if
my wife had worn some shapeless blouse, and I had seen her thus at her
home, I should not have been seduced.”




CHAPTER VIII.


“And note, also, this falsehood, of which all are guilty; the way in
which marriages are made. What could there be more natural? The young
girl is marriageable, she should marry. What simpler, provided the
young person is not a monster, and men can be found with a desire to
marry? Well, no, here begins a new hypocrisy.

“Formerly, when the maiden arrived at a favorable age, her marriage was
arranged by her parents. That was done, that is done still, throughout
humanity, among the Chinese, the Hindoos, the Mussulmans, and among our
common people also. Things are so managed in at least ninety-nine per
cent. of the families of the entire human race.

“Only we riotous livers have imagined that this way was bad, and have
invented another. And this other,—what is it? It is this. The young
girls are seated, and the gentlemen walk up and down before them, as in
a bazaar, and make their choice. The maidens wait and think, but do not
dare to say: ‘Take me, young man, me and not her. Look at these
shoulders and the rest.’ We males walk up and down, and estimate the
merchandise, and then we discourse upon the rights of woman, upon the
liberty that she acquires, I know not how, in the theatrical halls.”

“But what is to be done?” said I to him. “Shall the woman make the
advances?”

“I do not know. But, if it is a question of equality, let the equality
be complete. Though it has been found that to contract marriages
through the agency of match-makers is humiliating, it is nevertheless a
thousand times preferable to our system. There the rights and the
chances are equal; here the woman is a slave, exhibited in the market.
But as she cannot bend to her condition, or make advances herself,
there begins that other and more abominable lie which is sometimes
called _going into society_, sometimes _amusing one’s self_, and which
is really nothing but the hunt for a husband.

“But say to a mother or to her daughter that they are engaged only in a
hunt for a husband. God! What an offence! Yet they can do nothing else,
and have nothing else to do; and the terrible feature of it all is to
see sometimes very young, poor, and innocent maidens haunted solely by
such ideas. If only, I repeat, it were done frankly; but it is always
accompanied with lies and babble of this sort:—

“‘Ah, the descent of species! How interesting it is!’

“‘Oh, Lily is much interested in painting.’

“‘Shall you go to the Exposition? How charming it is!’

“‘And the troika, and the plays, and the symphony. Ah, how adorable!’

“‘My Lise is passionately fond of music.’

“‘And you, why do you not share these convictions?’

“And through all this verbiage, all have but one single idea: ‘Take me,
take my Lise. No, me! Only try!’”




