CHAPTER V.


Before dawn the next morning Polikey was up, and after harnessing the
mare and looking in his hat to see that the money was all right, he
started on his return journey.

Many times on the way Polikey took off his hat to see that the money
was safe. Once he said to himself, “I think that perhaps it would be
better if I should put it in my bosom.” This would necessitate the
untying of his sash, so he decided to keep it still in his hat, or
until he should have made half the journey, when he would be compelled
to stop to feed his horse and to rest.

He said to himself: “The lining is not sewn in very strongly and the
envelope might fall out, so I think I had better not take off my hat
until I reach home.”

The money was safe—at least, so it seemed to him—and he began to think
how grateful his mistress would be to him, and in his excited
imagination he saw the five rubles he was so sure of receiving.

Once more he examined the hat to see that the money was safe, and
finding everything all right he put on his hat and pulled it well down
over his ears, smiling all the while at his own thoughts.

Akulina had carefully sewed all the holes in the hat, but it burst out
in other places owing to Polikey’s removing it so often.

In the darkness he did not notice the new rents, and tried to push the
envelope further under the lining, and in doing so pushed one corner of
it through the plush.

The sun was getting high in the heavens, and Polikey having slept but
little the previous night and feeling its warm rays fell fast asleep,
after first pressing his hat more firmly on his head. By this action he
forced the envelope still further through the plush, and as he rode
along his head bobbed up and down.

Polikey did not awake till he arrived near his own house, and his first
act was to put his hand to his head to learn if his hat was all right.
Finding that it was in its place, he did not think it necessary to
examine it and see that the money was safe. Touching the mare gently
with the whip she started into a trot, and as he rode along he arranged
in his own mind how much he was to receive. With the air of a man
already holding a high position at the court, he looked around him with
an expression of lofty scorn on his face.

As he neared his house he could see before him the one room which
constituted their humble home, and the joiner’s wife next door carrying
her rolls of linen. He saw also the office of the court and his
mistress’s house, where he hoped he would be able presently to prove
that he was an honest, trustworthy man.

He reasoned with himself that any person can be abused by lying
tongues, but when his mistress would see him she would say: “Well done,
Polikey; you have shown that you can be honest. Here are three—it may
be five—perhaps ten—rubles for you;” and also she would order tea for
him, and might treat him to vodka—who knows?

The latter thought gave him great pleasure, as he was feeling very
cold.

Speaking aloud he said: “What a happy holy-day we can have with ten
rubles! Having so much money, I could pay Nikita the four rubles fifty
kopecks which I owe him, and yet have some left to buy shoes for the
children.”

When near the house Polikey began to arrange his clothes, smoothing
down his fur collar, re-tying his sash, and stroking his hair. To do
the latter he had to take off his hat, and when doing so felt in the
lining for the envelope. Quicker and quicker he ran his hand around the
lining, and not finding the money used both hands, first one and then
the other. But the envelope was not to be found.

Polikey was by this time greatly distressed, and his face was white
with fear as he passed his hand through the crown of his old hat.
Polikey stopped the mare and began a diligent search through the wagon
and its contents. Not finding the precious envelope, he felt in all his
pockets—_but the money could not be found!_

Wildly clutching at his hair, he exclaimed: “_Batiushka!_ What will I
do now? What will become of me?” At the same time he realized that he
was near his neighbors’ house and could be seen by them; so he turned
the mare around, and, pulling his hat down securely upon his head, he
rode quickly back in search of his lost treasure.




CHAPTER VI.


The whole day passed without any one in the village of Pokrovski having
seen anything of Polikey. During the afternoon his mistress inquired
many times as to his whereabouts, and sent Aksiutka frequently to
Akulina, who each time sent back word that Polikey had not yet
returned, saying also that perhaps the merchant had kept him, or that
something had happened to the mare.

His poor wife felt a heavy load upon her heart, and was scarcely able
to do her housework and put everything in order for the next day (which
was to be a holy-day). The children also anxiously awaited their
father’s appearance, and, though for different reasons, could hardly
restrain their impatience. The noblewoman and Akulina were concerned
only in regard to Polikey himself, while the children were interested
most in what he would bring them from the town.

The only news received by the villagers during the day concerning
Polikey was to the effect that neighboring peasants had seen him
running up and down the road and asking every one he met if he or she
had found an envelope.

One of them had seen him also walking by the side of his tired-out
horse. “I thought,” said he, “that the man was drunk, and had not fed
his horse for two days—the animal looked so exhausted.”

Unable to sleep, and with her heart palpitating at every sound, Akulina
lay awake all night vainly awaiting Polikey’s return. When the cock
crowed the third time she was obliged to get up to attend to the fire.
Day was just dawning and the church-bells had begun to ring. Soon all
the children were also up, but there was still no tidings of the
missing husband and father.

In the morning the chill blasts of winter entered their humble home,
and on looking out they saw that the houses, fields, and roads were
thickly covered with snow. The day was clear and cold, as if befitting
the holy-day they were about to celebrate. They were able to see a long
distance from the house, but no one was in sight.

Akulina was busy baking cakes, and had it not been for the joyous
shouts of the children she would not have known that Polikey was coming
up the road, for a few minutes later he came in with a bundle in his
hand and walked quietly to his corner. Akulina noticed that he was very
pale and that his face bore an expression of suffering—as if he would
like to have cried but could not do so. But she did not stop to study
it, but excitedly inquired: “What! Illitch, is everything all right
with you?”

He slowly muttered something, but his wife could not understand what he
said.

“What!” she cried out, “have you been to see our mistress?”

Polikey still sat on the bed in his corner, glaring wildly about him,
and smiling bitterly. He did not reply for a long time, and Akulina
again cried:

“Eh? Illitch! Why don’t you answer me? Why don’t you speak?”

Finally he said: “Akulina, I delivered the money to our mistress; and
oh, how she thanked me!” Then he suddenly looked about him, with an
anxious, startled air, and with a sad smile on his lips. Two things in
the room seemed to engross the most of his attention: the baby in the
cradle, and the rope which was attached to the ladder. Approaching the
cradle, he began with his thin fingers quickly to untie the knot in the
rope by which the two were connected. After untying it he stood for a
few moments looking silently at the baby.

Akulina did not notice this proceeding, and with her cakes on the board
went to place them in a corner.

Polikey quickly hid the rope beneath his coat, and again seated himself
on the bed.

“What is it that troubles you, Illitch?” inquired Akulina. “You are not
yourself.”

“I have not slept,” he answered.

Suddenly a dark shadow crossed the window, and a minute later the girl
Aksiutka quickly entered the room, exclaiming:

“The _boyarinia_ commands you, Polikey Illitch, to come to her this
moment!”

Polikey looked first at Akulina and then at the girl.

“This moment!” he cried. “What more is wanted?”

He spoke the last sentence so softly that Akulina became quieted in her
mind, thinking that perhaps their mistress intended to reward her
husband.

“Say that I will come immediately,” he said.

But Polikey failed to follow the girl, and went instead to another
place.

From the porch of his house there was a ladder reaching to the attic.
Arriving at the foot of the ladder Polikey looked around him, and
seeing no one about, he quickly ascended to the garret.


Meanwhile the girl had reached her mistress’s house.

“What does it mean that Polikey does not come?” said the noblewoman
impatiently. “Where can he be? Why does he not come at once?”

Aksiutka flew again to his house and demanded to see Polikey.

“He went a long time ago,” answered Akulina, and looking around with an
expression of fear on her face, she added, “He may have fallen asleep
somewhere on the way.”

About this time the joiner’s wife, with hair unkempt and clothes
bedraggled, went up to the loft to gather the linen which she had
previously put there to dry. Suddenly a cry of horror was heard, and
the woman, with her eyes closed, and crazed by fear, ran down the
ladder like a cat.

“Illitch,” she cried, “has hanged himself!”

Poor Akulina ran up the ladder before any of the people, who had
gathered from the surrounding houses, could prevent her. With a loud
shriek she fell back as if dead, and would surely have been killed had
not one of the spectators succeeded in catching her in his arms.

Before dark the same day a peasant of the village, while returning from
the town, found the envelope containing Polikey’s money on the
roadside, and soon after delivered it to the _boyarinia_.




THE CANDLE.


“Ye have heard that it hath been said, an eye for an eye and a tooth
for a tooth: but I say unto you, That ye resist not evil.”—ST. MATTHEW
v. 38, 39.


It was in the time of serfdom—many years before Alexander II.’s
liberation of the sixty million serfs in 1862. In those days the people
were ruled by different kinds of lords. There were not a few who,
remembering God, treated their slaves in a humane manner, and not as
beasts of burden, while there were others who were seldom known to
perform a kind or generous action; but the most barbarous and
tyrannical of all were those former serfs who arose from the dirt and
became princes.

It was this latter class who made life literally a burden to those who
were unfortunate enough to come under their rule. Many of them had
arisen from the ranks of the peasantry to become superintendents of
noblemen’s estates.

The peasants were obliged to work for their master a certain number of
days each week. There was plenty of land and water and the soil was
rich and fertile, while the meadows and forests were sufficient to
supply the needs of both the peasants and their lord.

There was a certain nobleman who had chosen a superintendent from the
peasantry on one of his other estates. No sooner had the power to
govern been vested in this newly-made official than he began to
practice the most outrageous cruelties upon the poor serfs who had been
placed under his control. Although this man had a wife and two married
daughters, and was making so much money that he could have lived
happily without transgressing in any way against either God or man, yet
he was filled with envy and jealousy and deeply sunk in sin.

Michael Simeonovitch began his persecutions by compelling the peasants
to perform more days of service on the estate every week than the laws
obliged them to work. He established a brick-yard, in which he forced
the men and women to do excessive labor, selling the bricks for his own
profit.

On one occasion the overworked serfs sent a delegation to Moscow to
complain of their treatment to their lord, but they obtained no
satisfaction. When the poor peasants returned disconsolate from the
nobleman their superintendent determined to have revenge for their
boldness in going above him for redress, and their life and that of
their fellow-victims became worse than before.

It happened that among the serfs there were some very treacherous
people who would falsely accuse their fellows of wrong-doing and sow
seeds of discord among the peasantry, whereupon Michael would become
greatly enraged, while his poor subjects began to live in fear of their
lives. When the superintendent passed through the village the people
would run and hide themselves as from a wild beast. Seeing thus the
terror which he had struck to the hearts of the moujiks, Michael’s
treatment of them became still more vindictive, so that from over-work
and ill-usage the lot of the poor serfs was indeed a hard one.

There was a time when it was possible for the peasants, when driven to
despair, to devise means whereby they could rid themselves of an
inhuman monster such as Simeonovitch, and so these unfortunate people
began to consider whether something could not be done to relieve _them_
of their intolerable yoke. They would hold little meetings in secret
places to bewail their misery and to confer with one another as to
which would be the best way to act. Now and then the boldest of the
gathering would rise and address his companions in this strain: “How
much longer can we tolerate such a villain to rule over us? Let us make
an end of it at once, for it were better for us to perish than to
suffer. It is surely not a sin to kill such a devil in human form.”

It happened once, before the Easter holidays, that one of these
meetings was held in the woods, where Michael had sent the serfs to
make a clearance for their master. At noon they assembled to eat their
dinner and to hold a consultation. “Why can’t we leave now?” said one.
“Very soon we shall be reduced to nothing. Already we are almost worked
to death—there being no rest, night or day, either for us or our poor
women. If anything should be done in a way not exactly to please him he
will find fault and perhaps flog some of us to death—as was the case
with poor Simeon, whom he killed not long ago. Only recently Anisim was
tortured in irons till he died. We certainly cannot stand this much
longer.” “Yes,” said another, “what is the use of waiting? Let us act
at once. Michael will be here this evening, and will be certain to
abuse us shamefully. Let us, then, thrust him from his horse and with
one blow of an axe give him what he deserves, and thus end our misery.
We can then dig a big hole and bury him like a dog, and no one will
know what became of him. Now let us come to an agreement—to stand
together as one man and not to betray one another.”

The last speaker was Vasili Minayeff, who, if possible, had more cause
to complain of Michael’s cruelty than any of his fellow-serfs. The
superintendent was in the habit of flogging him severely every week,
and he took also Vasili’s wife to serve him as cook.

Accordingly, during the evening that followed this meeting in the woods
Michael arrived on the scene on horseback. He began at once to find
fault with the manner in which the work had been done, and to complain
because some lime-trees had been cut down.

“I told you not to cut down any lime-trees!” shouted the enraged
superintendent. “Who did this thing? Tell me at once, or I shall flog
every one of you!”

On investigation, a peasant named Sidor was pointed out as the guilty
one, and his face was roundly slapped. Michael also severely punished
Vasili, because he had not done sufficient work, after which the master
rode safely home.

In the evening the serfs again assembled, and poor Vasili said: “Oh,
what kind of people _are_ we, anyway? We are only sparrows, and not men
at all! We agree to stand by each other, but as soon as the time for
action comes we all run and hide. Once a lot of sparrows conspired
against a hawk, but no sooner did the bird of prey appear than they
sneaked off in the grass. Selecting one of the choicest sparrows, the
hawk took it away to eat, after which the others came out crying,
‘Twee-twee!’ and found that one was missing. ‘Who is killed?’ they
asked. ‘Vanka! Well, he deserved it.’ You, my friends, are acting in
just the same manner. When Michael attacked Sidor you should have stood
by your promise. Why didn’t you arise, and with one stroke put an end
to him and to our misery?”

The effect of this speech was to make the peasants more firm in their
determination to kill their superintendent. The latter had already
given orders that they should be ready to plough during the Easter
holidays, and to sow the field with oats, whereupon the serfs became
stricken with grief, and gathered in Vasili’s house to hold another
indignation meeting. “If he has really forgotten God,” they said, “and
shall continue to commit such crimes against us, it is truly necessary
that we should kill him. If not, let us perish, for it can make no
difference to us now.”

This despairing programme, however, met with considerable opposition
from a peaceably-inclined man named Peter Mikhayeff. “Brethren,” said
he, “you are contemplating a grievous sin. The taking of human life is
a very serious matter. Of course it is easy to end the mortal existence
of a man, but what will become of the souls of those who commit the
deed? If Michael continues to act toward us unjustly God will surely
punish him. But, my friends, we must have patience.”

This pacific utterance only served to intensify the anger of Vasili.
Said he: “Peter is forever repeating the same old story, ‘It is a sin
to kill any one.’ Certainly it is sinful to murder; but we should
consider the kind of man we are dealing with. We all know it is wrong
to kill a good man, but even God would take away the life of such a dog
as he is. It is our duty, if we have any love for mankind, to shoot a
dog that is mad. It is a sin to let him live. If, therefore, we are to
suffer at all, let it be in the interests of the people—and they will
thank us for it. If we remain quiet any longer a flogging will be our
only reward. You are talking nonsense, Mikhayeff. Why don’t you think
of the sin we shall be committing if we work during the Easter
holidays—for you will refuse to work then yourself?”

“Well, then,” replied Peter, “if they shall send me to plough, I will
go. But I shall not be going of my own free will, and God will know
whose sin it is, and shall punish the offender accordingly. Yet we must
not forget him. Brethren, I am not giving you my own views only. The
law of God is not to return evil for evil; indeed, if you try in this
way to stamp out wickedness it will come upon you all the stronger. It
is not difficult for you to kill the man, but his blood will surely
stain your own soul. You may think you have killed a bad man—that you
have gotten rid of evil—but you will soon find out that the seeds of
still greater wickedness have been planted within you. If you yield to
misfortune it will surely come to you.”

As Peter was not without sympathizers among the peasants, the poor
serfs were consequently divided into two groups: the followers of
Vasili and those who held the views of Mikhayeff.

On Easter Sunday no work was done. Toward the evening an elder came to
the peasants from the nobleman’s court and said: “Our superintendent,
Michael Simeonovitch, orders you to go to-morrow to plough the field
for the oats.” Thus the official went through the village and directed
the men to prepare for work the next day—some by the river and others
by the roadway. The poor people were almost overcome with grief, many
of them shedding tears, but none dared to disobey the orders of their
master.

On the morning of Easter Monday, while the church bells were calling
the inhabitants to religious services, and while every one else was
about to enjoy a holiday, the unfortunate serfs started for the field
to plough. Michael arose rather late and took a walk about the farm.
The domestic servants were through with their work and had dressed
themselves for the day, while Michael’s wife and their widowed daughter
(who was visiting them, as was her custom on holidays) had been to
church and returned. A steaming samovar awaited them, and they began to
drink tea with Michael, who, after lighting his pipe, called the elder
to him.

“Well,” said the superintendent, “have you ordered the moujiks to
plough to-day?”

“Yes, sir, I did,” was the reply.

“Have they all gone to the field?”

“Yes, sir; all of them. I directed them myself where to begin.”

“That is all very well. You gave the orders, but are they ploughing? Go
at once and see, and you may tell them that I shall be there after
dinner. I shall expect to find one and a half acres done for every two
ploughs, and the work must be well done; otherwise they shall be
severely punished, notwithstanding the holiday.”

“I hear, sir, and obey.”

The elder started to go, but Michael called him back. After hesitating
for some time, as if he felt very uneasy, he said:

“By the way, listen to what those scoundrels say about me. Doubtless
some of them will curse me, and I want you to report the exact words. I
know what villains they are. They don’t find work at all pleasant. They
would rather lie down all day and do nothing. They would like to eat
and drink and make merry on holidays, but they forget that if the
ploughing is not done it will soon be too late. So you go and listen to
what is said, and tell it to me in detail. Go at once.”

“I hear, sir, and obey.”

Turning his back and mounting his horse, the elder was soon at the
field where the serfs were hard at work.

It happened that Michael’s wife, a very good-hearted woman, overheard
the conversation which her husband had just been holding with the
elder. Approaching him, she said:

“My good friend, Mishinka [diminutive of Michael], I beg of you to
consider the importance and solemnity of this holy-day. Do not sin, for
Christ’s sake. Let the poor moujiks go home.”

Michael laughed, but made no reply to his wife’s humane request.
Finally he said to her:

“You’ve not been whipped for a very long time, and now you have become
bold enough to interfere in affairs that are not your own.”

“Mishinka,” she persisted, “I have had a frightful dream concerning
you. You had better let the moujiks go.”

“Yes,” said he; “I perceive that you have gained so much flesh of late
that you think you would not feel the whip. Lookout!”

Rudely thrusting his hot pipe against her cheek, Michael chased his
wife from the room, after which he ordered his dinner. After eating a
hearty meal consisting of cabbage-soup, roast pig, meat-cake, pastry
with milk, jelly, sweet cakes, and vodka, he called his woman cook to
him and ordered her to be seated and sing songs, Simeonovitch
accompanying her on the guitar.

While the superintendent was thus enjoying himself to the fullest
satisfaction in the musical society of his cook the elder returned,
and, making a low bow to his superior, proceeded to give the desired
information concerning the serfs.

“Well,” asked Michael, “did they plough?”

“Yes,” replied the elder; “they have accomplished about half the
field.”

“Is there no fault to be found?”

“Not that I could discover. The work seems to be well done. They are
evidently afraid of you.”

“How is the soil?”

“Very good. It appears to be quite soft.”

“Well,” said Simeonovitch, after a pause, “what did they say about me?
Cursed me, I suppose?”

As the elder hesitated somewhat, Michael commanded him to speak and
tell him the whole truth. “Tell me all,” said he; “I want to know their
exact words. If you tell me the truth I shall reward you; but if you
conceal anything from me you will be punished. See here, Catherine,
pour out a glass of vodka to give him courage!”

After drinking to the health of his superior, the elder said to
himself: “It is not my fault if they do not praise him. I shall tell
him the truth.” Then turning suddenly to the superintendent he said:

“They complain, Michael Simeonovitch! They complain bitterly.”

“But what did they say?” demanded Michael. “Tell me!”

“Well, one thing they said was, ‘He does not believe in God.’”

Michael laughed. “Who said that?” he asked.

“It seemed to be their unanimous opinion. ‘He has been overcome by the
Evil One,’ they said.”

“Very good,” laughed the superintendent; “but tell me what each of them
said. What did Vasili say?”

The elder did not wish to betray his people, but he had a certain
grudge against Vasili, and he said:

“He cursed you more than did any of the others.”

“But what did he say?”

“It is awful to repeat it, sir. Vasili said, ‘He shall die like a dog,
having no chance to repent!’”

“Oh, the villain!” exclaimed Michael. “He would kill me if he were not
afraid. All right, Vasili; we shall have an accounting with you. And
Tishka—he called me a dog, I suppose?”

“Well,” said the elder, “they all spoke of you in anything but
complimentary terms; but it is mean in me to repeat what they said.”

“Mean or not you must tell me, I say!”

“Some of them declared that your back should be broken.”

Simeonovitch appeared to enjoy this immensely, for he laughed outright.
“We shall see whose back will be the first to be broken,” said he. “Was
that Tishka’s opinion? While I did not suppose they would say anything
good about me, I did not expect such curses and threats. And Peter
Mikhayeff—was that fool cursing me too?”

“No; he did not curse you at all. He appeared to be the only silent one
among them. Mikhayeff is a very wise moujik, and he surprises me very
much. At his actions all the other peasants seemed amazed.”

“What did he do?”

“He did something remarkable. He was diligently ploughing, and as I
approached him I heard some one singing very sweetly. Looking between
the ploughshares, I observed a bright object shining.”

“Well, what was it? Hurry up!”

“It was a small, five-kopeck wax candle, burning brightly, and the wind
was unable to blow it out. Peter, wearing a new shirt, sang beautiful
hymns as he ploughed, and no matter how he handled the implement the
candle continued to burn. In my presence he fixed the plough, shaking
it violently, but the bright little object between the colters remained
undisturbed.”

“And what did Mikhayeff say?”

“He said nothing—except when, on seeing me, he gave me the holy-day
salutation, after which he went on his way singing and ploughing as
before. I did not say anything to him, but, on approaching the other
moujiks, I found that they were laughing and making sport of their
silent companion. ‘It is a great sin to plough on Easter Monday,’ they
said. ‘You could not get absolution from your sin if you were to pray
all your life.’”

“And did Mikhayeff make no reply?”

“He stood long enough to say: ‘There should be peace on earth and
good-will to men,’ after which he resumed his ploughing and singing,
the candle burning even more brightly than before.”

Simeonovitch had now ceased to ridicule, and, putting aside his guitar,
his head dropped on his breast and he became lost in thought. Presently
he ordered the elder and cook to depart, after which Michael went
behind a screen and threw himself upon the bed. He was sighing and
moaning, as if in great distress, when his wife came in and spoke
kindly to him. He refused to listen to her, exclaiming:

“He has conquered me, and my end is near!”

“Mishinka,” said the woman, “arise and go to the moujiks in the field.
Let them go home, and everything will be all right. Heretofore you have
run far greater risks without any fear, but now you appear to be very
much alarmed.”

“He has conquered me!” he repeated. “I am lost!”

“What do you mean?” demanded his wife, angrily. “If you will go and do
as I tell you there will be no danger. Come, Mishinka,” she added,
tenderly; “I shall have the saddle-horse brought for you at once.”

When the horse arrived the woman persuaded her husband to mount the
animal, and to fulfil her request concerning the serfs. When he reached
the village a woman opened the gate for him to enter, and as he did so
the inhabitants, seeing the brutal superintendent whom everybody
feared, ran to hide themselves in their houses, gardens, and other
secluded places.

At length Michael reached the other gate, which he found closed also,
and, being unable to open it himself while seated on his horse, he
called loudly for assistance. As no one responded to his shouts he
dismounted and opened the gate, but as he was about to remount, and had
one foot in the stirrup, the horse became frightened at some pigs and
sprang suddenly to one side. The superintendent fell across the fence
and a very sharp picket pierced his stomach, when Michael fell
unconscious to the ground.

Toward the evening, when the serfs arrived at the village gate, their
horses refused to enter. On looking around, the peasants discovered the
dead body of their superintendent lying face downward in a pool of
blood, where he had fallen from the fence. Peter Mikhayeff alone had
sufficient courage to dismount and approach the prostrate form, his
companions riding around the village and entering by way of the back
yards. Peter closed the dead man’s eyes, after which he put the body in
a wagon and took it home.

When the nobleman learned of the fatal accident which had befallen his
superintendent, and of the brutal treatment which he had meted out to
those under him, he freed the serfs, exacting a small rent for the use
of his land and the other agricultural opportunities.

And thus the peasants clearly understood that the power of God is
manifested not in evil, but in goodness.




