CHAPTER I.


In a certain kingdom there lived a rich peasant, who had three
sons—Simeon (a soldier), Tarras-Briukhan (fat man), and Ivan (a
fool)—and one daughter, Milania, born dumb. Simeon went to war, to
serve the Czar; Tarras went to a city and became a merchant; and Ivan,
with his sister, remained at home to work on the farm.

For his valiant service in the army, Simeon received an estate with
high rank, and married a noble’s daughter. Besides his large pay, he
was in receipt of a handsome income from his estate; yet he was unable
to make ends meet. What the husband saved, the wife wasted in
extravagance. One day Simeon went to the estate to collect his income,
when the steward informed him that there was no income, saying:

“We have neither horses, cows, fishing-nets, nor implements; it is
necessary first to buy everything, and then to look for income.”

Simeon thereupon went to his father and said:

“You are rich, _batiushka_ [little father], but you have given nothing
to me. Give me one-third of what you possess as my share, and I will
transfer it to my estate.”

The old man replied: “You did not help to bring prosperity to our
household. For what reason, then, should you now demand the third part
of everything? It would be unjust to Ivan and his sister.”

“Yes,” said Simeon; “but he is a fool, and she was born dumb. What need
have they of anything?”

“See what Ivan will say.”

Ivan’s reply was: “Well, let him take his share.”

Simeon took the portion allotted to him, and went again to serve in the
army.

Tarras also met with success. He became rich and married a merchant’s
daughter, but even this failed to satisfy his desires, and he also went
to his father and said, “Give me my share.”

The old man, however, refused to comply with his request, saying: “You
had no hand in the accumulation of our property, and what our household
contains is the result of Ivan’s hard work. It would be unjust,” he
repeated, “to Ivan and his sister.”

Tarras replied: “But he does not need it. He is a fool, and cannot
marry, for no one will have him; and sister does not require anything,
for she was born dumb.” Turning then to Ivan he continued: “Give me
half the grain you have, and I will not touch the implements or
fishing-nets; and from the cattle I will take only the dark mare, as
she is not fit to plow.”

Ivan laughed and said: “Well, I will go and arrange matters so that
Tarras may have his share,” whereupon Tarras took the brown mare with
the grain to town, leaving Ivan with one old horse to work on as before
and support his father, mother, and sister.




CHAPTER II.


It was disappointing to the _Stary Tchert_ (Old Devil) that the
brothers did not quarrel over the division of the property, and that
they separated peacefully; and he cried out, calling his three small
devils (_Tchertionki_).

“See here,” said he, “there are living three brothers—Simeon the
soldier, Tarras-Briukhan, and Ivan the Fool. It is necessary that they
should quarrel. Now they live peacefully, and enjoy each other’s
hospitality. The Fool spoiled all my plans. Now you three go and work
with them in such a manner that they will be ready to tear each other’s
eyes out. Can you do this?”

“We can,” they replied.

“How will you accomplish it?”

“In this way: We will first ruin them to such an extent that they will
have nothing to eat, and we will then gather them together in one place
where we are sure that they will fight.”

“Very well; I see you understand your business. Go, and do not return
to me until you have created a feud between the three brothers—or I
will skin you alive.”

The three small devils went to a swamp to consult as to the best means
of accomplishing their mission. They disputed for a long time—each one
wanting the easiest part of the work—and not being able to agree,
concluded to draw lots; by which it was decided that the one who was
first finished had to come and help the others. This agreement being
entered into, they appointed a time when they were again to meet in the
swamp—to find out who was through and who needed assistance.

The time having arrived, the young devils met in the swamp as agreed,
when each related his experience. The first, who went to Simeon, said:
“I have succeeded in my undertaking, and to-morrow Simeon returns to
his father.”

His comrades, eager for particulars, inquired how he had done it.

“Well,” he began, “the first thing I did was to blow some courage into
his veins, and, on the strength of it, Simeon went to the Czar and
offered to conquer the whole world for him. The Emperor made him
commander-in-chief of the forces, and sent him with an army to fight
the Viceroy of India. Having started on their mission of conquest, they
were unaware that I, following in their wake, had wet all their powder.
I also went to the Indian ruler and showed him how I could create
numberless soldiers from straw.

“Simeon’s army, seeing that they were surrounded by such a vast number
of Indian warriors of my creation, became frightened, and Simeon
commanded to fire from cannons and rifles, which of course they were
unable to do. The soldiers, discouraged, retreated in great disorder.
Thus Simeon brought upon himself the terrible disgrace of defeat. His
estate was confiscated, and to-morrow he is to be executed. All that
remains for me to do, therefore,” concluded the young devil, “is to
release him to-morrow morning. Now, then, who wants my assistance?”

The second small devil (from Tarras) then related his story.

“I do not need any help,” he began. “My business is also all right. My
work with Tarras will be finished in one week. In the first place I
made him grow thin. He afterward became so covetous that he wanted to
possess everything he saw, and he spent all the money he had in the
purchase of immense quantities of goods. When his capital was gone he
still continued to buy with borrowed money, and has become involved in
such difficulties that he cannot free himself. At the end of one week
the date for the payment of his notes will have expired, and, his goods
being seized upon, he will become a bankrupt; and he also will return
to his father.”

At the conclusion of this narrative they inquired of the third devil
how things had fared between him and Ivan.

“Well,” said he, “my report is not so encouraging. The first thing I
did was to spit into his jug of _quass_ [a sour drink made from rye],
which made him sick at his stomach. He afterward went to plow his
summer-fallow, but I made the soil so hard that the plow could scarcely
penetrate it. I thought the Fool would not succeed, but he started to
work nevertheless. Moaning with pain, he still continued to labor. I
broke one plow, but he replaced it with another, fixing it securely,
and resumed work. Going beneath the surface of the ground I took hold
of the plowshares, but did not succeed in stopping Ivan. He pressed so
hard, and the colter was so sharp, that my hands were cut; and despite
my utmost efforts, he went over all but a small portion of the field.”

He concluded with: “Come, brothers, and help me, for if we do not
conquer him our whole enterprise will be a failure. If the Fool is
permitted successfully to conduct his farming, they will have no need,
for he will support his brothers.”




