CHAPTER IV.


Very early the next morning, almost before the stars had hidden
themselves from view, there was seen standing before Polikey’s home a
low wagon, the same in which the superintendent himself used to ride;
and harnessed to it was a large-boned, dark-brown mare, called for some
unknown reason by the name of _Baraban_ (drum). Aniutka, Polikey’s
eldest daughter, in spite of the heavy rain and the cold wind which was
blowing, stood outside barefooted and held (not without some fear) the
reins in one hand, while with the other she endeavored to keep her
green and yellow overcoat wound around her body, and also to hold
Polikey’s sheepskin coat.

In the house there were the greatest noise and confusion. The morning
was still so dark that the little daylight there was failed to
penetrate through the broken panes of glass, the window being stuffed
in many places with rags and paper to exclude the cold air.

Akulina ceased from her cooking for a while and helped to get Polikey
ready for the journey. Most of the children were still in bed, very
likely as a protection against the cold, for Akulina had taken away the
big overcoat which usually covered them and had substituted a shawl of
her own. Polikey’s shirt was all ready, nice and clean, but his shoes
badly needed repairing, and this fact caused his devoted wife much
anxiety. She took from her own feet the thick woollen stockings she was
wearing, and gave them to Polikey. She then began to repair his shoes,
patching up the holes so as to protect his feet from dampness.

While this was going on he was sitting on the side of the bed with his
feet dangling over the edge, and trying to turn the sash which confined
his coat at the waist. He was anxious to look as clean as possible, and
he declared his sash looked like a dirty rope.

One of his daughters, enveloped in a sheepskin coat, was sent to a
neighbor’s house to borrow a hat.

Within Polikey’s home the greatest confusion reigned, for the court
servants were constantly arriving with innumerable small orders which
they wished Polikey to execute for them in town. One wanted needles,
another tea, another tobacco, and last came the joiner’s wife, who by
this time had prepared her samovar, and, anxious to make up the quarrel
of the previous day, brought the traveller a cup of tea.

Neighbor Nikita refused the loan of the hat, so the old one had to be
patched up for the occasion. This occupied some time, as there were
many holes in it.

Finally Polikey was all ready, and jumping on the wagon started on his
journey, after first making the sign of the cross.

At the last moment his little boy, Mishka, ran to the door, begging to
be given a short ride; and then his little daughter, Mashka, appeared
on the scene and pleaded that she, too, might have a ride, declaring
that she would be quite warm enough without furs.

Polikey stopped the horse on hearing the children, and Akulina placed
them in the wagon, together with two others belonging to a neighbor—all
anxious to have a short ride.

As Akulina helped the little ones into the wagon she took occasion to
remind Polikey of the solemn promise he had made her not to touch a
drop of vodka during the journey.

Polikey drove the children as far as the blacksmith’s place, where he
let them out of the wagon, telling them they must return home. He then
arranged his clothing, and, setting his hat firmly on his head, started
his horse on a trot.

The two children, Mishka and Mashka, both barefooted, started running
at such a rapid pace that a strange dog from another village, seeing
them flying over the road, dropped his tail between his legs and ran
home squealing.

The weather was very cold, a sharp cutting wind blowing continuously;
but this did not disturb Polikey, whose mind was engrossed with
pleasant thoughts. As he rode through the wintry blasts he kept
repeating to himself: “So I am the man they wanted to send to Siberia,
and whom they threatened to enroll as a soldier—the same man whom every
one abused, and said he was lazy, and who was pointed out as a thief
and given the meanest work on the estate to do! Now I am going to
receive a large sum of money, for which my mistress is sending me
because she trusts me. I am also riding in the same wagon that the
superintendent himself uses when he is riding as a representative of
the court. I have the same harness, leather horse-collar, reins, and
all the other gear.”

Polikey, filled with pride at thought of the mission with which he had
been intrusted, drew himself up with an air of pride, and, fixing his
old hat more firmly on his head, buttoned his coat tightly about him
and urged his horse to greater speed.

“Just to think,” he continued; “I shall have in my possession three
thousand half-rubles [the peasant manner of speaking of money so as to
make it appear a larger sum than it really is], and will carry them in
my bosom. If I wished to I might run away to Odessa instead of taking
the money to my mistress. But no; I will not do that. I will surely
carry the money straight to the one who has been kind enough to trust
me.”

When Polikey reached the first _kabak_ (tavern) he found that from long
habit the mare was naturally turning her head toward it; but he would
not allow her to stop, though money had been given him to purchase both
food and drink. Striking the animal a sharp blow with the whip, he
passed by the tavern. The performance was repeated when he reached the
next kabak, which looked very inviting; but he resolutely set his face
against entering, and passed on.

About noon he arrived at his destination, and getting down from the
wagon approached the gate of the merchant’s house where the servants of
the court always stopped. Opening it he led the mare through, and
(after unharnessing her) fed her. This done, he next entered the house
and had dinner with the merchant’s workingman, and to them he related
what an important mission he had been sent on, making himself very
amusing by the pompous air which he assumed. Dinner over, he carried a
letter to the merchant which the noblewoman had given him to deliver.

The merchant, knowing thoroughly the reputation which Polikey bore,
felt doubtful of trusting him with so much money, and somewhat
anxiously inquired if he really had received orders to carry so many
rubles.

Polikey tried to appear offended at this question, but did not succeed,
and he only smiled.

The merchant, after reading the letter a second time and being
convinced that all was right, gave Polikey the money, which he put in
his bosom for safe-keeping.

On his way to the house he did not once stop at any of the shops he
passed. The clothing establishments possessed no attractions for him,
and after he had safely passed them all he stood for a moment, feeling
very pleased that he had been able to withstand temptation, and then
went on his way.

“I have money enough to buy up everything,” he said; “but I will not do
so.”

The numerous commissions which he had received compelled him to go to
the bazaar. There he bought only what had been ordered, but he could
not resist the temptation to ask the price of a very handsome
sheep-skin coat which attracted his attention. The merchant to whom he
spoke looked at Polikey and smiled, not believing that he had
sufficient money to purchase such an expensive coat. But Polikey,
pointing to his breast, said that he could buy out the whole shop if he
wished to. He thereupon ordered the shop-keeper to take his measure. He
tried the coat on and looked himself over carefully, testing the
quality and blowing upon the hair to see that none of it came out.
Finally, heaving a deep sigh, he took it off.

“The price is too high,” he said. “If you could let me have it for
fifteen rubles—”

But the merchant cut him short by snatching the coat from him and
throwing it angrily to one side.

Polikey left the bazaar and returned to the merchant’s house in high
spirits.

After supper he went out and fed the mare, and prepared everything for
the night. Returning to the house he got up on the stove to rest, and
while there he took out the envelope which contained the money and
looked long and earnestly at it. He could not read, but asked one of
those present to tell him what the writing on the envelope meant. It
was simply the address and the announcement that it contained fifteen
hundred rubles.

The envelope was made of common paper and was sealed with dark-brown
sealing wax. There was one large seal in the centre and four smaller
ones at the corners. Polikey continued to examine it carefully, even
inserting his finger till he touched the crisp notes. He appeared to
take a childish delight in having so much money in his possession.

Having finished his examination, he put the envelope inside the lining
of his old battered hat, and placing both under his head he went to
sleep; but during the night he frequently awoke and always felt to know
if the money was safe. Each time that he found that it was safe he
rejoiced at the thought that he, Polikey, abused and regarded by every
one as a thief, was intrusted with the care of such a large sum of
money, and also that he was about to return with it quite as safely as
the superintendent himself could have done.




