CHAPTER XXIV.


“Two days later I started for the assembly, having bid farewell to my
wife in an excellent and tranquil state of mind. In the district there
was always much to be done. It was a world and a life apart. During two
days I spent ten hours at the sessions. The evening of the second day,
on returning to my district lodgings, I found a letter from my wife,
telling me of the children, of their uncle, of the servants, and, among
other things, as if it were perfectly natural, that Troukhatchevsky had
been at the house, and had brought her the promised scores. He had also
proposed that they play again, but she had refused.

“For my part, I did not remember at all that he had promised any score.
It had seemed to me on Sunday evening that he took a definite leave,
and for this reason the news gave me a disagreeable surprise. I read
the letter again. There was something tender and timid about it. It
produced an extremely painful impression upon me. My heart swelled, and
the mad beast of jealousy began to roar in his lair, and seemed to want
to leap upon his prey. But I was afraid of this beast, and I imposed
silence upon it.

“What an abominable sentiment is jealousy! ‘What could be more natural
than what she has written?’ said I to myself. I went to bed, thinking
myself tranquil again. I thought of the business that remained to be
done, and I went to sleep without thinking of her.

“During these assemblies of the Zemstvo I always slept badly in my
strange quarters. That night I went to sleep directly, but, as
sometimes happens, a sort of sudden shock awoke me. I thought
immediately of her, of my physical love for her, of Troukhatchevsky,
and that between them everything had happened. And a feeling of rage
compressed my heart, and I tried to quiet myself.

“‘How stupid!’ said I to myself; ‘there is no reason, none at all. And
why humiliate ourselves, herself and myself, and especially myself, by
supposing such horrors? This mercenary violinist, known as a bad
man,—shall I think of him in connection with a respectable woman, the
mother of a family, _my_ wife? How silly!’ But on the other hand, I
said to myself: ‘Why should it not happen?’

“Why? Was it not the same simple and intelligible feeling in the name
of which I married, in the name of which I was living with her, the
only thing I wanted of her, and that which, consequently, others
desired, this musician among the rest? He was not married, was in good
health (I remember how his teeth ground the gristle of the cutlets, and
how eagerly he emptied the glass of wine with his red lips), was
careful of his person, well fed, and not only without principles, but
evidently with the principle that one should take advantage of the
pleasure that offers itself. There was a bond between them, music,—the
most refined form of sensual voluptuousness. What was there to restrain
them? Nothing. Everything, on the contrary, attracted them. And she,
she had been and had remained a mystery. I did not know her. I knew her
only as an animal, and an animal nothing can or should restrain. And
now I remember their faces on Sunday evening, when, after the ‘Kreutzer
Sonata,’ they played a passionate piece, written I know not by whom,
but a piece passionate to the point of obscenity.

“‘How could I have gone away?’ said I to myself, as I recalled their
faces. ‘Was it not clear that between them everything was done that
evening? Was it not clear that between them not only there were no more
obstacles, but that both—especially she—felt a certain shame after what
had happened at the piano? How weakly, pitiably, happily she smiled, as
she wiped the perspiration from her reddened face! They already avoided
each other’s eyes, and only at the supper, when she poured some water
for him, did they look at each other and smile imperceptibly.’

“Now I remember with fright that look and that scarcely perceptible
smile. ‘Yes, everything has happened,’ a voice said to me, and directly
another said the opposite. ‘Are you mad? It is impossible!’ said the
second voice.

“It was too painful to me to remain thus stretched in the darkness. I
struck a match, and the little yellow-papered room frightened me. I
lighted a cigarette, and, as always happens, when one turns in a circle
of inextricable contradiction, I began to smoke. I smoked cigarette
after cigarette to dull my senses, that I might not see my
contradictions. All night I did not sleep, and at five o’clock, when it
was not yet light, I decided that I could stand this strain no longer,
and that I would leave directly. There was a train at eight o’clock. I
awakened the keeper who was acting as my servant, and sent him to look
for horses. To the assembly of Zemstvo I sent a message that I was
called back to Moscow by pressing business, and that I begged them to
substitute for me a member of the Committee. At eight o’clock I got
into a _tarantass_ and started off.”




CHAPTER XXV.


“I had to go twenty-five versts by carriage and eight hours by train.
By carriage it was a very pleasant journey. The coolness of autumn was
accompanied by a brilliant sun. You know the weather when the wheels
imprint themselves upon the dirty road. The road was level, and the
light strong, and the air strengthening. The _tarantass_ was
comfortable. As I looked at the horses, the fields, and the people whom
we passed, I forgot where I was going. Sometimes it seemed to me that I
was travelling without an object,—simply promenading,—and that I should
go on thus to the end of the world. And I was happy when I so forgot
myself. But when I remembered where I was going, I said to myself: ‘I
shall see later. Don’t think about it.’

“When half way, an incident happened to distract me still further. The
_tarantass_, though new, broke down, and had to be repaired. The delays
in looking for a _télègue_, the repairs, the payment, the tea in the
inn, the conversation with the _dvornik_, all served to amuse me.
Toward nightfall all was ready, and I started off again. By night the
journey was still pleasanter than by day. The moon in its first
quarter, a slight frost, the road still in good condition, the horses,
the sprightly coachman, all served to put me in good spirits. I
scarcely thought of what awaited me, and was gay perhaps because of the
very thing that awaited me, and because I was about to say farewell to
the joys of life.

“But this tranquil state, the power of conquering my preoccupation, all
ended with the carriage drive. Scarcely had I entered the cars, when
the other thing began. Those eight hours on the rail were so terrible
to me that I shall never forget them in my life. Was it because on
entering the car I had a vivid imagination of having already arrived,
or because the railway acts upon people in such an exciting fashion? At
any rate, after boarding the train I could no longer control my
imagination, which incessantly, with extraordinary vivacity, drew
pictures before my eyes, each more cynical than its predecessor, which
kindled my jealousy. And always the same things about what was
happening at home during my absence. I burned with indignation, with
rage, and with a peculiar feeling which steeped me in humiliation, as I
contemplated these pictures. And I could not tear myself out of this
condition. I could not help looking at them, I could not efface them, I
could not keep from evoking them.

“The more I looked at these imaginary pictures, the more I believed in
their reality, forgetting that they had no serious foundation. The
vivacity of these images seemed to prove to me that my imaginations
were a reality. One would have said that a demon, against my will, was
inventing and breathing into me the most terrible fictions. A
conversation which dated a long time back, with the brother of
Troukhatchevsky, I remembered at that moment, in a sort of ecstasy, and
it tore my heart as I connected it with the musician and my wife. Yes,
it was very long ago. The brother of Troukhatchevsky, answering my
questions as to whether he frequented disreputable houses, said that a
respectable man does not go where he may contract a disease, in a low
and unclean spot, when one can find an honest woman. And here he, his
brother, the musician, had found the honest woman. ‘It is true that she
is no longer in her early youth. She has lost a tooth on one side, and
her face is slightly bloated,’ thought I for Troukhatchevsky. ‘But what
is to be done? One must profit by what one has.’

“‘Yes, he is bound to take her for his mistress,’ said I to myself
again; ‘and besides, she is not dangerous.’

“‘No, it is not possible’ I rejoined in fright. ‘Nothing, nothing of
the kind has happened, and there is no reason to suppose there has. Did
she not tell me that the very idea that I could be jealous of her
because of him was humiliating to her?’ ‘Yes, but she lied,’ I cried,
and all began over again.

“There were only two travellers in my compartment: an old woman with
her husband, neither of them very talkative; and even they got out at
one of the stations, leaving me all alone. I was like a beast in a
cage. Now I jumped up and approached the window, now I began to walk
back and forth, staggering as if I hoped to make the train go faster by
my efforts, and the car with its seats and its windows trembled
continually, as ours does now.”

And Posdnicheff rose abruptly, took a few steps, and sat down again.

“Oh, I am afraid, I am afraid of railway carriages. Fear seizes me. I
sat down again, and I said to myself: ‘I must think of something else.
For instance, of the inn keeper at whose house I took tea.’ And then,
in my imagination arose the _dvornik_, with his long beard, and his
grandson, a little fellow of the same age as my little Basile. My
little Basile! My little Basile! He will see the musician kiss his
mother! What thoughts will pass through his poor soul! But what does
that matter to her! She loves.

“And again it all began, the circle of the same thoughts. I suffered so
much that at last I did not know what to do with myself, and an idea
passed through my head that pleased me much,—to get out upon the rails,
throw myself under the cars, and thus finish everything. One thing
prevented me from doing so. It was pity! It was pity for myself,
evoking at the same time a hatred for her, for him, but not so much for
him. Toward him I felt a strange sentiment of my humiliation and his
victory, but toward her a terrible hatred.

“‘But I cannot kill myself and leave her free. She must suffer, she
must understand at least that I have suffered,’ said I to myself.

“At a station I saw people drinking at the lunch counter, and directly
I went to swallow a glass of vodka. Beside me stood a Jew, drinking
also. He began to talk to me, and I, in order not to be left alone in
my compartment, went with him into his third-class, dirty, full of
smoke, and covered with peelings and sunflower seeds. There I sat down
beside the Jew, and, as it seemed, he told many anecdotes.

“First I listened to him, but I did not understand what he said. He
noticed it, and exacted my attention to his person. Then I rose and
entered my own compartment.

“‘I must consider,’ said I to myself, ‘whether what I think is true,
whether there is any reason to torment myself.’ I sat down, wishing to
reflect quietly; but directly, instead of the peaceful reflections, the
same thing began again. Instead of the reasoning, the pictures.

“‘How many times have I tormented myself in this way,’ I thought (I
recalled previous and similar fits of jealousy), ‘and then seen it end
in nothing at all? It is the same now. Perhaps, yes, surely, I shall
find her quietly sleeping. She will awaken, she will be glad, and in
her words and looks I shall see that nothing has happened, that all
this is vain. Ah, if it would only so turn out!’ ‘But no, that has
happened too often! Now the end has come,’ a voice said to me.

“And again it all began. Ah, what torture! It is not to a hospital
filled with syphilitic patients that I would take a young man to
deprive him of the desire for women, but into my soul, to show him the
demon which tore it. The frightful part was that I recognized in myself
an indisputable right to the body of my wife, as if her body were
entirely mine. And at the same time I felt that I could not possess
this body, that it was not mine, that she could do with it as she
liked, and that she liked to do with it as I did not like. And I was
powerless against him and against her. He, like the Vanka of the song,
would sing, before mounting the gallows, how he would kiss her sweet
lips, etc., and he would even have the best of it before death. With
her it was still worse. If she _had not done it_, she had the desire,
she wished to do it, and I knew that she did. That was worse yet. It
would be better if she had already done it, to relieve me of my
uncertainty.

“In short, I could not say what I desired. I desired that she might not
want what she _must_ want. It was complete madness.”




