CHAPTER VIII.


Ivan remained on the farm and worked to support his father, mother, and
dumb sister. Once it happened that the old dog, which had grown up on
the farm, was taken sick, when Ivan thought he was dying, and, taking
pity on the animal, placed some bread in his hat and carried it to him.
It happened that when he turned out the bread the root which the little
devil had given him fell out also. The old dog swallowed it with the
bread and was almost instantly cured, when he jumped up and began to
wag his tail as an expression of joy. Ivan’s father and mother, seeing
the dog cured so quickly, asked by what means he had performed such a
miracle.

Ivan replied: “I had some roots which would cure any disease, and the
dog swallowed one of them.”

It happened about that time that the Czar’s daughter became ill, and
her father had it announced in every city, town, and village that
whosoever would cure her would be richly rewarded; and if the lucky
person should prove to be a single man he would give her in marriage to
him.

This announcement, of course, appeared in Ivan’s village.

Ivan’s father and mother called him and said: “If you have any of those
wonderful roots, go and cure the Czar’s daughter. You will be much
happier for having performed such a kind act—indeed, you will be made
happy for all your after life.”

“Very well,” said Ivan; and he immediately made ready for the journey.
As he reached the porch on his way out he saw a poor woman standing
directly in his path and holding a broken arm. The woman accosted him,
saying:

“I was told that you could cure me, and will you not please do so, as I
am powerless to do anything for myself?”

Ivan replied: “Very well, my poor woman; I will relieve you if I can.”

He produced a root which he handed to the poor woman and told her to
swallow it.

She did as Ivan told her and was instantly cured, and went away
rejoicing that she had recovered the use of her arm.

Ivan’s father and mother came out to wish him good luck on his journey,
and to them he told the story of the poor woman, saying that he had
given her his last root. On hearing this his parents were much
distressed, as they now believed him to be without the means of curing
the Czar’s daughter, and began to scold him.

“You had pity for a beggar and gave no thought to the Czar’s daughter,”
they said.

“I have pity for the Czar’s daughter also,” replied Ivan, after which
he harnessed his horse to his wagon and took his seat ready for his
departure; whereupon his parents said: “Where are you going, you
fool—to cure the Czar’s daughter, and without anything to do it with?”

“Very well,” replied Ivan, as he drove away.

In due time he arrived at the palace, and the moment he appeared on the
balcony the Czar’s daughter was cured. The Czar was overjoyed and
ordered Ivan to be brought into his presence. He dressed him in the
richest robes and addressed him as his son-in-law. Ivan was married to
the Czarevna, and, the Czar dying soon after, Ivan became ruler. Thus
the three brothers became rulers in different kingdoms.




CHAPTER IX.


The brothers lived and reigned. Simeon, the eldest brother, with his
straw soldiers took captive the genuine soldiers and trained all alike.
He was feared by every one.

Tarras-Briukhan, the other brother, did not squander the gold he
obtained from Ivan, but instead greatly increased his wealth, and at
the same time lived well. He kept his money in large trunks, and, while
having more than he knew what to do with, still continued to collect
money from his subjects. The people had to work for the money to pay
the taxes which Tarras levied on them, and life was made burdensome to
them.

Ivan the Fool did not enjoy his wealth and power to the same extent as
did his brothers. As soon as his father-in-law, the late Czar, was
buried, he discarded the Imperial robes which had fallen to him and
told his wife to put them away, as he had no further use for them.
Having cast aside the insignia of his rank, he once more donned his
peasant garb and started to work as of old.

“I felt lonesome,” he said, “and began to grow enormously stout, and
yet I had no appetite, and neither could I sleep.”

Ivan sent for his father, mother, and dumb sister, and brought them to
live with him, and they worked with him at whatever he chose to do.

The people soon learned that Ivan was a fool. His wife one day said to
him, “The people say you are a fool, Ivan.”

“Well, let them think so if they wish,” he replied.

His wife pondered this reply for some time, and at last decided that if
Ivan was a fool she also was one, and that it would be useless to go
contrary to her husband, thinking affectionately of the old proverb
that “where the needle goes there goes the thread also.” She therefore
cast aside her magnificent robes, and, putting them into the trunk with
Ivan’s, dressed herself in cheap clothing and joined her dumb
sister-in-law, with the intention of learning to work. She succeeded so
well that she soon became a great help to Ivan.

Seeing that Ivan was a fool, all the wise men left the kingdom and only
the fools remained. They had no money, their wealth consisting only of
the products of their labor. But they lived peacefully together,
supported themselves in comfort, and had plenty to spare for the needy
and afflicted.




