CHAPTER I.


Polikey was a court man—one of the staff of servants belonging to the
court household of a _boyarinia_ (lady of the nobility).

He held a very insignificant position on the estate, and lived in a
rather poor, small house with his wife and children.

The house was built by the deceased nobleman whose widow he still
continued to serve, and may be described as follows: The four walls
surrounding the one _izba_ (room) were built of stone, and the interior
was ten yards square. A Russian stove stood in the centre, around which
was a free passage. Each corner was fenced off as a separate inclosure
to the extent of several feet, and the one nearest to the door (the
smallest of all) was known as “Polikey’s corner.” Elsewhere in the room
stood the bed (with quilt, sheet, and cotton pillows), the cradle (with
a baby lying therein), and the three-legged table, on which the meals
were prepared and the family washing was done. At the latter also
Polikey was at work on the preparation of some materials for use in his
profession—that of an amateur veterinary surgeon. A calf, some hens,
the family clothes and household utensils, together with seven persons,
filled the little home to the utmost of its capacity. It would indeed
have been almost impossible for them to move around had it not been for
the convenience of the stove, on which some of them slept at night, and
which served as a table in the day-time.

It seemed hard to realize how so many persons managed to live in such
close quarters.

Polikey’s wife, Akulina, did the washing, spun and wove, bleached her
linen, cooked and baked, and found time also to quarrel and gossip with
her neighbors.

The monthly allowance of food which they received from the noblewoman’s
house was amply sufficient for the whole family, and there was always
enough meal left to make mash for the cow. Their fuel they got free,
and likewise the food for the cattle. In addition they were given a
small piece of land on which to raise vegetables. They had a cow, a
calf, and a number of chickens to care for.

Polikey was employed in the stables to take care of two stallions, and,
when necessary, to bleed the horses and cattle and clean their hoofs.

In his treatment of the animals he used syringes, plasters, and various
other remedies and appliances of his own invention. For these services
he received whatever provisions were required by his family, and a
certain sum of money—all of which would have been sufficient to enable
them to live comfortably and even happily, if their hearts had not been
filled with the shadow of a great sorrow.

This shadow darkened the lives of the entire family.

Polikey, while young, was employed in a horse-breeding establishment in
a neighboring village. The head stableman was a notorious horse-thief,
known far and wide as a great rogue, who, for his many misdeeds, was
finally exiled to Siberia. Under his instruction Polikey underwent a
course of training, and, being but a boy, was easily induced to perform
many evil deeds. He became so expert in the various kinds of wickedness
practiced by his teacher that, though he many times would gladly have
abandoned his evil ways, he could not, owing to the great hold these
early-formed habits had upon him. His father and mother died when he
was but a child, and he had no one to point out to him the paths of
virtue.

In addition to his other numerous shortcomings, Polikey was fond of
strong drink. He also had a habit of appropriating other people’s
property, when the opportunity offered of his doing so without being
seen. Collar-straps, padlocks, perch-bolts, and things even of greater
value belonging to others found their way with remarkable rapidity and
in great quantities to Polikey’s home. He did not, however, keep such
things for his own use, but sold them whenever he could find a
purchaser. His payment consisted chiefly of whiskey, though sometimes
he received cash.

This sort of employment, as his neighbors said, was both light and
profitable; it required neither education nor labor. It had one
drawback, however, which was calculated to reconcile his victims to
their losses: Though he could for a time have all his needs supplied
without expending either labor or money, there was always the
possibility of his methods being discovered; and this result was sure
to be followed by a long term of imprisonment. This impending danger
made life a burden for Polikey and his family.

Such a setback indeed very nearly happened to Polikey early in his
career. He married while still young, and God gave him much happiness.
His wife, who was a shepherd’s daughter, was a strong, intelligent,
hard-working woman. She bore him many children, each of whom was said
to be better than the preceding one.

Polikey still continued to steal, but once was caught with some small
articles belonging to others in his possession. Among them was a pair
of leather reins, the property of another peasant, who beat him
severely and reported him to his mistress.

From that time on Polikey was an object of suspicion, and he was twice
again detected in similar escapades. By this time the people began to
abuse him, and the clerk of the court threatened to recruit him into
the army as a soldier (which is regarded by the peasants as a great
punishment and disgrace). His noble mistress severely reprimanded him;
his wife wept from grief for his downfall, and everything went from bad
to worse.

Polikey, notwithstanding his weakness, was a good-natured sort of man,
but his love of strong drink had so overcome every moral instinct that
at times he was scarcely responsible for his actions. This habit he
vainly endeavored to overcome. It often happened that when he returned
home intoxicated, his wife, losing all patience, roundly cursed him and
cruelly beat him. At times he would cry like a child, and bemoan his
fate, saying: “Unfortunate man that I am, what shall I do? _Let my eyes
burst into pieces_ if I do not forever give up the vile habit! I will
not again touch vodka.”

In spite of all his promises of reform, but a short period (perhaps a
month) would elapse when Polikey would again mysteriously disappear
from his home and be lost for several days on a spree.

“From what source does he get the money he spends so freely?” the
neighbors inquired of each other, as they sadly shook their heads.

One of his most unfortunate exploits in the matter of stealing was in
connection with a clock which belonged to the estate of his mistress.
The clock stood in the private office of the noblewoman, and was so old
as to have outlived its usefulness, and was simply kept as an heirloom.
It so happened that Polikey went into the office one day when no one
was present but himself, and, seeing the old clock, it seemed to
possess a peculiar fascination for him, and he speedily transferred it
to his person. He carried it to a town not far from the village, where
he very readily found a purchaser.

As if purposely to secure his punishment, it happened that the
storekeeper to whom he sold it proved to be a relative of one of the
court servants, and who, when he visited his friend on the next
holiday, related all about his purchase of the clock.

An investigation was immediately instituted, and all the details of
Polikey’s transaction were brought to light and reported to his noble
mistress. He was called into her presence, and, when confronted with
the story of the theft, broke down and confessed all. He fell on his
knees before the noblewoman and plead with her for mercy. The
kind-hearted lady lectured him about God, the salvation of his soul,
and his future life. She talked to him also about the misery and
disgrace he brought upon his family, and altogether so worked upon his
feelings that he cried like a child. In conclusion his kind mistress
said: “I will forgive you this time on the condition that you promise
faithfully to reform, and never again to take what does not belong to
you.”

Polikey, still weeping, replied: “I will never steal again in all my
life, and if I break my promise may the earth open and swallow me up,
and let my body be burned with red-hot irons!”

Polikey returned to his home, and throwing himself on the oven spent
the entire day weeping and repeating the promise made to his mistress.

From that time on he was not again caught stealing, but his life became
extremely sad, for he was regarded with suspicion by every one and
pointed to as a thief.

When the time came round for securing recruits for the army, all the
peasants singled out Polikey as the first to be taken. The
superintendent was especially anxious to get rid of him, and went to
his mistress to induce her to have him sent away. The kind-hearted and
merciful woman, remembering the peasant’s repentance, refused to grant
the superintendent’s request, and told him he must take some other man
in his stead.




