CHAPTER I.

INTRODUCTORY.


No subjects of thought have ever been proposed more essential to the
culture and happiness of mankind than the two following inquiries.

Upon the first, human minds dwell unweariedly through every change of
circumstance from childhood to advanced age. It is this:--What reason
have we to look for a future life after that hour of dissolution which
inevitably awaits us all?

The second question unites itself closely, as by indissoluble links,
to the first. We always proceed to ask, Is there sufficient ground for
believing in the existence of a Supreme Moral Being, to whose righteous
care and kindness we can calmly commit ourselves when we come to die?

Suppose any man to maintain that the universe we inhabit,--and we who
are a portion of its occupants--came into existence by chance, he
renounces at once every right and title to expect a life succeeding
his bodily death. Chance--if the word means anything--means absolute
uncertainty; and from that which is in its own nature uncertain, what
continuing effects, what conclusive expectation, can be drawn?

Neither is the prospect improved by Materialists[a], in whose opinion
the being of man comprehends no element differing essentially, and in
kind, from the natural world he rules over. We see actually consequent
upon every death-bed the decay of our material frame; if, therefore,
that frame be not the casket of a brighter jewel, we can assuredly
affirm no hope higher or happier than corruption.

The feelings of most human beings revolt from a destiny so ignoble. And
many persons are satisfied that this revolt of feeling is in itself a
sufficient ground for some belief in Immortality. Why, they ask, should
so powerful an instinct dwell in the breast of our race with only a
misleading issue? The higher instincts of creatures below us do not
mislead them regarding that which is to come. Insects innumerable make
provision for the certain sustenance of a progeny they never can live
to behold. They also anticipate for themselves a futurity of life and
development. The caterpillar invests himself with the web he has spun,
and sinks into a chrysalid-sepulchre, to emerge from it in sun-lighted
beauty. Can any valid reason be assigned why the intuitive aspirations
of man should be more fallacious than such practical foresights of the
merely animal world below him?

So far as the writer of these pages is aware, no one has ever alleged
a reason why mankind should be thus deluded. And without going
further than our own country, it seems probable that this instinctive
persuasion is seldom wanting amongst the greater part of our people.
Although the moral consequences of such a persuasion, sometimes merely
passive, may be far less than good men could desire, yet they are
frequently strong enough to assist the weak and wavering when exposed
to sudden temptations. In the "short and simple annals of the poor,"
may be read countless instances of the fact. Neglected men and women,
the scorned outcasts of society, have been often held back by it from
greater criminality. They have found themselves unable to acquiesce
in the belief of _their_ world's opinion--the opinion of their evil
friends and companions--that death must be to all creatures the certain
end of all things.

If, on the other hand, absolute knowledge of a future state were the
natural gift of each person's understanding, there are thousands
amongst our educated classes to whom the trial and terror of their own
hearts would be incalculably mitigated. Numbers feel that speculative
doubts concerning the Being of a God, and life after death, are sources
of a continual perplexity and distress, under which they find little
or no sympathy. In every fresh affliction or anxiety, such a mind has
to sustain a double burden of sorrow, and concerning such it seems
emphatically true, that "the heart knoweth his own bitterness." There
may, however, be suggested one alleviation for every similar instance
of despondency. The same rule holds in this respect as in all human
pursuits,--labour is, and will always continue, the appointed path
by which we must attain. The more noble the object sought, the more
arduous the task and toil,--and what can be nobler than a well-grounded
belief in God and Immortality?

Another very large class of educated persons bear their doubts with
stoical composure, account them an inevitable burden, and consider it
lost time to ask questions concerning "the Unknowable." This class is
sustained in its attitude by the prevalence[b] of really sceptical
writings;--writings (that is) which deny the possibility of knowledge
beyond the circle of positive phenomena. Maxims to this effect are
not uncommonly disseminated through the periodical press, books of
fiction, and other kinds of light literature. The rapidity of modern
life leads men to take opinions upon trust, and keeps them back from
serious investigation. An ephemeral satirist becomes in their eyes
as valuable an authority as the most deeply-thinking reasoner. Much
work is saved by this valuation, to say nothing of the great gain
in self-complacency. And, no doubt, many persons feel particularly
complacent in taking their tone from minds which are evidently no
better informed, and no more finely strung than their own[c].

The class of sceptics just described, cannot be reckoned in figures.
They make up multitudes never enumerated apart in any religious
census. They live and die and make no sign,--and how can quiet
unavowed disbelief obtain a separate place in the columns of the
Registrar-General? Among the audible tones of respectable people it
finds no utterance, and therefore occupies no position. Every one
experienced in the world knows that this species of Indifferentism
is usually regular at public worship, and reticent where sceptical
phrases pass current. The only sure test is a moral one--of very slow
application, since it takes time for a decent sceptic to balance the
pleasures against the risks of immorality. Meantime, there remains some
possible hope for a happier choice during the period of indecision.

Far fewer, because far more strongly declared, are the literary
lodestars of that harbourless sea, where all beyond the horizon of
cloud and billow seems veiled and uncertain. Some amongst them may,
after all, be but wandering lights themselves[d], floating and drifting
like meteors which glimmer at nightfall across shadowy waters. Others
appear really fixed in a dim and joyless firmament where the Present
only is true, the remote Past a conjecture, and the Future altogether
inscrutable. According to them this bounded prospect is the true goal
and real aim of our transitory life,--within it the trials and griefs
of humanity assume their proper dimensions and pale their ineffectual
terrors, while peace, like a river of Eden, flows out over the once
martyred but now ransomed race of man. Even in our own imperfect
struggling day, the human creature may be happy who certainly knows
that this mixed existence is his All--that outside it he can live no
life except in the memory of his fellow-men--that there is no God,
no futurity of individual progress or perfection; but that one thing
happens equally to the good and the bad--the wise and the unwise.
This knowledge brings happiness, because it chases from the breast
self-centred hope and fear: the man who accepts this blank beholds
himself, as he really is, an atom of the Universal Whole--borne now by
the irresistible tide of force into sunlight--borne soon by the same
irresistible tide into a darkness of the shadow of death.

Compared with this creed, the martyrs of Monotheism were
self-loving--for did not they hope? Compared with this simple creed,
all who have stopped short on the threshold of frightful crimes, and
hesitated to stain their souls, were also self-loving--for did they not
fear?

A great variety of remonstrances have been addressed to writers of
this latter type[e]. Social consequences have been eloquently urged
against hypotheses which, if realised, would weaken, or perhaps
destroy, self-control, foresight, and self-improvement. In reply we
are told that these objects of pursuit still appear good and useful
to benevolent eyes. But it should be remembered that our age is one
of transition--half-developed as it were in Doubt. Our benevolent
men have not yet been fully disciplined in the coming school. Who,
therefore, shall safely predict for us the effects of its proposed
discipline? Add that, looking at the civilised world in general,
certain ideas (illusions, as they are sometimes called) respecting
a Futurity influenced by our present right and wrong-doing, are
ingrained in cultured man, and may perhaps be described as connate
with his nineteenth-century existence[f]. Is it possible, then, for
any one to say beforehand what may or may not be the consequence of
uprooting cherished principles fitted in their own nature to exercise
so practical an influence?

Remonstrances of this kind, however truthful and valuable in
themselves, would be out of place in the ensuing pages. A contribution
to the constructive science of Natural Theology must rest its
arguments upon the reason of the case, to the exclusion of many
interesting and persuasive considerations. All questions of Sociology,
have, however, a special fascination for numerous thinkers who are
unlikely to overlook negative conclusions lying close upon the confines
of their own science, and to them the treatment of such questions must
be remitted.

That these phases of thought have not, in fact, escaped the
consideration of benevolent observers, may be inferred from the special
circumstances under which this Essay is composed. Into every condition
(each being required by the exigencies of the subject) the present
writer enters with honest cordiality. His wish and aim is to place
before those who, while they doubt, still debate, certain reasonable
considerations which have appeared convincing to other speculative
minds. And he may defend himself from any possible charge of causeless
intermeddling with other men's concerns, in the words of one amongst
our most genuinely English poets:--

    "'Twere well, says one sage, erudite, profound,
    Terribly arch'd and aquiline his nose,
    And overbuilt with most impending brows,
    'Twere well could you permit the World to live
    As the World pleases: what's the World to you?
    Much. I was born of woman, and drew milk
    As sweet as charity from human breasts.
    I think, articulate, I laugh and weep,
    And exercise all functions of a man.
    How then should I and any man that lives
    Be strangers to each other?"[3]

There are, however, doubters whom the writer can scarcely desire
to address--human beings in whose hearts to deny God kindles a
vivid delight, because belief in Him would compel the renunciation
of some darling wickedness. The true spring of their Materialism,
Pantheism,--or whatever else happens to be the adopted form of
Negation--lies within the will[g] itself. And, therefore, the wish
to be better must precede the wish to hear any one who reasons of
righteousness, temperance, or judgment to come.

To those who doubt, yet desire that Truth--whichever way Truth may
incline--shall distinctly prevail, the ensuing pages are dedicated.
And one main endeavour to be kept in view by both writer and reader
is, that, laying aside passion and prejudice, these questions may be
discussed under the _siccum lumen_--the purified ray--of Right Reason.
To argue for victory may be allowed an advocate who pleads subject to
the intervention of a judge. But here we have no arbiter to say what
is or is not allowable; here, too, the matter is in itself something
graver than corporeal life, or death, or all else beneath the sky;
here, finally, the case is personal, since each reasoner first settles
an account with his own heart; next, tries and decides a conclusive
issue, and by his own sentence, accepts more than any human foresight
can declare. Here, then, special pleading[4] is altogether out of place
on either side, and we must, if we aim at what is best, argue for
nothing more or less than the plain and simple truth.

There must, of course, be difficulties in keeping this straight and
honest road. Few men like making admissions apparently at variance with
their own conclusions; fewer still like to forego pleas which, though
in their own judgment unsound, are certainly specious, and to many
minds persuasive. Such, however, is the wish and aim of the present
essayist. And, that he may bind himself the more firmly to his own
resolution, he requests his readers to believe that any over-statement
or other error of which he may fairly be found guilty, is occasioned
by the unpleasantly common cause of ignorance,--a cause which Dr.
Johnson confessed was his reason for defining "_pastern_" as a "horse's
knee." "Ignorance, madam, pure ignorance," he replied, to the surprise
of his fair critic, who expected an elaborate defence. _Per contra_,
the essayist may equitably claim that he shall not be convicted by a
too summary and inconsiderate process. At the first blush, there will
certainly appear in the eyes of many readers numerous seeming mistakes,
which, if carefully scrutinized, may afterwards be held the reverse. At
all events, plain dealing and honest purpose demand that, when Truth is
the issue truly sought, those who approach it from opposite sides must
(if they desire to do right) sift their objections and difficulties as
well as their favourite arguments.

Reasoning on Natural Theology falls necessarily into two divisions. The
_first_ is made up of arguments drawn from the world without us. The
_second_, of arguments drawn from the world within[h]. Each path of
reasoning is subject to a cross division. We may argue affirmatively to
a definite conclusion. We may also argue negatively with the same end
in view;--we may show how much more difficult and less tenable is the
contradictory hypothesis.

It would be an awkward and almost impracticable task to keep these
kinds of reasoning far apart. The natural procedure of thought, is to
combine, rather than to dissever, when we marshal facts for the purpose
of a full and wide generalization. Yet it does seem practicable to mark
every transition of thought distinctly; and, if clearly marked, the
distinction may easily be kept in mind.

With this precaution, it may appear allowable to treat Natural Theology
in a more discursive manner than could otherwise be permitted. The
object of so doing will be to divest discussion as much as possible of
a dry, logical stiffness; and, by ranging round each topic[i] to look
at it in various lights; a process which generally discovers both the
weakness and the strength of reasoning. Any one who has read Plato will
understand the advantage of Dialogue in this respect. A more familiar
book, Coleridge's "Friend," is another apt illustration. Each of its
series of essays takes a sweep of the kind; and each "landing-place"
affords a rest to the reader, and a fresh beginning to the intellectual
tour. Without venturing to copy the quaint invention of landing-places,
the present writer intends making every Chapter the occasion of a
fresh _start_. The separate trains of thought will thus proceed from
distinct points, and travel by separate routes, so as to admit of full
inspection in their progress. Each argument allowed by the reader to be
valid, will finally link itself to its neighbours; and all thoughtful
persons know how to estimate the strength of convergent conclusions.

The writer trusts, also, that he may be allowed to escape the two
alternatives,--either circumlocution, or the use of an objectionable
pronoun _singular_, by employing the plural "_we_." This word may
perhaps have a further good effect; it may remind both reader and
writer that they are engaged as pilgrim-companions on a journey of
joint exploration.

At the head of all their reasonings, Natural Theologians usually
place the celebrated argument from Design. It would be impossible, in
discussing it, to reproduce here the many illustrative examples of
Design which have been collected. It would likewise be useless; partly,
because they are all easily accessible and mostly well known; partly,
because their appositeness as _illustrations_ is now fully admitted;
and the controversy turns upon questions of another and more abstract
kind. It is asked whether the analogy founded on these instances is
relevant?--whether it proves too little, or too much?--and, how far
the inferences drawn from such examples really go? Our plan will,
therefore, be to devote our second Chapter to the examination of
such objections; to the review and elucidation of the argument from
Design. But if the reader wishes really to study the various questions
closely connected with this celebrated line of thought, and to view
the reasoning in a shape so complete as to be at once relevant and
satisfactory, he may be pleased to bestow a leisure hour on the
consecutive perusal of Chapters II., V., and VI., with their appended
notes and illustrations.

The _third_ Chapter is intended as a critical propædeutic or foundation
for the constructive science of Natural Theology. So far as our
experience of men in great cities teaches anything with respect to the
speculative difficulties which keep them from God, it seems to teach
one undoubted fact. There is grounded in their minds a persuasion
(underlying all further objections), that, whatever else we can know,
little or nothing is to be learned concerning God. The idea of Theism
is thus isolated from every other idea; and there is a presumption
against all reasoning which in any way leads up to a determinate
thought of the Divine Being or the Divine attributes.

Some such doubters allege the necessary limitation of human knowledge
in general:--

    "Know then thyself, presume not God to scan;
    The proper study of mankind is man."

But, is not one chief object in knowing man, to acquaint ourselves with
God? In this spirit Quarles says:--

    "Man is man's A B C; there's none that can
    Read God aright, unless he first spell man."

We may be perfectly sure that every human being, who (as Pope
continues) hangs between the sceptic and the stoic,--

    "In doubt to deem himself a god or beast,"

will never arrive at any knowledge of God whatsoever.

Others, again, who suppose mankind to know a great deal, conceive
all special thought which transcends the every-day human circle, to
be encompassed by a number of difficulties exceptionally its own.
If, it is said, there are angelic natures, they must needs pity our
poor attempts to survey _super_-human or _extra_-human spheres of
existence:--

    "Superior beings, when of late they saw
    A mortal man unfold all nature's law,
    Admir'd such wisdom in an earthly shape,
    And show'd a Newton as we show an ape."[5]

Pope's cynicism has been lately re-echoed in various comparisons. A
death-watch has been supposed to speculate on the final end of a clock;
a timepiece on the nature of its makers. Writers who use similitudes
may be asked to remember that if Man really possesses reason (to say
nothing of an immortal spirit), he cannot be ranged in analogy with
apes, death-watches, and timepieces. The moment brute organisms, or
inorganic constructions, are represented as _reasoning_, they cease to
be what they are--a Thing suddenly becomes a Person. If this were all,
the speech and faculties of Man would be represented as intact, though
veiled beneath some shape worthy of the invention of a Babrias or an
Æsop. But this is not all. The monstrous shape is at once both Thing
and Person, and its thinkings in this double character are supposed to
show by their grotesque failures the absurdity of our human endeavour
to reason concerning God or Immortality.

To this whole kind of preoccupation the third Chapter is addressed.
There are really no special difficulties in the way of Theism. It
argues from the known to the unknown; so do all the inductive sciences.
It accepts more than it can explain; so do we, each and all, in
accepting the truth of our own individuality and personal identity,
of the world outside us, and the mind within, which scrutinizes that
changing world. The more thoroughly questions relating to our first
sources of knowledge are debated, the more surely shall we perceive how
safe is the starting-point of Natural Theology.

Against Materialism, on the other hand, there may be urged a series
of difficulties properly its own, and this may be most easily seen
by placing it in contrast with pure Idealism. The Materialistic
starting-point is from an unauthorized postulate--in common parlance,
an unfounded assumption; each step it takes is attended with a fresh
need of postulation, amounting at last to the gravest burden of
improbability. And when the materializing goal is reached we gain
nothing--no treasure is discovered--no vista opened into new realms
of intellectual or moral empire. We are only told that our supposed
insight was but a dream. We are only warned to dream no more.
Materialism has murdered insight.

With the argument of this Chapter there arises a very important
question, which the reader is entreated to put to himself more than
once, and bestow upon it from time to time a pause of serious thought.
In a negative form the question runs thus: Since the difficulties
supposed to bar the _first_ march of Natural Theology are in no wise
peculiar to it, but attach themselves equally to a multitude of our
daily grounds of thinking and acting, must we not, _if_, on account of
such difficulties, we deny Natural Theism, also deny those persuasions
of ordinary life? How else can we maintain our critical consistency?
Let no man henceforward be confident that there exists an outward world
of either men or things--let him not carelessly suppose that he has
even an individual mind to speak of as his own--let all that concerns
_other_ness--all that concerns _self_ness be relegated along with the
Divine Being to the region of the Unknown and the Unknowable.

But we may imagine that, instead of denying these truths of common
life, many men will be hardy enough to affirm them. If so, in accepting
these they clearly accept a great deal more. To be consistent they must
accept also the reasonable beliefs and first principles upon which
reposes Theism.

The question thus put is therefore a dilemma or choice between two
alternatives. And there may seem to remain no great doubt as to which
alternative most practical reasoners will accept. This kind of dilemma
will recur at many several steps of our inquiry, but having been
illustrated in one instance at considerable length, its examination
on other occasions may be safely left to the intelligence of the
thoughtful reader.

The _four_ following chapters argue for the truth of Theism on
four several and independent grounds. These arguments are purely
constructive; and each is so far apart from the other three as to stand
or fall upon its own merits. But, when each of these four arguments
has been separately examined, if admitted either wholly or in a
modified shape, their consilient and conjoint effect must be taken into
consideration[j].

To minimize impediments in the way of true knowledge; and to rise into
clearness;--_these_ should be the hopes and aims of us all. Life is
full of foiled endeavours; but let us onward now with the hopeful!


ADDITIONAL NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER I.


A.--THE RIGHT HON. W. E. GLADSTONE AND OTHERS ON MODERN SCEPTICISM.

_Extract from Mr. Gladstone's Address delivered at the Liverpool
Collegiate Institution, December 21st, 1872._

"It is not now only the Christian Church, or only the Holy Scripture,
or only Christianity, which is attacked. The disposition is boldly
proclaimed to deal alike with root and branch, and to snap utterly the
ties which, under the still venerable name of Religion, unite man with
the unseen world, and lighten the struggles and the woes of life by the
hope of a better land.

"These things are done as the professed results and the newest
triumphs of Modern Thought and Modern Science; but I believe that
neither Science nor Thought is responsible, any more than Liberty is
responsible, for the misdeeds committed in their names. Upon the ground
of what is termed evolution, God is relieved of the labour of creation;
in the name of unchangeable laws, He is discharged from governing the
world; and His function of judgment is also dispensed with, as justice
and benevolence are held to forbid that men should hereafter be called
to strict account for actions, which under these unchangeable laws
they may have committed. But these are only the initial stages of the
process. Next we are introduced to the doctrine of the Absolute and
the Unconditioned; and under the authority of these phrases (to which,
and many other phrases, in their proper places, I have no objection)
we are instructed that we can know nothing about God, and therefore
can have no practical relations with Him. One writer--or, as it is now
termed, thinker--announces with pleasure that he has found the means
of reconciling Religion and Science. The mode is in principle most
equitable. He divides the field of thought between them. To Science he
awards all that of which we know, or may know, something; to Religion
he leaves a far wider domain,--that of which we know, and can know,
nothing. This sounds like jest, but it is melancholy earnest; and I
doubt whether any such noxious crop has been gathered in such rank
abundance from the press of England in any former year of our literary
history as in this present year of our redemption, eighteen hundred and
seventy-two." (pp. 22-3.)

The writer, or thinker, mentioned by Mr. Gladstone is thus described
at the end of the address, p. 33:--"My reference is to Mr. Herbert
Spencer. See his 'First Principles,' and especially the chapter on
the 'Reconciliation of Science and Religion.' It is needless to cite
particular passages. It would be difficult to mistake its meaning, for
it is written with great ability and clearness, as well as with every
indication of sincerity. Still it vividly recalls to mind an old story
of the man who, wishing to be rid of one who was in his house, said,
'Sir, there are two sides to my house, and we will divide them; you
shall take the outside.'

"I believe Mr. Spencer has been described in one of our daily journals
as the first thinker of the age."

To some people the Premier will appear more than reasonably disturbed
by the journal's description. There is (as we have remarked) a very
advanced type of the genus journalist in England, and its anonymous
zealots are liberal in distributing titles of honour--that is, among
their friends. _Per contra_, upon authors of Mr. Gladstone's calibre
and lofty mode of thought they bestow epithets very much the reverse of
complimentary. They seem, in fact, somewhat to resemble those critics
of whom Nathaniel Hawthorne wrote, that "though excellent fellows in
their way, there are no gentlemen in the world less sensible of any
sanctity in a book, or less likely to recognize an author's heart in
it." So far, however, as Mr. Herbert Spencer is concerned, the journal
censured might observe in justification of its approval that his system
seems a good deal read by the students of more than one school in our
Premier's own University--a proud distinction shared by Mr. Spencer
with several other eminent thinkers of the same speculative tendencies
as himself.

The eloquent speaker next passes under brief review two other typical
books,--one by a German, the second by an Englishman. Respecting the
opinions of the former author (Strauss[6]) Mr. Gladstone writes thus
(Authentic Report, p. 24):--"In his first chapter he puts the question,
'Are we still Christians?' and, after a detailed examination, he
concludes, always speaking on behalf of Modern Thought, that if we
wish our yea to be yea, and our nay nay, if we are to think and speak
our thoughts as honourable, upright men, we must reply that we are
Christians no longer. This question and answer, however, he observes,
are insufficient. The essential and fundamental inquiry is, whether we
are or are not still to have a Religion?

"To this inquiry he devotes his second chapter. In this second chapter
he finds that there is no personal God; there is no future state; the
dead live in the recollection of survivors--this is enough for them.
After this he has little difficulty in answering the question he has
put. All religious worship ought to be abolished. The very name of
'Divine Service' is an indignity to man. Therefore, in the sense in
which religion has been heretofore understood, his answer is that
we ought to have no religion any more. But proceeding, as he always
does, with commendable frankness, he admits that he ought to fill with
something the void which he has made. This he accordingly proceeds to
do. Instead of God, he offers to us the All, or Universum. This All, or
Universum, possesses, he tells us, neither consciousness nor reason.
But it presents to us order and law. He thinks it fitted, therefore,
to be the object of a new and true piety, which he claims for his
Universum, as the devout of the old style did for their God. If any one
repudiates this doctrine, to Dr. Strauss's reason the repudiation is
absurdity, and to his feelings blasphemy."[7]

Many readers will agree with the Premier in calling these "astonishing
assertions." Many will also speak of Strauss's positions as something
worse than astonishing when they read in the Illustrative Passages
(Address, p. 34) a declaration which he holds it his duty as well as
his right to make without any kind of reserve.[8]

Most persons will likewise agree with the Premier's further observation
(p. 38):--"I have made a statement that these ideas are not a mere
German brood, though I fear that we owe much of their seed to Germany,
as France owed to England the seed of her great Voltairian movement, so
far as it was a movement grounded in the region of thought."

In illustration of the statement that "there are many writers of
kindred sympathies in England, and some of as outspoken courage"
(Address, p. 26), Mr. Gladstone quotes four passages from Mr. Winwood
Reade's "Martyrdom of Man." The three first cited possess a painful
interest for the Natural Theologian. They are as follows:--(1.) "When
the faith in a personal God is extinguished; when prayer and praise are
no longer to be heard; when the belief is universal that with the body
dies the soul; then the false morals of theology will no longer lead
the human mind astray." (2.) "We teach that the soul is immortal; we
teach that there is a future life; we teach that there is a Heaven in
the ages far away: but not for us single corpuscles, not for us dots of
animated jelly, but for the One of whom we are the elements, and who,
though we perish, never dies." (3.) "God is so great that He does not
deign to have personal relations with us human atoms that are called
men. Those who desire to worship their Creator must worship Him through
mankind. Such, it is plain, is the scheme of Nature." (pp. 38-9.)

On account of his Address and _pièces justificatives_, Mr. Gladstone
has been already (like a prophet of old) "wounded in the house of his
friends." It may therefore be well to support his judgment by some
additional testimony. Now the _Pall Mall Gazette_, whatever faults may
be imputed to it by its adversaries, cannot be justly charged with
harshness or discourtesy towards materializing writers. And it so
happens that both Dr. Strauss and Mr. Reade have lately been criticised
in its columns. From these notices, therefore, I shall venture on
making some extracts.

Strauss's "Der Alte und der Neue Glaube" was reviewed at considerable
length in the number for November 27, 1872. I quote two passages only.

After an interesting introduction the reviewer proceeds thus:--

"As the title of the book indicates, the work to be effected divides
itself into two main parts. First, it is necessary to settle the
relations to be adopted towards the old Church faith, or Christianity.
That accomplished, the outlines at least of the new views that take
its place must be sketched out. Of course, before that can be done
it must be settled whether or not there is anything to put in place
of Christianity. It is logically correct to ask, first, whether
'we'--meaning 'the thinking minority,' who have grown dissatisfied with
'the old faith'--'are still Christians' in any sense. Having answered
that question in the negative, it is in order to ask next 'whether we
have any religion,'--which cannot be answered by a simple negative
or affirmative, or without further explanations as to the nature of
religion. We must see 'how we regard the world,' or the system of
existing things; what results we are led to by modern researches as
to its origin, purpose, and destiny. Although in the light that flows
from these, Strauss maintains that the old idea of a personal God must
disappear, he finds a Divinity in the All or totality of nature, whose
forces and course exhibit purpose or design--subjectively speaking--and
order, and to which we are bound, recognizing the wisdom that regulates
them, piously to resign ourselves, seeking to fulfil that order of
which we ourselves are a part." The following extract concludes the
notice:--"We have seen that Strauss refuses to acknowledge Christianity
because on examination its assertions appear to him incredible, and its
claims therefore inadmissible. That is the result of an examination
of the nature of Christianity, in which we have nothing new, as it is
substantially a synopsis of the fuller process of reasoning contained
in 'The Life of Jesus.' But it is not Christianity alone that must be
dispensed with. In accordance with the old declaration that miracles
are impossible, the supernatural also disappears. It is not merely
relegated, as by Herbert Spencer and Comte, to the sphere of the
Unknowable; it is not recognized in any manner whatsoever. In place of
creation, we have in these pages a process of continuous development
through immense periods of time; instead of God, as the source of law
and authority and order, nature proceeding harmoniously in an unending
process; instead of individual immortality, the conclusion that every
individual fulfils his destiny in this world. The divinities and the
after life of man are, as with Feuerbach, declared to be simply his
own desires. 'What man might be but is not, he makes his god; what he
might possess but cannot win for himself, that shall his god bestow
upon him.' In reference to the argument that man must somewhere
realize all the possibilities that are in him, and as he does not do
so in this life there must be a future one, Strauss asks whether all
seeds in nature come to maturity. Having dispensed, then, with the
supernatural, are we necessarily without any religion? We have seen
that Strauss answers in the negative, though not very confidently.
The fundamental views on human life, the existence of the world, and
so forth, are without doubt a religion, or the theoretical side of
one. If in order to a religion it be necessary to believe that the
universe fulfils a rational purpose through a rational order, we
have that presented to us. There is constant process and continuous
development. There is an ascent, as it were, of the forces of nature
which perform their mighty cycles through the ages, and a consequent
descent and vanishing away. The All remains ever the same, is at no
moment more complete than in the preceding, nor _vice versâ_, but there
is a process of becoming and disappearing which goes on, or may go on
_ad infinitum_. The design or purpose of every part is being fulfilled
at every moment, for at every moment there is the richest possible
unfolding of life in the total system of things. The highest idea to
which we can attain is that of the universe.

"Many people were scandalized when a few years ago Mr. Mill maintained
that the idea of a God was not indispensable to a religion. Comte's
'Religion of Humanity' was then in view. Strauss's religion, though
equally without a God, is deformed by no such crudities of thought
and feeling as Comte's. Rather is his book a representation in brief
compass of the views to which, whether we regret it or not, the
majority of educated and thinking men are in our day more and more
attracted."

One remarkable circumstance dwelt upon in this notice, as well as
in Mr. Gladstone's Address, is that Strauss, like Comte, finds a
substitute for the worship of a Deity--a something which both are
pleased to call a Religion. Strauss takes the theoretical, Comte the
sentimental view. According to the Frenchman, men are to worship
"Humanity" with a leaning to the female side. The un-deformed
religion of the German centres upon an Optimistic theory of the All
or Universum.[9] Both would seem practically to confess the real
necessity of some Religion to mankind, and the question naturally
occurs whether these _succedanea_ are more wholesome and elevating than
Theism, or whether (it may be added) they are as likely to be true
after all.

Mr. Winwood Reade's "Martyrdom of Man" had been criticised four days
earlier (_Pall Mall Gazette_, Nov. 23). As he is an English writer, I
take the liberty of making more copious extracts, but would recommend
such of my readers as have not perused the article to bestow half an
hour's steady thought upon it.

"Mr. Reade," writes the critic, "puts forth his book as a sort of
review, or survey, or abridgement of the general history of the human
race, and he has given to it the strange title it bears because he is
of opinion that 'the supreme and mysterious Power by whom the universe
has been created, and by whom it has been appointed to run its course
under fixed and invariable law; that awful One to whom it is profanity
to pray, of whom it is idle and irreverent to argue and debate, of
whom we should never presume to think save with humility and awe; that
Unknown God has ordained that mankind should be elevated by misfortune,
and that happiness should grow out of misery and pain.' But, although
the work is in the main historical, it is also partly cosmological,
partly physiological, and partly polemical. It deals with the past, the
present, and the future of the world as well as of humanity....

"In what he has to say on the present occasion Mr. Reade lays no
claim to originality. On the contrary, he warns us that he has
borrowed, 'not only facts and ideas, but phrases and even paragraphs
from other writers.' The purpose he has in view is to illustrate the
investigations and enforce the conclusions within a moderate compass
of higher and more voluminous authorities. But still there is quite
enough of his own handiwork in the volume to entitle him to be regarded
as far more than a mere compiler; and we venture to think that many
readers will find those portions of it which are the fruits of Mr.
Reade's personal experience as an African explorer, and his reflections
upon that which he has himself seen, among the most interesting and
instructive of all.

"In the writings of Mr. Darwin, Mr. Mill, Dr. Draper, and Mr. Herbert
Spencer, the authors to whom Mr. Reade seems to be chiefly indebted,
the assumed antagonism between the conclusions of modern science and
the premisses of popular theology is latent rather than manifest. With
them it is left as a matter of inference, and is nowhere forced upon
the attention as a matter of fact. Mr. Reade endeavours to supply
this deficiency, and he does so distinctly and abruptly enough....
In order to build we must destroy. Not only the Syrian superstition
must be attacked, but the belief in a 'personal God,' which engenders
a slavish and oriental condition of the mind, and the belief in a
posthumous reward which engenders a selfish and solitary condition
of the heart.... What Mr. Reade is pleased to designate 'the Syrian
superstition' is still the direct or indirect source of all the really
practical sympathy existing both between the higher and lower classes
of society and the higher and lower races of mankind. As to the belief
in a personal God, the passage we have quoted above from Mr. Reade
seems to show that he shares it, or the language he uses is mere
nonsense. It would be absurd to talk about anything except a personal
God creating the universe, appointing fixed and invariable laws, and
ordaining the destiny of mankind. And if Mr. Reade is referring merely
to force collectively or in the abstract, we cannot perceive why it
'should be idle and irreverent to argue and debate about' it, or why
'we should never presume to think, save with humility and awe' about
it, more than about its particular and concrete manifestations; for
instance, light, heat, or electricity. Moreover, if we admit that the
universe is in any sense the work of a supreme and mysterious Power who
has in any sense predestined an unalterable course for it to run, we
cannot understand how such a belief is fitted to remove the 'slavish
and oriental condition of mind' of which Mr. Reade complains. We should
have thought rather that the unmitigated fatalism it implies would be
far likelier to generate such an intellectual state than reliance on
providential superintendence and interposition carried to no matter
what extravagant lengths. Mr. Reade's proposition that the belief in
a posthumous reward engenders a selfish and solitary condition of the
heart appears to us likewise wide of the mark. As long as we continue
to be individual beings, our conduct will continue to be the result of
our individual feelings, present or anticipated. Practically, at all
events, the Stoic, the Sadducee, and the Christian equally will fulfil
instead of neglecting their duty--first, because they are conscious
that it is their duty, and secondly, because they know that fulfilling
it will bring them satisfaction, and that to neglect it will bring them
remorse. The only difference is that the Christian trusts that his
satisfaction in the one case, and fears that his remorse in the other
case, will be infinitely prolonged."

Mr. Reade's reviewer concludes his critique with a piece of wit from
Voltaire, which he views as enunciating a pretty fair summary of the
moral contained in the "Martyrdom of Man." Voltaire compares the
Creator of the world to the builder of a great house, and men to the
mice who inhabit its chinks and crannies. The Divine builder has not
enlightened us mice. This comparison has often since been repeated in
new and improved shapes by sceptical moderns, who treat a considerate
Death-watch as a typical thinker on problems of reason, such as Design
and Final Causation.

As author of a Lecture on Positivism in 1871, I cannot but be gratified
to perceive that Mr. Gladstone's views of Comte's character and system
are coincident with my own. (Authentic Report, pp. 25 and 36.)

This note began with extracts furnished by one Premier--it may not
inaptly close with quotations from the writings of another.

Mr. Disraeli, in his preface to the new edition of "Lothair," expresses
himself as follows (p. xv., seq.):--

"It cannot be denied that the aspect of the world and this country, to
those who have faith in the spiritual nature of man, is at this time
dark and distressful. They listen to doubts, and even denials, of an
active Providence; what is styled Materialism is in the ascendant.
To those who believe that an atheistical society, though it may be
polished and amiable, involves the seeds of anarchy, the prospect is
full of gloom.

"This disturbance in the mind of nations has been occasioned by two
causes: firstly, by the powerful assault on the divinity of the Semitic
literature by the Germans; and, secondly, by recent discoveries of
science, which are hastily supposed to be inconsistent with our
long-received convictions as to the relations between the Creator and
the created."

On the first cause of disturbance, Mr. Disraeli continues:--"Man brings
to the study of the oracles more learning and more criticism than of
yore: and it is well that it should be so. The documents will yet bear
a greater amount both of erudition and examination than they have
received; but the word of God is eternal, and will survive the spheres."

On the second, he observes:--"Scientific, like spiritual truth, has
ever from the beginning been descending from Heaven to man. He is a
being who organically demands direct relations with his Creator, and
he would not have been so organised if his requirements could not be
satisfied. We may analyse the sun and penetrate the stars, but man is
conscious that he is made in God's own image, and in his perplexity he
will ever appeal to 'our Father which art in Heaven.'"

Both these sources of doubt and denial have been exemplified in the
preceding note. I might indeed have hesitated to exemplify them so
fully were it not for the considerations mentioned in my preface to
this essay.


B.--ON CORRUPTION OF THE JUDGMENT BY MISDIRECTED MORAL SENTIMENTS.

Talfourd--then Mr. Serjeant Talfourd--thus describes what passed in his
own mind when viewing the site of Gibbon's abode at Lausanne:--"That
garden in which the Historian took his evening walk, after writing the
last lines of the work to which many years had been devoted;--a walk
which alone would have hallowed the spot, if, alas! there had not been
those intimations in the work itself of a purpose which, tending to
desecrate the world, must deprive all associations attendant on its
accomplishment of a claim to be dwelt on as holy! How melancholy is
it to feel that intellectual congratulation which attends the serene
triumph of a life of studious toil chilled by the consciousness that
the labour, the research, the Asiatic splendour of illustration,
have been devoted, in part at least, to obtain a wicked end--not in
the headlong wantonness of youth, or the wild sportiveness of animal
spirits, but urged by the deliberate, hearted purpose of crushing
the light of human hope--all that is worth living for, and all that
is worth dying for--and substituting for them nothing but a rayless
scepticism. That evening walk is an awful thing to meditate on; the
walk of a man of rare capacities, tending to his own physical decline,
among the serenities of loveliest nature, enjoying the thought that,
in the chief work of his life, just accomplished, he had embodied a
hatred to the doctrines which teach men to love one another, to forgive
injuries, and to hope for a diviner life beyond the grave; and exulting
in the conviction that this work would survive to teach its deadly
lesson to young ingenuous students, when he should be dust. One may
derive consolation from reflecting that the style is too meretricious,
and the attempt too elaborate and too subtle, to achieve the proposed
evil; and in hoping that there were some passages in the secret history
of the author's heart, which may extenuate its melancholy error; but
our personal veneration for successful toil is destroyed in the sense
of the strange malignity which blended with its impulses, and we feel
no desire to linger over the spot where so painful a contradiction is
presented as a charm."--_Vacation Rambles._ Ed. 2, p. 238.

We may gladly give Gibbon the benefit of the doubt with which the great
judge closes. But surely most attempts to address the mental state
depicted must needs be found impotent. There is great force in a dictum
of Schelling's ("Idealismus der Wissenschaftslehre") to the following
effect--"The medium by which spirits understand each other is not the
ambient air, but the deep-stirred sympathetic vibrations propagated
by a community of spiritual freedom. When a soul is not pervaded by
this atmosphere of conscious freedom, all inward communion with self
or with another is broken,--what wonder, then, if such a one remain
unintelligible to himself and to others, and in his fearful wilderness
of spirit wearies himself by idle words, to which no friendly echo
responds, either from his own or from another's breast?

"To remain unintelligible to such an one is glory and honour before
God and man. _Barbarus huic ego sim, nec tali intelligar ulli._ This,"
concludes Schelling, "is a wish and prayer from which no man can keep
himself."--_Sämmtliche Werke_, I. 443.


C.--ON SPECIAL PLEADING IN HISTORY AND MORALS.

A few emphatic sentences from Lord Macaulay's strictures on
historical special pleading will repay perusal:--"This species of
misrepresentation abounds in the most valuable works of modern
historians. Herodotus tells his story like a slovenly witness,
who, heated by partialities and prejudices, unacquainted with the
established rules of evidence, and uninstructed as to the obligations
of his oath, confounds what he imagines with what he has seen and
heard, and brings out facts, reports, conjectures, and fancies in
one mass. Hume is an accomplished advocate. Without positively
asserting much more than he can prove, he gives prominence to all the
circumstances which support his case; he glides lightly over those
which are unfavourable to it; his own witnesses are applauded and
encouraged; the statements which seem to throw discredit on them are
controverted; the contradictions into which they fall are explained
away; a clear and connected abstract of their evidence is given.
Everything that is offered on the other side is scrutinised with the
utmost severity; every suspicious circumstance is a ground for comment
and invective; what cannot be denied is extenuated, or passed by
without notice; concessions even are sometimes made; but this insidious
candour only increases the effect of the vast mass of sophistry.

"We have mentioned Hume as the ablest and most popular writer of his
class; but the charge which we have brought against him is one to which
all our most distinguished historians are in some degree obnoxious.
Gibbon, in particular, deserves very severe censure."--_Macaulay's
Miscellaneous Writings--History._

The reader may very advantageously carry along with him the above
quoted just remarks, if he has occasion to travel into Hume's sceptical
writings. Respecting these, where every feature of the author's
character appears with intensified distinctness of expression, it is
not too much to say that their influence, which had suffered suspended
animation,[10] is now felt in almost every cultivated circle in Europe.
Checked for a time under the empire of Kant and his successors, it has
been revived by the German Darwinists (so-called), who are bent on
evolving all that can be got from the theory of Evolution. Comte speaks
of Hume as his own master--an intellectual debt all the more readily
acknowledged, because Hume's treatment of most subjects leans towards
the French, rather than the Teutonic, side of English speculation. The
master's influence over numbers who, without being Comte's disciples,
are addicted to thinking Positively upon questions connected with Mind
and Morality, was never greater than at present.

Here, therefore, the disciplined inquirer will obtain a prolific field
of discovery, if he wishes to convince himself how little originality
pervades the set of opinions just now in fashion.

But the student of Hume ought surely to be a disciplined inquirer.
Many senior residents at our Universities will, therefore, join me in
regretting that his sceptical treatises should be so commonly found in
the hands of very young men. So far as such readers are concerned, it
does not much signify whether Hume's fallacies are due to onesidedness
of intellect or (as has been said by a critic, once himself a doubter)
whether he was influenced "by vanity, appetite, and the ambition of
forming a sect of _arguescents_." An opinion scarcely libellous,
considering what Hume has said respecting the validity of his own
paradoxes. However this may appear, the fallacies remain fallacies,
and are less easy of detection than they would have been were their
author a systematic thinker, instead of a philosophical _dilletante_.
Under any circumstances, it is not every aspirant to the "Round Table"
for whom the quest after secret spells is fitted. The youthful knight
has his own ward to keep, and needs help--not hindrance, much less
betrayal--inasmuch as:--

    "Tis his to struggle with that perilous age
    Which claims for manhood's vice the privilege
    Of boyhood;--when young Dionysus seems
    All glorious as he burst upon the east,
    A jocund and a welcome conqueror;
    And Aphrodite, sweet as from the sea
    She rose and floated in her pearly shell,
    A laughing girl;--when lawless will erects
    Honour's gay temple on the mount of God,
    And meek obedience bears the coward's brand;
    While Satan, in celestial panoply,
    With Sin, his lady, smiling by his side,
    Defies all heaven to arms!"

    _Hartley Coleridge's Poems_, Vol. II., p. 202.


D.--ON THE METHOD EMPLOYED IN THIS ESSAY.

The advantages which ensue from this mode of "ranging round each
topic" are well described by the late Sir B. Brodie (Psychological
Inquiries, 1st series, p. 18). "Our minds are so constructed that we
can keep the attention fixed on a particular object until we have,
as it were, looked all around it; and the mind that possesses this
faculty in the greatest degree of perfection will take cognisance of
relations of which another mind has no perception. It is this, much
more than any difference in the abstract power of reasoning, which
constitutes the vast difference which exists between the minds of
different individuals; which distinguishes the far-sighted statesman
from the shallow politician; the sagacious and accomplished general
from the mere disciplinarian. Such also is the history, not only of the
poetic genius, but also of the genius of discovery in science. 'I keep
the subject,' said Sir Isaac Newton, 'constantly before me, and wait
until the first dawnings open by little and little into a full light.'
It was thus that, after long meditation, he was led to the invention
of fluxions, and to the anticipation of the modern discovery of the
combustibility of the diamond. It was thus that Harvey discovered the
circulation of the blood; and that those views were suggested to Davy,
which are propounded in the Bakerian lecture of 1806, and which laid
the foundation of that grand series of experimental researches which
terminated in the decomposition of the earths and alkalies."

Dr. Tyndall also considers the case of Newton ("Fragments of Science,"
p. 60). "Newton pondered all these things. He had a great power of
pondering. He could look into the darkest subject until it became
entirely luminous. How this light arises we cannot explain; but, as
a matter of fact, it does arise." Dr. Tyndall had before remarked
on the question thus suggested, that "There is much in this process
of pondering and its results which it is impossible to analyse. It
is by a kind of inspiration that we rise from the wise and sedulous
contemplation of facts to the principles on which they depend. The
mind is, as it were, a photographic plate, which is gradually cleansed
by the effort to think rightly, and which when so cleansed, and not
before, receives impressions from the light of truth. This passage from
facts to principles is called induction, which in its highest form is
inspiration; but, to make it sure, the inward sight must be shown to be
in accordance with outward fact. To prove or disprove the induction, we
must resort to deduction and experiment."--Ibid, p. 57-8.

This last remark concerns the process of verification which the
accomplished writer discusses through several subsequent pages.

Notwithstanding a passing observation of Dr. Tyndall's that "this
power of pondering facts is one with which the ancients could be but
imperfectly acquainted," some readers will be struck by the thought
that it forms the nearest approach which can be made by any inductive
discoverer to the old philosophical method of Dialectic. Janet says, in
a volume to which those who have not encountered it will thank me for
introducing them, "La dialectique logique dans Platon est parfaitement
conforme aux lois de la raison. Elle ne sert qu'à réfuter les idées
fausses, ou à éclaircir les idées données antérieurement par une
sorte de synthèse, qui, suivant les uns, n'est que le progrès de la
généralisation, et, selon nous, est le progrès de l'intuition." (Études
sur la Dialectique dans Platon et dans Hegel, p. 393.) For a more
complete appreciation of what is here stated in few words, the student
should peruse pp. 244, seq. The account given by Janet appears in some
measure to coincide with Dr. Tyndall's idea, though perhaps the word
"Intuition" might be more entirely approved by Schelling or Coleridge
than by any Physicist.

Be this as it may, Dr. Tyndall's outline of the Inductive process in
its highest form is evidently one which describes the prerogative of
Genius--the exercise of Imagination as distinguished from Fancy--the
child, that is, of Reason, rather than a stray bantling of sportive wit.

To bring his general conception within the grasp of every-day workers,
and describe a procedure which may be adopted as a kind of practical
rule or maxim, let us look at this subject in the following manner.

Suppose we take the example of a great idea; that, for instance, of
the constitution of Great Britain, or any other nation which subsists
in tolerable freedom from revolutionary change. There are clearly two
elements involved--one, Permanence; the other, Progress. These, in the
actual working constitution, form its factors, or moments (as they may
be better termed); and in the idea or mental representation of the
same, we may liken them to complementary colours in the spectrum, which
appear separately contrasted in tint, but blend together in a wave of
white light. Now, our analysing faculty of mind is, in point of fact,
our intellectual prism. It separates each bright and strong idea into
elements so antagonistic as to be apparently incompatible. Like clear
yellow and shadowy violet, one component seems excellent in beauty,
another its foil or opposite. To one class of minds truth consists
in Permanence, and Progress is a note of evil omen. Of another class
the contradictory is true. The real statesman alone knows that their
blending is a question of measure and degree, of human affairs,--time,
circumstance, and opportunity.

We may ask with reason what gain accrues to the statesman by looking
at his country's constitution from this point of sight? Evidently a
good deal. He will soon discern that practically it cannot exist in
vigour if either factor be eliminated. Each is given in the analysis
of his prolific idea, and, however great may seem the apparent
incompatibility, both must be capable of co-existence and correlation.
Now, there could be no synthesis if, on the one hand, Progress did not
imply a something which remains identical and in unity with itself,
while it flourishes and grows;--or, on the other hand, if Permanence
were not safest, when its strength is manifested by its vital increase.
Consequently, to grow is to continue essentially the same;--to be
permanent is to live and bear fresh fruit every passing year.

A precisely similar advantage accrues to the Ethical Philosopher from a
process of the like description. He considers (it may be) the concrete
idea of moral activity. Obviously, there must be found in it an
unfettered power of choice, and a conformity to the rule of moral law.
Submitted to the analytic prism, the two elements come out at opposite
poles in very decided contrast. At the pole of necessary conformity
we find what looks like Determinism;--at the pole of choice appears
its irreconcilable antagonist, a sense of Responsibility, logically
unexplained, but inalienable from our moral nature. And our Ethical
inquirer finds the only possible synthesis of his two contrasted
moments of morality in the deep truth that each righteous man is a Law
unto himself. And hence it is, that the righteous shines out over the
lower world of mechanical arrangement--a faint, it may be, but still a
visible image of the God who made him what he is.[11]

By the same process of analysis and reconstruction the Natural
Theologian arrives (as may be shown) at a synthesis of Faith and
Reason. Yet these two are antagonistic in the eyes both of the sceptic
and the superstitious. _Les extrêmes se touchent_, and by both extremes
faith is relegated to the region of sentimental æsthetics.

Reason, say both, is Faith's natural enemy; and must fail to yield
any expectation of future happiness in the presence of a righteous
God, together with its long train of present hopes and fears. Our
plain answer is that the true synthesis of Natural Theism lies in
the chief primary fact of our human nature--the undeniable existence
of its Reasonable Beliefs. They originate deep down, and we may
affirm respecting the birth of each and all, as Dr. Tyndall affirms
of the inward vision which dawns upon the philosophic mind when
photographically cleansed by its own efforts to think rightly,--"how
this light arises we cannot explain, but as a matter of fact it does
arise." In its degree it may be (to use Dr. Tyndall's word) "a kind
of inspiration." And what endowment has a higher claim to such a
representative kinship?--what nobler gift can be conceived from God
to man than a Belief of Reason? Dr. Tyndall's further requirement
that "the inward sight must be shown to be in accordance with the
outward fact," a Natural Theologian may hope to meet by a sufficient
verification. He may meet it in the case of this particular Belief by
showing, as we shall try to show, our actual human experience of its
working and its worth.

We might pursue similar examples through the regions of Discovery
and Production, but the three instances already adduced may fairly
suffice. It is, perhaps, more interesting to observe the real gains
which accrue from pondering over an idea in the manner exemplified.
How much political _charlatanerie_ is at once disposed of when men
distinctly acknowledge that two reputed incompatibilities, however
useful as war-cries, are essentially conjoint elements in all truly
statesmanlike action: what countless angry controversies die in the
moral principle that each righteous man is a Law unto himself! And not
only to Natural Theology, but to other parts of knowledge, it is of the
greatest utility to perceive with equal distinctness that Reason has
its beliefs as well as Unreason; and that when we accept reasonable
beliefs as the basis of scientific investigation, we affirm their value
for the conduct and government of life. The true amount of that value
as a mainspring of our hopeful activities is estimated on another page.
Meantime, we may remark from the three examples above discussed, how
regularly an idea of Reason, analysed into its complementary factors,
resumes a concrete form when we employ it as a maxim of practical
life. The politician who separates progress from stability is really
preparing his country for revolution. The man on whose heart the law
is not written (like the necessity laid upon St. Paul[12]) is as yet
imperfectly righteous. And so too, if in our Beliefs we lose sight of
the gift that makes us human, we are likely to ring the changes between
superstition, atheism, and effeminate sentimentality.

When, from results, we pass to the easiest method for attaining them,
there seems but little to add to the extracts with which this note
commenced. And if the object be clearly defined, the labour of the
mental workshop need not be a severe discouragement. It is true that no
man can take his Thought--the offspring of his inward Light--pull it to
pieces, and reconstruct it, as he would deal with a thing of brass or
iron. But every earnest ponderer may keep his prolific idea steadily in
view, and hold conversations with himself respecting it. This is the
well-known method by which Aristotle virtually obtains his conclusions
before he finally proceeds to deduce them. From the same conception of
Method, real thinking appears to Plato as a Dialogue without speech.
And, doubtless, actual discussion between two or more living men would
be the surest way of arriving at the goal of insight, provided those
most uncommon of all endowments, common sense and common honesty, could
be assured to the dialecticians.[13]

Thus much, then, may serve as an illustration of the task we are
attempting, and of the means by which we hope to accomplish it.
If achieved, it will form a contribution to the great work thus
characterised by the Rector of Lincoln College from the University
pulpit, as reported in the _Oxford Undergraduates' Journal_ for October
26, 1871: "The Natural Theology of the last century is no longer
found to be satisfactory in presence of the geological and biological
sciences as they now stand. The answer that the sciences are wrong
and the theologians are right does not admit of being discussed or
refuted, for it is the answer of ignorance. The answer of the Catholic
Church, which is to take refuge in its own authority, can only be
practically tendered where there is an infallible living authority, as
in the chair of S. Peter. It seems to be the business of the English
Church especially--a Church which has never yet broken with reason or
proscribed education--to fairly face these questions, to resume the
Natural Theology of the past age, and to re-establish the synthesis of
Science and Faith."


E.--ON THE EFFECT OF CONSILIENT PROOFS.

The expressive word "_Consilience_" has been adopted on the authority
of Dr. Whewell and Professor Pritchard, both of whom employ it in
preference to the commoner expression _convergence_. Upon the force of
consilient proofs, Dr. Whewell writes thus:--

"The cases in which inductions from classes of facts altogether
different have _jumped together_, belong only to the best established
theories which the history of science contains. And as I shall have
occasion to refer to this peculiar feature in their evidence, I will
take the liberty of describing it by a particular phrase, and will term
it the _Consilience of Inductions_.

"It is exemplified principally in some of the greatest discoveries.
Thus it was found by Newton that the doctrine of the attraction of the
sun varying according to the inverse square of the distance, which
explained Kepler's _Third Law_ of the proportionality of the cubes of
the distances to the squares of the periodic times of the planets,
explained also his _First_ and _Second Laws_ of the elliptical motion
of each planet; although no connexion of these laws had been visible
before. Again, it appeared that the force of universal gravitation,
which had been inferred from the _perturbations_ of the moon and
planets by the sun and by each other, also accounted for the fact,
apparently altogether dissimilar and remote, of the _precession of the
equinoxes_. Here was a most striking and surprising coincidence, which
gave to the theory a stamp of truth beyond the power of ingenuity to
counterfeit....

... The theory of universal gravitation, and of the undulatory
theory of light, are indeed full of examples of this consilience of
inductions. With regard to the latter, it has been justly asserted by
Herschel, that the history of the undulatory theory was a succession
of _felicities_. And it is precisely the unexpected coincidences of
results drawn from distant parts of the subject which are properly thus
described." ("Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences," B. XI., chap. v.,
s. 3.)

And again, "It is true, the explanation of one set of facts may be
of the same nature as the explanation of the other class; but then,
that the cause explains _both_ classes, gives it a very different
claim upon our attention and assent from that which it would have
if it explained one class only. The very circumstance that the two
explanations coincide, is a most weighty presumption in their favour.
It is the testimony of two witnesses in behalf of the hypothesis; and
in proportion as these two witnesses are separate and independent,
the conviction produced by their agreement is more and more complete.
When the explanation of two kinds of phenomena, distinct, and not
apparently connected, leads us to the same cause, such a coincidence
does give a reality to the cause, which it has not while it merely
accounts for those appearances which suggested the supposition. This
coincidence of propositions inferred from separate classes of facts, is
exactly what we noticed in the last book, as one of the most decisive
characteristics of a true theory, under the name of _Consilience of
Inductions_.

"That Newton's first rule of philosophizing, so understood, authorizes
the inferences which he himself made, is really the ground on which
they are so firmly believed by philosophers. Thus, when the doctrine
of a gravity varying inversely as the square of the distance from
the body, accounted at the same time for the relations of times and
distances in the planetary orbits and for the amount of the moon's
deflection from the tangent of her orbit, such a doctrine became most
convincing: or, again, when the doctrine of the universal gravitation
of all parts of matter, which explained so admirably the inequalities
of the moon's motions, also gave a satisfactory account of a phenomenon
utterly different--the precession of the equinoxes. And of the same
kind is the evidence in favour of the undulatory theory of light, when
the assumption of the length of an undulation, to which we are led by
the colours of thin plates, is found to be identical with that length
which explains the phenomena of diffraction; or when the hypothesis of
transverse vibrations, suggested by the facts of polarization, explains
also the laws of double refraction. When such a convergence of two
trains of induction points to the same spot, we can no longer suspect
that we are wrong. Such an accumulation of proof really persuades us
that we have to do with a _vera causa_. And if this kind of proof be
multiplied,--if we again find other facts of a sort uncontemplated in
framing our hypothesis, but yet clearly accounted for when we have
adopted the supposition,--we are still further confirmed in our belief,
and by such accumulation of proof we may be so far satisfied as to
believe without conceiving it possible to doubt. In this case, when the
validity of the opinion adopted by us has been repeatedly confirmed by
its sufficiency in unforeseen cases, so that all doubt is removed and
forgotten, the theoretical cause takes its place among the realities of
the world, and becomes _a true cause_." (Ibid. B. XII., chap. xiii.,
art. 10.)

The reader of this Essay will be pleased to remark as he proceeds that
its argument is made up of a diversity of proofs (very many among them
being inductive), and that they all lend each other mutual support and
become consilient at last.


FOOTNOTES:

[a] The language of this paragraph is the language of ordinary
life. In Coleridge's "Table Talk," for example, the subject of
Man's distinguishing prerogative of Immortality is discussed by the
great speaker, and his nephew's note of the discussion is headed
"Materialism." There appears, indeed, considerable difficulty in
finding a precise expression for the form of belief, or unbelief,
commonly called Materialism. Most people speak of it as of some clear
and well-defined theory until they begin seriously to investigate
its _rationale_. Investigators are then apt to become loud in their
complaints of its inexactness. Take by way of instance the following
example. Speaking of "the doctrines of Materialism," Lord Brougham
remarks: "The vague and indistinct form of the propositions in which
they are conveyed affords one strong argument against their truth.
It is not easy to annex a definite meaning to the proposition that
mind is inseparably connected with a particular arrangement of the
particles of matter; it is more difficult to say what they mean who
call it a modification of matter; but to consider it as consisting in
a combination of matter, as coming into existence the instant that
the particles of matter assume a given arrangement, appears to be a
wholly unintelligible collocation of words."--(_Discourse of Natural
Theology_, p. 102).

Under such circumstances it may seem difficult for many a Materialist
to describe himself as the adherent of a distinct or closely reasoned
system. The main point we would submit for his earnest consideration
is the question whether his hypothesis lands him in certain subtle
refinements concerning the nature and connection of Force, Mind, and
those generalized facts which have been called the primary properties
of Matter,--or whether it leads him onward to the opinions described in
the text. Looking at the subject in this light, we might feel inclined
to draw a broad distinction between mere scientific Materialism and the
Materialistic doctrines of sceptical philosophy.

[b] "I doubt," said Mr. Gladstone at Liverpool on December 21,
1872,--"I doubt whether any such noxious crop has been gathered in such
rank abundance from the press of England in any former year of our
literary history as in this present year of our redemption, eighteen
hundred and seventy-two." The Premier had before remarked: "I believe
that neither Science nor Thought is responsible, any more than Liberty
is responsible, for the misdeeds committed in their names."

The passage from which these brief extracts are made is given at
greater length in the additional note to this Section (A).

[c] Since writing the above, my attention has been called to Paley's
censure of the "disingenuous _form_" under which Scepticism was placed
before the public in his day. He says (_Moral Philosophy_, B. v. Sect.
9): "Infidelity is served up in every shape that is likely to allure,
surprise, or beguile the imagination; in a fable, a tale, a novel, a
poem; in interspersed and broken hints, remote and oblique surmises;
in books of travels, of philosophy, of natural history; in a word, in
any form rather than the right one,--that of a professed and regular
disquisition. And because the coarse buffoonery and broad laugh of the
old and rude adversaries of the Christian faith would offend the taste,
perhaps, rather than the virtue of this cultivated age, a graver irony,
a more skilful and delicate banter, is substituted in their place."

[d] "Atheists," says the _Pall Mall Gazette_ of January 18, 1873,
"write Atheism because they are Atheists, but Alexandre Dumas writes
Atheism, though a good Catholic, who goes to church every Sunday."

[e] Pre-eminent amongst these remonstrants is Mr. Gladstone. In the
speech before cited, he says, p. 25: "It is to be hoped that they
will cause a shock and a reaction, and will compel many, who may
have too lightly valued the inheritance so dearly bought for them,
and may have entered upon dangerous paths, to consider, while there
is yet time, whither those paths will lead them. In no part of his
writings, perhaps, has Strauss been so effective, as where he assails
the inconsistency of those who adopt his premises, but decline to
follow him to their conclusions. Suffice it to say, these opinions are
by no means a merely German brood; there are many writers of kindred
sympathies in England, and some of as outspoken courage." (Compare the
extracts from this class of writers given along with the Premier's
remarks in Note A.)

[f] Die Zustände eines Volkes hängen hauptsächlich von seiner Denkweise
ab: diese ist der wichtigste und einflussreichste Zustand. Alle andern
können nur nach und in ihr begriffen werden. Sie ist es, die den
Menschen zu einem solchen macht; und in ihrer Ausbildung entwickelt
sich erst die Menschlichkeit.--(Wilhelm H. J. Bleek, "Ueber den
Ursprung der Sprache," p. 12).

[3] Cowper, "The Task," B. III.--It must be confessed that the
honest-minded humanitarian may often find in the reception
he encounters ample reason and motive enough for taking up
Teufelsdroeckh's parable:--"'In vain thou deniest it,' says the
Professor; 'thou _art_ my Brother. Thy very hatred, thy very envy,
those foolish lies thou tellest of me in thy splenetic humour: what
is all this but an inverted sympathy? Were I a steam-engine, wouldst
thou take the trouble to tell lies of me? Not thou! I should grind all
unheeded, whether badly or well,'"--(_Sartor Resartus_, B. III. c. 7).
And when the bigotry of Unbelief is not content with persecuting the
honest-minded humanitarian--when he hears some shallow, half-animalized
specimen of humanity shouting for a red-handed communism and the blood
of the innocent--_then_ he may not irrationally exclaim with the same
philosopher:--"Wert thou, my little Brotherkin, suddenly covered up
within the largest imaginable glass-bell,--what a thing it were, not
for thyself only, but for the world!"

[g] I am indebted to Mr. Gladstone's appendix (p. 40) for the following
apposite quotations from Sir George Cornewall Lewis's very scarce
work, "On the Influence of Authority in Matters of Opinion." Speaking
of "Authority, and its place not as an antagonist of Reason, but as
an instrument of Reason for the attainment of Truth," Sir George
remarks, in page 35 of his book: "'It is commonly said that the
belief is independent of the will,' and that no man can change it 'by
merely wishing it to be otherwise.' But 'the operation of a personal
interest may cause a man insensibly to adopt prejudices or partial and
unexamined opinions.' In page 38 he adds: 'Napoleon affords a striking
instance of the corruption of the judgment in consequence of the
misdirection of the moral sentiments.'"

All friends, and many casual readers, of S. T. Coleridge will
remember that he asserted the same, or perhaps a stronger, conclusion
upon metaphysical grounds, and with a force of language not easily
surpassed. This--one of Coleridge's bursts of gorgeous eloquence and
imagery--will be found in "The Friend," a book which, according to C.
Lamb, contains "his best talk." The subject commences on page 260 of
Vol. III., Ed. 2, and page 211, seq., Vol. III., Ed. 4. In the latter
place it is amplified by a summary of his arguments, pages 213, 214.
The position propounded, that true insight cannot exist apart from
moral rectitude, receives considerable light from the doctrine of
philosophical postulates maintained in the "Biographia Literaria,"
Vol. I. c. 12, and chiefly borrowed from Schelling, to whom there
is an honest reference in the first Edition, I. 250. I mention this
circumstance because Coleridge has been held guilty of unjustifiable
pillage by writers who have noted his borrowing, but omitted to observe
such acknowledgments as he makes, together with the additions and
alterations which he introduces.

The corruption of a naturally acute understanding has seldom been more
graphically painted than by Judge Talfourd. (See Additional Note,
B.)

[4] Compare Lord Macaulay on "Special Pleading in History," Additional
Note, C.

[h] These divisions have been sometimes called Physico-Theology and
Ethico-Theology; but the latter designation is far too restricted for
the line of thought pursued in the latter portion of this Essay.

[i] See Additional Note, D.

[5] Pope, "Essay on Man," Ep. II. Compare Mr. Pattison's notes, pp.
87, 88, and 90. We may remark that the Aphorism "Know thyself" has
been often employed to convey a lesson the most distant possible from
Pope's,--_e.g._, "Know thyself; and so shalt thou know God, as far as
is permitted to a creature, and in God all things."

[j] See Additional Note, E.

[6] The work referred to, "Der alte und der neue Glaube," appeared in
the latter half of 1872.

[7] Compare an illustrative passage, B. III. p. 34. "We have been
seeking to determine, whether our point of view, from which the
law-governed All, full of life and intelligence, is the summit of
thought (die höchste Idee), can still be called a religious point
of view, and we have animadverted upon Schopenhauer, who loses no
opportunity of flying in the face of this which is our Idea. As I have
said, such outbreaks impress our understanding as absurdities; to our
feelings, they are blasphemies. It appears to us rash and reckless,
on the part of a mere human individual, so boldly to set himself up
against the All, out of which he grows, and from which he has the
morsel of intelligence that he misuses. We see in this an abnegation
of that feeling of dependence, which we admit to belong to all men. We
demand the same piety towards our Universum, as the devout man of the
old fashion did for his God."

[8] This declaration we quote in its native German. Its first sentence,
together with the sentences immediately preceding, are those passages
selected for translation by Mr. Gladstone.

"Historisch genommen, d. h. die ungeheuren Wirkungen dieses Glaubens
mit seiner völligen Grundlosigkeit zusammengehalten, lässt sich die
Geschichte von der Auferstehung Jesu nur als ein weit historischer
Humbug bezeichnen. Es mag demüthigend sein für den menschlichen Stolz,
aber es ist so; Jesus könnte all das Wahre und Gute, auch all das
Einseitige und Schroffe das ja doch auf die Massen immer den stärksten
Eindruck macht, gelehrt und im Leben bethätigt haben; gleichwohl würden
seine Lehren wie einzelne Blätter im Winde verweht und zerstreut
worden sein, wären diese Blätter nicht von dem Wahnglauben an seine
Auferstehung als von einem derben handfesten Einbände zusammengefasst
und dadurch erhalten worden." (p. 72.)

[9] As a consequence of the difference in standpoint, the use made by
the two men of their several conclusions is marked by very considerable
contrast. Comte's Humanity was to be served by a ritual as well as a
social set of ordinances. Strauss looks quite another way. Considering
the outrage which would be committed upon philosophy and feeling should
his Universum find irreverent treatment in the words and writings
of men; our emotion, he says, on such occasions becomes thoroughly
religious. If then it be asked in express terms whether he and his
fellow-thinkers really have a Religion or no, they cannot answer
roundly as they will when questioned on Christianity; they must rather
say yes or no according to the meaning of the word Religion in the mind
of their questioner. (See Strauss, p. 143.)

[10] In the Livraison of the Deux Mondes for November, 1856, M.
Cucheval-Clarigny wrote thus: "Personne plus que David Hume n'a éprouvé
l'inconstance des jugemens humains. Après avoir été mis au rang des
esprits qui ont fait le plus d'honneur à l'humanité, on le compte
volontiers aujourd'hui parmi les corrupteurs de la raison et les
apôtres du mal." That another kind of interest has been more recently
felt in Hume is evidenced by the republication of his works in America
and England. While writing this note I learn that a new edition of the
seldom-read Treatise on Human Nature will shortly appear, with notes by
two well-known members of Balliol College.

[11] Compare with this the subjoined orison for a special gift of
moral rectitude penned by Professor Huxley (Lay Sermons, p. 373). "I
protest that if some great power would agree to make me always think
what is true and do what is right, on condition of being turned into
a sort of clock and wound up every morning before I got out of bed, I
should instantly close with the offer. The only freedom I care about
is the freedom to do right; the freedom to do wrong I am ready to part
with on the cheapest terms to any one who will take it of me." It
seems wonderful that the talented writer fails to perceive that should
his terms be granted the bargain would be dear indeed--it must take
place at the expense of his Personality. He would have no choice left,
consequently no rightness of choice. With the loss of his volition his
manhood would be forfeited; and the Huxley of our praise and blame must
needs sink at once and for ever from a Person to a Thing--

    "Rolled round in Earth's diurnal course
    With rocks, and stones, and trees."

After all, we may trust that this outpouring of soul after mechanical
goodness, is neither more nor less than a fresh rehearsal of the
popular fallacy or fable of a learned and intelligent, but somewhat
over-hasty, death-watch. The difference between the two myths is not
great, and both owe their existence to the prolific fancy of Professor
Huxley. About three years ago the teleological beetle speculated in
a manner which would have grieved the soul of Aldrich or Whately
respecting the purpose of a kitchen clock. The death-watch concluded,
like a death-watch, and not like a logician, that the clock's final end
was to tick. Man, as Bacon tells us, is the servant and interpreter
of nature. Does any one feel sure that a death-watch is the servant
and interpreter of kitchen timepieces? Yet his inconsequent thinking
served as an implement of Fate to "quail, crush, conclude, and quell"
Teleology in general, and the Design argument for Natural Theism in
particular. _Now_, a human Huxley clock always going morally right
_because it must_, is equally conclusive against all freedom and all
Conscience. Equally conclusive, we know, because equally true to Nature
and to Fact. As conclusive as arguments against received biological
tenets drawn from those great natural curiosities the Gorgon, the
dragon of St. George, and the fire-breathing Chimæra, who united in her
own fair person a lion, a dragon, and a goat. This latter well-known
phenomenon may seem nearly as striking as any right-minded clock
imaginable, and not much more incongruous.

Many readers may be reminded of Amurath's Ring. But few probably will
know, and fewer still recollect, Miss Edgeworth's clever comment upon
it in "Rosamond." The book is unfortunately scarce, not having been
reprinted along with "Early Lessons," therefore we add the extract
("Rosamond," vol. i., p. 148):--

"Do you remember, brother," said Laura, "your wish when you were
reading that story in the 'Adventurer,' last week?"

"Not I. What wish?" said Godfrey. "What story?"

"Don't you remember," said Laura, "when you were reading the story of
Amurath and his ring, which always pressed his finger when he was going
to do anything wrong?"

"Yes; I wished to have such a ring," said Godfrey.

"Well, a friend is as good as such a ring," said Rosamond; "for a
friend is, as somebody observed, a _second conscience_; I may call
Laura my _second conscience_."

"Mighty fine! but I don't like secondary conscience; a first conscience
is, in my opinion, a better thing," said Godfrey.

"You may have that too," said Rosamond.

"Too! but I'd rather have it alone," said Godfrey. "There is something
so cowardly in not daring to stand alone."

The lesson seems to be that second-hand goodness falls short of
true goodness, and that the impulse to moral action must arise from
within--so unmanly is every endeavour at shaking off, either by
cowardice or by unreflectiveness, the human burden and birthright of
Responsibility.

Amurath's ring was a mechanical conscience. Professor Huxley's clock
is a mechanism in the outward form of a man. These two imaginations
convey the useful lessons that neither Conscience nor Mankind are mere
machines. A clock goes because it must go its hourly round; a man
chooses which way, when, and whither he will go.

[12] 1 Corinthians ix. 16.

[13] For a useful account of Plato's Dialogue in connection with
Plato's philosophy, see "Introduction to the Republic," by Davies and
Vaughan, pp. xxi.-xxiv. Cambridge, 1852.




