CHAPTER III.

CONDITIONS OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE.


Is the great Book of Nature--the world we live in--a closed or open
book to Man? On this question all have thought often,--and many have
written much,--students--men of science--religious teachers--poets, and
philosophers.

We ask this question of ourselves variously circumstanced, and under
various impulses. We ask it if, like Æschylus' watchman, we contemplate

      "The congress of the nightly stars
    Bright potentates, set proudly in the sky."

Or when we sail upon a sea made solemn by its vastness, dying in far
distance, with no boundary except itself, as each swelling wave rises
against the sky. We ask it, on some stately mountain top looking down
over light and shadow,--over the rest and the motion of the landscape.
More earnestly still, perhaps, while from the depth of a twilight
valley we admire the sunset lingering upon inapproachable alpine
snows;--rosy heights unveiling their loveliness, yet soon to be hidden
till the Light of this lower world shall shine afresh amongst their
clefts and pinnacles.

And who is not in earnest, as sunset and sunrise remind him how
the majestic clock of Time moves on? Yonder glorious luminary has
warmed with form and life countless organisms, scattered over
mountain summits, in ocean depths, through wild savannahs and
forests;--organisms throughout regions of earth, water, air, so remote
and inaccessible that their wonderful excellence of beauty has never
been beheld by Man's perishable eye. Knowing, as we cannot but know,
how soon our own eyelids must close beneath the sun, we yearn within
our soul, longing for a truer insight into the great Universe above
and beyond us; and for a firmer feeling that we ourselves are an
imperishable part of it. Somewhere in this Universe, must surely be
contained things brighter and better than those we now possess. Else,
why is it clothed so lavishly with half-revealed charms, adapted to
touch our most delicate sympathies, to win us from our worse selves,
and allure us on like willing captives to its loveliness? Awakened in
our senses, awakened in our souls, we desire to know, to feel, and to
attain;--these three impulses become our fixed and enduring aspirations.

But, how? We all remember that Undine sought a soul and found a
sorrow;--a sorrow the more intolerable, because through its burden she
first realized her hard-earned dower of coveted immortality. Yet, as
she truly says, every creature cannot but strive after that which is
naturally higher than itself.

_One_ secret of progress we soon discover. What Nature can give us
depends on what she can tell us. And here is a prevailing motive for
the endeavour to unclose fair Nature's book.

_Another_ step in thought is early taken in our day, though the
civilized world was slow in reaching it. We soon perceive that Nature's
answers must catch their tone and compass from our interrogations. In
numerous sciences, this axiom carries the whole theory and practice of
experiment;--that grand distinction between Bacon's inductive process,
and the induction of the ancient world. In other walks of inquiry,
intellectual and moral, the same truth has grown up and blossomed with
a ruling idea of the crucial or prerogative question: slow in being
framed, and difficult often in the asking, but, when asked, certain to
elicit a reply.

A _third_ postulate is also quickly apparent. Our inquiries must be
subject, for utility's sake, to our power of assimilating knowledge.
And thus our faculty for asking questions is governed by our faculties
for apprehending answers.

The _last_ and paramount requirement is _forced_ upon us. Beyond and
over all, comes the pressure of our own need and private anxiety.
There are many truths which we discern afar off, like features of a
smiling land of promise; and, knowing that they must become one day the
heritage of mankind, we tend towards them without haste, yet without
forgetfulness, and in this temper of mind wait contentedly. But, there
are some truths for which we cannot afford to wait. They concern our
destinies too closely; they are too near our hearts; too influential on
our lives and happiness.

The old question asked in the youth of human philosophy, is the one we
all begin by asking in our first confidence and eagerness of pursuit.
Ask it in what words we may, it always comes to much the same thing;
and if we could answer it, we should answer all questions in one. For,
though we clothe our query with various shapes, and seldom put it in
the form following, its true meaning is, "what are the realities of the
Universe, and what the essential ground of all we see and think?"

It is always worth a thinker's while to look this human problem
more than once in the face. Suppose a faculty[88] for such insight
granted, it must be different in kind, rather than degree, from our
logic of ordinary life. It cannot proceed discursively, abstracting,
generalizing, connecting, deducing. It must know--or look at its object
directly, just as genius knows, images and conveys to other minds, not
through a train of explanatory definition, but by kindling within them
a spark of its own light. If there be such a faculty, it will work, (as
Aristotle[89] says of the Supreme Intellect,) by what seems to us most
like an act of touch; a figure half-shadowed out when we say we grasp
or apprehend a truth; and much as St. Paul speaks, in bidding men to
seek and feel after and find the Lord.

We are not all conscious of such a faculty. But if dim to some, is it
certainly dim to all? Did Plato see farther than Herschel could when he
burst the barriers of the sky? Did Schelling at any time behold what
Hamilton pronounced invisible?[90]

Or again, if not actually ours now,--if those who have asserted it have
spoken in error,--is there a hope that in the Future of Man individual
or collective, he will ever grow up to it? The thought is not unknown
to physicists as well as moralists. In both camps hopeful minds have
conceived the possibility. And, _then_ Mankind will look the secret of
the Universe face to face.

Meanwhile, thinking men have laid siege to the absolute Truth by aid
of such powers as they commonly call into action. For centuries past,
the nature of things in themselves,--and along with (or perhaps above)
all other natures, the "_Self_" within every man has been among the
most fascinating of objects pursued by human thought. Yet, how far
do we really know the life throbbing in every pulse? Can we tell the
secret of our own individuality? We feel it every day;--it endues
us with a separate existence, distinctly several, and apart from
others, and so intensely vivid to ourselves, that we seem in our own
eyes like small centres of the Universe, with men and women,--nay,
worlds and stars,--revolving round us.[91] Yet, strange to say, our
bodies are at all times undergoing change, sufficient in a few years
to eliminate their present frame, and remould a future compound of
gradually assimilated elements. And it seems stranger still, that
while the law of Change rules supreme in these fabrics,--(built to be
continually dissolved and continually built again),--each rude mark and
scar maintains its place; no old wound forgets to ache; no cicatrice
even, nor superficial blemish, dies quite away. We are always changing,
always being transformed; yet, to each of our bodies continues its one
individual configuration; within each of our minds its self-collection,
its memories, its expectations, and its individual consciousness.[t]

Weighing these inconsistencies together, shall we say that, in any
proper sense, we _know_ our own selves? And, if not, can we expect
truly to know the _self_ of anything? May we not travel further, and
inquire whether we can conceive a _self-ness_ of any kind,--whether
the very idea is not to us absolutely inconceivable? And, when this
question is answered as it must be answered, need we feel surprised if
we fall short of conceiving the self-subsistent God? At what value,
therefore, shall we rate sceptical arguments drawn from our failure;
and resting on the fallacious consequence, that the inconceivable (or
unthinkable as some prefer to call it) is likewise the impossible?[u]

That a fallacy really lurks beneath these words,--that the contrary is
true, we know as a matter of fact.[92] We entertain really no doubt
whatever of our own continued sameness, and individual existence. We
are quite sure that our _self-ness_ has, gone on throughout the years
of our natural life. How it first became clear to our inward sense,
is a point confessedly disputable. Some suppose that it existed as
a principle of consciousness,--a kind of primordial instinct in our
minds. Others--that our internal impressions, one and all, formed a
panoramic scene; impressions from without and impressions from within
evenly painted on the retina of the mental eye. Time and comparison
were needful to give us the true distinction. Those who think thus
usually take another step; and add that _resistance_ to our _self-ness_
first informs us of its being. There is resistance to a muscular
sense, somewhat akin to touch, but specialized to feel the kind of
impact given by things impenetrable. There is also a resistance which
thwarts our desires, endeavours, and determinations. Be this as it
may, we never doubt our own identity of being; we never doubt the
_other-ness_ and _outer-ness_ of beings like ourselves, and of objects
beyond number. Yet, that which makes ourselves and them, what we and
they are,--_our_ self-ness and _their_ self-ness--raises a question
we cannot answer; here is, we feel, a something which overpasses our
means of investigation. Men, however, do not stay to discuss such
questions, or to test the origin and limits of intellectual conceptions
before accepting the fact. They do not even ask whether Philosophical
victory sits on the banner of Idealism, pure or constructive; Realism
materialistic or natural;--or whether it crowns any other imaginable
variety of cosmological theorem. We are perfectly sure of our facts;
and no array of possible difficulties whatsoever can prevail to shake
our assurance.

Let us leave for the present, in its native shadows, the central point
of our own self; the original centre of our earliest apparent universe.
Yet, if we cannot _know_ this first growing-point of our individual
life, it may be useful to inquire what can we know _about_ it? can we
learn, for example, how that inner vitality, once begun, is maintained
and fed?--By a process of receiving into itself, (we are told), the
aliment which flows through our senses. We are also told, (as appeared
in the last chapter), how very requisite is a knowledge of _natural_
processes. Let us, then, look at this process of sense-alimentation,
narrowing the problem as much as possible. We have already cut off
_one_ end of it--the germ-point of the _self_-stimulated; and will
now cut off _another_ piece--the assimilation of mental ideas when
elaborated. We simply ask how does this food from without, get _into_
us? The widest avenue of entrance is proverbially our sense of
eyesight. Its information, (as people in general agree, from Horace
down to Mr. Mill), being gathered through many definite impressions,
and received from all distances, is at once the most significant, and
the most commanding. The first step is clear. We see by impinging rays
of light,--movements in a luminiferous ether, making images on the
sensitive network of the eye; a circumstance ascertained by the same
sense of sight which receives the image. From this delicate surface,
begins a second series of movements;--they take place this time in an
organized nerve-material, and are carried, like telegraph-currents, to
the Sensory. Arrived there, we may next suppose that they excite some
new motions, or corpuscular changes. Do we know--_can_ we know any
more? Is the grammar or dictionary written which translates them into
the language of the mind; or teaches us how we have, since our infancy,
worked a perpetual miracle of speech respecting each of them? The eye,
as an optical instrument,[v] is a marvel of science displayed; the eye
as an instrument of intelligence, especially of human intelligence, is
a marvel of inscrutable mystery.

The mysteries of every-day life are the last things dreamed of in
every-day philosophy. When we wake up to their existence, it is
astonishing to find how continually, without being able to explain
things, we can feel, and know them;--know them that is in the sense of
acting intelligently (without theorizing) upon them.

The example we have taken, teaches us several good and important
lessons. There is in it much we can understand; much that we cannot
understand; and a twilight territory between the intelligible and the
non-intelligible. All three are, of course, mixed together when we
speak of sight,--in itself, a matter of every-day experience. So far
as the mechanical construction of an optical chamber goes, everything
seems obvious. We can, likewise, perceive how well contrived is the
apparatus for washing and wiping the outside transparent surface.
Also, the value of its arched hedge against irritants dropping upon
the eyeball from above; and of the arrangements for altering both
axis and focus instantaneously. But what does this instrument enable
us to see? _Not_ the rays of light themselves,--only objects which
they illuminate. The space traversed by rays from all suns and
all stars, remains itself unseen. The ether which fills space is
invisible,--yet its motions make the light of the world.[93] Then,
too, the nervous screen on which these ray movements are received, is
not sensitive to all transmitted undulations. Red excites the optic
nerve by striking it with four hundred and seventy-four _millions of
millions_ of wave-impacts in a single second. Violet strikes it in the
same time with six hundred and ninety-nine _millions of millions_ of
impulses.[94] These two colours are the extremes of the light octave.
In an octave of sound, the highest note vibrates twice as quickly as
the lowest. So too, the shortest wave of violet is half the length of
the longest red wave, and its motion is twice as rapid. But the curious
point is that the human ear receives eleven octaves in the scale of
sound;[95]--the human eye has a range over only one octave in the scale
of light.

Our remarks have carried us over the borders of the twilight
territory,--a circumstance we may ascertain by putting into words what
we think we know, and our reasons for thinking that we know it. If the
eye be in focus, (but not otherwise), a line of light--that is to say
moving imponderable matter of extreme tenuity--so passes through its
transparent liquids as to strike a sensitive spot, and there produce
what is called an image. We apprehend in our minds this image-producing
function as a relation between light and the effect realized. A
relation definite and exact,--in scientific language a "constant";
which we can formulate into optical laws, and thus express with useful
nicety. Taking advantage of the laws thus obtained, and employing
that light-power which everywhere blesses our world, we reproduce the
_like_, image upon a screen. Its likeness we gather from comparison, by
looking into an eye from without. Both images, thus seen by us, are in
point of fact similar sensations.

A philosophic reader may at once perceive what the Idealist will infer
respecting this act of comparison. Neither image--on retina or on
screen--exists apart from the eye. So far as we know, if there were no
eyes there would be no images; and some writers (_e.g._, Schleiden)
have positively affirmed that without eyes all would be, not only to
us, but _in itself_, darkness;--the world absolutely void of Light.
But the truth may be summed in a sentence. Light is not for the eye in
the same sense that the eye is for light. Light is for other things
besides. It exerts its activity on life, animal and vegetable;--on
inorganic substances;--and in other ways likewise.--Going no further
than our screen, we can so manage matters as to engrave and otherwise
fix the image thrown upon it;--in other words our moving line of
imponderable matter will produce further effects, chemical and
mechanical, visible and palpable.

Proceeding to a cross-examination of the knowledge with which we
have credited ourselves, our next business is to try whether we can
verify the objectivity of our optical image. Now it impresses sight
in two respects,--as superficial form--and as colour. The family of
forms is, we are aware widely connected. Sound evokes them. Draw a
violin bow across a string stretched over finely silted sand, and the
different notes will be correlated by a diversity of shapes,[96]
into which the sand will arrange itself. Therefore, we ought to find
means of verifying Form without much difficulty. Indeed we do so
every day satisfactorily; our hands are perpetually demonstrating the
general accuracy of our eyes, and even those delicate instruments our
finger-ends, do not always add much to the information sight has given
us.

But about colour? Distinct colour-waves have (as we said before)
distinct velocities, and are therefore objectively distinguished even
in the inorganic universe. They also act differently upon the growth
of animals and plants,--and other distinctions might be added. The
_sensation_ is, however, our point,--the special thing called colour
both by careful speakers and in child parlance,--what do we really know
about this? Little indeed except as an impression received by sight.
The man born in complete blindness taking a piece of red cloth to
examine, described the fabric minutely; but, when asked if he could say
anything about its redness, likened that "hue angry and brave" to the
sound of a trumpet. A simile most conclusive,--suggested probably by
his having often heard of certain "scarlet-coated gentry";--and proving
beyond doubt that colour is non-existent in the sensory of a person
affected from birth by a deep-seated lesion. To one less thoroughly
blind, spectra are possible, and red light may be produced under
pressure. It thus appears, that colour must be perceived by a nervous
_substratum_, called the rod and cone layer; and hence we explain
our power of distinctly seeing the blood-vessels of the retina lying
immediately before that structure.[97]

These curiosities, of vision shew that our powers of verifying shape
are superior to our powers of verifying colour;[98] add, too, that
the latter sensation, (as an idealist might maintain,) is known to be
sometimes unreal, since it occurs without a coloured object. We can
produce it, for instance, by gazing at the sun--a phenomenon mentioned
by Aristotle. But then, this ideal sense-affection ranges with a
variety of others, which taken together constitute a very much wider
law. Not to mention many superinduced mental states, we see light under
the influence of a touch or blow,--of electricity,--of chemicals, such
as narcotic medicines, which attack the nervous system. We hear sound
under like appliances stimulating the auditory nerve. And the whole of
these affections are to be explained by another Aristotelian doctrine,
extended and pushed to its consequences. Special senses have their own
proper faculties, and when called into action each exerts its power
within its special province. Had Aristotle dissected out nerve-fibres,
he might have discovered the larger empire of specialty now known to
our anatomists.[99]

Idealism easily widens its doubt, to correspond with the dimensions of
the wider nervous law. Does not an aptitude for special impressions,
so stringently determined as to translate the antecedent "blow" into
the consequent, "light" or "sound," disqualify our senses for giving
evidence respecting supposed facts of the outer world? As for the
"distinctive impressibility of the eye," as Mr. Bain[100] describes
colour, it need not be held real except for our own sensorium,[w] and
if colour be a questionable reality, other alleged realities become
questionable too. The world we live in, may be a totally different
world from what we are taught, generation after generation, to believe
it. Who can lay down the limits of what our minds create for themselves
outside us?[101] The mental disease of the madman causes his eye to
see that which is not. Guilt and sickness fill bedchambers with unreal
spectres. Putting disease aside, and taking the case of healthy eye
and healthy mind, it is confessedly difficult to define the exact
province of each. A boy couched by Cheselden[102] saw all things in
one plane; there was no perspective, and objects in the room seemed to
touch his eyeballs. The mind creates perspective, how much then may it
not create? The mind also refuses to surrender its own associations
at the bidding of optical laws. Mr, Wheatstone's ingenious instrument
called the Pseudoscope, brings into play laws which reverse the
impressions of solidity and hollowness. A person looking through it
steadily at the face of a statue sees a hollow mask. The convexity of
feature is gone, and a concave set of features (representing the bust
reversed) is perceived in its stead. But, let the same person gaze
through his pseudoscope ever so long at the face of a human being,
and he will look for a like reversal in vain. The flesh and blood
features refuse to change;--in other words, the mind refuses to yield
its _long-accustomed_ impression.[103] If these things and others
like them are fairly considered, what becomes of our readings in the
unclosed book of Nature? The nature we see is our own thought reflected
back again. Nature's answers take not only tone and compass, but
meaning and utterance from our own interrogations. We think that we are
assimilating knowledge, when we are actually engaged in manufacturing
aliments to suit our own intellectual digestions. The most inward
of all things,--our essential _self_,--at once retired into shadow
when we pursued it; and now, in trying to show how _self_ is fed by
substance from without, we have learned to suspect that all its food is
unsubstantial.[x]

We may henceforth consider ourselves face to face with Sphinx; and
it is well to take the true measure of her lineaments. If the above
reasoning be sound, to know, is to make a mirror and reflect ourselves
back from it. To verify, is to put ourselves in new postures before
our infallible mirror. Each fresh item of induction, is a freshly
reflected phantom. At all events, the contrary position will never
be established. Ignorant as we are, respecting the true centre of
our mental firmament, we must necessarily be always more ignorant
respecting all _possibilities_ which seemingly outlie its glowing
horizon. No one who rationally weighs the worth of a fact, or who
decomposes it into its elementary constituents, will ever be absurd
enough to imagine that he can disprove the ideal theory by proving the
truth of its opposite.

The strongest strain of Idealism comes upon the _last_ sentence. Some
years ago, English philosophers had agreed in the conclusion that all
debates must for the future be settled by an appeal to facts. Could
there be a more happily chosen ground for arbitration?--or one better
suited to the calibre of everybody concerning whose business-like
reflections we might say, with King Henry,--

    "His thinkings are below the moon"?

Some inquiring spirits preferred "law," but then they agreed with all
others, (except transcendentalists,) that a law to be valid must also
be a fact.

A belief in this settlement still pervades most non-philosophic
circles. A fact is now-a-days an infallible remedy for the disturbed
mind; just as once

        "the sovereign'st thing on earth
    Was parmaceti for an inward bruise."

A mind too disturbed to abstain from logical litigation when this
receipt is administered, must certainly be afflicted with monomania.
Nobody, of course, (whether Idealist or Transcendentalist,) need feel
much aggrieved by being called mad. At some time or other, it is the
common lot of all, from a murderer proud of being caught red-handed
in our day, to a Jewish Pharisee and the son of a Pharisee, long ago
departed to his rest. Besides, some madnesses are so fortunate as to
justify themselves, an event now happening to Idealists.[104] In
Germany, France and England, the persuasion gains ground that no tasks
are so difficult as first to define, and secondly to establish a fact.

Now the task of a Natural Theologian, is to establish, (if he can),
the greatest and most solemn of all facts. In order to do his work
honestly, he must ascertain as far as possible the conditions of proof,
the ground on which fact-knowledge reposes. And it will be admitted
that the problem of evidence raised by Idealism, is difficult, crucial,
and underlies all other problems. "The most fundamental questions in
philosophy," says Mr. Mill, "are those which seek to determine what
we are able to know of external objects, and by what evidence we know
it."[105]

This field of inquiry is therefore of the most supreme interest to us.
Idealism possesses an additional attraction for any one who argues
under a belief in the final victory of truth. Both sides of the
argument may be placed in high relief, without incurring the imputation
of bad faith, or worse morality; and thus Idealism furnishes what used
to be sought for during the days of tournaments,--a strictly neutral,
ground.

In this ordeal let no one think a single effort directed

    "To crush a butterfly or brain a gnat."

Reasoners on "hard texts" seldom commit any error between premises and
conclusion;--granted the former, the other will surely follow. Most
oversights occur--or are slipped in--over the first postulates.[106]
These generally appear very simple and very true, and pass
unquestioned. Yet, no primary truth can ever be very simple to man,
else why so many conscientious doubters?

What indeed can seem more _simply_ true than the admission of a fact?
Yet facts are often inspissated theories, while many theories are
merely explained facts. One of the greatest authorities on Inductive
Philosophy writes thus (Whewell's Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences.
Ed. 2. Vol. I. p. 45)--"We are often told that such a thing is _a
Fact_; A FACT and not a Theory, with all the emphasis which,
in speaking or writing, tone or italics or capitals can give. We
see from what has been said, that when this is urged, before we can
estimate the truth, or the value of the assertion, we must ask to whom
is it a Fact? what habits of thought, what previous information, what
Ideas does it imply, to conceive the Fact as a Fact? Does not the
apprehension of the Fact imply assumptions which may with equal justice
be called Theory and which are perhaps false Theory? in which case, the
Fact is no Fact. Did not the ancients assert it as a Fact, that the
earth stood still, and the stars moved? and can any Fact have stronger
apparent evidence to justify persons in asserting it emphatically than
this had?"

The generality of English jurymen might be expected to give an
affirmative verdict. For have they not seen with their own eyes the Sun
rise up in the East, ascend to the top of the sky, and go down in the
West? And is not seeing, believing?

The question, what elements are required to yield the product of
trustworthy perception, phenomenon, or fact, is investigated by Dr.
Whewell through several pages preceding the one from which we have
quoted. After discussing it at length, he writes (p. 42): "And thus,
we have an intelligible distinction of Fact and Theory, if we consider
Theory as a conscious, and Fact as an _un_conscious inference, from the
phenomena which are presented to our senses."

The subject is in itself so singularly interesting that a few more
extracts are added in our Additional Notes.[y] Let the reader, while
perusing them, remember that Idealism once so sovereign in its empire,
is only the other pole of a line of thought which just now happens to
be in the ascendant. Both poles strongly resemble half-truths. And what
is more delusive in evidence than a half-truth, or more perilously
sophisticating to the mind of him who utters it?

The thorough-paced Idealist deals with the presentations of his inner
consciousness, precisely as the Positivist deals with the presentations
of his outer senses. They are _his_ phenomena, his facts. Beyond the
circumstances of their inward occurrence and succession he knows and
can know nothing. You may arrange them into series of antecedents
and consequents,--and then the observation becomes a law,--a law
of association, uniform order, or necessary connection: whichever
you may choose to call it. In one respect, he has an advantage over
the Positivist. No thinker equidistant from both, is likely to deny
that primary facts are for every man, the phenomena most immediately
apparent to his own consciousness.

Amongst ordinary men, however, the reasoning Idealist seldom appears;
the Idealist in feeling and temper is by no means rare. A man weary and
worn by sorrow or old age, thinks and speaks of his life as very like a
dream. And numbers who have exhausted the strength of self-controlling
will, loiter along their way, regardless whether a moving panorama on
each hand is or is not, an unreality. Like travel-tired travellers down
the Danube, or the Rhine, they interweave scenes bright and dark, as
they float by, in one endless train of dimly felt reverie.

The same characteristic holds good in regard to many a Positivist.
Very few people have ever examined those iron wheels, on which the
conclusions of Positively-inclined writers seem to run so rapidly. They
may be flawed--they may be true--hardly any one has thought of sounding
them. But common life has its Positivism, as well as its Chemistry; and
the Positivism of common life is everywhere. It saves labour,--you may
take facts as you find them. It troubles no one,--a Pyrrhonic posture
is the easiest of attitudes. It frees busy people from moral anxieties,
ideal terrors, the shadows of futurity. In short, to men of the world
it is neither more nor less than Indifferentism.

The comparison between these two Nihilistic tendencies might be
pushed farther, but it has been carried far enough for our purpose.
Both sorts, when viewed as principles of practical life, coincide
in yielding the conclusion we now wish to deduce. It is folly to
be deterred from the pursuit of ultimate truth, by any amount of
speculative difficulty whatsoever. And the reason is plain. Practical
truths--the beliefs which affect our hearts and lives--are always
ultimate truths. To give them up, is to give up our highest and
best,--perhaps our all. It is worse than useless to quail before
intellectual obstacles. The Difficult soon begins to appear the
Impossible.

And soon the result ensues, which might naturally be expected. Is it
possible to imagine any discouragement heavier, than the feeling that
we can effect little to acquire a knowledge of truth, goodness, and
God;--a feeling, that do what we will, all we want most--all that
is truly Divine--must remain to us a darkness or a dream? Let any
man think in his heart, that what ought to rule his life, and raise
him higher than his lower self, is a secret unknowable, and he loses
the fear of doing wrong;--for how can he help it?--and the hope of
a brighter and better future;--for how shall he attain it? Then, he
sits down to wrap himself in cynical self-sufficingness. Inevitable
ignorance is soon developed into intellectual Pessimism. The death of
hope and fear, makes the man himself a moral Pessimist. Our conscience,
sympathy, devotion, happiness in higher and in lower things alike,--if
unstirred by vivid emotions--must become dull and blunted. Next follows

    "The waveless calm, the slumber of the dead;"--

a state of suspended animation, broken only by fierce stimulants--the
galvanisms of, our lower life. These are succeeded, in due course, by
spasmodic susceptibilities, which demand at no distant day the anodyne
and the narcotic. And--

    "Oh, that way madness lies!"--

Therefore we repeat it,--and it cannot too often or too earnestly be
repeated,--let no man excuse himself from the pursuit of practical
truth[z] by any amount of speculative difficulty whatsoever. It
would be a false optimism to say there is no difficulty in thinking
truly;--to represent its difficulties as trifles;--or to forget the
painful fact that they beset our age of cold erudite criticism, like
pitfalls in the Valley of the Shadow of Death. But, must not all things
really great and good be toilsome to men who are neither very good nor
very great? And have we not, every one of us, who tries to be good, our
proper fields of hard yet repaying work? The bee gathers honey where
one idle schoolboy sees only thorns and briers--and where another sucks
poison.

In our days, Doubt is thorough. So thorough, that it soon ceases to be
doubt, and the mind passes quickly from its dim twilight to a rayless
blank. Mr. Herbert Spencer puts the case of Theology as follows (First
Principles p. 43): "Criticising the essential conceptions involved
in the different orders of beliefs, we find no one of them to be
logically defensible. Passing over the consideration of credibility,
and confining ourselves to that of conceivability, we see that Atheism,
Pantheism, and Theism, when rigorously analysed, severally prove to be
absolutely unthinkable." These three conceptions the writer does in
fact analyse after his own fashion,--briefly first, pp. 30-36,--and
further on argues the whole question _in extenso_. The result, of
course, is that all three "beliefs" must finally be abandoned. What
then becomes of the Absolute ground, or First Cause of all things?
Spencer is too clear-sighted not to acknowledge that there must
in reason be a First, and an Absolute. "M. Herbert Spencer," says
Ravaisson,[107] "en proclamant la grande maxime que nous ne connaissons
rien que de relatif, a fait cependant une réserve importante. L'idée
même du relatif, remarque-t-il, ne saurait se comprendre sans celle
à laquelle elle est opposée. Et nous concevons, en effet, au delà
de toutes les relations de phénomènes, l'absolu: c'est ce quelque
chose qui est placé au delà de toute science, et qui est l'objet de
la religion; quelque chose seulement de mystérieux, d'obscur, sur
quoi on ne peut avoir, selon M. Spencer, aucune lumière." The last
negative clause is amply justified on p. 113 of "First Principles." "By
continually seeking to know, and being continually thrown back with a
deepened conviction of the impossibility of knowing, we may keep alive
the consciousness that it is alike our highest wisdom and our highest
duty to regard that through which all things exist as The Unknowable."
And this closing word becomes with Spencer, the constant name of a
Power, the consciousness, of which is "manifested to us through all
phenomena."[108]

Such a position, maintained by such a writer, has of course met with
ample consideration. Mr. Huxley appears to have arrived at a somewhat
similar conclusion. Of Religion he says,[109] "Arising, like all other
kinds of knowledge, out of the action and interaction of man's mind,
with that which is not man's mind, it has taken the intellectual
coverings of Fetishism or Polytheism; of Theism or Atheism; of
Superstition or Rationalism. With these, and their relative merits
and demerits, I have nothing to do; but this it is needful for my
purpose to say, that if the religion of the present differs from that
of the past, it is because the theology of the present has become more
scientific than that of the past; because it has not only renounced
idols of wood and idols of stone, but begins to see the necessity of
breaking in pieces the idols built up of books and traditions and
fine-spun ecclesiastical cobwebs, and of cherishing the noblest and
most human of man's emotions, by worship 'for the most part of the
silent sort' at the altar of the Unknown and Unknowable."

Concerning this general idea (or negation of Idea) Mr. J. Martineau has
made antagonistic observations, by way of criticism on Mr. Spencer's
book. "To say," he writes,[110] "that the First Cause is wholly
removed from our apprehension is not simply a disclaimer of faculty on
our part; it is a charge of inability against the First Cause too....
And in the very act of declaring the First Cause incognizable, you do
not permit it to remain unknown. For that only is unknown, of which
you can neither affirm nor deny any predicate; here you deny the power
of self-disclosure to the 'Absolute,' of which therefore something
is known;--viz., that nothing can be known," And again with much
force,[111] "You cannot constitute a religion out of mystery alone,
any more than out of knowledge alone; nor can you measure the relation
of doctrines to humility and piety by the mere amount of conscious
darkness which they leave. All worship, being directed to what is
_above_ us and transcends our comprehension, stands in presence of a
mystery. But not all that stands before a mystery is worship."[aa]

Mr. Mill (doing battle with another antagonist) denies every attribute
claiming faith and worship, to the idea of a _morally Unknowable_ God.
The passage occurs in his Examination of Hamilton, pp. 123-4. "If,
instead of the 'glad tidings' that there exists a Being in whom all
the excellences which the highest human mind can conceive, exist in a
degree inconceivable to us, I am informed that the world is ruled by a
being whose attributes are infinite, but what they are we cannot learn,
nor what are the principles of his government, except that 'the highest
human morality which we are capable of conceiving' does not sanction
them; convince me of it, and I will bear my fate as I may. But when I
am told that I must believe this, and at the same time call this being
by the names which express and affirm the highest human morality, I say
in plain terms that I will not. Whatever power such a being may have
over me, there is one thing which he shall not do: he shall not compel
me to worship him."[ab]

Now, suppose that instead of siding on this occasion with Mill and
Martineau, we were to accept the alternative offered by Spencer and
Huxley. Would this surrender of Natural Theology--or rather of all
Theology--necessitate in reason any _other_ vast surrender also? We
have already answered in the affirmative. The surrender would penetrate
every field of knowledge and of thought. We have already shewn this.
For, the thread binding the present section into a connected whole
runs thus: Survey the conditions of interrogating, _first_, nature;
_secondly_, our own highest nature; _next_, our senses; _finally_, our
consciousness; and _add_ to them the enormous difficulties which attend
every step taken in compliance with those indispensable _conditions_.
Indispensable, that is, to our knowing anything, of any sort, in any
way whatsoever. You have, then, no right to isolate Theism. It is
false logic, to speak of the intellectual difficulties attaching to
our apprehension of the Deity, as if they were substantial objections.
In this respect, Theism stands within the same category of speculative
perplexity, and reasonable necessity, as do other supreme truths.[112]

Put the case to the judgment of Reason, once for all. If we agreed
to accept Herbert Spencer's position, we should consent to deny that
anything can be known of an Absolute. And the denial would proceed
upon _this_ maxim:--"whatsoever is inexplicable is also unknowable."
Consider, now, what other ultimate truths would fall into the same
tomb-like Category. We must silence all human utterance respecting all
first grounds;--our own individuality;--and every object of reason
which becomes inconceivable, when we attempt to define it by the
processes of ordinary logic. All utterance respecting our own senses
and sensations;--our own existence, as beings distinct from a world of
beings and things really existing outside us.

In fine, we could never know that we _know_ either anything or nothing;
for, we should have silenced the deepest of all utterances,--_the_ one
upon which all truth and reason depend. We should have relegated our
Mind along with our God, to the same abysmal gulf of the Unknowable.
Henceforth, we could predicate of Mind nothing essential to purposes of
knowledge,--and least of all essentials,--Veracity.

Mr. Mill closes his laborious endeavours to explain our natural belief
in Mind as follows: "The truth is, that we are here face to face with
that final inexplicability, at which, as Sir W. Hamilton observes, we
inevitably arrive when we reach ultimate facts; and in general, one
mode of stating it only appears more incomprehensible than another,
because the whole of human language is accommodated to the one, and
is so incongruous with the other, that it cannot be expressed in any
terms which do not deny its truth. The real stumbling-block is perhaps
not in any theory of the fact, but in the fact itself. The true
incomprehensibility perhaps is, that something which has ceased, or is
not yet in existence, can still be in a manner, present: that a series
of feelings, the infinitely greater part of which is past or future,
can be gathered up, as it were, into a single present conception,
accompanied by a belief of reality. I think, by far the wisest thing
we can do, is to accept the inexplicable fact, without any theory of
how it takes place; and when we are obliged to speak of it in terms
which assume a theory, to use them with a reservation as to their
meaning."[113] Two pages further he ingenuously adds: "I do not profess
to have adequately accounted for the belief in Mind." In other words,
the perplexities remain on Mill's system as they do on all systems.
But the Belief and the Fact remain likewise.

It is the same with our belief of other ultimate facts. We live an
individual life,--we know not what. We see and perceive,--we know not
how. Yet such are the facts, and we thoroughly believe and act upon
them.

The pivot on which these and similar beliefs turn is a subject of the
greatest interest and importance. On this same pivot turns our primary
affirmative Argument for Natural Theism. To establish it will be the
purpose of the next Chapter, and a succession of affirmative arguments,
separate but convergent, will occupy the remainder of this Essay.

       *       *       *       *       *

COROLLARY:--If any reader of these pages has felt the
fascination of some one among the many materializing hypotheses now in
vogue, let him remember that, in fair debate, Materialism can never
have the slightest chance against Idealism.

All materializing theories labour under an enormous weight of
unverified postulates. They set out from neither the most _natural_,
nor yet the _surest_, sources of our knowledge. Naturally, we start
from _self-ness_, and learn to put outer things and beings in
opposition to our own primary self-consciousness.

In after life, when we ask _why_ we are sure of any kind of knowledge;
the primary truths upon which _all_ our reasonings proceed, are always
the presentations of our own mind.

If we proceed to analyse accepted relativities, we soon perceive that
Mind enters into our facts, and also into our sense-presentations. In
particular, an examination of the noblest of all senses--the sense of
sight--will convince any careful analyst that such is undeniably the
case. The reader may recal Mr. Mill's words,[114]--"I do not believe
that the real externality to us of anything, except other minds,
is capable of proof." "For ourselves," says Professor Fraser, "we
can conceive only--(1) An externality to our present and transient
experience in _our own_ possible experience past and future, and (2)
An externality to our own conscious experience, in the contemporaneous,
as well as in the past or future experience of _other minds_"[115]
In this view Mr. Mill (who quotes Fraser), entirely acquiesces, and
in this same spirit he writes, "Matter may be defined, a Permanent
Possibility of Sensation;"[116]--and adds that he can accept no other
definition.

Whether the reader can or cannot define Matter otherwise; he will, at
all events, perceive that the Materialist assumes as _his_ primary
postulate, that which is by no means _the_ primary fact accepted
by Mankind. He starts with taking Matter for granted;--but, if he
inquires, he will discover that Matter is known to him in the _second_
place only; he really _first_ knew Mind. When he questions sensation,
or consciousness, he questions Mind; and, throughout his whole life,
theoretical as well as practical, Mind is _nearer_ to him, and more
_strongly_ evidenced, than any other "Possibility" whatsoever.

Such, then, is the _first_ heavy burden of unauthorized postulation,
which the Materialist's theory binds upon him. But, in the task of
postulating without authority from Nature, it seems impossible to
stop short. Mind, being an absolute necessity, must be got in some
way--(from Matter of course)--evolved, correlated, secreted. No account
is given _how_ Matter could have been thus transformed and glorified.
Yet, in default of such account, it is impossible to divine _why_ that
primary postulate ever existed at all.

The highest attenuation of Matter can no more help to explain Life or
Mind, than to say that brain, (deprived of its vitality,) is composed
of cerebrin, lecythin, and cholesterin, explains its sensibility, and
other vital and intellectual endowments. And we encounter the same
unbridged gulf at every turn of the materialistic hypothesis. There is
a wide gap between the inorganic world and all organisms, vegetable or
animal. We are, however, told that when certain inorganic elements are
combined, under certain conditions, they form protoplasm,--a substance
manifesting phenomena of vitality. The elements are known,--the
conditions are unknown,--and until protoplasm has been produced by
a chemical experimenter, instead of within a living laboratory, we
may safely believe that the unknown conditions form the essential
cause of the production. And we are given to understand by Professor
Huxley,[117] that on this subject speculation has been premature.

The gap between Body and Mind is wider still. Body has its known
properties,--measurable figure, weight, and other like specialties.
Mind has its properties also,--such as intelligence, emotion, reason,
will. _Thinking_ has never been shown to be a property of Body; nor
have _weight_ and _measure_ been applied to Mind. The laws of each
differ as decisively as their properties. Body obeys gravitation,
cohesion, and chemical affinity. Mind has its laws of reasoning,
mathematically, logically, analogically. Now, what resemblance is
here visible?[118] Body cannot compel Will,--but is moved by it;
and there is no more verisimilitude known to us of Body to Will,
than there exists between the noble thought of a high-souled Man
and the paving-stone he walks upon. The foregoing is, as every
honest materialist will acknowledge, but a slight specimen of the
many difficulties of Materialism. So little does any materializing
process of "resolution" really resolve anything, that _any_--even the
most plausible--can only be pronounced an abortive attempt to bring
something near and familiar to us, out of something unknowably remote.

The materialist's allegation is generally, that he wishes to accept
as little as possible. But the accusation of the natural Theologian
against Materialism, is that it accepts far too much. Mind being a
necessary and indispensable fact, the one fact underlying all other
facts,--whoever is bent on simplifying his beliefs, had better begin
by believing in his own Soul. And if further bent on viewing all things
as "resolvable," his surest wisdom will be to resolve Matter into
Mind. It is really the easier alternative, and has a double merit,--it
starts from the best-known fact, and it satisfies his desire for
"simplification."

At all events, the consequences resulting from Materialism, are too
serious to permit a disregard of Probability. We must, surely, find and
follow the very best guide we can:--

    "These are no school-points; nice philosophy
    May tolerate unlikely arguments,
    But heaven admits no jests."

Mr. Huxley,[119] who sees advantages (simplicity and unification)
in employing a materialistic terminology, adds the very striking
caution--"But the man of science, who, forgetting the limits of
philosophical inquiry, slides from these" (materialistic) "formulæ
and symbols into what is commonly understood by materialism, seems
to me to place himself on a level with the mathematician, who should
_mistake_ the x's and y's, with which he works his problems, _for real
entities_--and with this further disadvantage, as compared with the
mathematician, that the blunders of the latter are of no practical
consequence, while the errors of systematic materialism may paralyse
the energies and destroy the beauty of a life."

The words italicized are remarkable. The materializing _façons de
parler_ do not embody a knowledge of "real entities" after all. And
such is the language of one[120] who stands in the foremost rank of
European Biologists.


ADDITIONAL NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER III.


A.--ACCOUNT OF SOME THEORIES RESPECTING OUR PERSONAL IDENTITY.

In a sentence worthy of the pen of Glanvill or of Sir T. Browne, Locke
remarked "The _Ideas_, as well as Children of our Youth, often die
before us: And our Minds represent to us those Tombs, to which we
are approaching; where, though the Brass and Marble remain, yet the
Inscriptions are effaced by Time, and the Imagery moulders away. _The
Pictures drawn in our Minds, are laid in fading Colours_, and if not
sometimes refreshed, vanish and disappear." _On Retention_, B. II.,
chap. x. 5.

This truly human feeling did not hinder Locke from writing (chap,
xxvii.) on the subject of Self-ness in a manner which appeared to imply
that Consciousness, or Consciousness _plus_ Memory "_made_" Personal
Identity;--or to use Reid's words "whatever hath the consciousness of
present and past actions, is the same person to whom they belong."

Bishop Butler's strictures on the topic are known to most students:
but, as Sir William Hamilton observes (Foot-note on Reid, pp. 350,
351), "Long before Butler, to whom the merit is usually ascribed,
Locke's doctrine of Personal Identity had been attacked and refuted.
This was done even by his earliest critic, John Sergeant, whose words,
as he is an author wholly unknown to all historians of philosophy, and
his works of the rarest, I shall quote. He thus argues:--'The former
distinction forelaid, he (Locke) proceeds to make _personal identity in
man to consist in the consciousness that we are the same thinking thing
in different times and places_. He proves it, because consciousness
is inseparable from thinking, and, as it seems to him, _essential_ to
it.... But, to speak to the point: Consciousness of any action or other
accident we have now, or have had, is nothing but our knowledge that
it belonged to us; and, since we both agree that we have no innate
knowledges, it follows, that all, both actual and habitual knowledges,
which we have, are acquired or accidental to the subject or knower.
_Wherefore, the man, or that thing which is to be the knower, must have
had individuality or personality, from other principles, antecedently
to this knowledge, called consciousness: and, consequently, he will
retain his identity, or continue the same man, or (which is equivalent)
the same person, as long as he has those individuating principles...._
It being then most evident, _that a man must be the same, ere he can
know or be conscious that he is the same_, all his laborious descants
and extravagant consequences which are built upon this supposition,
that consciousness individuates the person, can need no farther
refutation.'

"The same objection was also made by Leibnitz in his strictures on
Locke's Essay....

"For the best criticism of Locke's doctrine of Personal Identity, I
may, however, refer the reader to M. Cousin's '_Cours de Philosophie_.'"

One of Locke's arguments is worthy of attention from its oddity. He
says (chap. xxvii. 20), "But if it be possible for the same Man to have
distinct incommunicable Consciousnesses at different Times, it is past
doubt the same Man would at different Times make different Persons;
which, we see, is the Sense of Mankind in the solemnest Declaration of
their Opinions, Human Laws not punishing the _Mad Man_ for the _Sober
Man's_ Actions, nor the _Sober Man_ for what the _Mad Man_ did, thereby
making them two Persons; which is somewhat explained by our Way of
speaking in _English_, when we say, such a one _is not himself_, or is
_besides himself_; in which Phrases it is insinuated, as if those who
now, or at least, first used them, thought that _Self_ was changed, the
_self_ same Person was no longer in that Man."

It appears strange that so acute a writer should not have perceived the
true consequences to be deduced from his observation. We never really
treat a man who goes mad as becoming another personage. But if he has
lost his self-control from causes by himself uncontrollable, we do not
punish his criminalities, and we do divest him of his social powers; he
can neither vote for Parliament, bequeath property, nor do many other
acts, during the period of his affliction. But we use all means for his
cure, and rejoice at his return to health and society. If a man "beside
himself" were "a different person," then "tipsy he" would certainly
not be "ipse he."--Yet the father of ethical science decided that the
criminal drunkard deserves double meed of punishment.

To Locke's theory of Personal Identity Hamilton dedicates one more
note. He gives (_Reid_, p. 353), an extract from Lord Kames (_Essays
on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion_), who pronounces
his own opinion and appends some unpublished remarks of Dr. Reid.
"Mr. Locke, writing on personal identity, has fallen short of his
usual accuracy. He inadvertently jumbles together the identity that
is nature's work, with our knowledge of it. Nay, he expresses himself
sometimes as if identity had no other foundation than that knowledge.
I am favoured by Dr. Reid with the following thoughts on personal
identity:--

"'All men agree that personality is indivisible; a part of a person
is an absurdity. A man who loses his estate, his health, an arm, or
a leg, continues still to be the same person. My personal identity,
therefore, is the continued existence of that indivisible thing which
I call myself. I am not thought; I am not action; I am not feeling;
but I think, and act, and feel. Thoughts, actions, feelings, change
every moment; but _self_, to which they belong, is permanent. If it be
asked how I know that it is permanent, the answer is, that I know it
from memory. Everything I remember to have seen, or heard, or done,
or suffered, convinces me that I existed at the time remembered. But,
though it is from memory that I have the knowledge of my personal
identity, yet personal identity must exist in nature, independent of
memory; otherwise, I should only be the same person as far as my memory
serves me; and what would become of my existence during the intervals
wherein my memory has failed me? My remembrance of any of my actions
does not make me to be the person who did the action, but only makes
me know that I was the person who did it. And yet it was Mr. Locke's
opinion, that my remembrance of an action is what makes me to be the
person who did it; a pregnant instance that even men of the greatest
genius may sometimes fall into an absurdity. Is it not an obvious
corollary, from Mr. Locke's opinion, that he never was born? He could
not remember his birth; and, therefore, was not the person born at such
a place and at such a time.'"

When we come to Hume, the case is considerably altered. He opens
the question after his own manner by asking _how_ the fact commonly
stated can be; and using the difficulty of explaining this "how" as
a sufficient objection against the fact asserted. "There are some
philosophers," he writes (_Treatise_, B. I., Part iv., Sect. 6), "who
imagine we are every moment intimately conscious of what we call our
_self_; that we feel its existence and its continuance in existence;
and are certain, beyond the evidence of a demonstration, both of its
perfect identity and simplicity....

"Unluckily all these positive assertions are contrary to that very
experience, which is pleaded for them, nor have we any idea of _self_,
after the manner it is here explained. For from what impression could
this idea he derived?... If any impression gives rise to the idea of
self, that impression must continue invariably the same, through the
whole course of our lives; since self is supposed to exist after that
manner. But there is no impression constant and invariable. Pain and
pleasure, grief and joy, passions and sensations succeed each other,
and never all exist at the same time. It cannot therefore be from any
of these impressions, or from any other, that the idea of self is
derived; and consequently there is no such idea.... For my part, when
I enter most intimately into what I call _myself_, I always stumble
on some particular perception or other, of heat or cold, light or
shade, love or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never can catch _myself_
at any time without a perception, and never can observe anything
but the perception.... The mind is a kind of theatre, where several
perceptions successively make their appearance; pass, re-pass, glide
away, and mingle in an infinite variety of postures and situations.
There is properly no _simplicity_ in it at one time, nor _identity_
in different; whatever natural propension we may have to imagine that
simplicity and identity. The comparison of the theatre must not mislead
us. They are the successive perceptions only, that constitute the mind;
nor have we the most distant notion of the place, where these scenes
are represented, or of the materials, of which it is composed."

It is curious that Hume wishing to represent Mind as a melting mist of
successive perceptions, should be driven into the use of a word which
implied a something continuing and permanent as affording the _stage_
on which all passing scenes called "impressions" are enacted.

Hume next discusses the laws of association; and then proceeds (same
Section sub fin.) "As memory alone acquaints us with the continuance
and extent of this succession of perceptions, 'tis to be considered,
upon that account chiefly, as the source of personal identity. Had
we no memory, we never should have any notion of causation, nor
consequently of that chain of causes and effects, which constitute our
self or person. But having once acquired this notion of causation from
the memory, we can extend the same chain of causes, and consequently
the identity of our persons beyond our memory, and can comprehend
times, and circumstances, and actions, which we have entirely forgot,
but suppose in general to have existed. For how few of our past
actions are there, of which we have any memory? Who can tell me, for
instance, what were his thoughts and actions on the first of January,
1715, the eleventh of March, 1719, and the third of August, 1733? Or
will he affirm, because he has entirely forgot the incidents of these
days, that the present self is not the same person with the self
of that time; and by that means overturn all the most established
notions of personal identity? In this view therefore memory does not
so much _produce_ as _discover_ personal identity, by shewing us the
relation of cause and effect among our different perceptions. 'Twill
be incumbent on those who affirm that memory produces entirely our
personal identity, to give a reason why we can thus extend our identity
beyond our memory.

"The whole of this doctrine leads us to a conclusion, which is of great
importance in the present affair, viz., that all the nice and subtile
questions concerning personal identity can never possibly be decided,
and are to be regarded rather as grammatical than as philosophical
difficulties. Identity depends on the relations of ideas; and these
relations produce identity, by means of that easy transition they
occasion. But as the relations, and the easiness of the transition may
diminish by insensible degrees, we have no just standard by which we
can decide any dispute concerning the time, when they acquire or lose a
title to the name of identity. All the disputes concerning the identity
of connected objects are merely verbal, except so far as the relation
of parts gives rise to some fiction or imaginary principle of union, as
we have already observed."

If any one feels dissatisfied with these conclusions our author
is ready with his apology--"The _intense_ view of these manifold
contradictions and imperfections in human reason has so wrought upon
me, and heated my brain, that I am ready to reject all belief and
reasoning, and can look upon no opinion even as more probable or likely
than another. Where am I, or what? From what causes do I derive my
existence, and to what condition shall I return? Whose favour shall
I court, and whose anger must I dread? What beings surround me? and
on whom have I any influence, or who have any influence on me? I am
confounded with all these questions, and begin to fancy myself in
the most deplorable condition imaginable, environed with the deepest
darkness, and utterly deprived of the use of every member and faculty.

"Most fortunately it happens, that since reason is incapable of
dispelling these clouds, nature herself suffices to that purpose,
and cures me of this philosophical melancholy and delirium, either
by relaxing this bent of mind, or by some avocation, and lively
impression of my senses, which obliterate all these chimeras. I dine,
I play a game of back-gammon, I converse, and am merry with my friends;
and when after three or four hours' amusement, I would return to these
speculations, they appear so cold, and strained, and ridiculous, that
I cannot find in my heart to enter into them any farther." (Part iv.,
Section 7.)

Is not this good-humoured? Is it not a piece of pleasant bantering, to
be equalled only by certain French philosophers? The real conclusion,
however, winds up his First Book and runs as follows:--"A true
sceptic will be diffident of his philosophical doubts, as well as
of his philosophical conviction; and will never refuse any innocent
satisfaction, which offers itself, upon account of either of them.

"Nor is it only proper we should in general indulge our inclination
in the most elaborate philosophical researches, notwithstanding our
sceptical principles, but also that we should yield (sic) to that
propensity, which inclines us to be positive and certain in _particular
points_, according to the light, in which we survey them in any
_particular instant_. 'Tis easier to forbear all examination and
inquiry, than to check ourselves in so natural a propensity, and guard
against that assurance, which always arises from an exact and full
survey of an object. On such an occasion we are apt not only to forget
our scepticism, but even our modesty too; and make use of such terms
as these, _'tis evident_, _'tis certain_, _'tis undeniable_; which a
due deference to the public ought, perhaps, to prevent. I may have
fallen into this fault after the example of others; but I here enter
a _caveat_ against any objections, which may be offered on that head;
and declare that such expressions were extorted from me by the present
view of the object, and imply no dogmatical spirit, nor conceited idea
of my own judgment, which are sentiments that I am sensible can become
nobody, and a sceptic still less than any other.[121]

       *       *       *       *       *

It is obvious to remark that no amount of easiness would maintain
most minds in this balanced position of the pleasant know-nothing
man. The general tendency would be to acknowledge the negative side
alone. And it would be well if an absence of serious convictions,
seriously asserted, and acted on, did not gradually weaken the sense of
Responsibility by making Truth appear indifferent because unattainable.

We, however, are just now more concerned with two other equally
obvious comments. One, that Hume appears to take for granted the
point at issue. Suppose it for argument's sake to be true that
impressions and ideas (as described by him) make up our whole ordinary
consciousness; does this shew that no latent power or entity exists by
which we _become_ conscious of those passing trains? When impressed by
colours, are we conscious of an optic nerve, retina, crystalline lens
and other instrumental powers of vision? Can we, if we try, perceive by
sense the nerve-currents brainwards, or the sensory which receives and
compares them? In both cases (eye and inward eye) pathology affords an
evidence of consciousness which happy health refuses us. The brainsick
sense sees colours and phantoms which are not--the disordered mind
dwells on impressions and ideas absolutely unreal, and acts on them as
stern realities. And thus our own purely subjective states reveal to us
our own subjectivity. 'Tis so in fevers, in lunacies, in vices--'tis so
to the drowning or the desperate man. These mournful changes which pass
over ourselves issue from an interior activity of self-ness and form
one of its commonest verifications.

This first comment admits of extension. If we endeavour to introduce
experiment (as well as experience) into Mental Science, must we not ask
a previous question:--Shall this or that experiment be tried? In other
words, by what inner law shall we shape our inquiries so as to gain
useful facts for our intended induction?--Nay, we may further ask: What
inner Being is to settle the questions, criticize them, and judge the
final issue? And if we seem to see our way on these topics, we may feel
pretty sure that whenever our psychology comes to practical trial, we
proceed as being sure of a Self, more or less _self-conscious of Self_,
and are quite confident that its self-ness will continue during the
whole time of our investigations.

Our second comment may be simply summed, but the consideration given
to it ought to be minute and careful. Suppose instead of successive
perceptions, impressions, or ideas, we substitute a succession of
phenomena, and then apply to them Hume's line of thought, we have an
acute statement of the modern teachings which relegate the noblest
part of our Nature, our reasonings and our beliefs to the territory of
the Unknowable. In a word, all knowledge thus seems to be gained by
"looking on," none by "looking in." Truth within ourselves especially
if it manifests a Truth above ourselves is made to appear hopeless. And
so far does the process of Elimination extend, that principles involved
even in our "looking on" must not be drawn out of their latency, for
fear they should become accepted parts of knowledge. Let any thinker
repeat with this substitution the Personal Identity argument in his
own mind, and he will soon see what a shadow is cast over an infinitely
wider world of thought.[122]

The same process of repetition ought in fairness to produce another
effect. Are not these philosophic _argutiæ_, these Pyrrhonic subtilties
closely akin to the difficulties raised against _all_ first principles;
and more particularly all Theistic principles? But does anybody on
their account doubt his own Self-ness or Identity? Or does any one
refuse to act on the supposition of _other-ness_, and _outer-ness_, or
ignore his world of fellow-men and hard objectivities which press upon
him from every side? Why then should anybody ignore on their account
the great First-Cause?

In the text of Chapter III. the elements of our reasonable belief
in our own Personal self-ness and sameness have been shortly
mentioned;--of such work-day belief, that is to say, as suffices
for actual life, and gains from it, and throughout it, a perpetual
verification. If any one wishes to go deeper than this, he must inquire
upon what evidence first principles are accepted by reasoning men; what
difficulties attach to such principles; and under what conditions these
difficulties are held to be nugatory. This inquiry is troublesome but
promises real satisfaction. We have not, therefore, declined it, as may
be seen in the ensuing Chapter. One fact is manifest beforehand--that
whatever evidence is presupposed valid by those first principles of
every-day knowledge, may be safely presupposed, accepted, and reasoned
upon, in the ground-work of Natural Theology.

It was Hume's object to push his scepticism to its most extreme verge.
Thus pushed, it "so wrought upon" him that he was "ready to reject
all belief and reasoning" till a return to every-day life made his
speculations appear in his own eyes "cold and strained and ridiculous."
What then was the inference Hume himself intended? Which was really
groundless--every-day belief or scepticism? Will his useful dilemma
induce the reader to receive Kant's excuse for the celebrated doubter,
when he bids us let the man alone because he is but trying the strength
of human reason? At all events, Hume's way of stating his case seems to
justify the old remark, that, while Superstition is refuted by Reason,
Nature itself refutes the Sceptic.


 B.--EXTRACTS FROM POPULAR LECTURES, BY PROFESSOR HELMHOLTZ, ON THE
 RECENT PROGRESS OF THE THEORY OF VISION.

"If now we compare the eye with other optical instruments, we observe
the advantage it has over them in its very large field of vision. This
for each eye separately is 160° (nearly two right angles) laterally,
and 120° vertically, and for both together somewhat more than two right
angles from right to left. The field of view of instruments made by art
is usually very small, and becomes smaller with the increased size of
the image.

"But we must also admit, that we are accustomed to expect in these
instruments complete precision of the image in its entire extent, while
it is only necessary for the image on the retina to be exact over a
very small surface, namely, that of the yellow spot. The diameter
of the central pit corresponds in the field of vision to an angular
magnitude which can be covered by the nail of one's forefinger when the
hand is stretched out as far as possible. In this small part of the
field our power of vision is so accurate that it can distinguish the
distance between two points, of only _one minute_ angular magnitude,
_i.e._ a distance equal to the sixtieth part of the diameter of the
finger-nail. This distance corresponds to the width of one of the
cones of the retina. All the other parts of the retinal image are seen
imperfectly, and the more so the nearer to the limit of the retina they
fall. So that the image which we receive by the eye is like a picture,
minutely and elaborately finished in the centre, but only roughly
sketched in at the borders. But although at each instant we only see
a very small part of the field of vision accurately, we see this in
combination with what surrounds it, and enough of this outer and larger
part of the field, to notice any striking object, and particularly
any change that takes place in it. All of this is unattainable in a
telescope.

"But if the objects are too small, we cannot discern them at all with
the greater part of the retina.

    'When, lost in boundless blue on high,
    The lark pours forth his thrilling song,'

the 'ethereal minstrel' is lost until we can bring her image to a focus
upon the central pit of our retina. Then only are we able to _see_ her.

"To _look_ at anything means to place the eye in such a position that
the image of the object falls on the small region of perfectly clear
vision. This we may call _direct_ vision, applying the term _indirect_
to that exercised with the lateral parts of the retina--indeed with all
except the yellow spot.

"The defects which result from the inexactness of vision and the
smaller number of cones in the greater part of the retina are
compensated by the rapidity with which we can turn the eye to one
point after another of the field of vision, and it is this rapidity of
movement which really constitutes the chief advantage of the eye over
other optical instruments....

"A great part of the importance of the eye as an organ of expression
depends on the same fact; for the movements of the eyeball--its
glances--are among the most direct signs of the movement of the
attention, of the movements of the mind, of the person who is looking
at us." _Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects_, pp. 212-214.

The great German next proceeds to catalogue some principal defects of
the Eye. 1. Chromatic aberration connected with 2. spherical aberration
and defective centering of the cornea and lens, together producing the
imperfection known as astigmatism, and 3. irregular radiation round
the images of illuminated points. "Now," adds Helmholtz, "it is not
too much to say that if an optician wanted to sell me an instrument
which had all these defects, I should think myself quite justified in
blaming his carelessness in the strongest terms, and giving him back
his instrument. Of course, I shall not do this with my eyes, and shall
be only too glad to keep them as long as I can--defects and all. Still,
the fact that, however bad they may be, I can get no others, does not
at all diminish their defects, so long as I maintain the narrow but
indisputable position of a critic on purely optical grounds." (p. 219.)

He then goes on to other faults. 4. Defective transparency. 5. Floating
corpuscules (Muscæ Volitantes). 6. The "blind spot" with other gaps
in the field of vision. "So much," he concludes, "for the physical
properties of the Eye. If I am asked why I have spent so much time
in explaining its imperfection to my readers, I answer, as I said at
first, that I have not done so in order to depreciate the performances
of this wonderful organ, or to diminish our admiration of its
construction. It was my object to make the reader understand, at the
first step of our inquiry, that it is not any mechanical perfection of
the organs of our senses which secures for us such wonderfully true
and exact impressions of the outer world. The next section of this
inquiry will introduce much bolder and more paradoxical conclusions
than any I have yet stated. We have now seen that the eye in itself is
not by any means so complete an optical instrument as it first appears:
its extraordinary value depends upon the way in which we use it: its
perfection is practical, not absolute.... Wherever we scrutinise the
construction of physiological organs, we find the same character of
practical adaptation to the wants of the organism; although, perhaps,
there is no instance which we can follow out so minutely as that of the
eye.

"For the eye has every possible defect that can be found in an optical
instrument, and even some which are peculiar to itself; but they are
all so counteracted, that the inexactness of the image which results
from their presence very little exceeds, under ordinary conditions of
illumination, the limits which are set to the delicacy of sensation by
the dimensions of the retinal cones....

"The adaptation of the eye to its function is, therefore, most
complete, and is seen in the very limits which are set to its defects.
Here the result which may be reached by innumerable generations
working under the Darwinian law of inheritance, coincides with what
the wisest Wisdom may have devised beforehand. A sensible man will not
cut firewood with a razor, and so we may assume that each step in the
elaboration of the eye must have made the organ more vulnerable and
more slow in its development. We must also bear in mind that soft,
watery animal textures must always be unfavourable and difficult
material for an instrument of the mind....

"But, apparently, we are not yet come much nearer to understanding
sight. We have only made one step: we have learnt how the optical
arrangement of the eye renders it possible to separate the rays of
light which come in from all parts of the field of vision, and to bring
together again all those that have proceeded from a single point, so
that they may produce their effect upon a single fibre of the optic
nerve.

"Let us see, therefore, how much we know of the sensations of the eye,
and how far this will bring us towards the solution of the problem." P.
226, seq.

From the Professor's mention of "much bolder and more paradoxical
conclusions," the final result of his next inquiry may be anticipated.
Sensation is so far from making evident the truth of our visual
knowledge that it increases our perplexities tenfold. "The
inaccuracies," he tells us, "and imperfections of the eye as an optical
instrument, and those which belong to the image on the retina, now
appear insignificant in comparison with the incongruities which we
have met with in the field of sensation. One might almost believe that
Nature had here contradicted herself on purpose, in order to destroy
any dream of a pre-existing harmony between the outer and the inner
world.

"And what progress have we made in our task of explaining Sight? It
might seem that we are farther off than ever; the riddle only more
complicated, and less hope than ever of finding out the answer. The
reader may perhaps feel inclined to reproach Science with only knowing
how to break up with fruitless criticism the fair world presented to us
by our senses, in order to annihilate the fragments." (p. 269.)

How triumphant does Idealism now appear! How little trustworthy that
boasted sense of which mankind have constantly said, "seeing is
believing," although an apostle and philosophers innumerable have put
the two in opposition!

Perhaps, however, instead of leading to a "triumph of Idealism," the
paradoxes and incongruities--in a word, the vast accumulation of the
Unknowable--belonging to eyesight _considered as a Sensation_, must
be allowed to land us on the shore of a far-stretching Scepticism
illimitable to the mind's eye. And this seems to be the eminent
writer's own final opinion.[123] So, too, it will always appear when
the case is fairly argued out; and that for the reasons adduced in
our text. The course of argument there pursued was adopted before the
Professor's book came to hand; but we have now added some extracts from
his pages in the shape of footnotes, and have given references to other
interesting topics touched upon by him.

For our purpose, however, it is necessary in some degree to disregard
the variety of those topics, and fix our attention upon the conclusive
issue. It is plain, that respecting our senses, as well as our other
primary sources of information, the limits of what we can completely
explain are very narrow. Yet each for himself and all of us for
our race must needs every day accept and act upon this limited and
imperfect kind of knowledge about what most essentially concerns our
actions as well as our speculations.

Several strong examples of such incompleteness are given by
Helmholtz in his scientific inquiry into the rationale of the
visual sense-impressions. We observe, for instance, in his chapter
on Sensation (p. 236 seq.) that all light-waves are the same in
kind of movement, but differ in size as widely as the ripples on a
sea-beach (round which happy children play) differ from the vast
Atlantic ship-engulfing billows sixty or a hundred feet apart. All
these undulations are similar in respect of reflection, refraction,
interference, diffraction, and polarisation, as well as in their
production of heat.[124] Now, it is the interpretation of such
movements into its own language by which our eye gives us the sensation
of colour. Yet this power of interpretation is curiously limited--it
does not appreciate the gentler ripples of the light-waves--it does
not reach to their mightier undulations. Consequently, there may be
tender colour-delicacies adorning the Universe, completely incognisable
by us, and there may be also glows and intensities of light-beams
magnificently resplendent, and unspeakably grand in tone, of which we
can through our visual apparatus form no possible conception. Thus, our
eye translates some waves into a language which we call colour, but
its scholarship is limited. A certain number of signs it catches and
interprets, the rest lie altogether outside its ken. The Sun's softer
light-harmonies, and his most awful emanations of beauty remain equally
unknown.

And another limitation has been imposed upon our optical apparatus. For
a perception of heating powers belonging to colour-waves the eye refers
us to the skin;--and as to their chemical powers we are only just now
discovering the instruments fitted for their true appreciation.

Skilful, too, and yet at the same time very skill-less, is the
divination into sunlight given us by our human eyes;--sunlight, that
is to say, as a general resultant in its whiteness. For, if our eyes,
keen and susceptible to us perfect clearness, attempt to analyze white
light into its factors and elements, their resolving faculty manifests
still more blank inabilities. And they fail also in examining certain
colours:--

"The most striking difference," writes Helmholtz, "between the mixture
of pigments and that of coloured light is, that while painters make
green by mixing blue and yellow pigments, the union of blue and yellow
rays of light, produces white.... In general, then, light, which
consists of undulations of different wave-lengths, produces different
impressions upon our eye, namely, those of different colours. But the
number of hues which we can recognise is much smaller than that of
the various possible combinations of rays with different wave-lengths
which external objects can convey to our eyes. The retina cannot
distinguish between the white which is produced by the union of scarlet
and bluish-green light, and that which is composed of yellowish-green
and violet, or of yellow and ultramarine blue, or of red, green,
and violet, or of all the colours of the spectrum united. All these
combinations appear identically as white; and yet, from a physical
point of view, they are very different. In fact, the only resemblance
between the several combinations just mentioned is, that they are
indistinguishable to the human eye. For instance, a surface illuminated
with red and bluish-green light would come out black in a photograph;
while another lighted with yellowish-green and violet would appear
very bright, although both surfaces alike seem to the eye to be simply
white. Again, if we successively illuminate coloured objects with white
beams of light of various composition, they will appear differently
coloured. And whenever we decompose two such beams by a prism, or look
at them through a coloured glass, the difference between them at once
becomes evident.

"Other colours, also, especially when they are not strongly pronounced,
may, like pure white light, be composed of very different mixtures, and
yet appear indistinguishable to the eye, while in every other property,
physical or chemical, they are entirely distinct." (pp. 239-241.)

We may speak of visual Sensation, then, as a _limited_ power of
_translating_ light. And what relation does visual _Perception_ bear to
this Power? Probably the simplest way of expressing it, is to say that
it is neither more nor less than the _translation of a translation_.
The mind thus construes to itself what the visual sense is every moment
busied with expressing in its own special language--the interpretation
of movement, into colour, light and shadow. And from these data--these
colours, lights and shadows, the mind draws its own inferences.

Now these inferences thus drawn from preceding Sense
inferences,--limited in range, as we have seen, and defective in
analytic power;--these inferences, such as they are, constitute the
boasted certainty of eyesight; and of all things apprehended by its
means,--all

    --quæ sunt oculis subjecta fidelibus et quæ
    Ipse sibi _tradit_ spectator.

It needs but a statement of the mode in which our final
mind-interpretations are constructed,--of these translated
translations,--obscure in grammar and imperfect in vocabulary--to
prove how very difficult is the position of the Realist. In view of
this Empire of the Unknowable proclaimed by Science over the surest
of our perceiving powers, the firmest foundations of our experimental
knowledge, Helmholtz suggests that his reader "may feel determined to
stick fast to the 'sound common sense' of mankind, and believe his own
senses more than physiology." (p. 270.)

And such, no doubt, is the conclusion of the matter to the greater part
of mankind. But we will in the first place prefer hearing the last word
of the physiologist. From page 270 to page 313 of his work, he argues
out the great question of _how_ we perceive under the full impression
of its vast importance to psychology, metaphysics, and the first
principles upon which all science and all reasonings repose. "We have,"
he says (p. 281), "already learned enough to see that the questions
which have here to be decided are of fundamental importance, not only
for the physiology of sight, but for a correct understanding of the
true nature and limits of human knowledge generally."

The Physiologist's last word is this--Sense impressions are signs, the
meaning of which we learn inductively by a process of self education.
"Illusions obviously depend upon mental processes which may be
described as false inductions.... There appears to me to be in reality
only a superficial difference between the 'conclusions' of logicians
and those inductive conclusions of which we recognise the result in
the conceptions we gain of the outer world through our sensations. The
difference chiefly depends upon the former conclusions being capable
of expression in words, while the latter are not; because, instead of
words, they only deal with sensations and the memory of sensations.
Indeed, it is just the impossibility of describing sensations, whether
actual or remembered, in words, which makes it so difficult to discuss
this department of psychology at all." (pp. 307, 8.) And again (p.
314), "There is a most striking analogy between the entire range of
processes which we have been discussing, and another System of Signs,
which is not given by nature but arbitrarily chosen, and which must
undoubtedly be learned before it is understood. I mean the words of our
mother tongue.

"Learning how to speak is obviously a much more difficult task than
acquiring a foreign language in after-life. First, the child has
to guess that the sounds it hears are intended to be signs at all;
next, the meaning of each separate sound must be found out, by the
same kind of induction as the meaning of the sensations of sight or
touch; and yet we see children by the end of their first year already
understanding certain words and phrases, even if they are not yet able
to repeat them. We may sometimes observe the same in dogs.

"Now this connection between Names and Objects, which demonstrably
must be _learnt_, becomes just as firm and indestructible as that
between Sensations and the Objects which produce them. We cannot help
thinking of the usual signification of a word, even when it is used
exceptionally in some other sense; we cannot help feeling the mental
emotions which a fictitious narrative calls forth, even when we know
that it is not true; just in the same way as we cannot get rid of the
normal signification of the sensations produced by any illusion of the
senses, even when we know that they are not real.

"There is one other point of comparison which is worth notice. The
elementary signs of language are only twenty-six letters, and yet what
wonderfully varied meanings can we express and communicate by their
combination! Consider, in comparison with this, the enormous number of
elementary signs with which the machinery of sight is provided. We may
take the number of fibres in the optic nerves as two hundred and fifty
thousand. Each of these is capable of innumerable different degrees of
sensation of one, two, or three primary colours. It follows that it is
possible to construct an immeasurably greater number of combinations
here than with the few letters which build up our words. Nor must we
forget the extremely rapid changes of which the images of sight are
capable. No wonder, then, if our senses speak to us in language which
can express far more delicate distinctions and richer varieties than
can be conveyed by words."

Finally (pp. 315, 16), "The correspondence, therefore, between the
external world and the Perceptions of Sight rests, either in whole or
in part, upon the same foundation as all our knowledge of the actual
world,--on _experience_, and on constant _verification_ of its accuracy
by experiments which we perform with every movement of our body. It
follows, of course, that we are only warranted in accepting the reality
of this correspondence so far as these means of verification extend,
which is really as far as for practical purposes we need.

"Beyond these limits, as, for example, in the region of Qualities,
we are in some instances able to prove conclusively that there is no
correspondence at all between sensations and their objects.

"Only the relations of time, of space, of equality, and those which
are derived from them, of number, size, regularity of co-existence and
of sequence--'mathematical relations' in short, are common to the
outer and the inner world, and here we may indeed look for a complete
correspondence between our conceptions and the objects which excite
them.

"But it seems to me that we should not quarrel with the bounty of
nature because the greatness, and also the emptiness, of these abstract
relations have been concealed from us by the manifold brilliance of a
system of signs; since thus they can be the more easily surveyed and
used for practical ends, while yet traces enough remain visible to
guide the philosophical spirit aright, in its search after the meaning
of sensible Images and Signs."

Let therefore this account of visual Perception be accepted by us,
as it will probably be by three-fourths of scientific men throughout
Europe. And, next, let us ask, as every real thinker will proceed to
ask, on _what_ grounds of _certitude_ rests our assurance as regards
the daily and hourly information received through this avenue of
perception, reasoned and acted upon with unswerving confidence by us
all?

For an examination of the ground principle of Induction, the reader
must be referred to our next chapter. But it is at once clear that no
human _experience_ can possess the attribute of universality, otherwise
it would cease to be human. We have then in this present appeal to the
veracity of Experience, no _absolute_ knowledge to deal with, only
knowledge as relative to mankind. Nay, we must go a little further
still in our limitation, and say to the _generality_ of mankind. For
our eyes do not all see perfectly alike--a North-American Indian sees
what a Cockney cannot discover; the trained eye discerns differently
from the untrained. On the differences of power in eye and ear rest the
differences in many kinds of theorising--amongst which art-perceptions
yield an obvious and familiar set of examples. And if we try for a
more precise estimate of the value of our limited human relativity,
and proceed by way of comparison between _our own_ diverse endowments,
who shall venture to say that the eye of our body interpreted by our
understanding, tells our inmost self more truly than the eye of our
human soul, informing us directly of the facts of its intuitive vision?
So far as our actual means of valuing these two modes of beholding can
go, there is no knowledge so perfect as the product of pure intuition,
the glorious fabric of Mathematical Science. And to pure Science it
matters not whether the requisite Schematism is drawn upon a sheet
of white paper or on the clear tablet of the imagining faculty of a
philosopher. The purely inward view is in truth generally the farthest
reaching, and the most unclouded. When, therefore, it is, and has been
for centuries, apparent to the inmost eye of the generality of our race
that there _really_ exists a spiritual world within themselves--above
them, and in the far distant future beyond us all, permanent while
we change, and the evidence of our own ultimate permanency,--such
knowledge may undeniably be human, the very flower and distinction of
our human nature; and it may on that account be received by us as true.

If, again, our ordinary human soul is so far a Christian as to exclaim
with Tertullian, "O good God," by what logical process shall we confute
its utterance, while we maintain the utterance of our commonest
sense-perceptions?

That we all see in frames, that we all think in frames, no rational
thinker or perceiver will deny. If, however, any of us chooses to be
an Idealist or Nihilist, let him at least be consistent;--if he will
assert the necessity of Doubt, let him maintain its empire by doubting
his own assertion. But let no man think that Doubt leads him any
whither except to an abnegation of thought, a mistrust alike of Sense
and Soul, and an abdication of every human prerogative:--

    "Thy hand, great Anarch, lets the curtain fall,
    And universal Darkness buries all."

So sang the witty rhymer, but we may add in prose that Doubt if
thoroughly real, invariably commits suicide, and becomes first
doubtful, after that, a non-entity at last.


C.--HELMHOLTZ ON SPECIALTIES OF SENSIBILITY.

The following passages from this interesting writer will be found in
his Chapter "on the Sensations of Sight," between pp. 232 and 236. They
will, it is hoped, be thoroughly intelligible if read in connection
with the part of our last Chapter (pp. 158, 9) where a reference to
this note was made.

"The nerve-fibres have been often compared with telegraphic wires
traversing a country, and the comparison is well fitted to illustrate
this striking and important peculiarity of their mode of action. In
the network of telegraphs we find everywhere the same copper or iron
wires carrying the same kind of movement, a stream of electricity,
but producing the most different results in the various stations
according to the auxiliary apparatus with which they are connected. At
one station the effect is the ringing of a bell, at another a signal
is moved, and at a third a recording instrument is set to work....
Nerve-fibres and telegraphic wires are equally striking examples to
illustrate the doctrine that the same causes may, under different
conditions, produce different results.... As motor nerves, when
irritated, produce movement, because they are connected with muscles,
and glandular nerves secretion, because they lead to glands, so do
sensitive nerves, when they are irritated, produce sensation, because
they are connected with sensitive organs.... Whether by the irritation
of a nerve we produce a muscular movement, a secretion or a sensation
depends upon whether we are handling a motor, a glandular, or a
sensitive nerve, and not at all upon what means of irritation we may
use. It may be an electrical shock, or tearing the nerve, or cutting
it through, or moistening it with a solution of salt, or touching it
with a hot wire. In the same way (and this great step in advance was
due to Johannes Müller) the _kind_ of sensation which will ensue when
we irritate a sensitive nerve, whether an impression of light, or of
sound, or of feeling, or of smell, or of taste, will be produced,
depends entirely upon which sense the excited nerve subserves, and not
at all upon the method of excitation we adopt.

"Let us now apply this to the optic nerve, which is the object of
our present enquiry. In the first place, we know that no kind of
action upon any part of the body except the eye and the nerve which
belongs to it, can ever produce the sensation of light. The stories
of somnambulists, which are the only arguments that can be adduced
against this belief, we may be allowed to disbelieve. But, on the other
hand, it is not light alone which can produce the sensation of light
upon the eye, but also any other power which can excite the optic
nerve. If the weakest electrical currents are passed through the eye
they produce flashes of light. A blow, or even a slight pressure made
upon the side of the eyeball with the finger, makes an impression of
light in the darkest room, and, under favourable circumstances, this
may become intense. In these cases it is important to remember that
there is no objective light produced in the retina, as some of the
older physiologists assumed, for the sensation of light may be so
strong that a second observer could not fail to see through the pupil
the illumination of the retina which would follow, if the sensation
were really produced by an actual development of light within the eye.
But nothing of the sort has ever been seen. Pressure or the electric
current excites the optic nerve, and therefore, according to Müller's
law, a sensation of light results, but under these circumstances, at
least, there is not the smallest spark of actual light.

"In the same way, increased pressure of blood, its abnormal
constitution in fevers, or its contamination with intoxicating or
narcotic drugs, can produce sensations of light to which no actual
light corresponds. Even in cases in which an eye is entirely lost by
accident or by an operation, the irritation of the stump of the optic
nerve while it is healing is capable of producing similar subjective
effects. It follows from these facts that the peculiarity in kind
which distinguishes the sensation of light from all others, does not
depend upon any peculiar qualities of light itself. Every action which
is capable of exciting the optic nerve is capable of producing the
impression of light; and the purely subjective sensation thus produced
is so precisely similar to that caused by external light, that persons
unacquainted with these phenomena readily suppose that the rays they
see are real objective beams.

"Thus we see that external light produces no other effects in the optic
nerve than other agents of an entirely different nature. In one respect
only does light differ from the other causes which are capable of
exciting this nerve: namely, that the retina, being placed at the back
of the firm globe of the eye, and further protected by the bony orbit,
is almost entirely withdrawn from other exciting agents, and is thus
only exceptionally affected by them, while it is continually receiving
the rays of light which stream in upon it through the transparent media
of the eye.

"On the other hand, the optic nerve, by reason of the peculiar
structures in connection with the ends of its fibres, the rods and
cones of the retina, is incomparably more sensitive to rays of light
than any other nervous apparatus of the body, since the rest can only
be affected by rays which are concentrated enough to produce noticeable
elevation of temperature.

"This explains why the sensations of the optic nerve are for us the
ordinary sensible sign of the presence of light in the field of vision,
and why we always connect the sensation of light with light itself,
even where they are really unconnected. But we must never forget that
a survey of all the facts in their natural connection puts it beyond
doubt that external light is only _one_ of the exciting causes capable
of bringing the optic nerve into functional activity, and therefore
that there is no exclusive relation between the sensation of light and
light itself."

Some of the quotations just made direct attention to illusions of
Sight which (as we have seen in our last note) Helmholtz elsewhere
calls "false inductions." Now one curious fact relative to these
impressions is that in many instances the objective consequent is due
to a subjective antecedent. Some readers may like to peruse a short
account of five variously caused sight-illusions taken from an Oration
on _Positivism_ delivered by the present writer at St. George's Hall in
May 1871. The particulars here given of the fifth illusion should be
compared with the foot-note on page 158 _ante_.

"I will mention five instances in which people believe they see
something, and do not see it; in other words, the objective antecedent
is wanting, and the impression is produced partly by the sensory
apparatus, partly by the mind itself. As I describe these instances
one by one, let my hearers ask themselves, How does this illusion come
about? Is it produced by our optic instrument or by our mental activity?

"First, then, Take a lighted stick, and whirl it rapidly round and
round. You believe you see a circle of sparks--in reality it is no more
than a simple train, and on a like illusion the Catherine-wheel is
constructed. Again, put yourself in the hands of an optically inclined
friend, and let him operate upon you thus. He shall place a cardboard
down the middle axis of your face, quite close against your nose--one
side of his board, say the right, coloured a brilliant red, the left
a vivid green. After an instant or two let him suddenly substitute
another board, white on both sides. Do my young friends guess what will
follow? Your right eye will see green, your left red--the reverse of
what they saw before; yet neither will see correctly, for both eyes are
looking at uncoloured surfaces.

"Thirdly, Watch the full moon rising--how large and round she looks,
resting as it were upon that eastern hill, and seen amidst the tops of
its forest trees! How much larger and broader than when she hangs aloft
in upper sky! Has every one here learned the true reason why? If not,
look at her through a slit in a card, and her diameter will be the same.

"Fourthly, A schoolboy is crossing his bedroom in the deep dark night,
anxiously hoping that his head may not come into collision with the
bed-post. Though carefully and successfully avoiding it, he imagines of
a sudden that the blow is imminent. Quick as thought he stops to save
his head, and, behold, the room is as quickly filled with sparks or
flames of fire. Another moment, and all becomes dark once more. I have
heard many a schoolboy exclaim over this phenomenon, but never knew
one who could explain it. Finally, did you ever, on opening your eyes
in a morning, close them quickly again, and keep them shut, directing
them as if to look straight forwards? Most persons of active nervous
power, after a few trials--say a dozen, or a score--are surprised to
see colours appear and flit before the sight. Some years ago, Germany's
greatest poet tried, at the suggestion of her greatest physiologist,
a series of experiments on these coloured images. He found that
by an effort of will he could cause them to come and go, govern
their movement, march, and succession. And this took place under no
conditions of impaired sensation, nor any hallucination of a diseased
mind. A thoroughly healthy will succeeded in impressing itself upon
physical instruments, controlling their law, and creating at its own
pleasure an unfailingly bright phantasmagoria.

"Some here may, others may not, have apprehended the distinctions
between our five cases. The first two are due to the sensory apparatus,
its optical laws of continued impression and complementary colour.
In the latter three, mind intervenes. The enlarged size of the moon
occurs through rapid comparison, the fiery lights in a dark room
through instinctive apprehension, both influences of mind on the
sensory system. The fifth and most interesting of all is no bad
example of interference between moral and material law. The will truly
causative (you may remark) overrules the natural process of physical
impression, alters it, and creates a designed effect. I wish I could
induce my young friends to devise a number of experiments on similar
mixed cases, and, having tried them, to dissect out their real laws.
These sharpenings of the critical faculty are exceedingly useful--they
cultivate clearness; and most people know that two-thirds among our
mistakes in life are caused by confusion of thought.

"Besides all other uses, such lessons teach at once the necessity, as
we said before, of observing your own observations. And as, first, the
real witness of every observation is our mind; every fact which comes
through our bodily senses being to us a mental impression, it seems
but common sense to hear above all things what mind has to say for and
about itself. Then, secondly, where would be the benefit derived from
our observations, if we could not reason upon them, or could place no
confidence in our own reasonings? Yet the art of reasoning is so purely
a mental process, that it can be represented by symbols as abstract
and free from material meaning as if they were bare algebraic signs.
Thirdly, in the most accurate of sciences mind extends our knowledge
far beyond the circle of observation, and gives us axiomatic assurance
of its own accuracy. Who ever saw, or ever can see, all straight lines
in all conceivable positions, yet who doubts that throughout the whole
universe no two straight lines ever did inclose or can inclose a space?
And, fourthly, can it be a matter of indifference to any of us what
evidence the mind offers concerning its own moral nature, and what is
the value of that evidence, and the laws deducible therefrom? How true
it thus appears that 'know thyself' lies at the root of all knowledge,
and that the man who receives no witness from within can know nothing
as he ought to know it!"


D.--POPULAR ACCOUNT OF PURE IDEALISM WITH CRITICAL REMARKS.

"A classification of systems of philosophy according to the
cosmological conceptions governing them has actually been made. It is
founded on a consideration of the differences among philosophers as to
what that totality of existence is which is to be accepted as really
vouched for by Mind. All agree, as we have said, that Mind is the sole
voucher for anything; but philosophers are divisible into schools
according to the various views they have taken of the constitution of
that phenomenal Universe, that Cosmos, that total round of things,
of which we have a recurring assurance in every act of perception,
and which is orbed forth more or less fully for each man in his wider
contemplations.

"The popular or habitual conception of mankind in general is that there
are two distinct worlds mixed up in the phenomenal Cosmos--a world
of Mind, consisting of multitudes of individual minds, and a world
of Matter, consisting of all the extended immensity and variety of
material objects. Neither of these worlds is thought of as begotten of
the other, but each of them as existing independently in its own proper
nature and within its own definite bounds, though they traffic with
each other at present. Sweep away all existing minds, and the deserted
Earth would continue to spin round all the same, still whirling its
rocks, trees, clouds, and all the rest of its material pomp and
garniture, alternately in the sunshine and in the depths of the starry
stillness. Though no eye should behold, and no ear should hear, there
would be evenings of silver moonlight on the ocean-marge, and the waves
would roar as they broke and retired. On the other hand, suppose the
entire fabric of the material Universe abolished and dissolved, and
the dishoused population of spirits would still somehow survive in the
imaginable vacancy. If this second notion is not so easy or common as
the first, it still virtually belongs to the popular conception of the
contents or constitution of the Cosmos. The conception is that of a
Natural Dualism, or of the contact in every act of perception of two
distinct spheres, one an internal perceiving mind, and the other an
external world composed of the actual and identical objects which this
mind perceives.

"On the first exercise of philosophic thought, however, this conception
is blurred. An immense quantity of what we all instinctively think of
as really existing out of ourselves turns out, on investigation, not to
exist at all as we fancy it existing, but to consist only of affections
of the perceiving mind. The redness of the rose is not a real external
thing, immutably the same in itself; it is only a certain peculiar
action on my physiology which the presence of an external cause or
object seems to determine. Were my physiology different, the action
would be different, though the cause or object remained the same.
Indeed, there _are_ persons in whom the presence of a rose occasions
no sensation of redness such as is known to me, but a much vaguer
sensation, not distinguishable from what I should at once distinguish
as greenness. And, as colour is thus at once detected as no external
independently-existing reality, but only a recurring physiological
affection of myself and other sentient beings like myself, so with
a thousand other things which, by habit or instinct, I suppose as
externally and independently existing. When I imagine the depopulated
Earth still wheeling its inanimate rotundity through the daily sunshine
and the nocturnal shadow, or one of its bays still resonant in moonlit
evenings with the roar of the breaking waves, it is because, in spite
of myself, I intrude into the fancy the supposition of a listening
ear, and a beholding eye analogous to my own. It is only by a strong
effort that I can realize that a great deal at least of what I thus
think of as the goings-on of things by themselves is not and cannot be
their goings-on by themselves, but consists at the utmost of effects
interbred between them and a particular sentiency in the midst of them.
But the effort may be made; and, when it is made repeatedly, in a great
many directions, and with reference to a great many of the so-called
properties of matter, the inevitable result for the philosophic mind is
that the popularly-imagined substance of a real external world finds
itself eaten away or corroded, at least to a certain depth. So far
philosophers are agreed. It is when they proceed to consider to _what_
depth the popularly-imagined substance of the real external world is
thus eaten away, or accounted for, that they begin to differ.

"Some philosophers, departing as little as may be from the popular
judgment, suppose that, however much of the apparent external world may
be resolved into affections of the subjective sentiency, there still
remains an objective residue of such primary qualities as extension,
figure, divisibility, mobility, etc., belonging to external matter
itself, and by the direct and immediate cognizance of which the mind is
brought face to face with external substance, and knows something of
its real goings-on. Philosophers of this school are known generally as
REALISTS. More numerous, however, are those who, not allowing
an objective and independent reality even to the so-called primary
qualities of matter, but believing them as well as colour, odour, or
savour, to be only affections of the sentiency, deny that the mind is
in any sense brought face to face with real external things such as
they seem in the act of perception. To thinkers of this school there
has been given the general name of IDEALISTS. This broad
distinction of Philosophers cosmologically into REALISTS and
IDEALISTS is so far convenient enough. Cosmologically, or in
respect of this present Universe of ours, with its dualism of Mind
and Matter, every man must declare himself either a REALIST
or an IDEALIST, if he understands the meanings attached to
these terms. The distinction has reference solely to his notion of the
so-called external or material world in its relations to the perceiving
mind. If he abides, though only in part, by the popular conception,
and regards the material world as a substantial reality independent
of the perceiving mind, and which the mind, according to its powers,
presses against and directly apprehends in every act of perception,
then he is a REALIST. If, on the other hand, he cannot see
that there need be asserted any external material world with such
characters as we attribute to it, but supposes that our unanimous
agreement in the imagination of such an external world is merely a
habit of our own sentiency, projecting its own ideas or affections
outwards, and giving them a body, then he is an IDEALIST."
Masson, "_Recent British Philosophy_," pp. 58-64. Again p. 69, seq.,
"There is the system of _Constructive Idealism_. It may be so called to
distinguish it from the more developed and extreme Idealism presently
to be spoken of. According to this system, we do not perceive the
real external world immediately, but only mediately--that is, the
objects which we take as the things actually perceived are not the
real objects at all, but only vicarious assurances, representatives,
or nuntii of real unknown objects. The hills, the rocks, the trees,
the stars, all the choir of heaven and earth, are not, in any of
their qualities, primary, secondary, or whatever we choose to call
them, the actual existences out of us, but only the addresses of a
'something' to our physiology, or eductions by our physiology out of a
'something.' They are all Thoughts or Ideas, with only this peculiarity
involved in them, that they will not rest in themselves, but compel
a reference to objects out of self, with which, by some arrangement
or other, they stand in relation. Difficult as this system may be to
understand, and violently as it wrenches the popular common sense, it
is yet the system into which the great majority of philosophers in
all ages and countries hitherto are seen, more or less distinctly,
to have been carried by their speculations. While the Natural
Realists among philosophers have been very few, and even these have
been Realists in a sense unintelligible to the popular mind, quite a
host of philosophers have been Constructive Idealists. These might be
farther subdivided according to particular variations in the form of
their Idealism. Thus, there have been many Constructive Idealists who
have regarded the objects rising to the mind in external perception,
and taken to be representative of real unknown objects, as something
more than modifications of the mind itself--as having their origin
without. Among these have been reckoned Malebranche, Berkeley, Clarke,
Sir Isaac Newton, Tucker, and possibly Locke. But there have been
other Constructive Idealists, who have supposed the objects rising
in the mind in external perception to be only modifications of the
mind itself, but yet, by some arrangement, vicarious of real unknown
objects, and intimating their existence. Among such have been reckoned
Descartes, Leibnitz, Condillac, Kant, and most Platonists. The general
name 'Idealists' it will be seen properly enough includes both the
classes as distinct from the Natural Realists, inasmuch as both classes
hold that what the mind is directly cognizant of in external perception
is only ideas. But, inasmuch as these ideas are held by both classes,
though under divers hypotheses, to refer to real existences beyond
themselves, and distinct from the perceiving mind, the thinkers in
question may also properly enough be called Realists or Dualists,
though not 'Natural' Realists or Dualists. They occupy a midway place
between the Natural Realists and the philosophers next to be mentioned.

"There is the system of _Pure Idealism_, which abolishes matter as
a distinct or independent existence in any sense, and resolves it
completely into mind. Though this system is named in the scheme, for
the sake of symmetry, and as the exact antithesis to Materialism, it is
difficult to cite representatives that could be certainly discriminated
from the merely Constructive Idealists just mentioned on the one hand,
and from the school of philosophers next following on the other. Fichte
is, perhaps, the purest example." _Ibid._ pp. 69-72.

For perfect clearness we must put together two other passages from
Professor Masson's interesting volume:--

"There is the system of _Nihilism_, or, as it may be better called,
_Non-Substantialism_. According to this system, the Phænomenal Cosmos,
whether regarded as consisting of two parallel successions of phænomena
(Mind and Matter), or of only one (Mind or Matter), resolves itself,
on analysis, into an absolute Nothingness,--mere appearances with
no credible substratum of Reality; a play of phantasms in a void.
If there have been no positive or dogmatic Nihilists, yet both Hume
for one purpose, and Fichte for another, have propounded Nihilism as
the ultimate issue of all reasoning that does not start with some _à
priori_ postulate." Masson, "_Recent British Philosophy_," p. 66....
If any one could assert "There is no Absolute," surely it might be the
Nihilist, who has analysed away both Matter and Thought, and attenuated
the Cosmos into vapour and non-significance. Yet, from the abyss of a
speculatively reasoned Nihilism more void than Hume's, Fichte returned,
by a convulsive act of soul,--which he termed _faith_--an intense, a
burning, a blazing Ontologist. _Ibid._ p. 81."[125]

This is certainly an eloquent account of philosophic Idealism as it may
in its various phases be represented to the world of general readers.
It turns, as every such speculation must turn, on the great principle,
that our Sensations are so many series of signs and symbols.[126] They
may be preordained, and our apprehension of them innate;--they may be
arbitrary, and their interpretation the work of man's intelligence. To
decide this question, is to decide something as to the extent of their
_relativity_; but will any one pronounce their information absolutely
true?

At this point occurs a wide divergence between two great schools of
Idealism--the Psychological, and the Theological thinkers. These
schools inosculate in respect of some of their arguments, and of their
objections against ordinary modes of thought. They disagree, however,
in their aims--the ports at which they land themselves and their
disciples.

Psychological Idealism is best known to most readers through Mr. J.
S. Mill. The Theological view, so far as this country goes, seems
to have made scant progress beyond Berkeley and a few of his clever
followers. For ordinary Englishmen, a reference to continental writers
on this question seems useless;--Theology being discussed by them in
so _ab extrâ_ a manner as to put them out of court with even the most
metaphysical of our theologians.

Regarding the subject in a psychological light, Mr. O'Hanlon made
the following common-sense remarks amongst others of a more abstract
nature:[127]--

"To come now to Mr. Mill's Idealism. He, as all the world of thinkers
knows, following the steps of Berkeley and Hume, claims, by means of
his power of analysis, and by the aid of the formidable psychological
instrument furnished him by the doctrine of the Association of Ideas,
to have got rid of all other existences save and except states of
consciousness, actual and possible.... I propose to try and answer his
arguments" (_i.e._ within certain expressed limitations)--

 "Let A = all my sensations.

   "  B = the group of sensations and of permanent possibilities of
 sensation I call my body.

   "  C = the group of permanent possibilities of sensation I call my
 friend Smith.

"Now I find B always related to A in a very peculiar manner. B has
in perpetual conjunction with it a long series of manifold states of
consciousness, A. C resembles B in very many particulars, but it is
not so related to A. I hence conclude, if I follow Mr. Mill, that C is
so related to some other A, that is, to some other consciousness. In
drawing this conclusion, in extending to C, which so closely resembles
B, my experience of B, I, according to Mr. Mill, do but extend the
principles of inductive evidence, which experience shews hold good of
my states of consciousness, to _a sphere without my consciousness_."

The italicized words sound simple enough to the ordinary reader, but
argument upon them involves (as Mr. O'Hanlon observes) two serious
postulates. "(a) That there is a sphere beyond my consciousness;
the very thing to be proved, (b) That the laws, which obtain in my
consciousness, also obtain in the sphere beyond it." But;--

"'Such an inference'" he goes on to quote from Mill "'would only
be warrantable if we could know _à priori_ that we must have been
created capable of conceiving whatever is capable of existing: that
the universe of thought and that of reality, the microcosm and the
macrocosm (as they once were called) must have been framed in complete
correspondence with one another. That this is really the case has been
laid down expressly by some systems of philosophy, by implication in
more, and is the foundation (among others) of the systems of Schelling
and Hegel; but _an assumption_ more destitute of evidence could
scarcely be made, nor can one easily imagine any evidence that could
prove it unless it were revealed from above.'" Mill on Hamilton, chap.
VI. p. 65.

The reader will probably see at once where the abstract difficulty
lies, and how it runs up into the higher metaphysics.

Now, as Mr. O'Hanlon puts the case, taking all this for granted;

"A boy cuts his finger and screams.... Yet if I was not by, the boy,
the knife, the blood, the scream, would only exist potentially."

Or on the other hand if I sacrifice consistency and substitute
'actually' for 'potentially,' "I thereby reject the validity of the
Psychological method" which asserts "that the belief in an external
cause of our sensations" is not original but "generated 'so early as to
have become inseparable from our consciousness before the time at which
memory commences.'... Nevertheless, it afterwards admits that the
belief in the case of persons, has an external cause. Hereby the method
commits suicide, falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus."

Finally, he remarks, "the psychological method professes very little
regard for our natural beliefs. Now I can, by a vigorous effort, regard
matter as mere states or possible states of my consciousness (at least
I can do so for the moment), but I can also look on other persons in
the same light. Why should one natural belief be treated more tenderly
than another?... In short, if I refuse to postulate a _non ego_, and if
I hold that, supposing the states of consciousness I call the _ego_ can
be shewn capable of producing the notion of the _non ego_, then they
did produce it, and if I hold that they can be shewn to be so capable,
such a theory is equally applicable to external consciousnesses as to
external matter. In both cases, I cannot get out of the sphere of my
own feelings; there may be something beyond or there may not, but if
there is, it is at all events incognisable by me, and to all intents
and purposes I am alone in the universe."[128]

In drift and true meaning Bishop Berkeley's Idealism differed _toto
cælo_ from Mill's, as well as from Hume's idealistic Scepticism. His
belief in a world outside us all was as firm as that of the firmest
Realist, and by a world outside us he meant a world which neither
we nor our conceptions can alter. His reasoning was also of the most
common-sense description. Sensation is (as before said) a _sign_
between us and things outside. But the sign tells us nothing of any
_substratum_ on which the things signified depend for their sign-giving
powers. Matter (as commonly understood[129]) is a figment devised by
certain philosophers;--the true subsistence of the outward world is in
and for mind, and apart from thought it does not subsist at all. But
my mind, nay the human mind, is limited. There is One whose thoughts
are not as our thoughts;--in Him the world subsists, and in Him we
also have our Being continually. The world is what it is to us, in and
through Him, and it appeals not to our so-called material frames but to
our minds.

Berkeley's argument was simply this. Take away gross matter--and the
world is still perfectly Real. It is real because God is real. Real for
us, real in Him; and by this we _know_ His Reality.[130]

By comparing this phase of Idealism with the modern doctrine of what is
called the "Conditioned," its Theological interest becomes still more
obvious. Suppose we naturally know only what is conditioned (_i.e._
dependent on some Absolute reality to us unknown), what ought, asks Dr.
Mansel, to be the inference? The right inference is that the Divine
Absolute did not leave our world in ignorance, but did really reveal
Himself to Man.

The fate of arguments framed in special interests, however noble those
interests may be, is usually the same. Some clever antagonist allows
their destructive force, but refuses their affirmative conclusions.
Berkeley's denial of the unknown substratum called matter was approved
by sceptics, who scoffed at his unknown God. His idealism was
pronounced unanswerable, his divinity needed no answer. Therefore,
the Reason remained without satisfaction of any kind, "Most of the
writings" says Hume "of that very ingenious author form the best
lessons of scepticism which are to be found either among the ancient
or modern philosophers, Bayle not excepted. He professes, however, in
his title-page (and undoubtedly with great truth,) to have composed
his book against the sceptics as well as against the atheists and
freethinkers. But that all his arguments, though otherwise intended,
are, in reality, merely sceptical, appears from this, _that they
admit of no answer, and produce no conviction_." (_Inquiry concerning
the Human Understanding._ Section XII.) And be it remarked that this
final clause forms a skilled definition of Scepticism--its essential
notion--given by an expert. Dean Mansel himself who left at his death
an unfinished article upon Berkeley, suffered under a charge of
promoting what he desired to discourage. So dangerous is it to deal
with wide questions by narrowing their sweep to a point; yet on the
other hand how few students are prepared to read and think widely?

Shall we attribute to a growing width of Thought, the increased breadth
of view under which Idealism has of late years been represented? The
German Philosopher, with whom Schwegler closes his philosophic history
writes "This ideality or non-substantiality of the finite is the
chief maxim of philosophy; and for that reason every true philosophy
is idealistic" (Idealismus).[131] In England Mr. Green of Balliol
signalises Berkeley's "true proposition--there is nothing real apart
from thought--" and carefully distinguishes it from the one so often
substituted for it--the fatal flaw of the Berkeleian argument.[132]
Another influential thinker, Mr. Herbert Spencer,--who, like Professor
Huxley, uses materialistic symbols treating them as symbols only,--has
been for some time labouring after a "reconciliation of Realism and
Idealism," which again is considered by an able critic, Mr. Henry
Sidgwick, "an impossible compromise."--Mr. Spencer's answer to Mr.
Sidgwick, on this particular point, will be found in his recently
published volume of "Essays" (III. 282 seq.). A very instructive
sentence occurs on p. 290. "Should it be said that this regarding of
everything constituting experience and thought as symbolic, has a very
shadowy aspect; I reply that these which I speak of as symbols, are
real relatively to our consciousness; and are symbolic only in their
relation to the Ultimate Reality."

So much then for a question which in a variety of shapes has exercised
the human intellect throughout countless generations, and in all
countries from India to the United States. It has also pervaded
all spheres of Thought from physical science, (on which compare
further, Additional Note I., and our next chapter), to the great
philosophico-theological domain as we have already seen in certain
specimens of Western thought. It would be easy to illustrate its empire
far more extensively from those wonderful Eastern systems brought
home to English readers thirty-six years ago by the translation of
Ritters' Ancient Philosophy, but very imperfectly comprehended even
now, notwithstanding the agreeable reception which Professor Max Müller
has provided for them. To his writings we will gladly refer the curious
student.


E.--ON THE RELATIONS OF FACT AND THEORY.

"The distinction between Theory (that is, true Theory) and Fact is
this: that in Theory the Ideas are considered as distinct from the
Facts: in Facts, though Ideas may be involved, they are not, in our
apprehension, separated from the sensations. In a Fact, the Ideas are
applied so readily and familiarly, and incorporated with the sensations
so entirely, that we do not see _them_, we see _through them_. A person
who carefully notes the motion of a star all night, sees the circle
which it describes as he sees the star, though the circle is, in fact a
result of his own Ideas. A person who has in his mind the measures of
different lines and countries on the earth's surface, and who can put
them together into one conception, finds that they can make no figure
but a globular one: to him, the earth's globular form is a Fact, as
much as the square form of his chamber. A person to whom the grounds
of believing the earth to travel round the sun are as familiar as
the grounds for believing the movements of the mail coaches in this
country, looks upon the former event as a Fact, just as he looks
upon the latter events as Facts. And a person who, knowing the Fact
of the earth's annual motion, refers it distinctly to its mechanical
cause, conceives the sun's attraction as a Fact, just as he conceives
as a Fact, the action of the wind which turns the sails of a mill. He
cannot _see_ the force in either case; he supplies it out of his own
Ideas. And thus, a true Theory is a Fact; a Fact is a familiar Theory.
That which is a Fact under one aspect, is a Theory under another.
The most recondite Theories when firmly established are Facts; the
simplest Facts involve something of the nature of Theory. Theory and
Fact correspond, in a certain degree, with Ideas and Sensations, as to
the nature of their opposition. But the Facts are Facts, so far as the
Ideas have been combined with the Sensations and absorbed in them: the
Theories are Theories, so far as the Ideas are kept distinct from the
Sensations, and so far as it is considered still a question whether
those can be made to agree with these.

"We may, as I have said, illustrate this matter by considering man as
_interpreting_ the phenomena which he sees. He often interprets without
being aware that he does so. Thus when we see the needle move towards
the magnet, we assert that the magnet exercises an attractive force on
the needle. But it is only by an interpretative act of our own minds
that we ascribe this motion to attraction. That, in this case, a force
is exerted--something of the nature of the pull which we could apply by
our own volition--is our interpretation of the phenomena; although we
may be conscious of the act of interpretation, and may then regard the
attraction as a Fact.

"Nor is it in such cases only that we interpret phenomena in our
own way, without being conscious of what we do. We see a tree at a
distance, and judge it to be a chestnut or a lime; yet this is only an
inference from the colour or form of the mass according to preconceived
classifications of our own. Our lives are full of such unconscious
interpretations. The farmer recognizes a good or a bad soil; the
artist a picture of a favourite master; the geologist a rock of a
known locality, as we recognize the faces and voices of our friends;
that is, by judgments formed on what we see and hear; but judgments in
which we do not analyze the steps, or distinguish the inference from
the appearance. And in these mixtures of observation and inference, we
speak of the judgment thus formed, as a Fact directly observed.

"Even in the case in which our perceptions appear to be most direct,
and least to involve any interpretations of our own,--in the simple
process of seeing,--who does not know how much we, by an act of the
mind, add to that which our senses receive? Does any one fancy that
he sees a solid cube? It is easy to show that the solidity of the
figure, the relative position of its faces and edges to each other,
are inferences of the spectator; no more conveyed to his conviction
by the eye alone, than they would be if he were looking at a painted
representation of a cube. The scene of nature is a picture without
depth of substance, no less than the scene of art; and in the one
case as in the other, it is the mind which, by an act of its own,
discovers that colour and shape denote distance and solidity. Most men
are unconscious of this perpetual habit of reading the language of the
external world, and translating as they read. The draughtsman, indeed,
is compelled, for his purposes, to return back in thought from the
solid bodies which he has inferred, to the shapes of surface which he
really sees. He knows that there is a mask of theory over the whole
face of nature, if it be _theory_ to infer more than we _see_. But
other men, unaware of this masquerade, hold it to be a fact that they
see cubes and spheres, spacious apartments and winding avenues. And
these things are facts to them, because they are unconscious of the
mental operation by which they have penetrated nature's disguise.

"And thus, we still have an intelligible distinction of Fact and
Theory, if we consider Theory as a conscious, and Fact as an
unconscious inference, from the phenomena which are presented to our
senses."--Whewell, _Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences_, B. I. Chap.
ii. Sect. 10.


F.--ON THE "UNKNOWABLE."

If the word which heads this note could be accepted in the sense
understood by Mr. Spencer's American critic, as a truthful and in all
respects complete description of the First Ground of all things, there
must of course be an end of all Theology, natural, and supernatural;
Theism, Pantheism, and Atheism, would together become what Comte
thought them,--equally unfounded, equally unmeaning, and therefore
equally to be opposed, condemned, and ostracized. Between Humanity and
all that is Superhuman the gulf would appear hopelessly impassable.

"To be consistent," says the Editor of the American _Index_,
"Empiricism must utterly sink the soul in its material
surroundings...." Mr. Spencer makes his election in Empiricism, but
shrinks from the acceptance of its necessary implications, and thereby
forfeits his title to rank among the great leaders of philosophy.
Teaching that every faculty of the mind is the effect of impressions
made by the Environment upon the Organism, he should also teach that
the mind is nothing distinct from the organism, and that the mind's
faculties will perish at the disintegration of the organism; that, as
fire is a mere phenomenon of chemical combination, ceasing with it, so
life is a mere phenomenon of organic "re-arrangement of parts," and
will cease when the Dissolution which is the converse and sequel of
Evolution has become complete; and that the "theory of a 'soul' is as
completely exploded as the theory of 'phlogiston.'"

Such is the opinion of an unsympathising reviewer, who calls himself
a Positivist of the latest development. He despises Comte, praises
Hamilton, and preaches the truth of Dualism. "If," he writes, "physical
science sneeringly objects that mental science proceeds on a sheer
assumption of mind, the retort is crushing and cogent that physical
science proceeds on the sheer assumption of matter. Who ever yet
demonstrated the existence of either?... Only by admitting what
can neither be demonstrated without a begging of the question, nor
doubted without a _reductio ad absurdam_ of all intelligence,--namely,
the natural veracity of the intuitive and cognitive powers,--is a
truly positive science possible." From this dualistic Positivism he
predicts the rise of a new Theology. "We believe that Theism must
be re-theologized on the basis of pure Positivism, as the absolute
condition of its future growth." From the same point of view, Mr.
Spencer's "reconciliation of Science and Religion" is "pretended"; and
his "philosophy is chiefly valuable as indicating the rapid spread of
the true spirit of Positivism," but, "like Comtism, it possesses little
or no value as an exposition of Positivism in the highest departments
of science."

This censure of Spencer was combated in a subsequent number of the
_Index_, by a writer signing himself "Evolutionist." The Editor
prints his letter, and replies to it briefly:--"1. The 'unknowable'
must be an absolute blank to every intelligence. It surely cannot
be held legitimate to make _any predicate_ of it whatever, as Mr.
Spencer himself admits. Yet he does make predicates of it which are
'derived from our own natures' and thus violates his own principle.
'Omnipresence' is simply _presence throughout all space_; and what do
we know of 'presence' at all but by our own experience? Mr. Spencer
does the very thing he forbids us to do, in making this predication.

"2. The difference between him and us is briefly this. He denies that
we know anything of Force; we affirm that we know it just so far as it
perceptibly acts. The Cause of Nature we maintain to be known _in its
effects_. Hence Force is not to us the 'Unknowable,' but is rather the
'God of Science,' known just so far as Nature is known."

Here follow some stringent criticisms of the distinction between
phenomena and noumena accepted by Mill as well as Spencer, which we
pass over as being somewhat unintelligible without a longer discussion
than can here be given to them.

On the subject of our first quotation--Empiricism--many readers may
like to peruse the opinion of a writer far removed from Mr. Abbott in
philosophy. The following is Hegel's dictum:--

"In Empiricism lies the great principle that whatever is true must
be in the actual world and present to sensation.... Touching this
principle it has been justly observed that, in what we call Experience,
as distinct from the individual sensation of individual facts, there
are two elements. First, there is the infinitely complex matter, which
so far as itself is concerned is individualised: secondly, there is the
form, as seen in the characteristics of universality and necessity.
Empiricism no doubt can point to many, almost innumerable, similar
perceptions: but, after all, no multitude, however great, can be the
same thing as universality. Similarly, Empiricism reaches so far as the
perception of changes in succession and of objects in juxtaposition or
co-existence; but it presents no necessary connexion. If sensation,
therefore, is to maintain its claim to be the sole basis of what men
hold for truth, universality and necessity can have no right to exist:
they become an accident of our minds, a mere custom, the content of
which might be otherwise constituted than it is.

"It is an important corollary of this theory, that in the empirical
mode of treatment the truths and rules of justice and morality, as
well as the body of religion, are exhibited as the work of chance, and
stripped of their objective character and inner truth."[133]

Considering how far Hegel confirms the American Positivist's opinion
respecting the inevitable conclusions of consistent Empiricism,
Mr. Spencer may with reason be congratulated on his very happy
inconsistency.

The subject of quotation No. 2--Spencer's position in regard of the
Unknowable--contains a censure which unites in alliance many widely
differing authorities on this side the Atlantic. Some of these assail
it from an extremely hostile point of view; but the criticism of others
is conceived in a half-friendly, half-indifferent spirit. Mr. Spencer
has very lately published a third volume of "Essays," and devotes
Articles X. and XI. to his reviewers.[134] It need hardly be said that
these pages will repay perusal. We shall here venture on giving a brief
account of his defence as it presents itself to our own understanding.

The most salient difference between him and his critics _generally_,
seems to lie in this circumstance;--they begin by taking the word
"Unknowable" in its strict (_i.e._ its proper) signification. Hence
they appear to assume that by "Absolute" he means--or _ought_ to
mean even when seeming to say the contrary--"_absolutely_ abstract."
Now of a mere, that is, a pure and complete abstraction, nothing can
be predicated, because the idea is perfectly empty. It is in fact a
Nothingness.

But suppose we say of this Absolute, (as Spencer does), it exists;--we
_have_ predicated something already;--something which destroys its
complete emptiness. And again, if we are asked or, (what is better),
ask ourselves how we _know_ that an Absolute does exist, and proceed
to reply, as Spencer himself replies, because it _must_ exist; we
shall have made respecting our Absolute this highest of all possible
predications. It is not only Being, but necessary Being, or, in
other words, it is a Self-Existent. Still more, since it is so in
contradistinction from the universe of relativities, it is The
Self-Existent, a totally different idea from that which the American
editor dissects.

But now comes the question, who or what is answerable for the
Reviewer's misconception,--Spencer or his critics? Is it the poverty
of language, or the law of controversial sequency,--a law under
which every thought arises as antagonistic to some other thought,
and afterwards, when arisen and firmly established so as to become
the subject of analysis, is found to yield more than was at first
conceived. Then, of course, another antithesis arises respecting it,
and we have to decide how much and what is truly meant, a question
which often comes before us in this shape:--Is our thought merely the
_not_ so and so, or is it a real _substantive_ idea? In the former
case it is one-sided and negative; in the latter it is many-sided and
affirmative.

At the first blush, it seems natural to blame Mr. Herbert Spencer.
Every one must feel astonished to find how much he himself knows
of the Unknowable. The following sentences, however, contain a
good account of one amongst his principal explanations of this
apparent incongruity. Speaking of Mr. Martineau's conception of the
Creator,[135] he writes (_Essays_, Vol. III. p. 299):--

"Finding, as just shewn, that it leaves the essential mystery unsolved;
I do not see that it has an advantage over the doctrine of the
Unknowable in its unqualified shape. There cannot, I think, be more
than temporary rest in a proximate solution which takes for its basis
the ultimately insoluble. Just as thought cannot be prevented from
passing beyond Appearance, and trying to conceive the Cause behind;
so, following out the interpretation Mr. Martineau offers, thought
cannot be prevented from asking what Cause it is which restricts the
Cause he assigns. And if we must admit that the question under this
eventual form cannot be answered, may we not as well confess that the
question under its immediate form cannot be answered? Is it not better
candidly to acknowledge the incompetence of our intelligence, rather
than to persist in calling that an explanation which does but disguise
the inexplicable? Whatever answer each may give to this question, he
cannot rightly blame those who, finding in themselves an indestructible
consciousness of an ultimate Cause, whence proceed alike what we call
the Material Universe and what we call Mind, refrain from affirming
anything respecting it; because they find it as inscrutable in nature,
as it is inconceivable in extent and duration."

There will be to many people much force in this plea for leaving
inscrutables amidst their primary obscurities. But it is open to a
rejoinder suggested by Mr. Spencer himself,--you cannot prevent the
Mind from inquiring; and, in point of fact, Spencer in person leads the
way. He places before us the ultimate idea of a self-existent First
Cause. Now surely he might reflect that such an Idea not only permits
but invites analysis;--it is no empty abstraction, but a substantive
thought and a full one. But he bars analysis to his own satisfaction,
by saying that the Idea is in its own Nature inscrutable. Respecting
this position two questions arise. First, if inscrutable as to its
ultimate nature--its highest essence, and deepest thought,--is it so
in its attributes? Next, if Spencer's special walk in philosophy ends
with the bare positing of this Idea, must _all_ Philosophy do the
same? Suppose the Physicist says--"Here I learn to know the Fact of a
self-existent universal First Cause," may not the investigator of our
Practical human Reason try to discover whether an Ethical view ought
or ought not to be taken of this Self-Existent? To answer "No," is
either to make physical philosophy the _sole_ philosophy; or it is to
dismember and disjoint the universal Body of Truth into departmental
carcase-fragments;--a process which never can begin till all Life
has been effectually crushed out of the Whole.[136] For every one
who takes wide views of Philosophy;--for every inquirer into First
Principles;--above all, if Mr. Spencer will permit us to say so, for
every Encyclopædic writer like himself, a question must arise the
answer to which it is incumbent on all and each to ascertain, "Can we
have any conscious idea whatever of a First Cause without including
that very fact of Personality from which Spencer appears to shrink?"
Nay we may rather put the point thus: "Is not our idea and definition
of _Causality_ derived from Personal existence, and apart from this
source of derivation, does not the derived idea perish?"--If so, to
speak of a non-personal First Cause both of the outside world and
of mind itself is to use words to which no thinker can consciously
attach any real meaning. There must, says Mr. Spencer, be Power behind
Appearance;--in other words, Phenomena imply a Cause behind them,--but
to add that this Power or Cause is conceivably impersonal, seems
nothing better than to imagine (Hibernicè) at the beginning of the
phenomenal chain, a _prior_ phenomenon which in its own nature and _ex
vi verborum_ cannot account for a Beginning[137] at all;--cannot, to
use Mr. Spencer's expression, be "ultimate"; and, in short, requires to
be accounted for, itself.

The truth is, that such ideas as First, Ultimate, Power accounting
for appearance, or Cause underlying phenomena, cannot be spoken of as
altogether Unknowable; because they imply and contain within themselves
certain knowable and strongly defined characteristics. Pressed by his
critics, Mr. Spencer becomes painfully aware of this truth; and is
fearful of being driven by logic and philosophical consistency to plead
guilty of believing in a Personal Author of the Universe, and of making
Theism the ultimate word of Science. We see on pp. 292 and 302 of Vol.
III. how he manifests a preference for the phrase non-relative, _vice_
Absolute; meaning thereby (if he means anything new) to replace an
affirmative idea by a negational abstract, empty enough to land him at
once in American Positivism. For, _if_ the non-relative means _more_
than to say that he is unable to predicate _relativity_ of the _whole_
Universe of things--if it means _more_ than an avowal of Positivist
ignorance--it really does mean a true Absolute after all; and very few
students of Mr. Spencer will doubt that in the sense of an Absolute
(not necessarily Hegelian), this ground idea of his must be accepted.

As courteous antagonists, we will endeavour to abstain from joining
with Mr. Sidgwick in the severest censure which has yet befallen Mr.
Spencer,--the imputation of a "mazy inconsistency," a "fundamental
incoherence," and an "inability to harmonize different lines of
thought." We rather wish to congratulate him on presenting such
an appearance before the eye of a critic so accomplished, and so
equitable; it is a sign that we have not as yet heard Mr. Spencer's
final utterance. He is, we are quite sure, divided by a wide tract of
thought from the American Positivists;--but we are _not_ sure that
he may not ultimately be found amid the ranks of Scientific Theists.
This at the present moment appears the most natural development of
the thoughts maintained in his recently published volume. That the
nature of GOD, considered as the "ultimate cause of what we
call the material universe and what we call mind," is to us at present
inscrutable;--that clouds and darkness are round about Him;--that
His ways are not as our ways, nor His thoughts as our thoughts, no
meditative Theist will deny. But, though the Heavens are higher than
the Earth, though beatified spirits worship in humble adoration of
the Incomprehensible, yet the measureless distance does not hinder us
from knowing Him as a Spirit, and therefore as a PERSON; nor
yet from confidently affirming that Righteousness and Judgment are the
habitation of His throne.


G.--MR. J. S. MILL AS AN INDEPENDENT MORALIST.

Few passages of Mr. Mill's writings are better worth reading than pages
123, 4, of his "Examination of Sir W. Hamilton's Philosophy." In these
pages the eminent writer asserts his own strong moral sentiments, and
throws to the winds that inconsistent Utilitarianism with which he had
trained his mind to associate them. He will worship no Unknowable Being
whose supreme moral nature does not affirm our human morality. "Why is
this?" an opponent might fairly ask; "is it not useful so to do? is
not such worship conducive to that noblest final end, the interest of
mankind?" By saying "No" you affirm two things: one, the _dissociation_
of Religion from Utility; a second, the indivisible _association_ of
Religion with absolute Morality.

Some antagonists may consider the first of these two propositions
inadmissible, the second objectionable, or at all events, exceedingly
doubtful. Every one who maintains that Natural Theology has, in
addition to its other elements, a firm and moral ground, will accept
with ready assent the second proposition, and will say that the
truth or falsehood of the first depends on the meaning attached to
an ambiguous word. We are equally sure that "Godliness is profitable
for all things," and that "Honesty is the best policy." But then
we are quite sure also, that the final cause of Godliness is not
profit, nor its essential nature a love of gain; and that policy is
not a true description of honesty, nor the being politic the true and
proper aim of the honest man. And Mr. Mill, when his moral sentiments
asserted themselves, felt these certainties as elements of his inner
life. Rather than worship a Being whose unknown moral attributes fell
beneath, not the dictates of Utility, but the purest instincts of his
own inmost morality, Mr. Mill goes on to declare that he is willing
to suffer the horrors of Eternal death.[138] Hell is better than a
violation of his own moral nature. Can this be a declaration deduced
from the supreme law of Interest,--is it not rather a foundation maxim
of independent morality? Violate such foundation maxims, says the
independent moralist, and you need not even speak of "Going to hell,"
hell will come to you. Sooner or later you will find its undying
torments within you.

In an article on the death of Mr. Mill, the _Pall Mall Gazette_
expresses its perception of his leading inconsistency as follows:--

"It is impossible to read Mr. Mill's works with any attention, and in
particular to look with intelligence on the later part of his career,
without seeing that by temperament he was essentially religious, but
that as far as positive doctrine went his mind was an absolute blank.
We believe that it was this sharp contrast between theory and feeling
which drove him into the schemes for the improvement of the world
which have been exposed to so many, and, in some respects, to such
well-founded objections. Having to love something, and being, as it
were, chained down by his own logic to this world and this life, past,
present, and future, he struggled to make a sort of religion out of
man as he might come to be after centuries or millenniums. Humanity,
progress, a realization of all the ideals at which his theories
pointed--these were his divinities, for he was a man who could not do
without some divinity, and he could find no other. We do not think
that his life or his thoughts were triumphant. If he had consistently
followed out his own views, if he had carried out his Benthamism with
perfect consistency, the result would have been too hard, too grim, too
dismal for his eager and sensitive heart. Hence came the faltering,
the inconsistency, the romance of his later days. It is a spectacle
which may well humble every one who looks on it with intelligence and
sympathy. From us, at least, it shall never draw one word of sarcasm,
or one thought which is not full of deep respect, regret, and pity. He
bore a burden common to many. If he bent under it, it was not because
his strength was less, but because his sensibility was greater. When
he died one of the tenderest and most passionate hearts that ever set
to work an intellect of iron was laid to rest. May he rest in peace,
and find, if it be possible, that his knowledge was less complete than
he perhaps supposed, and that there was more to be known than was
acknowledged in his philosophy." (_Pall Mall Gazette_, Saturday, May,
10, 1873.)

A little earlier in the same article we find another paragraph worthy
of careful consideration:--"No succession of writers ever exercised
greater power over the fortunes of this nation, we might say of any
nation, than Locke, Hume, Adam Smith, Bentham, and Mr. Mill. What may
be described as the theory of modern life has been thought out by them,
and translated into its practical equivalents with a persistency, a
precision, a degree of method and calmness unequalled in the history of
thought. We do not say that their results are complete, but we do say
that their teaching has been successful to an unexampled degree; and
that, however unpopular it may be with ardent and enthusiastic persons,
it is impossible to believe that it could have done what it has done
without possessing a very strong hold on human nature."

Viewing this extract by the light of the one before cited, we cannot
help asking what side of human nature is it to which the Benthamite
doctrines attach themselves? Shall we not regret that the hard, the
grim, and the dismal, should characterize our 19th century philosophy?
Philosophy that is falsely so called; for the true is "not harsh and
crabbed as dull fools suppose."

The text of this Essay and its earlier notes were completed while
Mr. Mill was in the ripeness of his powers, and when the present
writer never expected to outlive him. Death softens our view of one
who has passed away--the bygone life becomes like a moonlighted
landscape--asperities hidden in shadow, and a soft radiance poured over
each grander eminence. So may it be felt by the critic of every great
departed! If, indeed, it prove otherwise with Mr. Mill, the preventing
cause will probably be found in certain pages of his published
"Autobiography."


H.--ARCHEBIOSIS, OR SPONTANEOUS GENERATION.

The origin of Life is a question that naturally excites much interest,
and consequently has been much discussed. It is obviously a problem
that presents difficulties of no ordinary kind, and therefore it is
by no means astonishing that many theories have been started and
statements made which have in turn been quickly contradicted.

It is now known that the whole cycle of phenomena--collectively denoted
by the term "_Life_,"--is manifested by a substance possessing definite
physical and chemical properties, and by no other. This substance
constitutes the entire organism of the lower forms of life, whether
animal or vegetable, and also of the higher in their earliest stage,
while from it by various metamorphoses are developed the different
histological elements composing the complex tissues of higher animals
and plants. Its name Protoplasm is in consequence exceedingly apt, when
properly understood.

As to the origin of Protoplasm (or apparent Life) it is clear from a
little consideration that two questions may be asked: first, how did
Protoplasm arise? and secondly, when once this substance had come into
being are we to suppose that from that time to this all Protoplasm has
been derived by unbroken descent from the first Protoplasm, or does
fresh Protoplasm even now arise in the same way as did the first?--in
other words, does the transition from the inorganic to the organic,
from what has never lived to what is living, still take place as it
must have taken place at some period or another?

To neither of these questions can Physical Science return a perfectly
certain and definite answer. And it must be confessed that as far as
our knowledge of Nature goes, those have the best of it who maintain
first, that all existing Protoplasm implies pre-existing Protoplasm;
secondly, that as to the method, the conditions of the real origin
of Protoplasm nothing whatsoever is known; and thirdly, that,
notwithstanding all assertions and experiments to the contrary, the
origin of living things from dead and decaying organic matter (_i.e._,
matter that has lived), or from inorganic matter under given conditions
(spontaneous generation, generatio æquivoca, archebiosis) has never
been proved and demonstrated in such a manner as to allow us no room
for hesitation, no place for doubt.

The difficulties and dangers besetting this thorny and much-vexed
subject will be better understood if we institute a short examination
into the history and present condition of the doctrine of Spontaneous
Generation.

It is certain from the results of astronomical and geological
investigation, that at an exceedingly remote epoch, estimated by untold
millions of years, the earth's surface was absolutely unfitted for the
presence of life; nay, more, that even the laws of chemical combination
were suspended, and in abeyance. After the glowing spheroid cooled
down, and various chemical compounds were formed, life as a matter of
fact made its appearance on the earth. Throughout the inorganic world
the continuity is unbroken--the present is truly the child of the
past. But in the organic world it is not so. Whether life arose in the
natural course of universal law, or how it did arise, we cannot tell,
scientifically, that is to say; no assertion, one way or the other,
admits either of proof or disproof. There are absolutely no data to
proceed upon. The very first organic remains discovered belong to a
comparatively high type. It is as though in a garden every plant and
bush burst at once into full flower, and never showed the flower in the
bud.

These points are very well put in a passage of Littré:[139] "Jusqu'à ce
moment, nous avons cheminé de phénomènes en phénomènes qui se passaient
tous sous le régime des lois chimiques et physiques. Leur succession
ne présentait aucune solution de continuité; les degrés tenaient l'un
à l'autre; et c'est cette déduction qui satisfait l'esprit humain, et
qu'il nomme explication. Une fois que l'on reconnait une dissémination
première, dans l'espace, d'une matière douée de gravitation et de
mouvement, tout en ignorant absolument d'où vient cette matière and
d'où procèdent son mouvement et sa dissémination, le reste s'ensuit.
Des amas qu'on appelle soleils se forment par condensation; cette
condensation développe une immense chaleur; le refroidissement graduel
sépare les amas primordiaux en amas secondaires et plus petits qui
se meuvent comme lui, se refroidissent comme lui, et représentent
nos planètes, nos satellites, et en particulier notre terre. On a
l'univers, on passe au monde, et du monde au globe terrestre.

"Mais là, sur le monde terrestre, un hiatus se présente. Un phénomène
nouveau, une force nouvelle apparaît, et la vie se développe en
végétalité et animalité. Ce phénomène nouveau, cette force nouvelle,
cette vie ne succèdent point par une action continue aux actions
continues dont le soleil et la terre sont le théâtre; du moins, en
l'état actuel de nos connaissances, la continuité nous échappe. On
conçoit, grâce à des faits expérimentaux recueillis de toutes parts et
transformés en lois, comment notre globe se refroidit, comment, en se
refroidissant, il prend sa forme, comment l'atmosphère, les continents,
la mer se constituent; mais on ne conçoit plus comment la vie y parait
à un moment donné. Et ce fut bien à un moment donné: pendant des
millions de siècles, la terre, vu son incandescence, fut impropre à
toute vie. Quand la température y eut baissé au degré compatible avec
les existences vivantes, ces existences se montrèrent; mais comment?
par quel procédé?

"Il ne faut pourtant pas faire valoir outre mesure cette discontinuité.
Une discontinuité, autre que celle qui appartient à l'apparition de la
vie, est survenue dans le cours du développement de la terre. Quand les
particules qui la composent, étaient animées d'une immense chaleur,
une dissociation complète y régnait; elles n'obéissaient qu'aux lois
du mouvement, de la gravitation, de la chaleur et de la lumière; les
lois chimiques, c'est-à-dire de combinaison et de décombinaison, n'y
étaient qu'à l'état virtuel. Elles passèrent à l'état effectif, dès
que l'abaissement de la température le permit. Je sais bien qu'une
différence considérable existe entre ces deux discontinuités: en effet,
depuis lors, il a toujours été possible de reproduire à volonté les
faits chimiques; et, toutes les fois que nous en avons besoin, nous
répétons le phénomène d'origine qui se produisit dans les combinaisons
et décombinaisons. Pour la vie, c'est autre chose; elle a été une
fois émise, et, depuis le phénomène d'origine, elle ne se propage
que par génération. Un être vivant est necessaire pour produire un
être vivant; et, ni par les procédés de la nature, ni par ceux de la
science, ce qui se fit au moment créateur ne se refait. Malgré cette
considérable différence, il demeure que la terre a possédé des forces
virtuelles qui sont entrées en action, quand les conditions générales,
se modifiant graduellement, l'ont permis."

A little further on he continues:--"Au point de vue d'origine, on
abandonnera la question comme toutes les questions qui impliquent une
cause première. La philosophie positive s'exprime là-dessus comme elle
s'exprime touchant toutes les choses hyperphysiques, c'est-à-dire
placées au delà de l'expérience. Quand elle entend les matérialistes
prononcer que la vie est le résultat des forces physiques et chimiques
dont on connaît l'action, elle refuse d'accepter une solution qui
dépasse les prémisses. Mais elle n'écarte pas la solution matérialiste
au profit de la solution théologique; l'intervention d'un Dieu
créateur est également invérifiable par l'expérience, et, partant,
atteinte de la même fin de non-recevoir. Maintenant, si on demande
à la philosophie positive quelle est, à elle, sa solution entre la
génération matérialiste et la création surnaturelle, elle répond
qu'elle n'a aucune solution à proposer, que rien ne peut la forcer à
croire ce qui n'est pas démontré, et qu'elle accepte, avec autant de
fermeté que d'humilité, une ignorance invincible sur tout ce qui est
indemontrable."

In the first passage certain salient points are strikingly brought out,
above all the vast difference between the worlds organic and inorganic;
but, next, how much soever a Positivist may be pleased to believe only
that which admits of phenomenal verification, it is not every one,
especially if given to thought, who would willingly endorse the second
paragraph. If we know only what we can verify, many beliefs must needs
be abandoned, and amongst them some which have received the almost
universal assent of mankind. Knowledge (in the sense of verifiable
knowledge) and Belief may appear two widely different things; but it
should never be forgotten that we often accept the one as surely as the
other.

The ancients held that living things arose from the earth at any
time, engendered by the warmth of the sun and moisture. Absurd as it
may seem, the belief that blue-bottle flies, etc., were a natural
result of the decay of meat and other organic matter obtained credence
even in comparatively modern times. Redi, an eminent Italian, first
demonstrated experimentally the falsehood of this doctrine, and for
some time the hypothesis of spontaneous generation appeared to have
received a death-blow. And by degrees the conviction that every living
thing proceeded from a germ gained strength, and was confirmed by the
rapidly extending use of the microscope. Yet in the eighteenth century
certain experiments of Needham seemed to establish the fact that in
boiled infusions where presumably all germs were destroyed, small
Infusoria made their appearance even when means were taken to exclude
the entrance of fresh germs. Buffon lent the authority of his great
name. These experiments were repeated by the Abbé Spallanzani, who
showed by more careful methods the fallacy of the conclusions drawn. A
passage in Sir B. Brodie[140] which alludes to these facts may be worth
quoting:--

"Crites. Then am I to understand that you would reject altogether the
hypothesis of equivocal generation, which supposes that under certain
circumstances, even at the present time, particles of inorganic
matter are brought together, and so united as to become endowed with
organization and life?

"Eubulus. The question is one of great interest, and I will refer you
to Ergates for an answer, knowing at the same time pretty well what
that answer will be.

"Ergates. Of course Crites refers to the production of those minute
creatures, known by the name of _Infusoria_, in the experiments of
Walter Needham, and some others.

"It is true that in these experiments certain vegetable and animal
infusions, after no very long period of time, when examined by the
microscope, are found to contain a multitude of minute creatures,
of various forms, exhibiting signs of spontaneous motion, and
multiplying their species in the usual manner. Some of these are
even of a complicated structure, much beyond what might, _à priori_,
be expected as the result of the first attempt of inorganic matter
to enter into the realms of organic life. The subject has been so
frequently discussed, that I need not trouble you with the details of
the arguments which have led the most eminent naturalists to believe
that these creatures are not really spontaneously engendered, but that
they are derived from minute ova which are present in the air, and
which, when placed under circumstances favourable to their development,
burst into life: in the same way as the egg undergoes those changes
which convert its contents into a bird, when placed under the influence
of the animal heat of the parent. But even if this view of the matter
be not correct, the case is not really altered; for, after all,
the _Infusoria_ are never detected except in vegetable and animal
infusions, which necessarily presuppose the existence of organic life."

But it is one thing to demolish the theory and statements of an
antagonist, and another to erect a structure in their place.
However completely Spallanzani had demonstrated the faults and
untrustworthiness of Needham's results, he had not established the
opposite doctrine, and to many it seemed that the very conditions
under which his experimentation was conducted, were sufficient to
prevent the development of life. But the work begun by Schulze and
Schwann and ended by Pasteur apparently has supplied what was wanting
in Spallanzani's researches. The evidence is thus admirably summed by
Professor Huxley:[141]--

"It is demonstrable, that a fluid eminently fit for the development
of the lowest forms of life, but which contains neither germs, nor any
protein compound, gives rise to living things in great abundance, if
it is exposed to ordinary air; while no such development takes place,
if the air with which it is in contact is mechanically freed from the
solid particles, which ordinarily float in it and which maybe made
visible by appropriate means.

"It is demonstrable, that the great majority of these particles are
destructible by heat, and that some of them are germs, or living
particles, capable of giving rise to the same forms of life as those
which appear when the fluid is exposed to unpurified air.

"It is demonstrable, that inoculation of the experimental fluid with
a drop of liquid known to contain living particles, gives rise to the
same phenomena as exposure to unpurified air.

"And it is further certain that these living particles are so minute
that the assumption of their suspension in ordinary air presents
not the slightest difficulty. On the contrary, considering their
lightness and the wide diffusion of the organisms which produce them,
it is impossible to conceive that they should not be suspended in the
atmosphere in myriads."

The experimental means by which these facts are proved may be briefly
stated:--

I. The air contains solid particles. Professor Tyndall has shown, as
all who have read "Dust and Disease" know to their own discomfort, that
the purest common air, when submitted to a beam of electric light,
renders the track of that beam visible. Ergo, it must contain solid
particles capable of scattering light.

II. These particles are mostly destructible by heat, or may be
mechanically strained off. He has shown this by the fact that common
air which has passed through a red-hot tube, or through a filter of
cotton-wool, will no longer render the track of the electric beam
visible.

III. Many of these particles are germs. Schulze and Schwann proved that
when air is passed through red-hot tubes, then through a fluid which is
capable of affording a nidus to the germs, if present, no development
of life takes place. Similarly Schr[oe]der established the same fact by
using a strainer of cotton-wool. Further, Pasteur gave an additional
proof by microscopical examination, as well as by a direct experiment.
He passed air through gun-cotton, dissolved this in ether; and in the
collodion germs were clearly recognizable. Also he plunged a piece of
cotton-wool through which air had been strained into an experimental
fluid. This fluid soon swarmed with forms of life.

IV. The experimental fluid may be inoculated by simple exposure to
air as well as by any fluids known to contain living forms; _e.g._,
if the fluid be placed in an open vessel, living forms soon make
their appearance. Yet supposing the aperture of the vessel, instead
of pointing vertically upwards, be turned obliquely or downwards, the
fluid will remain clear for an indefinite time. Similarly a drop of an
infusion containing living forms added to the experimental fluid soon
causes it to swarm with life. The forms that appear are the same in
either case.

V. The experimental fluid cannot give rise itself to these forms. It is
known as Pasteur's solution, and consists of water, ammonium, tartrate,
sugar, and yeast ash. Hence there is no organic matter in it. If proper
care be taken, it may be kept for an indefinite time.

VI. The germs are so minute that in many cases, even when known to be
present, they are scarcely visible to the highest microscopic powers.
They must be universally diffused, as any organic infusion left exposed
soon swarms with the forms to which they give rise.

Such an array of facts, proved experimentally over and over again,
must convince the most tenacious sceptic, and he may feel inclined to
agree with the opinion expressed in the following passage from Sir B.
Brodie:[142]--

"Crites. Then, if I understand you rightly, you have arrived at these
conclusions. First, that there was a time when this earth was not in
a fit state for the maintenance of either animal or vegetable life.
Secondly, that in its present condition there is no evidence of any
law being in operation which would account for any living beings being
called into existence except as the offspring of other living beings
which previously existed; and that from these premises we cannot fail
to arrive at this further conclusion, that the first introduction of
life on earth must have been by some special act of the creative power,
of which we have no experience at present.

"Eubulus. I suspect that this, really and truly, is all we actually
know on the subject."

Notwithstanding this apparently irresistible amount of evidence,
the question of abiogenesis has recently been revived by Dr. C.
Bastian in a well-known book, "The Beginnings of Life." Dr. Bastian
believes that he has demonstrated the origin of living organisms from
organic infusions as well as from solutions of salts containing no
organic matter: nay, even more wonderful facts than these which it is
unnecessary to specify. His experiments are so numerous, his assertions
and figures so clear and definite, and his reputation for previous
good scientific work once so high, that the book has caused no small
stir and discussion. Could Dr. Bastian's facts be only established,
they would inevitably revolutionize the whole science of Biology.

However, the same fate which has overtaken his predecessors has
befallen Dr. Bastian himself. A nearly universal verdict of "Not
proven" has been returned: and not only is the accuracy of his
experimentation denied, but even worse accusations have been brought.
To enter into details of his experiments would require too much space,
but it may not be uninteresting to detail some of the peculiarities and
difficulties which attend on the investigation of such a subject as
Spontaneous Generation.

At the very threshold of the inquiry stands a grand difficulty. Strange
as it may seem, it is nevertheless true, that notwithstanding the
many years, the immense labour bestowed by illustrious men on this
subject, next to nothing is known of the relations existing between
the lowest forms of life, animal or vegetable (especially the latter),
as well as their germs, and varying physical and chemical conditions.
Heat, light, cold and darkness, alkalies and acids with other chemical
compounds, one would imagine to be not without their influence. Yet
what this influence may be in a given case, none can tell. Enough is
known in the way of a few detached facts to make it certain that these
agents have very decided effects. It might be thought that any one
who wished to attack the problem of Spontaneous Generation anew would
first try to obtain some connected knowledge on this point. Indeed,
until it has been cleared up somewhat, it is not very evident what good
Experimentation on Heterogenesis can do. It is much as if a chemist
were to throw a handful of stuff (what he knew not) into a crucible,
and then expect a valuable result. It can scarcely be doubted that
many of these lower organisms live and grow under conditions which _à
priori_ might seem incompatible with vitality.

It is clear also that the work of one experimenter ought to be such as
may admit of repetition by another with the same result. Now no one
who attempts the study of this subject of Spontaneous Generation, can
fail to be struck with the immense mass of conflicting evidence. Some
mischievous spirit appears to have purposely thrown confusion over the
whole. Facts are alternately stated and denied. It is very hard to be
sure of the right road, even for an experienced person.

Another point relates to the value of the evidence when obtained. It
can scarcely be doubted that out of a given number of experiments
undertaken to establish a case of Heterogenesis or Archebiosis, great
value should be attached to the negative evidence afforded by those
that disprove the supposed fact. A little consideration will show the
reason. The precautions to be taken against the intrusion of germs
are innumerable: a slight exposure to the air, accidental contact of
an unheated rod or tube, or neglect of some other particulars may
inoculate the experimental fluid. Hence even with care the chances are
many in favour of some such accidental intrusion, and great caution
should always be exercised before an affirmative result can be regarded
as firmly established.

And further there is the experimentalist himself to be taken into
account. The task requires an intimate knowledge of many minute
organisms, and the different forms they assume; an acquaintance, wide
and accurate, with various experimental methods; a clear view of the
end and the various precautions required to attain that end; a mind
ready to contrive, prone to doubt and to hesitate, rather than to be
convinced. Men vary much in the amount of what is scientifically termed
their personal equation, and one difficulty in accepting the results of
a piece of work is the danger of misplaced confidence.

As was said before, Dr. Bastian's attempt to demonstrate the reality of
Spontaneous Generation has been a failure. His experiments have been
repeated, and failed to give the like results in the hands of competent
men. Witness the following quotation from a careful review of his book
in the Microscopical Journal.[143] It relates to the now celebrated
cheese and turnip solution.

"Nevertheless in consequence of the interest which Dr. Bastian's work
has excited, we have made the experiment (and that repeatedly) as
directed by him. This is not the occasion on which to give the details
of the experiments in question. It will, however, perhaps add some
value to the remarks which it has been our duty to make when we state
that, carefully following Dr. Bastian's directions, using at the same
time great care as to cleanliness and due boiling, we have obtained
results which _in every single instance_, out of more than forty tubes
closed on four separate occasions, simply contradict Dr. Bastian. We
believe, then, that Dr. Bastian's last dogma in archebiosis,--his
belief in turnip solution with a fragment of cheese--must be placed in
the same category as his colloidal urea, his spontaneously generated
bog-moss, his fungi born in crystals, his unmistakable processes of
heterogenesis, and his 'watching' and 'experimentation' in general."

The reviewer proceeds to question whether Dr. Bastian has even the
knowledge requisite for so delicate an investigation. It would be
supposed that he was intimately acquainted with various microscopical
structures; but we read,[144] "Professor Huxley gives a contribution
towards the determination of the personal value in Dr. Bastian's
researches. 'He (Dr. Bastian) will recollect that he wrote to me asking
permission to bring for my examination certain preparations of organic
structures, which he declared he had clear and positive evidence to
prove to have been developed in his closed and digested tubes. Dr.
Bastian will remember that when the first of these wonderful specimens
was put under my microscope I told him at once that it was nothing
but a fragment of the leaf of the common bog-moss (Sphagnum), and he
will recollect that I had to fetch Schacht's book "Die Pflanzenzelle"
and show him a figure which fitted very well with what we had under
the microscope before I could get him to listen to my suggestion, and
that only actual comparison with Sphagnum, after he had left my house,
forced him to admit the astounding blunder which he had made.'

"Of these three pieces of evidence, the last is the most important,
for, whilst it places us on our guard with regard to Dr. Bastian's
accuracy generally, it at the same time furnishes a key to the
explanation of a number of his experiments in which, according to
that precipitate discoverer, 'organisms' were found on opening tubes
containing infusions which had been boiled and sealed hermetically."

How then are we to sum up the case? for or against Dr. Bastian? Can any
thoughtful person admit the conclusions of one apparently so unfit for
his task? The best answer is in the words of his Reviewer.[145]

"Briefly it is to be said that the chapters in this book on
heterogenesis, contain a reckless attempt to revolutionize biological
doctrine without a single demonstration of fact to justify it, even
if it be admitted that the observations and drawings cited are
accurate. Revolution in science as in politics can only be justified by
success--a wanton attempt in either sphere must deserve the severest
condemnation. Dr. Bastian by his exhibition of himself in dealing with
heterogenesis writes himself down as incapable--as inadmissible in the
character of a witness in a scientific investigation. The Sphagnum
delusion is now explained, for it becomes evident that we have to deal
with an individual with whom such delusions are no rare exceptions.

"We should indeed be sorry to believe that Dr. Bastian is himself
aware of the injury which he is doing to the cause of science, by
promulgating these rash assertions as to the beginnings and changes of
living things; we altogether decline to entertain the notion that he
is himself conscious of the baselessness and flimsy character of his
startling discoveries, and is nevertheless willing at the expense of
injury to the cause of intellectual progress, to obtain for himself
a temporary notoriety. On the contrary, we believe that he is under
the influence of a delusion, similar to those which from time to time
obtain notoriety in the case of 'spiritualists,' 'circle-squarers,'
and such victims of belief in the marvellous. The origin and mode of
growth of such delusions form a very interesting psychological study,
and it is only when we have obtained a proper conception of Dr. Bastian
as an abnormal psychological phenomenon that we can hope rightly to
appreciate the whole of the statements made in his book.

"Delusion and self-deception are much commoner than the world is
generally accustomed to consider them. In a very well-known and often
quoted remark we have a recognition of the wide-spread occurrence of
delusions and an attempt to explain their origin; the saying to which
we allude is, 'The wish was father to the thought.' There cannot be the
least doubt that men are unconsciously hindered or misdirected in their
estimate of fact by previously formed desires. Such a desire acts on
the mind like the suggestion of the mesmerist to an individual who has
allowed himself to be brought into the hypnotic condition. In this way
many misconceptions and strange contradictions of testimony are to be
explained."

The importance of the subject is sufficient apology for so long a
quotation. But our quotations allow us to draw one conclusion; that
so far as Spontaneous Generation is concerned human knowledge is
exactly _in statu quo_. Up to this time there is no evidence, worth
consideration, that establishes a single good case of heterogenesis;
nay, rather all evidence points to the conclusion that Protoplasm
is invariably derived from pre-existing Protoplasm, at least under
existing conditions. Then too there is no fact known which enables us
to say how Protoplasm arose in the first instance. On this point we are
in the darkness of complete scientific ignorance. The whole discussion
may be well closed by a striking passage from Professor Huxley's before
quoted address.[146]

"But though I cannot express this conviction of mine too strongly,
I must carefully guard myself against the supposition that I intend
to suggest that no such thing as abiogenesis ever has taken place
in the past, or ever will take place in the future. With organic
chemistry, molecular physics, and physiology yet in their infancy, and
every day making prodigious strides, I think it would be the height
of presumption for any man to say that the conditions under which
matter assumes the properties we call 'vital' may not, some day, be
artificially brought together. All I feel justified in affirming is,
that I see no reason for believing that the feat has been performed yet.

"And, looking back through the prodigious vista of the past, I find
no record of the commencement of life, and therefore I am devoid of
any means of forming a definite conclusion as to the conditions of
its appearance. Belief, in the scientific sense of the word, is a
serious matter, and needs strong foundations. To say, therefore, in the
admitted absence of evidence, that I have any belief as to the mode
in which the existing forms of life have originated, would be using
words in a wrong sense. But expectation is permissible where belief is
not; and if it were given me to look beyond the abyss of geologically
recorded time to the still more remote period when the earth was
passing through physical and chemical conditions, which it can no more
see again than a man can recal his infancy, I should expect to be a
witness of the evolution of living protoplasm from not living matter.
I should expect to see it appear under forms of great simplicity,
endowed, like existing Fungi, with the power of determining the
formation of new protoplasm from such matters as ammonium carbonates,
oxalates and tartrates, alkaline and earthy phosphates, and water,
without the aid of light. That is the expectation to which analogical
reasoning leads me; but I beg you once more to recollect that I have no
right to call my opinion anything but an act of philosophical faith."

Obviously, as Professor Huxley points out, between philosophical faith
and philosophical knowledge there is a chasm to be bridged over. But
should the hypothesis ever be verified, it would make no difference
to the reasonings of the Natural Theologian--since the concurrence
of conditions necessary for the production of the phænomenon would
manifestly ensue upon some definite though recondite law, at present
beyond our ken.


I.--ON MATERIALISM.

The ambiguities attaching to this term were mentioned in a foot-note
on our very first page. Since that note was written, the tendency of
scientific men has been to increase the number of hypotheses respecting
the nature and laws of the material world, and by consequence to
multiply the shades of signification conveyed by the word Materialism.

So long as such distinctions are confined to the territory of pure
science, whether that of the Physicist or of the Biologist, they do
not in themselves affect the religious (or ethico-religious) position
of any thinker; and need not, therefore, occasion any trouble to the
Natural Theologian. But it is worth while to observe how rashly, on
account of some such scientific discussion, a writer is said to be a
Materialist or no Materialist, by persons who (understanding little
or nothing of science themselves) drag the unhappy author outside the
pale of his own domain, and affix to him some religious or irreligious
epithet which he has neither desired nor deserved.

The philosophic idealist often escapes; he is pronounced "no
Materialist," because he doubts the substantive existence of Matter,
yet he may and often does hold that the ideal thing he calls his soul,
has a life inextricably bound up with that other ideal thing he calls
his body, and must perish with it, never to live again.

We may add the useful remark that so far as Ethico-religious
Materialism is concerned it is much more easily tested by the
Doctrine of Soul than the Doctrine of Body. For example, consistent
Materializers will always maintain that the reasoning human soul
differs from the animal soul of brutes, not in quality, but in
quantity. Dr. L. Büchner (sometimes called a "crass Materialist")
makes this assertion repeatedly, and explains it by adding--"Man has
no absolute advantage above the animal; his mental superiority being
merely relative. There is not one intellectual faculty which belongs to
man _exclusively_; his superiority is merely the result of the greater
intensity, and the proper combination, of his capacities. The enlarged
human faculties are, as we have already seen, the natural and necessary
result of the higher and more perfect development of his material organ
of thought."[147]

Turning to a more refined species of Materialism, we find a similar
value always placed on the dogma that whatever differences exist
between man and brute, they amount to a distinction not of kind, but
only of degree. The consequences hence deduced are of the very greatest
importance, and they run much as follows. No one will venture to assert
that the power of what has been hastily called Volition is, or can be,
an endowment of mere animal nature. We do not lay upon the tiger (as we
do popularly lay upon the tyrant) a moral responsibility on account of
his savage appetites. Their indulgence does not flow from any reasoning
faculty of Will. His cruelty is the movement of automatic instincts,
governed by laws like those which rule over the inanimate world; more
complicated probably, but no-ways different in their essence. The
fall of a stone, and the spring of a tiger, are both consequences of
determining laws inherent in their several modes of existence, and
moving both as machinery is moved by a steam engine. Now, a difference
in degree only, argues no difference in those essential laws which
rule equally the greater and the less. The giant and the dwarf are
alike subject to the same laws of body and mind; and man is (as we have
seen) but a mentally taller brute. The tyrant, therefore, resembles
the tiger; the human animal is moved as the other animals are moved,
and, like them, is subject to the determining law, just as the lifeless
world is so subjected. In plain words, then, this human machine is
moved like other machines. What we call Reason, spontaneity, volition,
are, when analysed, no exceptions to the law-governed mechanism of the
world we live in. Our motives make us, not we our motives. The faculty
we exercise under the name of Choice, is really neither more nor less
than a determined, unalterable, impulsion; the result of a mechanical
law. And this law has formed and now constitutes the Universe.[148]

Refined Materialism proceeds to ask in the next place, what more do
we know of Matter than its rigid undeviating reign of Law?--The great
Globe itself obeys the same Laws as the falling stone: they pervade
and direct the mechanism of the starry heavens. Life does not exempt
either vegetable or animal from the same rule of law. We have just
seen that Mankind is _not_ so made to differ, as to permit a plea of
exemption from the same empire. Ascend from Protoplasm to the highest
human intelligence,--one heritage devolves through brute to man. The
same mechanical law accounts for the "Psychogeny" of both. Mechanical
Law, in its ramifications, is (as has been said) all we really know
of Matter. It now turns out that all Mind has been developed by this
same ever-ramifying law; may be analyzed back into its elements; is
most truly expressed by its symbols; and can never be exempted from its
determinations. Mind, therefore, and Matter are resolvable into this
sole unity--the Law of ultimate mechanical movement and impulsion.

We have called this system a refined Materialism; but another name for
one of its most influential shapes has appeared and made considerable
progress, particularly on the continent of Europe. This name is Monism;
and is intended to declare that every other belief must be at best a
Dualism.[149]

What then is the true human meaning of this Monistic creed? Our souls
(if we have souls), possess the image, not of Absolute Being and
Personality, but of abstract Fate, and rayless, eyeless Necessity.
We live machines; those supposed moralities we commonly miscall
our Volitions, spring out from beneath the moving wheels. We die,
as machines go to pieces when the wheels get out of gear; and no
other account need be asked of the broken clock-work. Here lies a
man, close beside him moulders a dog. They are now what they always
were,--copartners in the same inexorable destiny.

Inexorable:--yes; for, standing beside these two graves, we see where
our higher Philosophy and our religious hopes alike lie buried. What
is Mechanical Law to us? The antithesis of Providence; therefore, with
the edict which proclaims its sway, all our prayers are ended. And
what is Man, compared with the equal dog who bears him company? One
event befals them both; yet we may ask whether before or after that one
event, Man has or can have any preeminence above the beast? Let him
be spoken of as statesman, warrior, orator, poet, painter, sculptor,
musician; none of these epithets convey any truth. He may possibly be
a speaking, striking, weaving, drawing, colouring, sound-producing
machine. But the Designer of the Universe and the human artist have
disappeared together. What we took for the author of immortal works,
an original genius, an inspired hero of his kind, "a man and a leader
of men," was a piece of wheel-work driven by unalterable law. There
was the same "must be" to him as to his dog. There never was and never
could have been, nor yet ever will be any _essential_ difference; two
spirits are gone downwards to the earth.

Man has not even the sad preeminence of Sin. Where can he find or make
room for wrong-doing, when impelling Mechanism determines all? And
where Sin is not, Repentance cannot come.

Hope is shut out along with Remorse and its unmeaning pains. Man has no
ladder of ascent left him; and why should he wish to climb? If there
were such a ladder as Jacob dreamed, its base must rest on lifeless
Law, and at its summit there would only be this same Law, enthroned and
Deified.

Thus, when the primæval Nebula arose in Space (how or why it arose
is not told us), its vapoury Law contained all that is, and all that
can be:--Plato and Shakespeare, Moses and St. John glimmered in its
tremulous twilight. Worlds inanimate and animate scintillated from
its fires. What we call Heaven and Earth are its dumb children, its
law-determined Evolutions. Thou and I, O reader, have harboured
strange fancies;--let them go;--we are but parts of the Whole; and
the Whole is a mechanical Unity. Now that we find ourselves disabused
and illuminated, our great difficulty may perhaps be to fall down,
Strauss-like, and worship this _Universum_. Can such worship, or such
an object of worship, bless and satisfy our high aspiring race? Eyes
that have watched for Righteousness, hearts that have yearned after
it, let the answer come from you! In this answer lives or dies the
twofold belief of the Natural Theologian, the twofold hope resulting
to Mankind. The belief, that is to say, in a personal Immortality, the
belief in a personal God.

It may now seem plain that the readiest test of moral or religious
Materialism is its doctrine, not of Body but of Soul. There is no
charm in such a word as Matter to differentiate the character of
a philosophy. Looking at the material world, any thinker may be a
Natural Realist or a Pure Idealist; yet being either or neither, he
may materialize, or the reverse, so far as Morals and Religion are
concerned. The simple question ought rather to be; Is man mechanically
governed by the Law which rules the world of Abiology (the lifeless
inorganic world), or is he, can he become, a Law unto himself?[150]

It would be unfair to omit impressing upon the reader's mind
that physical science _per se_ is by no means answerable for
ethico-religious Materialism. As a question of fact, it does not seem
established that students of Nature, whether physicists or biologists,
have, as such, been the chief offenders. On the contrary, for every
single instance of the kind, it seems quite probable that at least
_two_ metaphysical writers might be found guilty. Obviously, some such
large proportion may reasonably be expected, when we consider that
Determinism, (the word Mill and others prefer to Necessity), is a
theory involving a certain kind of metaphysics.

But the really largest crop of materializers arises from a Debateable
Land. There is a hybrid class of "thinkers," concerning whom the best
physical-science authorities allege that "such nebulous rascals are
mere metaphysicians," while metaphysical speculators, pure and simple,
feel quite sure that "though under a cloud, the gentlemen must be
Physicists."[151]

So far as Biology[152] is concerned, let the reader compare Mr.
Herbert Spencer's latest utterances already referred to, (in _Essays_,
Vol. III. _sub. fin._, especially pp. 249-50), with the following
passages from Mr. Huxley. "I suppose if there be an 'iron' law, it
is that of gravitation; and if there be a physical necessity, it is
that a stone, unsupported, must fall to the ground. But what is all we
really know and can know about the latter phenomenon? Simply, that,
in all human experience, stones have fallen to the ground under these
conditions; that we have not the smallest reason for believing that
any stone so circumstanced will not fall to the ground; and that we
have, on the contrary, every reason to believe that it will so fall.
It is very convenient to indicate that all the conditions of belief
have been fulfilled in this case, by calling the statement that
unsupported stones will fall to the ground, 'a law of nature.' But
when, as commonly happens, we change _will_ into _must_, we introduce
an idea of necessity which most assuredly does not lie in the observed
facts, and has no warranty that I can discover elsewhere. For my part,
I utterly repudiate and anathematize the intruder. Fact I know; and
Law I know; but what is this Necessity, save an empty shadow of my own
mind's throwing? But if it is certain that we can have no knowledge of
the nature of either matter or spirit, and that the notion of necessity
is something illegitimately thrust into the perfectly legitimate
conception of law, the materialistic position that there is nothing in
the world but matter, force, and necessity, is as utterly devoid of
justification as the most baseless of theological dogmas." ("On the
Physical Basis of Life," _Lay Sermons_, pp. 157-8.)

       *       *       *       *       *

And again (pp. 159-60):--

"We live in a world which is full of misery and ignorance, and the
plain duty of each and all of us is to try to make the little corner he
can influence somewhat less miserable and somewhat less ignorant than
it was before he entered it. To do this effectually it is necessary
to be fully possessed of only two beliefs: the first, that the order
of nature is ascertainable by our faculties to an extent which is
practically unlimited; the second, that our volition counts for
something as a condition of the course of events.

"Each of these beliefs can be verified experimentally, as often as we
like to try. Each, therefore, stands upon the strongest foundation upon
which any belief can rest, and forms one of our highest truths. If we
find that the ascertainment of the order of nature is facilitated by
using one terminology, or one set of symbols, rather than another, it
is our clear duty to use the former; and no harm can accrue, so long as
we bear in mind, that we are dealing merely with terms and symbols."

Symbols, are to the true philosopher like old-fashioned copper
"tokens," privately impressed with letters and devices, but lacking the
Royal image and superscription. They are, as Spencer and Huxley agree,
"unknown quantities;"--relativities not entities. They are employable
enough where they suit,[153] provided Mr. Huxley's _caveat_ (p. 161)
is steadily kept in mind. "The errors of systematic materialism may
paralyze the energies and destroy the beauty of a life."

The reader may be pleased to put the subject of Materialism before
himself in a compendious shape as follows:--If the question asked be,
"_What_ is Matter?" the answer appears little likely to be of moment
to morals or Natural Theology, except so far as human ignorance is
made a plea for Scepticism. But, if it is inquired, "whether the
_Mechanical_ Laws of Matter are the laws of Universal Nature, including
human nature? the issue becomes most momentous. The reply made, answers
another question of the deepest interest:--"Are there any conditions
under which a Science of Natural Theology is possible?" If Mechanism be
the law of the Universe, Natural Theology is plainly impossible.


FOOTNOTES:

[88] Professor Max Müller writes as follows.--"If philosophy has to
explain what is, not what ought to be, there will be and can be no
rest till we admit, what cannot be denied, that there is in man a
(third) faculty, which I call simply the faculty of apprehending the
Infinite, not only in religion, but in all things; a power independent
of sense and reason, a power in a certain sense contradicted by sense
and reason, but yet a very real power, which has held its own from the
beginning of the world, neither sense nor reason being able to overcome
it, while it alone is able to overcome both reason and sense." _Max
Muller's Lectures on the Science of Religion_.--Lect. I. New Ed. p. 20.
The use of the word faculty is defended in a note.

I quote this passage with pleasure, because one main objection brought
against the possible existence of such a faculty is taken from the
_negative form_ of the word Infinite. The Professor maintains that, as
a question of Philology, Infinite signifies an affirmative idea. In his
Lectures on Language, second series, p. 576. he writes thus. "There is
no Infinite, we are told, for as there is a Finite, the Infinite has
its limit in the Finite, it cannot be Infinite. Now all this is mere
playing on words without thoughts. Why is infinite a negative idea?
Because _infinite_ is derived from _finite_ by means of the negative
particle _in_! But this is a mere accident, it is a fact in the history
of language, and no more. The same idea may be expressed by the
Perfect, the Eternal, the Self-existing, which are positive terms, or
contain at least no negative element. That negative words may express
positive ideas was known perfectly to Greek philosophers such as
Chrysippus, and they would as little have thought of calling _immortal_
a negative idea as they would have considered _blind_ positive. The
true idea of the Infinite is neither a negation nor a modification
of any other idea. The Finite, on the contrary, is in reality the
limitation or modification of the Infinite, nor is it possible, if we
reason in good earnest, to conceive of the Finite in any other sense
than as the shadow of the Infinite. Even Language will confess to this,
if we cross-examine her properly." He adds a happy quotation from
Roger Bacon: "'et dicitur infinitum non per privationem terminorum
quantitatis, sed per negationem corruptionis et non esse.' Oxford of
the nineteenth century need not be ashamed, as far as metaphysics are
concerned, of Oxford of the thirteenth." Coleridge's theory of the
Intuitive reason is well known to most readers.

[89] Metaph. XII. 7.

[90] Hamilton's Discussions, vol. 1. Art. 1.

[91] Very few people have ever sate down and sturdily endeavoured to
realize before their mind's eye, the distinct idea of any _other_
mind separate from themselves and independently subsistent. A short
trial will shew the difficulty, perhaps impossibility of the proposed
realization.

Any one who tries and fails, may be glad to learn that eminent
metaphysicians have retreated in despair from the task of justifying,
by _argument_, our belief in any minds other than our own. To common
sense, it may seem a natural inquiry whether this metaphysical failure
holds _morally, in foro conscientiæ_, as a valid excuse for most men's
neglect of other men's rights and interests? If _not_, it would appear
that morality is a more delicate test of certainty, than some sorts of
metaphysics.

[t] For the information of some readers, and the entertainment of
others, a few of the less popularized theories respecting Self-ness or
Personal Identity are thrown into Additional Note A.

[u] Nothing is more common in conversation than for a talker to
affirm that such and such a position must be _untrue_ "because it
is inconceivable." The assertor ought in return to be asked one or
two questions, _e.g._, "Do you mean inconceivable to yourself or to
the generality of Mankind?" If the latter, "Is the contradictory
also inconceivable?" Again, "Do you mean by the word inconceivable,
_unthinkable_ or _unimaginable_?" Few people clearly consider this last
distinction. Further, "If unthinkable, is it absolutely so, or only
very difficult to think?" And it seems likewise important to deliberate
whether any position ought to be pronounced absolutely unthinkable,
unless the human mind lies under a stern necessity of thinking and
accepting its contradictory.

[92] "Conceivable" and other like expressions are always relative to
conceiving minds; and what appears either conceivable or inconceivable
to one mind, may be the contrary to another. A painter not only
conceives,--but draws a Centaur, and places him feeding on a wide
plain or sloping hill side. But, can the Physiologist conceive such a
monstrosity? The solution is easy; the painter thinks of his figure,
the physiologist of the structure; and this example furnishes a good
caution as to the use of similar words.

From words we may pass to ideas. Take any conception involving the
condition of Time or Space,--(those two optical tubes of our mind's
perceiving eye),--and place it before the understanding; first as
a _Finite_ and next as an _Infinite_. The result is a conflict of
arguments, ending in a contradiction of all possibility that _either_
way the conception can be true. Any one moderately acquainted with
Kant's best-known work, is aware that, by thus treating the world's
existence, he raises overwhelming difficulties against its being
_either_ limited or unlimited in extent;--eternal _or_ having a
commencement in duration;--(p. 338. Ed. Rosenkranz) yet, the world
_does_ exist in fact. Kant goes on to subject other cosmological ideas
to the same enigmatical reasoning, with the same consequences.

Some readers of purely modern science, may illustrate this question
of the "_conceivable_" by what has been written on that extraordinary
riddle, the "_four_ dimensions of space." They will see opinions _pro_
and _con_ in an article by Professor Sylvester in Nature vol. 1. A
note (p. 238) contains one conclusion of the Professor's, interesting
as _his_ answer to a question asked by us a few paragraphs back.
He says, "If an Aristotle, or Descartes, or Kant assures me that
he recognises God in the conscience, I accuse my own blindness if
I fail to see with him.... I acknowledge two separate sources of
authority,--the collective sense of mankind, and the illumination of
privileged intellects." Plato then may have really _seen_ more than
Lucretius--Coleridge more than Comte or Littré.

[v] The advantages and defects of the optical structure of our human
eyes have been carefully estimated by Helmholtz. He has also discussed
the difficulties attending eyesight considered as a sensation and
perception. Extracts from his clear yet popular Lectures are given in
Additional Note B.

[93] _Proceedings of the Royal Institution._ V. 456.

[94] All theories of light require these immense numbers. Sir J.
Herschel says there is no "mode of conceiving the subject which does
not call upon us to admit the exertion of mechanical forces which may
well be termed infinite." The numeration in the text is a rough and
ready shape of statement at once intelligible. But it is interesting
to view the subject more exactly.--Light travels in one second
192,000 miles. Each mile contains 63,360 inches, and in each inch are
39,000 waves of red light, calculated at their _mean_ length. Now,
multiply these three sets of figures together, and we get a rate of
474,439,680,000,000 red waves per second. The mean length of a violet
wave is the 1/57500th part of an inch; and by a like multiplication we
find a product of 699,494,400,000,000 of violet light-strokes thrown
upon the retina in each second. The phrase "_millions of millions_"
is used in the text, because few people realize the idea of any
arithmetical whole beyond a million.

[95] "What we hear" writes Professor Max Müller "when listening to
a chorus or a symphony is a commotion of elastic air, of which the
wildest sea would give a very inadequate image. The lowest tone which
the ear perceives is due to about 30 vibrations in one second, the
highest to about 4,000. Consider then what happens in a _Presto_ when
thousands of voices and instruments are simultaneously producing waves
of air, each wave crossing the other, not only like the surface waves
of the water, but like spherical bodies, and, as it would seem, without
any perceptible disturbance; consider that each tone is accompanied
by secondary tones, that each instrument has its peculiar _timbre_,
due to secondary vibrations; and, lastly, let us remember that all
this cross-fire of waves, all this whirlpool of sound, is moderated by
laws which determine what we call harmony, and by certain traditions
or habits which determine what we call melody--both these elements
being absent in the songs of birds--that all this must be reflected
like a microscopic photograph on the two small organs of hearing,
and there excite not only perception, but perception followed by a
new feeling even more mysterious, which we call either pleasure or
pain; and it will be clear that we are surrounded on all sides by
miracles transcending all we are accustomed to call miraculous, and
yet disclosing to the genius of an Euler or a Newton laws which admit
of the most minute mathematical determination." _Science of Language_,
Second Series, p. 115.

[96] There is a much more scientific mode of trying this experiment. A
description of the instrument (Kaleidophone), and cuts of the figures
produced, may be seen in Tyndall on Sound, pp. 132. seq.

[97] There is reason for believing that a large proportion of animal
eyes see much as ours do when in a normal state. Colour blindness
is frequent in Man and occurs between red and green, yet a bull
distinguishes the two like a _healthy_, human being. He is allured by
the sight of a green field, and lashes himself into fury when a red rag
is waved before him.

The eyes of insects are very far removed in structure from ours. A
butterfly's compound eye contains 17,000 tubes, that of the Mordella
beetle 25,000. Their perception of colours appears vivid and distinct.
They resemble birds, reptiles, and other creatures in choosing for
their lairs and resting-places objects _coloured like themselves_.
It is not difficult to mount one of these compound eyes, so as to
look through it by aid of a lens placed in focus. Leeuwenhoeck looked
through the eye of a dragon fly (made up of 12,544 tubes), "and viewed
the steeple of a church which was 299 feet high, and 750 feet from the
place where he stood. He could plainly see the steeple, though not
apparently larger than the point of a fine needle. He also viewed a
house in the same manner, and could discern the front, distinguish the
doors and windows, and perceive whether they were open or shut." See
_Insect Miscellanies_, p. 129.

[98] Two points connected with colour admit of being easily
experimented on, and deserve from their interest to be made the
subjects of repeated observations.

The first has relation to the question of _primary_ colours;--are they
alike in man and in _all_ the lower animals?--In birds and reptiles
there are anatomical reasons for believing the primaries to be red,
yellow, and blue. But are they the same in our race?--may they not
more probably be red, green, and violet? In this case yellow is the
transition from red to green, blue from green to violet. As colour
blindness consists in an insensibility to red, and as the outer circle
of the field of vision is feeble in its reds, the number of experiments
which might be suggested is evidently considerable.

Let a person place two threads respectively red and green near the
bridge of the nose, so as to be seen by the inner angle of the pupil
only. If dexterously moved, both seem green;--if not, both will in
time become black. Where the want of sensitive appreciation of red is
great, the same result follows in every part of the field of sight.
Thus reverend gentlemen in former times have been induced to wear
scarlet hose under the impression that they had put on black silk;
and in these railroad days many persons find themselves unable to
distinguish between the safety and the danger signal lights. It seems
strange indeed that any scientific advisers of railway Boards should
have recommended for use the two colours, above all others, most likely
to get confounded.

The theory which supposes red, green, and violet to be Man's three
primary colours is the hypothesis of our great countryman Dr. Thomas
Young, and deserves much more consideration than was for a long time
awarded it. If we may judge of his theory by his appreciation of
pictures it must have been excellent;--the present writer saw with
admiration in 1845 the grand series of Reynolds' portraits which Dr.
Young had left behind him.

The second topic of interest is the inquiry into the number and tone
of subjective colours. A perfect theory of colour ought, of course, to
embrace all possible human sensations of the kind. Now many persons
are able to see in dreams a rich amber light far softer and more pure
than any tint ever beheld by the Eye. It generally appears to irradiate
Space, and silvery figures, most often the celestial orbs, float within
it. A still more beautiful production of reflex energy exerted after
tranquil rest is the blending of delicate green with a hyacinthine hue
quite strange to this world, and indescribably lovely in its tender
shadings off. By means of this subjective activity the experiments of
Goethe and J. Müller may be varied almost _ad libitum_. The easiest
plan is on first waking to keep the eyelids steadily closed, and
watch for the unbidden rise of tints. Persons of strong pictorial and
poetic powers can, after some practice, control their appearance and
succession; and much diversity may be produced by slightly separating
the fringe of eyelashes and looking between the loosely pressed
fingers. The remarkable point in these and similar experiments seems to
be that we are thus enabled to gaze upon beauties more marvellous than
the outward eye ever beheld--yet we _see_ them.

Another and a painful source of knowledge on this subject consists
in registering the visual impressions of persons bodily or mentally
diseased. The difference between these and the normal impressions of
healthy people would seem to arise from reflex action, the disordered
sensory or mind reacting upon the optic apparatus; or, as it may
be said, the centre of our being is through these aberrations made
manifest in its control of the circumference.

Now, it will be obvious to any reflective person how very important
all information we can acquire respecting this central empire over the
impressions of our sense-nerves may become when we try to estimate the
conditions of human knowledge. If it be true that the Mind imposes
laws of activity on the nervous system even when receiving impressions
from it, then the necessity we are under of _thinking_ in accordance
with certain inly imposed laws receives a most striking illustration.
And the inference from it carries an _a fortiori_ probability
since our thoughts lie nearer to our mental centre than any of our
sense-impressions.

[99] Nerves of common feeling are acutely sensitive when divided, and
the patient animal under a Majendie or a dentist utters a sharp shriek.
The case is different with motor nerves, with those of the sympathetic
system, and with (what is more to our purpose) nerves of sensation. It
seems clear that mechanical injuries, or even touches, excite them in
the direction of their own special functions. Auditory nerves feel a
shock as a sound,--optic nerves receive it as a sudden and brilliant
light. We are doubly assured from these effects of the true functions
belonging to the several sets of nerves. Disease and injury are great
discoverers of what ought to be healthy susceptibilities. In such
cases, however, they prove also something more agreeable to think upon.
They prove that suffering is confined within definite limits, and that
_economy_ of pain forms part of the universal design, for the sensitive
animal as well as the sensitive man. If all our nerves shrank equally
with equal tenderness, life would be a history of protracted agony. Yet
one might have expected, _primâ facie_, that a fibre which telegraphs
shapes and colours with their blendings, would eloquently tell the
story of its own occasional anguish. And our whole nervous framework
might have been conceived as an instrument of torture. It has not been
so constituted.

_Per contra_, the nerves of common feeling assert their own
vocation.--"A brazen canstick turned" sets the teeth on edge, and
troubles the skin with horripilation. Believers in ghosts--and also
disbelievers--are aware that some sights

    "Make knotted and combined locks to part,
    And each particular hair to stand on end."

For extended information on this subject compare Additional Note C.

[100] Aristotle so described it before Mr. Bain and other modern
writers, "[Greek: to gar horaton esti chrôma]," De Anima II. 7. 1.
As Kampe carefully observes, "so ist die Farbe (nicht die gefärbten
Körper) das Eigenthümliche des Gesichtssinns." See also his note,
Erkenntnisstheorie des Aristoteles, p. 88.

[w] Compare Helmholtz on "The Sensation of Sight," _Lectures_, pp. 256,
7, and 259.

"We have already seen enough to answer the question whether it is
possible to maintain the natural and innate conviction that the quality
of our sensations, and especially our sensations of sight, give us a
true impression of corresponding qualities in the outer world. It is
clear that they do not. The question was really decided by Johannes
Müller's deduction from well ascertained facts of the law of specific
nervous energy. Whether the rays of the sun appear to us as colour,
or as warmth, does not at all depend upon their own properties, but
simply upon whether they excite the fibres of the optic nerve, or
those of the skin. Pressure upon the eyeball, a feeble current of
electricity passed through it, a narcotic drug carried to the retina
by the blood, are capable of exciting the sensation of light just as
well as the sunbeams. The most complete difference offered by our
several sensations, that namely between those of sight, of hearing,
of taste, of smell, and of touch--this deepest of all distinctions,
so deep that it is impossible to draw any comparison of likeness, or
unlikeness, between the sensations of colour and of musical tones--does
not, as we now see, at all depend upon the nature of the external
object, but solely upon the central connections of the nerves which
are affected.... But not only uneducated persons, who are accustomed
to trust blindly to their senses, even the educated, who know that
their senses may be deceived, are inclined to demur to so complete a
want of any closer correspondence in kind between actual objects and
the sensations they produce than the law I have just expounded. For
instance, natural philosophers long hesitated to admit the identity
of the rays of light and of heat, and exhausted all possible means of
escaping a conclusion which seemed to contradict the evidence of their
senses.

"Another example is that of Goethe, as I have endeavoured to show
elsewhere. He was led to contradict Newton's theory of colours,
because he could not persuade himself that white, which appears to
our sensation as the purest manifestation of the brightest light,
could be composed of darker colours. It was Newton's discovery of the
composition of light that was the first germ of the modern doctrine
of the true functions of the senses; and in the writings of his
contemporary, Locke, were correctly laid down the most important
principles on which the right interpretation of sensible qualities
depends. But, however clearly we may feel that here lies the difficulty
for a large number of people, I have never found the opposite
conviction of certainty derived from the senses so distinctly expressed
that it is possible to lay hold of the point of error: and the reason
seems to me to lie in the fact that beneath the popular notions on the
subject lie other and more fundamentally erroneous conceptions."

[101] Is there, asks Idealistic Scepticism, any outside world at all?

We have all of us always believed in the veritable existence of this
outside world from our childhood. So have we believed always in our own
real and continued personal existence. The unyielding objectivities
concerning which our senses inform us--the identical Self which
receives their information--are entities no man ordinarily thinks of
calling in question.

Let any one sit down and try to imagine himself a human animal let
loose upon life without a firm belief in either of these two primary
convictions. What could life be to him? to his descendants? to the
world of men if similarly unbelieving? Yet what are the conditions
or evidences of veracity upon which his and his fellows' present
convictions must necessarily repose? Can he and others help believing
them true? and why?--This "why" is a safe answer to the most plausible
as well as the most refined objection against such primary beliefs as
those premised by Natural Theology.

[102] Cheselden's case is reported in the Philosophical Transactions
for 1728, and also in his Anatomy. Respecting the point above quoted he
is confirmed by Mr. Nunneley, "_On the Organs of Vision_," 1858.

[103] See Dr. Carpenter's Principles of Human Physiology. Ed. 7. p.
713. § 635.

[x] The following quaint apology for our senses at the expense of our
understanding may be new to the majority of my readers:--

"We have seen two notorious instances of _sensitive deception_, which
justifie the charge of _Petron. Arbiter_.

    Fallunt nos oculi, vagique sensus
    Oppressâ ratione mentiuntur.

And yet to speak properly, and to do our _senses_ right, simply they
are not deceived, but only administer an occasion to our forward
_understandings_ to deceive themselves: and so though they are some
way accessory to our delusion; yet the more principal faculties are
the _Capital offenders_. Thus if the _Senses_ represent the _Earth_ as
_fixt_ and _immoveable_; they give us the truth of their _Sentiments_:
To _sense_ it is _so_, and it would be deceit to present it otherwise.
For (as we have shewn) though it do _move_ in itself; it _rests_ to us,
who are carry'd with it.... But if hence our Understandings falsely
deduct, that there is the same quality in the _external impressor_;
'tis, it is _criminal_, our _sense_ is _innocent_. When the _Ear_
tingles, we really hear a _sound_: If we judge it without us, it's
the fallacy of our _Judgments_. The _apparitions_ of our frighted
_Phancies_ are real _sensibles_: But if we translate them without the
compass of our Brains, and apprehend them as external objects; it's
the unwary rashness of our _Understanding_ deludes us. And if our
disaffected Palates resent nought but bitterness from our choicest
viands, we truly tast the unpleasing quality, though falsely conceive
it in that, which is no more then the occasion of its production. If
any find fault with the novelty of the notion; the learned St. _Austin_
stands ready to confute the charge: and they who revere _Antiquity_,
will derive satisfaction from so venerable a suffrage. He tells us,
_Si quis remum frangi in aquâ opinatur, et, cum_ _aufertur, integrari;
non malum habet internuncium, sed malus est Judex_. And onward to this
purpose, The sense could not otherwise perceive it in the _water_,
neither ought it: For since the _Water_ is one thing, and the _Air_
another; 'tis requisite and necessary, that the _sense_ should be as
different as the _medium_: Wherefore the Eye sees aright; if there be
a mistake, 'tis the Judgement's the Deceiver. Elsewhere he saith, that
our Eyes misinform us not, but faithfully transmit their resentment to
the mind. And against the _Scepticks_, That it's a piece of injustice
to complain of our _senses_, and to exact from them an account, which
is beyond the sphear of their notice: and resolutely determines,
_Quicquid possunt videre oculi, verum vident_. So that what we have
said of the _senses deceptions_, is rigidly to be charg'd only on our
careless Understandings, misleading us through the ill management of
sensible informations." Glanvill, _Vanity of Dogmatizing_. Chap. x.
First Ed. p. 91, seq.

The reader may like to consider how far Glanvill's apology for the
senses is removed from the following propositions laid down by a recent
writer just quoted who thus defends while he limits the veracity of
sense-impressions:--

"What we directly apprehend," writes Professor Helmholtz, "is not
the immediate action of the external exciting cause upon the ends
of our nerves, but only the changed condition of the nervous fibres
which we call the state of _excitation_ or functional activity." And
further on:--"The simple rule for all illusions of sight is this: _we
always believe that we see such objects as would, under conditions
of normal vision, produce the retinal image of which we are actually
conscious_. If these images are such as could not be produced by any
normal kind of observation, we judge of them according to their nearest
resemblance; and in forming this judgment, we more easily neglect the
parts of sensation which are imperfectly than those which are perfectly
apprehended. When more than one interpretation is possible, we usually
waver involuntarily between them; but it is possible to end this
uncertainty by bringing the idea of any of the possible interpretations
we choose as vividly as possible before the mind by a conscious effort
of the will." Helmholtz on _The Recent Progress of the Theory of
Vision_. pp. 230, 31 and p. 307.

[104] Two acute reasoners, who will be alternately acquitted of
madness by contending schools of thought, have arrived at conclusions
very favourable to the sanity of idealizing men. In his first lecture
at the Royal Institution, Professor Masson spoke in the following
terms of _Hume_ and _Fichte_. "There is the system of Nihilism, or,
as it may be better called, Non-Substantialism. According to this
system, the Phænomenal Cosmos, whether regarded as consisting of
two parallel successions of phænomena (Mind _and_ Matter), or of
only one (Mind _or_ Matter), resolves itself, on analysis, into an
absolute Nothingness,--mere appearances with no credible substratum of
Reality; a play of phantasms in a void. If there have been no positive
or dogmatic Nihilists, yet both Hume for one purpose, and Fichte
for another, have propounded Nihilism as the ultimate issue of all
reasoning that does not start with some _à priori_ postulate."--Recent
British Philosophy, p. 66. The reader will observe that to raise the
question fully, we have spoken of the special form of Idealism to
which Mr. Mill gives the first place in his description, (Examination
of Hamilton's Philosophy, p. 8.) "According to one of the forms, the
sensations which, in common parlance, we are said to receive from
objects, are not only all that we can possibly know of the objects, but
are all that we have any ground for believing to exist.----Those who
hold this opinion are said to doubt or deny the existence of matter.
They are sometimes called by the name Idealists, sometimes by that of
Sceptics, according to the other opinions which they hold. They include
the followers of Berkeley and those of Hume. Among recent thinkers,
the acute and accomplished Professor Ferrier, though by a circuitous
path, and expressing himself in a very different phraseology, seems to
have arrived at essentially the same point of view. These philosophers
maintain the Relativity of our knowledge in the most extreme form in
which the doctrine can be understood, since they contend, not merely
that all we can possibly know of anything is the manner in which it
affects the human faculties, but that there is nothing else to be
known; that affections of human or of some other minds are all that we
can know to exist."

Mr. Mill's own position will be found in his 11th Chapter. After
defining Matter to be a "Permanent Possibility of Sensation," (p.
227) and explaining his definition, he writes in a note (p. 232),
the following decisive sentences: "My able American critic, Dr. H.
B. Smith, contends through several pages that these facts afford no
proofs that objects _are_ external to us. I never pretended that they
do. I am accounting for our conceiving, or representing to ourselves,
the Permanent Possibilities as real objects external to us. I do not
believe that the real externality to us of anything, except other
minds, is capable of proof."

Mr. O'Hanlon's pamphlet entitled "A Criticism of John Stuart Mill's
Pure Idealism; and an attempt to shew that, if logically carried out,
it is Pure Nihilism," seems less known than it deserves to be. Mr.
Mill noticed and answered it in his 3rd Edition--chiefly among the
criticisms commencing p. 244.----Mr. O'Hanlon's early decease has
given a painful interest to his promising labours. Some paragraphs from
his now scarce pamphlet are placed at the end of Additional Note D, on
"Pure Idealism."

[105] _On Hamilton._ p. 6. Mill is thus echoed from across the
broad Atlantic;--"The profoundest question of philosophy turns
on the relation of Thought to Being, Mind to Matter, Subject to
Object, or (in empiricistic phrase) Organism to Environment. Is
the Organism purely the product of the Environment? Then we have
Empiricism, Sensationalism, Materialism, whose motto is that of
Destutt-Tracy,--"_Penser c'est sentir_." Is the Environment the product
of the Organism? Then we have Transcendentalism, Egoism, Idealism,
whose motto is that of Berkeley,--"The _esse_ of objects is _percipi_."
F. E. Abbot, in _The Index_ (American), for July 27, 1872.

[106] Lord Macaulay has some pertinent and characteristic remarks
concerning this topic in his literary estimate of Dr. Johnson. "How
it chanced that a man who reasoned on his premises so ably, should
assume his premises so foolishly, is one of the great mysteries of
human nature. The same inconsistency may be observed in the schoolmen
of the middle ages. Those writers show so much acuteness and force
of mind in arguing on their wretched data, that a modern reader is
perpetually at a loss to comprehend how such minds came by such data.
Not a flaw in the superstructure of the theory which they are rearing
escapes their vigilance. Yet they are blind to the obvious unsoundness
of the foundation. It is the same with some eminent lawyers. Their
legal arguments are intellectual prodigies, abounding with the happiest
analogies and the most refined distinctions. The principles of their
arbitrary science being once admitted, the statute-book and the reports
being once assumed as the foundations of reasoning, these men must
be allowed to be perfect masters of logic. But if a question arises
as to the postulates on which their whole system rests, if they are
called upon to vindicate the fundamental maxims of that system which
they have passed their lives in studying, these very men often talk
the language of savages or of children." (_Essays_, Ed. 1852. p. 175.)
As to the schoolmen, any one who wishes to form a fair idea of their
acuteness with little trouble to himself, may consult the "Synopsis
Distinctionum" of H. L. Castanæus, a book found in most learned
libraries.

[y] See Additional Note E.--The great interest of this subject for
our purpose lies in the circumstance that the relation of Theory to
Fact is in effect a question most closely akin to the one already
mooted concerning the relation of our Sensations to our Perceptions
(compare Additional Note B). These two questions are indeed so very
similar as to be in the main identical. What we want to learn regarding
both relations, is, _first_, the _extent_ of the relativity to our
human nature; in other words how _much we_ have _mentally put_ into
our Theories and Sensations _before_ we treat them as Facts and
Perceptions. _Secondly_, what reason we have for believing _any_ of
our knowledge comprehended under either or both of these relativities
(Perception and Fact) to be true _beyond_ our human sphere; and, above
all, whether we are able to assert, on good grounds, that such and such
parts of either kind of our knowledge are absolutely and immutably
true?--

If, for example, we ask--Is it thus true that there are real objects
external to ourselves? "I do not believe," Mr. Mill has told us, "that
the real externality to us of anything, except other minds, is capable
of proof." And a few lines further, "The view I take of externality,
in the sense in which I acknowledge it as real, could not be more
accurately expressed than in Professor Fraser's words." These are "For
ourselves we can conceive only--(1) An externality to our present
and transient experience in _our own_ possible experience past and
future, and (2) An externality to our own conscious experience, in the
contemporaneous, as well as in the past or future experience of _other
minds_." (_On Hamilton._ p. 232, note.) This explanation, Mill had
just before observed, is an externality in the only sense we need care
about; and it means in plain words, that we possess no absolutely true
but only some utilitarian knowledge of the real existence of an outside
world. We must, however, and do care infinitely more for another kind
of answer to quite another kind of question. Is the antithesis between
Right and Wrong,--the Moral Imperative "Do this and live, transgress
and die,"--absolutely and immutably true? If not, who would calculate
profit and loss as they are calculated in the Gospel; who would or
could believe in a Righteous that is to say, a Real and True God?

Many minds, appalled by the vastness of these issues, and finding no
satisfactory answer to questions of such infinite importance, have
fallen back on the position of Dr. Newman in his _Grammar of Assent_.
But the unsatisfactory characteristic attaching to this position,
is that there seems to be no _limit_ to such Assents, because there
appears no Reasonable canon or maxim to explain, defend, and regulate
them. To the far larger number of minds the problem states itself
as a dilemma. There are exactly two alternatives open to Man. His
choice lies between two contrasted positions--the most antagonistic
conceivable, yet both resulting from one common supposed fact.
Ignorance and impotence are the truest characters inscribed upon
our Reason. Man must decide either for an unlimited Doubt such as
that which Hume delineates, wide as the universal whole of our human
Existence; or else yield the kind of Assent to which Dr. Newman invites
as being the sole secure refuge for any soul driven by despair into a
recoil from utter absence of belief and hope--the want of everything
to trust and love. Now, let it be observed that an assent transcending
reasonable proof is, in effect, a confession that Reason falls short
of establishing those transcendental truths to which the mind has
thus assented. And contrariwise, limitless Doubt making all else
uncertain, affirms with unmistakeable decisiveness the impotence of
human Reason.--"The observation of human blindness and weakness," says
Hume, "is the result of all philosophy, and meets us at every turn,
in spite of our endeavours to elude or avoid it." Hence, we see that
Hume's conclusion is identical with that underlying a position directly
antagonistic to his own, and in this respect _les extrêmes se touchent_.

It follows, then, with equal clearness, that any Dilemma which
restricts human choice to the two alternatives above stated, rests
upon a denial that Man's Reason can guide Mankind to truth--(and by
consequence that he can ever feel after and find his God);--whilst,
conversely, this same denial, if posited as a basis of speculation,
permits no human choice beyond the two horns of a Dilemma thus made
necessarily imperative upon us all.

Neither alternative, however, can be accepted by the Natural
Theologian, nor can he possibly receive any such Dilemma as founded in
Truth or Reason. On the one hand the Superhuman, and Supernatural lie
outside his science which has for its sphere Nature, including Man's
Nature; and which steadily endeavours to attain the true interpretation
and evidence yielded by both Natures, to a belief extending beyond
their present territory and fluent conditions. On the other hand,
his science becomes impossible if unlimited Doubt is the sole dreary
prospect open to the philosophic inquirer. And with his science all
other sciences must perish. Doubt saps the foundations of them all;
common-sense facts, scientific theories, and practical every-day
beliefs, are all impartially shewn to be baseless. So far as our
realities are concerned

                        "We are such stuff
    As dreams are made on; and our little life
    Is rounded with a sleep."

Science is therefore an alien from Man's world; the soul an outcast
amid her own:--

    "As in strange lands a traveller walking slow,
      In doubt and great perplexity,
    A little before moon-rise hears the low
      Moan of an unknown sea;

    "And knows not if it be thunder or a sound
      Of stones thrown down, or one deep cry
    Of great wild beasts; then thinketh, 'I have found
      A new land, but I die.'"

"Not for this," says the same reflective poet--

                              "Not for this
    Was common clay ta'en from the common earth,
    Moulded by God, and tempered with the tears
    Of angels to the perfect shape of man."

Let it be observed in conclusion, that the mode in which common-sense
people are accustomed to treat the primary tenets of most sciences, and
the validity of their own ordinary beliefs, may be placed in curious
contrast with their attitude towards the proofs of Natural Theology.
In the former case, acceptance is easy and wholesale; in the latter,
every mind seems to bristle with objections. Now there are evidently
thousands who _must_ surrender their judgments to the demands of a
present and pressing utility, and must take upon trust a multitude
of maxims which they can never hope to investigate. The difficulties
necessarily involved in each and all of these easy acceptations thus
remain unsuspected, and cannot therefore be placed side by side with
the difficulties of Theism.

But, next arises a serious question. How far can a similar facility of
wholesale acceptance and a similar absence of comparison with deeper
truths, be considered a philosophic or even a fair procedure in the
case of men and women who _think_ themselves into Atheism?

[z] Neither can it be too often repeated that practical truth involves
an enormous amount of speculative difficulty, and is received
as the daily basis of human action in the face of doubts, which
speculatively considered are absolutely insoluble. There is (as will
appear in Chapter IV.) reason to extend this remark beyond what is
commonly called practical truth far into the realm of speculative
knowledge, or to speak more exactly, of all knowledge whatsoever.
Suppose, for instance, the continuity of our inward power of receiving
sense-impressions, of knowing, and reasoning; (our personal Identity)
is a groundless belief;--Suppose too that our sense-impressions
are reflections from self-created shadows and not from objective
realities;--_where_ can any knowledge be truly subsistent save in
that place of exile now generally termed "the Unknowable"? Compare
Additional Notes A and B appended to this present Chapter.

[107] La Philosophie en France. IX. p. 66.

[108] First Principles, p. 108.

[109] Lay Sermon delivered on Sunday, Jan. 7, 1866; in the collected
vol. pp. 19, 20.

[110] Essays I. p. 190.

[111] Ibid. p. 211.

[aa] Mr. Herbert Spencer has been freely criticized by Americans, in
part as not being sufficiently thorough--in part as being untrue to his
own position. A few quotations will be found in Additional Note F, on
"The Unknowable."

[ab] The paragraph, taken in its entireness, is pervaded with the vivid
sense of a Moral Law which can neither change nor perish--a Law at once
human and Divine. This strong protest is both in thought and expression
a complete contrast to the ordinary tone of Mr. Mill's disquisitions,
attempered as they generally are between benevolence and expediency.
Instead of pondering the Utilities of a race which, comparatively
speaking, began to exist yesterday, it appeals with decisive sternness,
once and for ever, to the Immutable and the Absolute. It reminds one of
a torch-bearing Prometheus pitted against the selfish despot of a new
and morally enfeebled Olympus. See Additional Note G.

[112] This sentence contains two propositions; the question of
speculative perplexity has been treated in this Chapter--that of
reasonable necessity is reserved for our next.

[113] On Hamilton, p. 242.

[114] Mill on Hamilton, p. 232, note.

[115] Ibid. p. 233, note.

[116] Ibid. p. 227.

[117] British Association Report, 1870. lxxvii. lxxxiv.

[118] The remark above made respecting a "_living laboratory_" will
be readily understood by every one who remembers the great mistakes
committed, some years ago, in treating the stomach as a mere chemical
workshop;--forgetful of its all-important endowment,--vitality. That
oversight has been alluded to here because it may yield a lesson to
Psychologists; for may not a far higher kind of endowment in like
manner be forgotten when men materialize the principles one and all on
which is conditioned the transforming power of mental assimilation?

[119] Lay Sermons, p. 160.

[120] And of more than one as we shall see hereafter. Its point will be
best understood upon a perusal of Additional Notes F and I.

[121] All these quotations will be found between pp. 332 and 360 of the
Treatise. Ed. 1817.

[122] Compare Mr. Green's Introduction to Hume's _Treatise on Human
Nature_, Vol. I., pp. 263, seq., where he discusses the bearing of this
subject upon Hume's doctrine of Cause and Effect.

[123] He sums up in the words of Goethe, thus given in the translation
of his lectures from which we have quoted--

    "Woe! woe!
    Thou hast destroyed
    The beautiful world
    With powerful fist;
    In ruin 'tis hurled,
    By the blow of a demigod shattered.
    The scattered
    Fragments into the void we carry,
    Deploring
    The beauty perished beyond restoring."


[124] "All the different sorts of rays which I have mentioned produce
one effect in common. They raise the temperature of the objects on
which they fall, and accordingly are all felt by our skin as rays of
heat." (p. 237.)

[125] The former of these two latter quotations has been cited already
in a foot-note on p. 164 _ante_. It is repeated here for the sake of
bringing together Masson's classification of Fichte, first as "_Pure_
Idealist," and secondly as "Nihilist." Mr. O'Hanlon's criticism of Mill
reaches exactly the same goal as regards that subtle controversialist.
His position is that Mill's Pure Idealism when analysed, turns out to
be Pure Nihilism.

[126] Compare Note B preceding.

[127] In the pamphlet referred to p. 165 _ante_, note. The quotations
in our text commence on its 5th page. The subject will be most easily
comprehended after a reperusal of the argument of Chap. III. pp.
164-172 inclusive.

[128] On p. 14 the ingenious writer adds a further argument based on
Mill's admissions. "If the fire apart from my consciousness be some
positive condition or conditions of warmth and light, if the corn be
some positive condition or conditions of food, my thesis is made out,
and your Pure Idealism falls to the ground. If, on the other hand, 'the
fire' be nothing positive apart from my consciousness, then, since it
is nothing at all when so apart, you can have no right to speak of
'modifications' taking place in it, whether we are asleep or awake,
present or absent."

[129] It is worth observing how truly our Bishop anticipated the
vulgar objection against his theory. Towards the end of his Dialogues
Hylas (who clings to the olden elemental nature) speaks thus: "To say,
There is no Matter in the World, is still shocking to me. Whereas
to say--There is no Matter, if by that Term be meant an unthinking
Substance existing without the Mind; but if by Matter is meant some
sensible Thing, whose Existence consists in being perceived, then there
is Matter:--this Distinction gives it quite another Turn; and Men will
come into your Notions with small Difficulty, when they are proposed in
that manner." Lord Byron condescended to repeat the "coxcombs' grin"--

    "When Bishop Berkeley said there was no matter,
      And prov'd it--'twas no matter what he said."


[130] Read for example the following eloquent passages from Berkeley's
"Three Dialogues." Philonous, who represents Berkeley himself, says:
"To me it is evident, for the Reasons you allow of, that sensible
Things cannot exist otherwise than in a Mind or Spirit. Whence I
conclude, not that they have no real Existence, but that seeing they
depend not on my Thought, and have an Existence distinct from being
perceived by me, _there must be some other Mind wherein they exist_. As
sure, therefore, as the sensible World really exists, so sure is there
an infinite omnipresent Spirit who contains and supports it.

"Hylas. What! This is no more than I and all Christians hold; nay,
and all others too who believe there is a God, and that he knows and
comprehends all Things.

"Phil. Ay, but here lies the Difference. Men commonly believe that all
Things are known or perceived by God, because they believed the Being
of a God, whereas I, on the other side, immediately and necessarily
conclude the Being of a God, because all sensible Things must be
perceived by Him.

"Hylas. But so long as we all believe the same thing, what matter is it
how we come by that Belief?

"Phil. But neither do we agree in the same Opinion. For Philosophers,
tho' they acknowledge all corporeal Beings to be perceived by God, yet
they attribute to them an absolute Subsistence distinct from their
being perceived by any Mind whatever, which I do not. Besides, is there
no Difference between saying, _There is a God, therefore he perceives
all Things_: and saying, _Sensible Things do really exist: and if they
really exist, they are necessarily perceived by an infinite Mind:
therefore there is an infinite Mind, or God?_ This furnishes you with a
direct and immediate Demonstration, from a most evident Principle, of
the _Being of a God_....

Hylas. It cannot be denied, there is something highly serviceable to
Religion in what you advance. But do you not think it looks very like
a Notion entertained by some eminent Moderns, of _seeing all things in
God_?

Phil. I would gladly know that Opinion; pray explain it to me.

Hylas. They conceive that the Soul, being immaterial, is incapable
of being united with material Things, so as to perceive them in
themselves, but that she perceives them by her Union with the Substance
of God, which being spiritual, is therefore purely intelligible, or
capable of being the immediate Object of a Spirit's Thought. Besides,
the Divine Essence contains in it Perfections correspondent to each
created Being; and which are, for that Reason, proper to exhibit or
represent them to the Mind.

Phil. I do not understand how our Ideas, which are Things altogether
passive and inert, can be the Essence, or any Part (or like any Part)
of the Essence or Substance of God, who is an impassive, indivisible,
purely active Being. Many more Difficulties and Objections there are,
which occur at first View against this Hypothesis, but I shall only
add, that it is liable to all the Absurdities of the common Hypotheses
in making a created World exist otherwise than in the Mind of a Spirit.
Beside all which it has this peculiar to itself; that it makes that
material World serve to no Purpose. And if it pass for a good Argument
against other Hypotheses in the Sciences, that they suppose Nature or
the Divine Wisdom to make something in vain, or do that by tedious
round-about Methods, which might have been performed in a much more
easy and compendious way, what shall we think of that Hypothesis which
supposes the whole World made in vain?

Hylas. But what say you, are not you too of Opinion that we see all
Things in God? If I mistake not, what you advance comes near it.

Phil. I entirely agree with what the Holy Scripture saith, _That in God
we live, and move, and have our Being_. But that we see Things in his
Essence after the manner above set forth, I am far from believing. Take
here in brief my Meaning. It is evident that the Things I perceive are
my own Ideas, and that no Idea can exist, unless it be in a Mind. Nor
is it less plain that these Ideas or Things by me perceived, either
themselves or their Archetypes exist independently of my Mind, since
I know myself not to be their Author, it being out of my Power to
determine at Pleasure what particular Ideas I shall be affected with
upon opening my Eyes or Ears. They must therefore exist in some other
Mind, whose Will it is they should be exhibited to me. The Things, I
say, immediately perceived, are Ideas or Sensations, call them which
you will. But how can any Idea or Sensation exist in, or be produced
by, anything but a Mind or Spirit? This, indeed, is inconceivable: and
to assert that which is inconceivable, is to talk Nonsense: Is it not?.

Hylas. Without doubt.

Phil. But on the other hand, it is very conceivable that they should
exist in, and be produced by, a Spirit; since this is no more than I
daily experience in myself, inasmuch as I perceive numberless Ideas;
and by an Act of my Will can form a great Variety of them, and raise
them up in my Imagination: Tho' it must be confessed, these Creatures
of the Fancy are not altogether so distinct, so strong, vivid, and
permanent, as those perceived by my Senses, which latter are called
_Real Things_. From all which I conclude, _there is a Mind which
affects me every Moment with all the sensible Impressions I perceive_.
And from the Variety, Order, and Manner of these, I conclude the Author
of them to be _wise, powerful, and good, beyond comprehension_. Mark it
well, I do not say, I see Things by perceiving that which represents
them in the intelligible Substance of God. This I do not understand;
but I say, The Things by me perceived are known by the Understanding,
and produced by the Will, of an infinite Spirit. And is not all this
most plain and evident? Is there any more in it, than what a little
Observation of our own Minds, and that which passes in them not only
enables us to conceive, but also obliges us to acknowledge?"

Numberless charming quotations might be added from the "Principles" as
well as the Dialogues, but those already given may suffice, and they
have been chosen now because not very commonly quoted.

[131] Hegel Encyklopädie T. i. S. 95. (Werke VI. 189.) The quotation
above is from Mr. Wallace's translation p. 153. Compare his Index.

[132] In the just published Edition of Hume's Treatise on Human Nature,
I. p. 140. We must all regret the loss of Dean Mansel's ultimate
thoughts on "The real error of Berkeley's Idealism." Letters &c. p.
391. But more than a dozen years earlier, he wrote, (_Prolegomena
Logica_, Chap. V.) "The fault of Berkeley did not consist in doubting
the existence of matter, but in asserting its non-existence." How far
Mansel himself went in the direction of this same doubt may be judged
from the following passage, which occurs in the Prolegomena one page
before. "Beyond the range of conscious beings, we can have only a
negative idea of substance. The name is applied in relation to certain
collections of sensible phenomena, natural or artificial, connected
with each other in various ways; by locomotion, by vegetation, by
contributing to a common end, by certain positions in space. But here
we have no positive notion of substance distinct from phenomena. I do
not attribute to the billiard ball a consciousness of its own figure,
colour, and motion; but, in denying consciousness, I deny the only
form in which unity and substance have been presented to me. I have
therefore no data for thinking one way or the other on the question.
Some kind of unity between the several phenomena may exist, or it may
not; but if it does exist, it exists in a manner of which I can form no
conception; and if it does not exist, my faculties do not enable me to
detect its absence." In other words (as Mr. O'Hanlon might have phrased
it) "My friend Smith is I know a person,--therefore a substance. But
Smith's hat and coat, being unconscious, lack the only forms in which
unity and substance have been presented to me. Smith's coat is blue,
its fabric woollen; his hat black, and of silken texture;--there
may or may not be unities in which these phenomena of colour and
structural appearance cohere; my faculties do not, however, enable me
to decide whether hat and coat are or are not _positively_ substantial
unifications.

It would appear from all this, that hats and coats and other familiar
so-called substances, are as little _essentially_ known to us as
that vast territory of supernatural Being which has been named the
"Unknowable."

[133] From Mr. Wallace's translation of Hegel's Logik, pp. 65, 8, and
9. As the translator preserves the numbering of the Sections, reference
is easy to the original German. Hegel adds a remark well worthy of
attention:--"The scepticism of Hume, by whom this observation was
chiefly made, should be clearly marked off from Greek scepticism. Hume
founds his remarks on the truth of the empirical element, on feeling
and sensation, and proceeds to attack universal truths and laws,
because they do not derive their authority from sense-perception. So
far was ancient scepticism from making feeling and sensation a canon
of truth, that it turned against the deliverances of sense first of
all."--Ibid. p. 69.

[134] Pp. 234-341. The preface to this volume is dated February 1874.

[135] Martineau's conception discussed by Spencer is hampered by a
theory of Matter difficult _per se_.

[136] See back pp. 76-8 and 107 (end of note) and connect with these
passages the oft-repeated Wordsworthian maxim:--

 "We murder to dissect."


[137] See our Chapter VI. _On Causation_.

[138] The paragraph cited in the text of Chapter III. concludes with
these words:--"I will call no being good, who is not what I mean when
I apply that epithet to my fellow-creatures; and if such a being can
sentence me to hell for not so calling him, to hell I will go."

Now, no man can sit down and _calculate_ himself into Mr. Mill's
conviction thus enounced; neither could any cool process of argument
have ever kindled such a flame. A sternness of purpose like his must be
either the skeleton-armour covering the thoughtless boy in Tennyson's
Gareth and Lynette, or it is the reflection of a light intuitively
flashed through the soul--the echo of a chord struck upon the writer's
very heart-strings. Such and so deep, beyond doubt, was the ingenuous
feeling of Mr. Mill.

[139] La Science au point de Vue Philosophique, pp. 539-542.

[140] Psychological Inquiries, second part, pp. 195-197.

[141] Address (Presidential) to British Association at Liverpool, 1870,
p. 15.

[142] Loc. cit. pp. 199-200.

[143] Quarterly Journal of Microscopical Science, January, 1873, p. 74.

[144] Loc. cit. p. 64.

[145] Loc. cit. pp. 69-70.

[146] Loc. cit. pp. 16-17.

[147] This quotation is from his _Matter and Force_, Chapter XIX.
Büchner is never tired of emphasizing the Materialism of thought. In an
address prefixed to his tenth Edition, speaking of the hypothesis of
Mind acting on Brain he calls it "the tragi-comic pianoforte theory,"
and regrets that there should be so many "human pianofortes out of tune
in the world." Büchner's own Materialism is outspoken, as may be judged
from the following propositions:--

1. Spirit without Body is unimaginable.

2. The Soul brings with it "no innate intuitions"; and

3. It is not an _ens per se_, but a product of external influences.

4. There is no individual immortality nor personal continuance after
death.

5. The Soul's knowledge relates only to earthly things.

6. It becomes a _person_ by being opposed to earthly individualities.

7. (Adopted from C. Vogt) "The soul ... is a product of the development
of the brain; just as muscular activity is a product of muscular
development, and secretion a product of glandular development. So soon
as the substances composing the brain are aggregated in a similar form,
will they exhibit the same functions.... Mental activity changes with
the periods of life, and ceases altogether at death."

Büchner's writings are sufficiently known in this country. In America
they are food for the million.

Proposition No. 6 is particularly noticeable because it re-echoes the
fallacy of Locke (see page 182-3 _ante_) on personal identity. By
opposition to earthly individualities we do not "_become_" persons, but
the sense of antagonism between ourselves and other externalities (both
men and things), sharpens every day our belief in our own personality,
and furnishes its daily verification.

The grossness of this writer's Materialism does not hinder him from
using the word "soul" on almost every page; and in one of his more
recent publications he is candid enough to acknowledge that this
old-fashioned entity is not yet quite improved off the face of the
Earth. He says:--"Just the properties of the human mind and the
impossibility of explaining them, were from the most ancient times one
of the main supports of spiritualism and theological systems. True,
their explanation is still wanting." Büchner, of course, looks for
the speedy elimination of "Soul" proper, on exactly the same grounds
which underlie his own whole system. Mental activity and Brain go
together (he argues), as Force and Matter go together. It may be
answered, that every practical reasoner knows the danger of arguing
from _concomitancies_, however well-established, to _Causality_; and
the risk is evidently much increased when a like argument is used to
_Identity_. Besides, if Mental activity is resolvable into Brain, why
should not Matter be likewise resolved into Force? Thus the whole
Universe, inanimate and animated, material and psychical, becomes
Force. The chain would run in this manner: Mind = Brain = Matter =
Force. But how are we to know that Force must be all of one kind and
description? Or, again, why may not the concomitancies be rather
resolved some other way;--_e.g._, Matter (including Brain) = Force =
Mind? Thus Materialism might slide into Idealism, Pantheism, or even
Theism; since in some shape or other Mind would form and sustain the
Universe. Our last citation of Büchner is taken from a New York Edition
of his _Materialism_, p. 19.

[148] In other words, that kind of law which pervades the lowest sphere
of Nature is conceived as dominant over the highest also. The whole
Universe is submitted to its iron rule. There is of Man's Mind as well
as of the flagstone with which he paves his streets, one account, one
law, one science, one philosophy; nay, strangely enough, as we shall
see further on, one religion! The law of stocks and stones is supreme,
it rules alike Man's present and his future, and ought to be the sole
object of his veneration.

Positivism, as is well known, makes many sciences and classifies them
by an ascending scale of Laws. "La Philosophie Positive," writes Littré
(_Paroles_, p. 10) ... "apercevant que, suivant la vraie conception,
où la matière n'est pas séparable de ses propriétés, le mot de
matérialisme n'avait plus d'emploi philosophique qu'en histoire, elle
l'a renouvelé, et s'en est servie pour caractériser l'intrusion de la
méthode de toute science inférieure dans la science supérieure."

If Littré had said, "the intrusion of the _lowest_ into the highest,"
he would have rightly characterized the systems we are describing.

Von Feuchtersleben puts the practical state of the question thus:--"All
we can say is, that an intellectual world reveals itself to us, by the
law of the true, the good, and the beautiful, and that a physical world
manifests itself by those laws which act in space and time. What lies
beyond these laws, as it were the substance of both worlds, we know
not; we only call that of the physical world, matter or body in the
abstract, that of the super-physical, we call spirit (Geist), and must
never forget that hereby we have only pronounced an abstraction.

"But now we ask further, wherein does this higher law manifest itself
to us, as the physical law does in the material world? Nowhere but
in man, and in him only through the medium of his cultivated and
refined reason. What we feel, what we remember, nay, the very inmost
sensations of our individual existence, may be referred to the world
which surrounds us. Thought alone, exalted to the highest degree shows
us another world. We are ourselves therefore not spirit, but we watch,
as it were, what we call by that name, and which manifests itself
to us only by its laws. (Est Deus in nobis.) Man, therefore, should
be the link which connects the two worlds; and this is the problem,
this is the enigma, which can never be solved." He adds in a note:
"Materialism, that is, the view which will not allow the separation
of the intellectual principle from the corporeal, but looks upon the
former as a higher power of the latter, not only explains nothing,
but makes the enigma still more obscure. _Medical Psychology_, Ed.
Sydenham, pp. 15-16.

[149] Compare footnote (_c_) pp. 56-7 _ante_. This whole theory
is dreamlike,--a sort of romance or revel of a half-metaphysical,
half-materializing imagination. The following rather long extract from
Haeckel's book will shew the hypothesis on its most poetical side.
But alas for its prose, and its plain practical application! "It is
indeed," he writes, "not difficult to arrive through an unprejudiced
consideration of facts, at a clear conviction that Theism, which
has its origin in Mythology, and which, under the name of "Pure
Monotheism," rules the civilized peoples of modern day, and plays
even now so conspicuous a part in organic Morphology as the Myth of
Creation, is in fact not Monotheism but AMPHITHEISM. This
predominant religion was MONOTHEISM only so long as all
Natural Phenomena were, without any exception, taken to be the direct
result of the personal divine government of the world,--only so long
as all inorganic or organic Phenomena--from the blowing of the wind
and the rolling of the thunder, to the light of the sun and the course
of the stars; from the flowery fragrance of plants and the wing of
the bird, to the Mind-formation of Man and the development-history
of peoples;--were direct actions of a monarchical, personal Creator.
But when modern Natural Science demonstrated that the whole realm of
inorganic Nature was governed by fixed, unvarying laws of Nature;
when Physics and Chemistry reduced Abiology to mathematical formulæ,
then the half of his realm was wrested from the personal Creator, and
there remained to him organic Nature alone, and even the half of this
was next set free by recent Physiology, so that organic Morphology
alone remained subject to the personal, arbitrary government of the
mediatised ruler of the world. Thus, out of the earlier Monotheism
grew up that full-blown Amphitheism which at present rules the modern
Cosmology of civilized peoples; and which appears in Science as the
thoroughly perverted Dualism against which we have contended most
determinedly in our General Morphology. For, what else is this Dualism
but the battle between two Gods of fundamentally distinct natures? On
the one hand, we see in the realm of Abiology, dominated by Mechanism,
the exclusive sovereignty of unvarying and necessary Nature-laws, of
the [Greek: anankê], which at all times and in all places constantly
remains one and the same.

"On the other hand, in the realm of Biology (which is still governed
by Teleology), and especially in the realm of organic Morphology, we
see the ridiculous arbitrary government of a personal and thoroughly
humanlike Creator, who vainly wearies himself with endeavouring to
create a 'perfect' Organism, and constantly rejects the earlier
creations of a 'former age,' in that he is continually setting up
new and improved editions in their places. We have already shewn, in
our sixth chapter, why we must entirely reject this pitiful idea of
a personal Creator (Vol. I. p. 173). It is in fact a degradation of
the pure God-Idea. Most men picture to themselves this 'beloved God'
as being thoroughly humanlike: he is in their eyes an architect, who
is engaged in carrying on the construction of the world according
to some previously rejected plan; but who never gets done with it,
because during the process of completion, he is always hitting on new
and better ideas; he is a Stage-manager, who directs the earth like a
great puppet-play, and generally knows how to handle with tolerable
skill the numerous threads by which he manages the hearts of men:
he is a half-deprived king who only rules over the inorganic realm
conditionally, and according to firmly fixed laws; rules on the other
hand over the organic realm absolutely as patriarchal land-father, who
in this domain allows himself to be led into a daily alteration of his
world-plan by the wishes and prayers of his own children, among whom
the most perfect Vertebrates are those principally favoured.

"Let us turn away from this unworthy Anthropomorphism of modern
Dogmatics, which degrade God himself into an aerial Vertebrate, and
let us look on the contrary at the infinitely higher God-Idea to
which Monism conducts us; in that it demonstrates the UNITY OF GOD in
the whole of Nature, and abolishes the antithesis of an organic and
inorganic God which sows the germ of a death-agony in the heart of
that predominating Amphitheism. Our Cosmology knows only ONE SOLE GOD,
and this ALMIGHTY GOD rules the whole of Nature without exception. We
contemplate his operation in all phenomena of every description. To it
the whole inorganic material world is subject, and so too the whole
world of organization. If each body _in vacuo_ falls fifteen feet in
the first second; if three atoms of Oxygen to one of Sulphur always
produce Sulphuric Acid; if the angle which one columnar surface of
rock crystal makes with the neighbouring one is always 120°; then,
these phenomena are the immediate operations of God, equally with the
blossoms of plants, the movements of animals, the thoughts of Mankind.
We all exist by 'God's grace'; the stone as well as the water, the
Radiolarian as well as the pine tree, the gorilla as much as the
Emperor of China.

"This Cosmology which contemplates GOD'S SPIRIT AND POWER IN
ALL NATURAL PHENOMENA is alone worthy of His all-comprehensive
greatness; only when we refer all forces and all phenomena of movement,
all forms and properties of matter, to God, as the Author of all
things, do we attain to that human intuition of God, and veneration
of God, which really befits his immeasurable greatness. For 'in Him
we live and move and have our being.' Thus the philosophy of Nature
becomes in fact Theology. The worship of Nature becomes that true
worship of God of which Göethe says:--'CERTAINLY THERE IS NO MORE
BEAUTIFUL VENERATION OF GOD, THAN THAT WHICH ARISES FROM COMMUNION WITH
NATURE IN OUR OWN BREASTS.'

"GOD IS ALMIGHTY; he is the sole Author, the prime Cause of
all things; that is, in other words, GOD IS THE UNIVERSAL CAUSAL
LAW. God is absolutely perfect; he can never act otherwise than
perfectly rightly, therefore he can never act arbitrarily or freely;
that is to say, GOD IS NECESSITY. God is the sum of all
forces; so also, therefore, of all Matter. Every conception of God,
which separates him from Matter, opposes to him a sum of forces which
are not of divine Nature; every such conception leads to Amphitheism,
consequently to Polytheism.

"Since MONISM demonstrates the UNITY OF THE WHOLE OF
NATURE, it proves, likewise, that only ONE GOD exists,
and that this God manifests himself in the collective phenomena of
Nature. Since Monism grounds the collective phenomena of organic and
inorganic Nature on the UNIVERSAL CAUSAL LAW, and displays
them as the effects of 'active causes,' it shews at the same time,
that GOD IS THE NECESSARY CAUSE OF ALL THINGS AND IS THE LAW
ITSELF. Since Monism acknowledges no other beside the divine
Forces in Nature, since it recognizes all laws of Nature as divine, it
raises itself to the greatest and most elevated conception of which
man, as the most perfect of all animals, is capable, to the conception
of the UNITY OF GOD AND NATURE.

    'Was wär' ein Gott, der nur von aussen stiesse,
    Im Kreis das All am Finger laufen liesse!
    Ihm ziemt's, die Welt im Innern zu bewegen,
    Natur in Sich, Sich in Natur zu hegen,
    So dass, was in Ihm lebt und webt und ist,
    Nie Seine Kraft, nie Seinen Geist vermisst.'"

Haeckel's _Generelle Morphologie der Organismen_. Vol. II. Book viii.
Chap. 30.

No one who reads the latter part of this quotation will doubt that
Haeckel is a refined, or, in other words, a metaphysical Materialist.
That he has produced an effect in materializing circles is evident;
witness the following passages from Büchner "the crass." "To any one
who does not stubbornly and obstinately cling to old prejudices, this
new Cosmology which has superseded the dualism of former systems
of philosophy and thought, must appear as clear, simple, free of
dualism, easily intelligible and perfectly satisfactory. On account
of this very antagonism to the dualistic character of the speculative
philosophy of the past, I should like best to designate the philosophy
of Materialism as _monistic philosophy_, or _philosophy of unity_;
and the cosmology founded upon it as _monism_, in accordance with the
suggestion of Professor Haeckel.... Since the indestructibility of
matter, as previously described, has found its necessary complement
in the indestructibility of force; and since the separation of force
and matter has been recognized as a mere abstraction and existing
only in our thoughts: it is really impossible to speak any longer of
Materialism as a system which derives everything from matter only.
Otherwise we might just as well speak of _Dynamism_, that is of a
system that derives everything from force (dynamis). But in reality
both are identical and inseparable; and therefore a philosophy built
upon those ideas cannot be better designated than as _monistic_, or
a _philosophy of unity_." (_Materialism, ut supra_ p. 24.) This last
phrase is more metaphysical than Büchner's wont; but S. T. Coleridge,
if alive, would tell him that what the world really wants, is a
"Philosophy of Multeity in Unity." To annihilate the Manifold is to
destroy our sole knowledge of the One.

[150] It was previously intimated that the idealizing philosopher often
escapes ethical censure more easily than he deserves. Idealism may,
or may not, be a bar to irreligious materialism. For example:--"The
materialism of Strauss was not inconsistent with an idealism of the
Hegelian type; for, as he showed in his last work, the question
between logically consistent idealists and materialists who carry out
their principles is, at its roots, one of names and terms rather than
of antagonistic principles." _Pall Mall Gazette_ for Feb. 11, 1874.
The Idealism referred to, is that which identifies pure Being with
Impersonal Thought. Now Berkeley's idealism culminated with the Divine
Personality, through whose omnipresence and spiritual subsistence
those properties or modes of existence, called material, are realized
to us, who, together with all the world, exist in and by Him. Yet, as
far as Berkeley's argument rests upon the common ground of idealistic
reasoning, it is approachable by the Atheist or the Sceptic. Of Hobbes
a reviewer has lately remarked: "He clearly demonstrated that the
secondary qualities of body are purely subjective, and his language
is almost strong enough to lead us to believe that he would have gone
a long way with Berkeley. For he claims to have proved that 'as in
vision, so also in _conceptions_ that arise from the other senses,
the subject of their inherence is not the object but the sentient.'"
_Westminster Review_, April, 1874, p. 387.

The truth from which so many theories, physical and metaphysical,
branch out, is thus clearly stated by Professor Huxley. "All the
phenomena of nature are, in their ultimate analysis, known to us only
as facts of consciousness." "On Descartes," _Lay Sermons_, p. 374.
This statement is an incontrovertible proposition; and may help in
persuading us to believe our own souls. At all events, we plainly see
that the sum total of our human knowledge is potentially contained in
their evidence.

[151] A mongrel Word-book would be a valuable addition to popular
science. How many metaphysicians proper, or how many skilled students
of Natural Science, can explain that novel compound "Psychoplasm"? The
_Westminster Review_ is _not_ lost in admiration for either this new
coinage, or another specimen from the same mint,--"Metempirics." (See
No. for July, 1874.) The _Fortnightly_ is more congratulatory.

[152] Ravaisson, the great philosophical critic of France, considers
Biology among the sciences directly antagonistic to Materialism.
He classifies the tendencies of scientific studies thus. There
are, he says, "Deux directions opposées auxquelles nous inclinent
les deux ordres differents de connaissances:--la direction qui
aboutit au Materialisme, et c'est celle dans laquelle nous engagent
les mathématiques et la physique, et la direction qui mène au
spiritualisme, et c'est celle où acheminent la biologie et surtout les
sciences morales et esthétiques." (_La Philosophie en France_, p. 98.)
His description of a certain degree of progress in the mind of Comte
illustrates this same idea:--"Il comprit, en présence de la vie, que
ce n'était pas assez, comme il avait pu le croire dans la sphère des
choses mécaniques et physiques, de considérer des phénomènes à la suite
ou à côté les uns des autres, mais que, de plus, que surtout il fallait
prendre en considération l'ordre et l'ensemble.

"En présence des êtres organisés, on s'aperçoit, disait-il, que le
détail des phénomènes, quelque explication plus ou moins suffisante
qu'on en donne, n'est ni le tout ni même le principal; que le
principal, et l'on pourrait presque dire le tout, c'est l'ensemble dans
l'espace, le progrès dans le temps, et qu'expliquer un être vivant, ce
serait montrer la raison de cet ensemble et de ce progrès, qui est la
vie même....

"Dans les sciences des choses inorganiques, disait-il encore, on
procède par déduction des détails au tout; dans les sciences des êtres
organisés, c'est de l'ensemble que se tire par déduction, la vraie
connaissance des parties.

"De plus, d'accord maintenant avec Platon, Aristote, Leibniz, il
déclarait que l'ensemble étant le résultat et l'expression d'une
certaine unité, à laquelle tout concourt et se co-ordonne et qui est le
but où tout marche, c'est dans cette unité, c'est dans le but, c'est
dans la fin ou cause finale qu'est le secret de l'organisme.

"Le 16 Juillet 1843, écrivant à M. Stuart Mill, il exprimait l'opinion
que, si ce savant ne le suivait pas dans les voies plus larges où
dorénavant il allait marchait, c'est que, très-versé dans les études
mathématiques et physiques, il n'était pas assez familier avec les
phénomènes de la vie. Plus avancé dans la science biologique, M. Mill
aurait mieux compris comment il faut, outre le détail des faits,
quelque chose qui les domine, qui les combine et les co-ordonne."
(_Ibid._ p. 75, _seq._)

[153] These pages are inappropriate to that wide and momentous
controversy:--Has each Science a Method of its own?--and by consequence
its own terminology? That such a question remains to be debated, is a
clear proof that most of our philosophizing is yet tentative; and has
not passed over the critical "first stage."




