CHAPTER II.

PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN.


 "It is an assured truth, and a conclusion of experience, that a little
 or superficial knowledge of Philosophy may incline the mind of Man to
 Atheism, but a farther proceeding therein doth bring the mind back
 again to Religion: for in the entrance of Philosophy, when the second
 causes, which are next unto the senses, do offer themselves to the
 mind of man, if it dwell and stay there it may induce some oblivion
 of the highest Cause; but when a man passeth on farther, and seeth
 the dependence of causes and the works of Providence; then, according
 to the allegory of the poets, he will easily believe that the highest
 link of Nature's chain must needs be tied to the foot of _Jupiter's_
 chair."

  _Lord Bacon's Advancement of Learning,_ Book I.

 "Deus sine dominio, providentiâ, et causis finalibus nihil aliud est
 quam fatum et natura. A cæcâ necessitate metaphysicâ, quæ eadem est
 et semper et ubique, nulla oritur variatio. Tota rerum conditarum pro
 locis ac temporibus diversitas, ab ideis et voluntate entis necessario
 existentis solummodo oriri potuit."--_Sir Isaac Newton, Scholium at
 close of Principia._

    "Tax not my sloth that I
      Fold my arms beside the brook;
    Each cloud that floated in the sky
      Writes a letter in my book.

    "There was never mystery
       But 'tis figured in the flowers;
    Was never secret history
       But birds tell it in the bowers."

    _Emerson's Poems.--The Apology._


    SYNOPSIS OF CHAPTER II.

This Chapter enters upon an examination of the kind of reasoning
involved in the Argument from Design, and an inquiry into its special
force. These investigations are accompanied by illustrative examples of
Analogy in different shapes. The most powerful objections against this
argument, and the various modes of stating it, are then described and
criticised.

A re-statement of the whole line of thought is followed by the outline
of a proposed method for the constructive science of Natural Theology.

The Chapter closes with a corollary on Efficient and Final Causes.

    _Analysis_--Argument from Design--Its Popular Form, and the Popular
    Objections raised against it--Art and Nature dissimilar--Organic
    and Inorganic Worlds, their Unlikeness and their Likenesses--Difference
    between Similitude and Analogy, whether the latter be Illustrative
    or Illative, and easiest ways of stating both Analogies.

    Scientific Difficulties--Charge of proving too much--Anthropomorphism
    and Dualism--Physical and Moral Antithesis--Was Paley to blame
    for introducing these Questions?--Answer to the charge of proving
    too much--On how many points need Analogy rest?--Examples.

    Charge of proving too little--Design assumes Designer as a Foregone
    Conclusion--Process observed is test of Designer in Art, but fails in
    Nature--Criticism on these Objections.

    Baden Powell compared with Paley--Wide Views and Inductions--Argument
    analysed into _Gradations_ of Proof, Order, and Intelligence--Means,
    Ends, and Foresight--Physical and Moral Causation--Argument
    analysed into various _Lines_ of Proof--Their Separate and
    Consilient Force.

    Value of Powell's views on Causation--Objections against some
    peculiarities of his language--Natural Theology and Natural Religion
    distinguished--Professor Newman--Use of Words on subject of Design.

    Statement of the Constructive Method now to be employed--Corollary
    on Efficient and Final Causes.


    _Additional Notes and Illustrations_:--

    A.--On the abstract reasonings involved in Natural Theology.
    B.--On the phrase "Design implies a Designer."
    C.--Hume on the analogies of Art and Nature.
    D.--The Pantheistic consequences charged upon Physical Speculation.
    E.--The extent and divisions of the Science of Natural Theology.
    F.--On Teleology.


CHAPTER II.

PHILOSOPHY OF DESIGN.


The argument from Design in Nature has been made familiar to most
readers in Natural Theology by Paley's well-known book. It is probable
that no argument has ever been more praised, and at the same time
more strongly controverted. Our business lies, of course, with the
controversy; and we must say a few words on our present mode of dealing
with it.

Nothing could be more useless than to repeat illustrative examples
of Design already thrice told by an endless variety of treatises. Of
so wide a subject everything may be quoted as an illustration, from
a pebble to a world, if only the principle illustrated--the pivot on
which the argument turns--be understood and admitted. In modern times,
this turning-point is precisely the centre of the dispute. Untrained
minds misapprehend the meaning of the word Design, and are further
still from apprehending the real force of argument from analogy. And
when these subjects come to be discussed by skilled writers, various
questions are always raised which generally issue in irreconcilable
differences of opinion.

Our plan here will be to take the argument in its best-known shape,
and examine it from the points of view occupied by several classes
of objectors, beginning, as is reasonable, with the most popular
difficulties and misapprehensions. It does not seem necessary to load
the page with references to controversialists of the ordinary sort,
particularly as we endeavour to look at the whole question through
their eyes.

Respecting the more philosophic questions it is necessary to observe,
that the Evolution-theory will not form a topic of the present chapter.
It is excluded for two reasons. One, that we are now trying to put a
value on the argument from Design _per se_, and not to compare it with
rival theories. The other reason springs from the subject of Evolution
itself--it is too extensive to be thus briefly treated--and the sum of
this Essay must be taken together as furnishing a counter statement
to the manner in which it has been employed by certain of its ardent
advocates.[14]

We hope for a further advantage from the method proposed. The cause of
truth ought to gain from being looked at on more than one side; and,
whatever be the worth and true effect of reasoning from Design, we may
expect by this method to display it adequately.

The word itself, like all figurative terms--or words used in a
secondary sense--is by no means free from ambiguity. It has, in common
parlance, several shades of signification. Design being the centre of
Paley's argument, and containing the one idea which gives force to all
the rest: his first object was to fix the sense in which he employed
it. He did so by using an illustration.

To explain by comparison is always a popular resource, some serious
drawbacks notwithstanding. Almost every one prefers that an author
should use a sparkling similitude which tells a great deal, rather
than write what looks like a grammar and dictionary of his science.
Analysis and induction require thought on the part of him who employs
them--thought also on the part of a reader determined to understand
what he reads. Paley saw all this thoroughly, and at the beginning
of his book employed the now celebrated comparison taken from a
watchmaker and a watch. His judgment received support from the
popularity he enjoyed, and from the way in which everybody borrowed his
illustration.[15]

Yet Paley's deference to the popular understanding gave rise to the
first general misapprehension of his treatise. He sets out from a kind
of surprise--the surprise his readers would feel at finding a watch
upon a heath. Now this feeling was immediately alleged as a conclusive
objection against Paley's comparison, and as a ground for distrusting
the whole argument founded upon it. The world, it was said, cannot be
likened to a watch, nor yet to any other sort of mechanism. Between
things natural, and the things which men make, the difference is not
a mere contrast of perfection with imperfection. The real reason why
we are surprised to see Paley's watch lying on a moor--and not at all
surprised to see Paley's stone lying beside it--springs from this
very difference. And though the history of a stone, common, coarse,
and worthless, is really more wonderful than the history of any watch,
and though the stone has an infinitely longer pedigree, we should
never speak or think of it in the same way. We feel that the objects
are dissimilar, and our surprise testifies the fact. A heath is given
up to nature, a watchmaker's shop to art. The watch is out of place
among stones, the stone among watches. The idea raised at the outset,
therefore, is that Art and Nature would seem to be thoroughly unlike.

At a first view of the subject, these remarks appear open to one
obvious rejoinder. The sort of surprised feeling which Paley describes,
is not in itself a proof of real unlikeness. A weed is a plant out
of place; we do not expect thriving crops of cabbage or teazle in a
carefully kept rose-garden, nor gooseberry bushes amongst azaleas. The
proudest flower that blossoms is a weed in a vineyard, in a plot of
opium-poppies, or mixed with other herbs medicinal. So, too, a rough
diamond would not be out of place in a watchmaker's shop; but if we
saw a stone of no selling value inside a case of watches we should
certainly experience some surprise. And the feeling would remain even
though we were quite unable to explain how the poor pebble differed
chemically from the priceless gem. We know that the latter would appear
to a jeweller's customers like a rose among flowers, but the former
worthless as a weed. The jeweller would consider it a trespasser fit
only to be turned out of doors.

But does this rejoinder satisfactorily dispose of the difficulty? Is
not the true reason why we might observe with some wonder a watch lying
upon a moor resolvable into the fact of our knowing its use and being
quite sure that some one had dropped it there?[k] A savage might not
feel in the least surprised, unless, indeed, he happened to suppose
that the watch was a kind of animal he had never seen before, and took
notice of the singular sound it made. In this event he would probably
break it to pieces without discovering the purpose or mode of its
contrivance.

Throughout all disputatious matter, a thought on one side leads to a
thought upon the other--at least, amongst tolerably fair people. The
idea which we have just imagined our savage to entertain respecting a
watch suggests a further question. What effect ought in reason to be
produced upon cultured minds by the contemplation of some unknown or
half-comprehended phenomenon?--a question this, closely bearing upon
the whole subject under discussion. Now surely it is from intelligent
wonder--a contrast of the unknown with what we already know--a feeling
of mystery to be solved by us, that inquiry and science perpetually
spring. A fossil-shell, the former habitation of a marine animal, found
upon some mountain top, presents a contrast and a mystery of this kind.
Moreover, the highest triumph of inquiring science is the discovery,
not of difference anywhere, but rather of resemblances in objects
apparently diverse. An uninquiring mind will never perceive any common
attribute, either ideal or structural, between a stone and a watch.

But did Paley himself perceive any such community of attribute? So
far does he appear from the perception that he speaks of the stone as
an "unorganised, unmechanised substance, without mark or indication
of contrivance," and adds, "It might be difficult to show that such
substance could not have existed from eternity." Paley's day was meagre
in natural science, and Paley was as meagrely acquainted with its
results as he was with metaphysical philosophy. Few people, however,
even now-a-days, know enough of the laws which govern inorganic
products to find their investigation a slight or easy task. For a
purpose of comparison with any human work or mechanism, most inquirers
will prefer having recourse with Paley to the world of organisation.
The flower and fructification of a plant or shrub growing on the heath
beside Paley's watch, though carelessly passed over a thousand times,
and exciting no surprise from anything unusual in its _habitat_, will,
when observed, raise the most sincere admiration. And the same may be
said of the bony skeleton of the lizard[16] racing round plant and
shrub, the forehand of the mole which burrows beneath them, and the
wing of the bat circling nightly in upper air.

Take, then, replies the objector, an organism, vegetable or animal,
whichever you or Paley may prefer. The difficulty formerly urged at
once recurs, slightly altered in shape, but with augmented point and
force. Your organisms are not put together like the parts of a watch
(_undique collatis membris_)--brass from this place, steel from that,
and so on, with china dial-plate, covering-glass, and gold case.
All these things were apart in nature, they were severally chosen,
manipulated, and brought together. What we see is a successful union of
materials possessing inherent adaptation to definite purposes--such as
the freedom of brass from rust, or the superior elasticity of steel,
qualities indicating the skill and workmanlike knowledge of some human
artificer, and showing by their utilization the truth of what was
before asserted. Watches and worlds, the products of Art and of Nature,
are obviously and thoroughly unlike.

By way of answer, it might be observed that in organization we do
really see very distinct constituents combined. In a plant, for
instance, there is the combination of a growing point, a humus or
pabulum that feeds it, and the stimuli, air, water, light, and all
the "skiey influences" by which its passive vitality is excited
and sustained. We see plant life, by reason of these concurrent
adaptations, swelling into leaf, stem, bud, corolla, and fruit,
throughout all the brighter tribes of vegetable beauty that bloom
apparent to the unassisted eye. And the like holds true respecting
animals, but with increased variety and complication of conditions,
made necessary by their higher mode of existence. The marvels of
their many powers, habits, and perfections of form and movement are
great, but greater still the vast multitude of ministering aids put in
requisition to ensure their earliest appearance and after continuance
in life and enjoyment. When we contemplate microscopic Nature, a like
sweep of combination is again evident to the skilful naturalist, and
excites his constant wonder, especially when observed in connection
with the exquisite finish of minute creatures and their infinitesimal
parts, both alike unperceived by our ordinary human senses. And a
similar idea of invisible, and perhaps almost incomprehensible, harmony
might be raised by a consideration of the elements, metallic and
non-metallic, brought together in numberless inorganic productions, as
well as of the forces which bind them in hard cohesion, and give them
such properties as we may discover in the commonest block of granite.
And what if we could extend our field of view to a world--to the
universe?

The answer suggested by this last paragraph has its value, and the
principle involved in it will occur for our scrutiny further on. But
at present this train of thought, if pursued, might be likened to the
weed we spoke of,--it would not be altogether in place here. The truth
is that the whole objection thus parried appears more out of place
still, and is therefore itself not a flower, but a weed of popular
rhetoric. And the reason of its irrelevancy is plain. Paley's argument
does not really turn upon the similitude of any two objects of simple
apprehension, but upon an analogical comparison; the discovery, that
is, of the likeness between two ratios, a process known in common life
under the name of Proportion. Hence it is from the illative force of
analogy that this topic of Design derives its value. The analogy does,
in fact, serve a double purpose,--- _first_ to explain, and _secondly_
to prove. We had better look at it from both points of view.

The easiest method for making an _illustrative_ analogy intelligible is
to state it in old-fashioned style as a rule of three sum; the fourth
term being the conclusion which completes it. "As a watch is to the
watchmaker, so is creation, (exemplified by such and such a specimen,)
to its Creator." That is to say, there exists some ratio or relation
connecting the watch and the watchmaker, which exists also between the
world and its Creator.

To see its _illative_ force used as an argument, we need only alter the
position of the four terms, and state our proportion as is more usual
in modern day. "As the watch is to such and such specimens of creation,
so is the watchmaker to the Author of any and all of these things."

In the _first_ statement Paley's similitude is displayed in full as an
asserted illustration of Design. The watch is a thing contrived--that
is, a design realized, and the maker is its contriver. Just so, is the
world a Design realized by its Creator. And it appears plainly implied
in the assertion, that even as the little watch shows the limited power
and intelligence of its maker, so the vast and unfathomable universe
illustrates the infinite power and wisdom of its incomprehensible
Author.

The _second_ mode of statement displays the force of Paley's analogy
viewed as a chain of reasoning. The watch is _not like_ the world, but
there is something in common between them, and this something it is
Paley's purpose, and the purpose of his various continuators, to show
at the greatest convenient length. Now such community of character must
be sufficient to establish a further community still. When we see a
watch we are sure it had a designer,--the watchmaker; and here, again,
Paley means to argue that from every example of contrivance which we
can adduce and examine, the same inference ensues, and always must
ensue. Therefore (he concludes) from the immeasurable designed world we
infer the world's omnipotent Designer.

The chief Divine attributes (as, for example, omnipotence) are dwelt
upon by Paley towards the close of his treatise. But it seems well to
insert the adjective at once. Most thinking persons admit that whoever
believes in a Creator may find from the physical Cosmos and its

  "Mysterious worlds untravelled by the sun,"

ample reason for justifying the noblest of such adjectives. They
generally go further, and allow that any Theist finds in these endless
marvels a full confirmation of his faith--there is, as Coleridge says,
a whole universe at hand to ratify the decision. But what many educated
people who concede thus much disallow, is the sufficient witness of
Design standing by itself to prove what it may fairly corroborate or
even extend. To illustrate, confirm, or widen what is already held a
truth is one thing; to serve as its sole sufficient witness is another.
This conclusiveness some deny, and more scruple to affirm. And one of
the drawbacks in arguing from analogy seems to be, that all except the
most philosophically trained minds experience a sort of hesitation
in estimating its force--a hesitation which they are at a loss to
define in words. Consequently, the attack upon its adequacy is always
difficult to answer; so many various shades of negation must be classed
together for brevity's sake, and met by one or two general lines of
defence. The safest way, probably, is to make the negative classes as
wide as possible, and to put the scientific doubts in their most fatal
form of expression. And it appears hard to imagine anything really
destructive of evidence which may not be brought under one of the two
following heads. There may be, first, a failure of evidence when it
is not strong enough in its facts and circumstances to justify the
conclusion drawn--when, in short, it proves too little. Secondly, it is
worthless, if its acceptance so damages the position occupied by those
who employ it, that their purpose is thereby destroyed, their _locus
standi_ demolished--in other words, they have proved too much.

May we not, then, presume it impossible to bring worse charges against
any argument than whatever can be urged in support of these two
accusations? And we will _first_ put the well-known analogy on its
trial for proving too much, because it is from anxiety to avoid this
charge that most analogical reasoners are apt to risk proving too
little.

Admit, say Paley's most decided antagonists, the relevancy of an
argument from human art. It must be taken to show the Creator of the
Universe as Theists conceive and acknowledge Him. Let us at once ask
in what light He is thereby represented? Is it not, so to speak, as a
supreme Anthropomorphic[l] Craftsman sketching a vast plan or design,
and moulding the materials necessary for its realization? We begin with
the remark that His work--the world--must show some traces of that
plastic process and the hand of its Moulder. The requirement seems just
and reasonable, and is commonly answered by an appeal to what have been
termed the records of creation, the structure of the heavens, and the
structure of the earth. Thus, for example, we are referred to Geology
and Palæontology, and are led from age to age, and type to type. In
passing from one formation to another we seem (as Goethe said) to catch
Nature in the fact. At all events the plastic process is everywhere
traceable, and to its evidences the Theist points with triumph.

But no intelligent objector can stop here. He will next inquire what
on theistic principles was the origin of this material substance so
constantly undergoing transformation. Most sceptical thinkers put the
inquiry in a trenchant manner; they not only demand to be answered,
but they prescribe beforehand the sort of answer to be returned. It is
useless, they tell us, to speak of archetypes existing in the Divine
mind, and to illustrate them by the creative thought of musician or
sculptor, of painter or of poet. The hard, coarse world must be looked
at as it is: an actual material habitation for sorrowing and sinful
human creatures; its physical conditions, imperfect in that respect,
unhappily corresponding too well with the low moralities of its tenants.

Now, they say, if we examine Paley's common-sense analogy no one
can at all doubt what answer is suggested there. The steel of the
watch-spring, the brass of the wheel-work, and other materials for all
the curious mechanical contrivances required, were taken into account
by the watch-designer when he formed his design. Had it been otherwise
he could not have calculated on finding the necessary strength,
elasticity, resistance to rust, and other properties on which Paley
dwells so distinctly. In like manner, it has been said by some physical
science Christians since Paley's time: "Let matter and its primary
properties be presupposed, and the argument from Design is easy." True,
but it seems quite as easy to suppose the world itself eternal. And we
know that this supposition was adopted by pagan philosophers, to whom
it appeared the easiest of all beliefs.

But other philosophic pagans, holding clearly that the world
had a beginning, conceived its First Cause to be like Paley's
Designer--analogous to an earthly workman. They carried out the analogy
thoroughly--more thoroughly than modern writers, and believed both
Artificer and the matter from which He shaped the visible universe,
self-subsistent, indestructible, and co-eternal.

In this eternity of matter and its native inflexibilities, these
great heathen thinkers found an apology for what they considered
the failure of creative power--misshapen things, monstrosities, and
imperfections. The Creator never desired them, but His will was
thwarted by the material He worked in. Against this dualism the early
Fathers protested. Will the modern Theist (his assailants ask) deny
himself, and affirm two independent and self-existent principles;
or will he deny the parallelism asserted in Paley's analogy? Can he
conscientiously believe that its issue is a worthy representation of
the Divine and omnipotent Creator? If not, it has failed by proving too
much[m].

raised. Who can help seeing that several of them lie equally against
all rational theories which have ever been suggested to account for the
origin of that sorrow and evil which we see and acknowledge everywhere?
And does not the same remark apply to every attempt at solving the
antithesis of mind and matter? Some thoughtful men have believed that
they could see their way to a solution; others believe it altogether
above human reason, and point with a kind of triumph to the failures
of philosophy. However this may be, the mournful moral enigma,[17]
and the unexplained antithesis underlying our knowledge of nature,
attach themselves equally to every possible conception of the universe,
religious or irreligious, common-sense or metaphysical. They have no
special connection with our argument from Design, and ought not in
fairness to be brought as objections against it.

The more real question just now is, whether Paley's mechanical analogy
was to blame for introducing the problem of cosmical matter into the
discussion.

On this question the opinions of competent and unprejudiced judges
disagree. By an eminent and accomplished writer the case is summed
up as follows, in the Harveian Oration for 1865. Having previously
included the material factor under mechanical adaptation as
distinguished from art in the highest sense, Dr. Acland goes on to
say (page 13): "The illustration of the watch so quaintly employed by
Nieuwentyt, and so entirely appropriated by Paley, only in a coarse
way suggests the parallel between infinite art and common mechanical
skill. It has done some mischief to the cause it advocates, by making
familiar a rude illustration, which minds without imagination, or void
of constructive power, have accepted as a recognised explanation of the
_method of operation_ by an Infinite Creative Will."

Paley's critics should however observe, that he did not himself
intend the objectionable inference. Probably he never even perceived
that it might be drawn from his comparison. Abstract inquiries
connected with Theism, he banished to the end of his book, where they
are discussed in a manner little calculated to satisfy any readers
who have ever felt them as substantial difficulties.[18] But then,
he would most likely have referred these persons to the writings of
professed metaphysicians. It may be wise for us to take warning both
by what Paley did and by what he left undone. Some deeper questions
are indispensable to the argument from Design, but we shall follow
his example so far as to avoid such disquisitions as were current in
his day under the name of metaphysics. On the other hand we shall
draw the required data from that critical Fact-philosophy of Mind and
Human Nature, which forms to so many thinkers the birth-star of a new
science, one amongst the rising hopes of our nineteenth century.

Meantime, our business on hand is to rebut the present accusation of
proving too much, brought against Paley's analogy. We shall try to
complete our answer by setting his argument in the point of view under
which he evidently meant it to be looked at.

Either as an illustration or as a means of proof, Analogy need not hold
in more than a single point; provided only that this single point is
clear and well-established--resting, for example, on a moral law or a
causal _nexus_. Any one who desires to make an analytical investigation
into this law of inference will receive valuable aid from Ueberweg's
Logic, §§ 131 and 2, particularly if compared with § 129.

To a common-sense mind we may give sufficient satisfaction by adducing
one or two good analogies. Thus, for instance, the duties of a
religious minister are often explained by saying that he ought to be
the shepherd of his flock; that is, his relation to his people ought
to resemble that of the shepherd to his sheep. We all understand how
truly is here expressed a world of watchful care. But are all points of
the relation to be implied? May the spiritual pastor ever become the
slayer or the salesman of his flock?

Again,--writers upon political subjects some years ago used very
commonly to quote from the days of Alfred the Great supposed precedents
for our most modern constitutional _dicta_. In many cases the thing
defended was a legitimate outgrowth of the precedent cited; but
to pronounce the two _identical_ seemed sufficiently absurd. In
confutation of some such absurdities, clever men argued that the body
corporate has, like the individual body, its childhood, growth, and
maturity. The argument became generally accepted, and got extended to
the distinctions between healthy increase and sickly degeneration, with
other like inferences. The further conclusion was next drawn, that
every national body resembles the human frame in a necessary decay, and
inevitable mortality. Now, whatever opinion may be entertained as to
the fact of a death-rate of nationalities, nothing seems more certain
than that those who first employed the comparison never contemplated
this particular corollary. Whether their first use of it was wise
or unwise, has been, like Paley's Watch-analogy, a matter of some
considerable dispute.

The general subject of Analogy, rightly or wrongly extended, admits of
wider illustration.

Simile and metaphor are often compressed analogies, and many of them
gain in beauty from expansion. Pope's celebrated comparison of the
traveller ascending the Alps with the student who scales the heights of
literature; and how

    "Hills peep o'er hills, and Alps on Alps arise;"

is a good example of a poet's successfully expanding his own thought.
Still more exquisitively true to nature is the final parallel drawn in
Coleridge's description of the divided friends who stood apart,--

    "Like cliffs which had been rent asunder,"

while the marks of a former union lingered indestructible. Perhaps
few readers of "Christabel" ever looked at Lodore, and "its scars
remaining," without feeling how aptly they represent traces of
thought and affection engraved upon the soul of man, deeper and more
imperishable than the primæval rocks between which the "dreary sea" now
flows.

The wonderful force of many among Shakespeare's metaphors is derived
from compressed analogy. But by expanding

    "The slings and arrows of outrageous Fortune,"

we should form no better conception of the goddess; and the next line,

    "Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,"

might easily be turned into nonsense! Like Paley's "watch," the "sea"
holds true only in one point. Shakespeare had before his eye the image
of multitudinous vastness. But what arms could we take up to stem the
billows of a swelling tide?

No one can read many commentators on the Scripture without feeling
how groundless are numberless conclusions arrived at by extending
Scriptural analogies beyond their just limits. Preachers and platform
speakers are still more guilty. Not content with straining Holy Writ,
they add to the mischief by pressing into their service comparisons
of double meaning. The above quoted word "sea," has long been a
much-enduring similitude in its relation to the countries and islands
of the earth. What is it really to us, the earth's inhabitants? Our
highway and bond of union? or a waste of waters given to divide rivals,
as Horace phrases it, "_Oceano dissociabili_"? The last is the oldest
metaphor.[19]

Enough has been said upon various analogies to show how frequently even
in their widest use (that of illustration), the effect of extending
them beyond their one salient point, is utter confusion. And with
respect to illative analogy, this rule becomes obviously more stringent
still. Paley meant it to be observed strictly as regards his own
analogous reasoning.

But the caution itself must be cautiously applied, where the salient
point on which the inference turns is too superficial, or too weak
to stand alone. And this is the very thing we have to discuss
next,--because a _second_ accusation brought against the argument from
Design is, that by reason of weakness in its pivot, it proves far too
little.

This second charge is less usual amongst popular than scientific
writers, and most of us may learn something by sifting it. Their
position may be described in few words as standing thus:--

All examples which men can, of their own knowledge, connect with
Design, fall under one sole class, and from this class alone they
can argue. It contains the products of human workmanship and
manufacture--and nothing else. By its characteristic processes (which
together with their result make the sum of what we know about this
class) it is so essentially dissociated from the products of Nature,
that any appearance of design common between them must be pronounced
superficial in the absence of stronger _nexus_. But since proof of
such _nexus_ remains wanting, Paley's analogy is worthless. It will
be observed that the effect of this position is to sever between
human works and natural things quite as completely as did the popular
objection which we put first in our list of assaults upon Paley. Yet,
though these conclusions may seem suspiciously coincident, the grounds
of argument are really distinct. Scientific persons do not compare two
objects natural and artificial, nor yet their two sets of constituents,
and say, "These are unlike." They argue rather that the relative or
proportionate likeness asserted is insufficiently made out, and that
when it is said "Design implies a designer," people are speaking of
design worked out in the known way of workmen. We (they observe) need
not _deny_ a designer of the world, but we desiderate evidence of his
actual workmanship. By this we shall know that he first conceived and
then realized the alleged design. We do not feel convinced by being
shown certain organic _somethings_ in their perfect state, and being
told to observe how very like contrivances they are. They may be very
like, certainly, but we want assurances that they can be nothing else.
We want to have shown us some work _being_ done, and to ascertain
that it is carried on in a workmanlike manner. Then we shall say with
confidence, Here is the active hand of a designer. To compress our
requisition into a single sentence,--We want not only to catch Nature
in the fact, but also to ascertain that Nature's way of performing the
fact has something essentially humanlike about it.

To see our meaning clearly (add these objectors) take the instance of
some marvellous work of man's art previously unknown to us. We could,
if we perceived the _marks_ of human fabrication, reason from a watch,
or some other well known machine, to the conclusion that some person
had designed it. In other words, we should feel sure that we were
looking at a new product of skill, which differed from what we had seen
before in the degree of excellence attained. The difference we feel in
our transition from Art to Nature appears, on the contrary, to be a
difference not only between more or less perfect products or processes,
but a thorough difference of kind in the whole _manner_ of bringing
about the results placed before our eyes. Or put the case (they
continue) as a piece of circumstantial evidence. We say positively of
this or that machine, They are contrivances, things designed, because
we know the _history_ of their manufacture. We feel positive, because
we are arguing from a plain patent fact to a hidden but absolutely
essential condition, without which the fact could not exist. As regards
natural products we have not got the fact--we do not know the history
of their production. We cannot say, Here is the process, because the
processes of Nature are mostly unknown to us. Paley therefore would
have us assume the fact and argue from it; first to design, next, to
something more hidden still,--a Designer. Yet what we _do_ know of
natural processes is not encouraging; there is visible about them more
unlikeness than likeness to the processes employed by man. The truth
may be surmised, that Paley was always seeing in his own examples the
footprints, as he thought, of a Designer. Hence he affirmed Design,
and then argued back again in a never-ending circle. There is really
no reason why he should have travelled round such a circuit. If his
argument shows anything, it shows a Designer at once.[n]

With some risk of tediousness, this last attack on Paley has been
detailed at great length, and placed (as the present writer believes)
in several of its most formidable shapes[o]. But for additional
security of fair dealing with the strongest of all objections--one
which, if established, would be a death-blow to all argument on the
subject (since its _ultimatum_ is unconditional surrender)--for these
reasons, then, and in order to satisfy the most rigorous understanding,
let it be finally rehearsed in the words of a most eminent physicist
whom no one will accuse of haste, oversight, or credulity. To this
rehearsal the Professor adds what is to us more important still,--his
judgment on the point at issue.

But before quoting Professor Baden Powell, it may be worth while to
make two short notes on the few preceding paragraphs. Let us take the
last paragraph first.

It really does appear that marks of Design and the footprints of a
Designer are in common sense very nearly one and the same thing. If we
concentrate our attention on the former, we are looking at an object
on the side of certain properties,--that is, of certain subjectively
perceived relations. For instance, we may think of the eye only as an
optical instrument wonderfully constituted, and enumerate the parts of
its visual apparatus. But the moment we speak of this apparatus as a
provision _intentionally_ made for sight, we have introduced the idea
of a Designer in the strongest sense of the word. Now, it is difficult
to think of anything as an example of intelligent arrangement, and
at the same time give no hint even to our own thoughts of arranging
Intelligence. We can hardly look through a pane of glass and admire the
perfect transparency of _one_ surface to the exclusion of the _other_!
We are not now speaking of what _might_ be done, if attempted by a man
so profoundly skilled in analytics that

    "He could distinguish, and divide
    A hair 'twixt south and south-west side."

We are rather speaking of what it is _natural_ to do. And it may be
doubted whether anybody thinks of a design _as_ design very long
without thinking also of the Designer.

One other remark is suggested by the reference to _process_ as
contradistinguished from _product_. Here, again, the real question
is, How far is such a distinction maintainable in fact? Does it rest
upon any definite separation in Nature? The exact contradictory is the
truth; taking the world as it is, the distinction, though clear in
thought, becomes essentially fluent when objectively regarded. What
we call a production one moment, we say is a process the next. You
have, for example, a galvanic current, produced by certain chemical
combinations, and often a product _per se_ of some importance. Yet the
current itself is a part of the electrotyping process. Suppose this
done, you have your electrotype--your coin,--a hard fact,--a solid
production, bright, beautiful, admirable! But we will suppose you,
while devising all this, to have a further view;--the coin is to be
employed in the process of imposture. Here again comes a result--a
great fraud committed; but this is not all. The fraudulent procedure
turns out a very useful police-trap, and your chemical combination
sends the last actor on the scene to Portland, for at least ten years.
Consider in this brief history the scientific arrangements, material
conditions, and workmanlike execution, discernible in its earlier
parts; then, see how mind becomes gradually predominant, and how Law,
based on ideas of corrective justice, enters the series. Add the
judge and jury, and you admit the force of intellect,--deliberating,
deciding, putting further activities in motion; till, perhaps, if the
reformatory process succeeds, Portland may have the honour of giving to
society the welcome product of (as times go) a passably honest man. We
might really frame a curious inquiry as respects this flowing tide of
process and production, production and process, with its commingling
currents and waves which seem to interrupt each other like circles of
diffracted light. We might ask which of all these parts of the moving
diorama is most distinctly human. I believe most people would say,
those scenes in which mind, not mere workmanship, is most evidently
discernible.

Professor Powell seems to have thought so too. The difficulty we have
been discussing he states as an objection requiring solution.[20]

 "In those cases most nearly approaching the nature of human works,
 such as the varied and endless changes in matter going on in the
 _laboratory of nature_, the results, even when most analogous to those
 obtained in human laboratories, yet present no marks of the process or
 of the means employed, by which to recognise the analogous workman;
 and in all the grander productions, the incessant evolutions of
 vegetable and animal life, which no human laboratory can produce,--in
 the structure of earth and ocean, or the infinite expanse of the
 heavens and their transcendent mechanism, still further must we be
 from finding any analogy to the works of man, or, by consequence, any
 analogy to a personal individual artificer."

The next paragraph contains his own judgment.

 "But the more just view of the case is that which arises from
 the consideration that the real evidence is that of _mind_ and
 _intelligence_; for here we have a proper and strict analogy. _Mind_
 directing the operations of the laboratory or the workshop, is no
 part of the _visible apparatus_, nor are its operations seen in
 _themselves_--they are visible only in their _effects_;--and from
 effects, however dissimilar in magnitude or in kind, yet agreeing
 in the one grand condition of _order_, _adjustment_, profound and
 recondite connexion and dependence, there is the same evidence and
 outward manifestation of INVISIBLE INTELLIGENCE, as vast and
 illimitable as the universe throughout which those manifestations are
 seen."

This second extract may be analysed into distinct propositions somewhat
as follows:--

In a manufactory,--

Mind is no part of the visible apparatus--nor are its operations
visible,--

But the effects make the operations manifest.--

In the universe,--

Effects may be seen differing from Human productions in many ways,--but
agreeing in one common characteristic,--order--adjustment--hidden
interdependence.

Such effects make manifest the operation of an Invisible Intelligence
as vast as the Universe itself.

The majority of people might suppose this a conclusive inference from
Nature to the Being of a Personal God. But Professor Powell does not
so intend it; and therefore some readers may feel disposed to blame
his use of words. It is, however, only fair that before so doing, they
should carefully consider his whole mode of apprehending the subject in
its completeness. And the easiest way of understanding Powell is, most
probably, to compare him with Paley.

The latter is confident that when he has derived the design and
arrangement of the world from a mind analogous to the mind of man, but
immeasurably vast as the Universe which man inhabits,--little more need
be said. He thinks the infinite intelligence thus demonstrated, is
clearly no other than the Great First Cause, and Creator of all things.
"Contrivance, if established, appears to me to prove everything which
we wish to prove." This sentence begins Chap. xxiii., and the rest of
Paley's Natural Theology is intended to demonstrate and verify its
correctness.

Powell thinks that the step from a mind or intelligence, even if
conceived illimitable as the Universe, to a First Cause, Supreme Mind,
or Moral Cause, is a very much longer ascent[p] than Paley thought it.
By these latter terms he meant--as Paley did--the Divine Personality
believed in by Theists, and evidenced, _first_, as mind by a reign
of law, order, and arrangement, so far as the world can evidence
Him;--but manifest, _secondly_, in His higher nature as the fountain
and originator of law--that is, a true Cause, a manifestation due to
the causal structure of our own human minds. The point of difference is
the length of the step to be taken from Law to Causation; but Powell
agrees with his predecessor in asserting it, though arduous, to be
absolutely safe. The point he insists on is that we cannot take it by
a contemplation of the world without us only. "Ever-present _mind_" he
says,[21] "is a direct inference from the universal order of nature,
or rather only another mode of expressing it. But of the _mode_ of
existence of that mind we can infer nothing."

From this view he draws conclusions in opposite directions.
Pantheism,[22] the co-existence or identification of mind with
matter, "is at best a mere gratuitous hypothesis, and as such
wholly unphilosophical in itself, and leading to many preposterous
consequences." There are also grounds on which Theism appears certain
and Pantheism extravagant, absurd, and contradictory.[23] To see
these grounds we are to carry out the analogy given us by the common
characteristics of order, adjustment, and interdependence visible
through their effects as in the human workshop or laboratory, so, too,
in the vast illimitable Universe, and described in our second extract
as manifestations of Mind or invisible Intelligence. In the paragraph
immediately following that extract,[24] he continues:--

 "It is by _analogy_ with the exercise of intellect, and the volition,
 or power of moral causation, of which we are conscious within
 ourselves, that we speak of the _Supreme Mind_ and _Moral Cause_ of
 the Universe, of whose operation, order, arrangement and adaptation,
 are the external manifestations. _Order_ implies what by _analogy_
 we call _intelligence_; subserviency to an observed end implies
 intelligence _foreseeing_ which by analogy, we call _Design_."

The last sentence of the paragraph now quoted is very remarkable.
The eminent writer directs attention to a distinction between two
several inferences which can be drawn from the observed manifestations
of Order, and of Foresight. From the first, he says, we infer
Intelligence, from the latter we infer Design. It seems singular that
Powell should have defined this distinction so clearly, and made no
further use of it.

He might naturally have insisted upon the separate and diverse
evidences thus afforded by the physical world. Amid the variety of
human minds, some may feel impressed by the contemplation of Nature in
one of these ways, some in the other. To many persons the magnificent
spectacle of a law-governed Universe, infinitely manifold yet
everywhere harmonious, appears to justify the belief in one supreme
Reason and sovereign Will. Separate parts of this same Universe--or
the whole in its entirety of vastness--when considered as manifesting
purpose--that is, intentional adaptation to separate ends or to one
end--are to other minds a more convincing line of thought.

With many writers on Natural Theology the different shades of meaning
implied in the word Design[25] may prevent clearness of conception in
this respect. But our author (like Paley) appears to use this word in
its strongest signification.

And this usage of Powell's brings into view another point in his
reasoning even more singular than the one to which we have just
adverted. Surely, if in the natural world we observe the manifestations
of an Intelligence foreseeing an End, and employing means in
subserviency to that end, it seems strange to conclude that respecting
the mode of existence of such Intelligence we can infer nothing,
yet the words occur on the very next page. It would seem almost an
impossibility to suppose such a mind existing as anything less than a
Personality under the twofold aspect of a Reason and a Will. Paley's
common sense drew this conclusion at once, and very profound thinkers
have agreed with Paley on the topic. "That," says F. H. Jacobi, "which,
in opposition to Fate, makes God into a true God, is called Foresight.
Where it is, there alone is Reason; and where Reason is, there also is
Foresight. Foresight in itself is Spirit, and to that only which is of
Spirit do those feelings of admiration, awe, and love, which announce
its existence, correspond. We can indeed declare of any object that
it is beautiful or perfect, without previously knowing how it became
so, whether with or without the operation of Foresight;--but the power
which caused it so to be, _that_ we cannot admire, if it produced the
object, without aim or purpose, according to laws of mere Necessity of
Nature."[26]

In point of fact Professor Powell was himself of the same opinion, for
in another place he writes thus:--

 "Now, the bare fact of order and arrangement is on all hands
 undisputed, though commonly most inadequately understood and
 appreciated.

 "The inference of design, intention, forethought, is something
 _beyond_ the last mentioned truth, and not to be _confounded with it_.
 This implies intelligent agency, or moral causation. Hence again, we
 advance to the notion of distinct existence, or what is sometimes
 called personality; and thence proceed to ascribe the other Divine
 attributes and perfections as centring in that independent Being."[27]

It appears only just to the Archdeacon that we should notice this
variation of language on the part of his censor.[28] Of this variation
itself the true account seems undoubtedly to be as follows. The writer
was engaged in tracing the progress of conviction in his own mind.
He first observes order, adjustment, interdependence, throughout
the Universe. Hence he is penetrated by the impression of pervading
Intelligence. Next, he perceives that these results could never have
taken place unless foreseen and provided for by a designed subserviency
of means to ends, and this convinces him of the Personality of that
universal Mind. Finally, he draws, from the analysis of Causation, a
full definition of the great Originator of all things.

The fact, however, remains that each of these gradations of reasoning
may be stated just as easily and more logically as separate and
convergent lines of thought, because each can be rested on a separate
combination of proofs. But the elucidation of this subject cannot be
compressed into few words, and must be deferred to our fifth and sixth
chapters.

Still there is a very peculiar and special satisfaction in following
the path of argument which persuaded an acute and practised reasoner,
accomplished in several departments of knowledge, and himself of a turn
of mind which would appear naturally adapted to the utmost refinements
of sceptical investigation. We shall, therefore, now return to our
comparison of Powell with his predecessor.

These two distinguished writers do, in fact, come at last to the
same conclusion. But they reach it through a difference in the paths
travelled over by such logic of evidence as may after all seem natural
enough to a theological pleader on one side, and on the other to a
scientific physicist.

Professor Powell, of course, leads us more deeply than his predecessor
into the thorny thickets surrounding Natural Theology. No one can read
his essays without remarking the subtlety of his thought, which to
many readers appears over refined, and to some as employed on points
in themselves unimportant. Mr. Baden Powell's own deliberate judgment
was the other way, as we find from the last[29] of his considerable
performances on our subject. "Points," he writes, "which may be seen to
involve the greatest difficulty to more profound inquirers, are often
such as do not occasion the least perplexity to ordinary minds, but are
allowed to pass without hesitation.... On the other hand, exceptions
held forth as fatal by the shallow caviller are seen by the more deeply
reflecting in all their actual littleness and fallacy."

We may add that a subtle argument is often like a sharp thin blade,
cutting clean into the very heart of a question. If it indeed prove
a home thrust, few things ought to be more fearlessly and cheerfully
welcomed by those who desire to dissect out the naked, intrinsic truth.
We will, therefore, dissect a little deeper, following the Professor's
track of demonstration.

We find him, then, reaching down to a _septum_, or, as botanists prefer
to speak, a strong dissepiment between a _law of Nature_ or _physical
causation_, and a _true Cause_ in the highest and most emphatic
sense[q].

Such a separation is not to be sought from a writer of Paley's date,
when the modern notion of law was unformed, or rather was in process
of formation. Thus Newton's discoveries were thought by many persons
irreligious, because the stability of the heavens appeared like
something necessarily determined. Respecting this opinion, Powell
observes (and from his point of view with truth), that "such necessity
of reason is the highest proof of design." Paley, on the contrary,
felt inclined to despair of discovering much evidence of Design in
Astronomy, but he looked upon the starry heavens as affording the
most ample and glorious confirmation of the agency of an intelligent
Creator, when proved from some other source. In his next chapter (the
23rd) he proceeds to reprehend the mistaken sense of law, growing up
amongst physicists in his own day. "It will," he says, "be made to take
the place of power, and still more, of intelligent power," and will
"be assigned for the cause of anything or of any property of anything
that exists." In this remark he shows his accustomed penetration. Law,
antecedent and consequent, with their series of physical evolutions,
have been talked of by men who confuse physics and metaphysics, as
if they could thereby account for a whole universe.[30] Now, from
this cloudy confusion[r], Professor Powell is exempt. He accepts (as
obviously he must accept) the natural-science idea of law, which looks
at it as an orderly expression of force, and tells us that "law and
order, physical causation and uniformity of action are the elevated
manifestations of Divinity, creation and providence."[31] But from
the conception of Mind or Intelligence thus given us, which, though
invisible to the eye, is yet, in its effects, plainly visible, he
distinguishes, over and over again, the idea of a true originating
first Cause.[32] We see the necessity of a moral Cause as distinguished
from a physical antecedent, when we survey Nature. But Nature does
not contain the idea in an explicit shape. She only necessitates its
acceptance. This idea, we find, he tells us, manifest in our own moral
nature,--by analogy we discern it in the Divine. He likewise severely
blames those who commingle in words the two contrasted thoughts and
lines of inference, and mentions Coleridge and Sterling[33] by way of
example. As concerns his own mode of establishing the idea of causation
in its proper and peculiar force, Professor Powell agrees with a large
number of metaphysicians, ancient and modern. It might seem superfluous
to name as an instance the late Dean Mansel, were not a passage in his
"Prolegomena" so full of good matter on the topic.[34]

In this view of causation, then, Powell advanced nothing new. But what
he did advance was really valuable. The man who can rise no higher than
law or succession as he sees it impressed on outward nature, stands in
a totally different position from the man whose insight into Reason
and Will has shown him the idea of true Causation. For, he has seen
that whoever is the author of his own act, does something which puts
in movement a new series of antecedence and consequence,--a new train
of events, the issue of which no man can foresee;--though of what has
come, and is coming, he, the individual man, is the truly responsible
cause[s]. But if _he_ can introduce into the order of the outward world
a new antecedent carrying after it a chain of new consequents, what
shall he think respecting the absolute Cause of all worlds, things and
beings, the thinker himself included? Who shall persuade him to deny
the reasonableness of a Providence following creation? Who can reprove
the man when he feels and asserts his own moral power, for a belief in
Miracles? Above all, who will demonstrate that prayer is inefficacious,
if we can rise (as Baden Powell says we can rise) "by _analogy_
with the exercise of intellect, and the volition, or power of moral
causation, of which we are conscious within ourselves, to the Supreme
Mind and Moral Cause of the universe?"

It is no slight praise to say that Professor Powell clearly saw,
and no less clearly expressed, a truth not always apprehended among
physicists. By giving it expression, he rendered a substantial service
to Natural Theology. It is, indeed, a serious drawback and impediment
to Natural Theologians that their argument requires some acquaintance
with more than one wide field of knowledge. They have to reason from
the material world,--they have also to reason from the world of mind;
and in countries like England, France, and Germany, where division of
labour penetrates every calling, literary as well as manufacturing, a
combination of this sort is a matter of infrequent occurrence. To this
retarding circumstance may be ascribed the want of progress in several
mixed sciences,[35] which, like the subject we are treating, occupy two
distinct tracts of border-land territory.

The separating wall between Law and Cause built up by Professor Powell,
was founded on fact, and will probably remain unshaken. But he added to
it a theoretical limitation of the term, Natural Theology, which, like
many changes in verbal usage, does not appear defensible,--particularly
as its bad effects are plainly shown in Professor Powell's own book.

Within two pages of the passage on Causation last quoted, he startles
the unwary reader by saying (p. 173) that "Natural Theology confessedly
'proves too little,' because it cannot rise to the metaphysical
idea or scriptural representation of God." It is generally vain to
inquire what may be meant by "Metaphysical." Few people are aware
that everybody, learned or unlearned, talks metaphysics either well
or ill; and usually (as M. Jourdain talked prose) without knowing it.
The epithet "metaphysical" figures often enough as another name for
what is unintelligible;--and most Englishmen apply it to all "ideas"
not strictly commercial or practical. Here it seems to stand along
with Scripture, in opposition to Natural Theology; while the latter
term is in turn opposed to the science of the human mind. Yet does not
Powell distinctly trace a Mind and Intelligence analogous to the mind
and intelligence of Man, throughout the world of outward Nature; and
does he not further determine that this same analogy, fairly carried
out, leads to what he _now_ calls "the metaphysical idea, or scriptural
representation of God?" In other words, when discussing the question
of Evidence, he finds Mind pervading outward Nature,--he treats Mind
as the ordering and sovereign part of the Natural world, which visibly
shows the effect of its invisible direction, and bids us follow up this
higher nature in its analogies to God, of Whose operation the order
and arrangement of the Universe are external manifestations. But, when
he speaks of Natural Theology, that higher nature seems to disappear;
intellect, volition, and the power of moral causation, slip out of
sight, and are blotted from his catalogue of natural facts. Human
nature must thus be treated as no part of universal Nature, in order
that a needlessly narrow and purely theoretical fence may be drawn
round the science of Natural Theology! Natural Theology and Natural
Religion are, in truth, terms originally adopted as mere antitheses
to Revelation. The _first_ signifies what mankind might have known,
or may know, of the Divine Being, prior to, or apart from, any direct
message sent by Himself. The _second_ is intended to comprehend those
relations between that Divine Being and ourselves, which must ensue
immediately upon the acceptance of Theism.[36] The _ideas_ expressed by
these two terms are as old as Revelation itself,--a strong reason why
their meaning should not be lightly altered.[37] But this antithetic
usage was never intended to prejudge the question whether the results
of Natural Theology and Religion do not coincide to a very great extent
with the teaching of revelation. Much less was there any idea of
answering this question in the negative, as a hasty reader of certain
isolated passages in Professor Powell's book might easily be led to
answer it.[38]

Our strictures may be aptly concluded by a quotation taken from another
recent writer. Professor Newman understands the evidence of Design in
the same breadth of meaning which we have attached to it. Under it he
comprehends the evidence of Mind naturally known to us, as may be seen
by the following extracts:--

 "A lung," says Mr. Newman,[39] "bears a certain relation to the air,
 a gill to the water, the eye to light, the mind to truth, human
 hearts to one another: is it gratuitous and puerile to say that
 these relations imply design? There is no undue specification here,
 no antagonist argument, no intrusion of human artifice: we take the
 things fresh from nature. In saying that lungs _were intended_ to
 breathe, and eyes to see, we imply an argument from Fitness to Design,
 which carries conviction to the overwhelming majority of cultivated
 as well as uncultivated minds.... If such a fact stood alone in
 the universe, and no other existences _spoke of Design_, it would
 probably remain a mere enigma to us; but when the whole human world is
 pervaded by similar instances, not to see a Universal Mind in nature
 appears almost a brutal insensibility.... Of the physical structure
 of mind, no one pretends to know anything; but this does not weaken
 our conviction that the mind was meant to discern truth. Why should
 any philosopher resist this judgment? One thing might justify him;
 namely, if there were strong _à priori_ reasons for disbelieving that
 Mind exists anywhere except in man. But the case is just the reverse.
 That puny beings who are but of yesterday, and presently disappear,
 should alone possess that which of all things is highest and most
 wonderful, is _à priori_ exceedingly unplausible. As Socrates and
 Cicero have pointedly asked: 'Whence have we picked it up?' Its source
 is not in ourselves: there must surely be a source beyond us. Thus the
 tables are turned: we must _primâ facie_ expect to find Mind in the
 Universe, acting on some stupendous scale, and of course imperfectly
 understood by us. Consequently, such Fitnesses as meet our view on all
 sides bring a reasonable conviction that Design lies beneath them. To
 confess this, is to confess the doctrine of an _intelligent Creator_,
 although we pretend not to understand anything concerning the mode,
 stages, or time of Creation. _Adding now the conclusions drawn
 from the Order of the universe_, we have testimony, adapted to the
 cultivated judgment, that there is a Boundless, Eternal, Unchangeable,
 Designing Mind, not without whom this system of things coheres: and
 this Mind we call GOD."

To take stumbling-blocks out of the reader's way has been the main
object of this Chapter. It has discussed the meaning and force of
several words. The discussion may have seemed somewhat intricate,--but
if honest, and, so far as it goes, thorough, no one will deny its
utility. For facts are known to us as words, and words are facts to
our intellect, since they express our apprehension of objects. They
are, in brief, the interpreters of a world-wide human consciousness.
And in the strength of consciousness our knowledge stands, if it does
stand;--unfaithful to consciousness, it must fall, and ought to die the
death of a traitor.[40]

The word most discussed has been that one upon which turns the best
known argument by Natural Theology--"Design." We trust also, that it
may hereafter gain additional clearness under sidelights from other
trains of thought.[41] And what next follows will be essentially a
discussion of thoughts and things--in which words are to be treated
less as their representatives, and more as our servants and implements.
For this Chapter will have been written to very little purpose if the
reader has failed to perceive that Natural Theology[42] includes at
the very least two distinct elements--two separate sets of premises
drawn from different sources. One of these factors rests upon our
human knowledge of the natural world we live in--the other requires a
deeper kind of knowledge, and one far less cultivated upon inductive
principles--the knowledge, that is to say, of our own nature--our
essential humanity and self-ness.

The investigation of this last element is of paramount importance for
the purpose we have in hand, since, without some ascertained principles
and conditions of truth, men may fold their hands and view all behind
and above the moving diorama of present impressions as ideas sublime
but hopeless[43]--too high for us, who surely can never attain to
them. The plan, therefore, of this essay is to take from the point now
reached a fresh start--to set out, not from a consideration of what we
may desire to know, but of how much or how little can be known, and the
conditions of our knowing it.

An honest wish to be sure of one single thing soon shows us the
impediments we meet in making quite sure of anything. Soon, also, we
painfully learn that these impediments arise from _two_ persistent sets
of causes. Difficulties on the one hand occasioned by the obscurity,
complication, or many-sidedness of objects actually existing _in
rerum naturâ_. Difficulties on the other hand, which, like barnacles
and remoræ attached to a good ship's wooden bottom, act as drags
and retardations on our own apprehending faculties. Barnacle-like,
they can only be kept at a distance or detached by carefully-devised
contrivances. And these again give rise to troubles of other
kinds,--just as copper-sheathed keels or iron vessels are not without
their drawbacks.

The inquiry we propose will have a great collateral advantage, both to
him who doubts and to him who accepts Theism. For we shall at least
get rid of what may fairly be termed a stupid prejudice. Persons who
read and think little, are apt to base upon their own ignorance a vague
presumption that the path of knowledge is plain and easy, until men
try to know God. _Then_ all is hard; the pleasant path becomes a rough
and toilsome road. Others who read, but think less than they read,
are aware that very real obstacles beset all deep inquiry, yet form
hazy and imperfect notions as to the true extent of those obstacles.
They little think how often we are all obliged to accept and maintain
first truths;--difficulties objective, and difficulties subjective,
notwithstanding.

Of one practical conclusion resulting from these difficulties, we
may feel assured beforehand. Many objects of the greatest interest
and importance to truth can never be truly known as they are in
themselves;--our utmost hope is to know, not them, but as much as we
can discover respecting them. And sometimes this limited knowledge is
invaluable. If it does not gratify our natural desire for speculation,
it may often guide and govern our lives. Unspeakably important, for
example, in itself and in its consequences, must be an affirmative
answer to our anxious question concerning the existence of a God.

       *       *       *       *       *

COROLLARY.--It plainly appears from what has been said, that
the knowledge of an "efficient cause" (in physics) does not, and
cannot, at all preclude the inquiry after a purpose or "final cause";
but, on the contrary, leads to its investigation. In a watch's action,
the former is represented by the moving power--that is, the spring; the
latter, by the watch's function--that of indicating hours, minutes,
and seconds. Would any uninformed person, examining a watch for the
first time, and knowing no more than what he sees,--be able to give to
himself any real account of the watch, if spring, train of wheel-work,
and pointers, were shown him; but _no_ hint given of the purpose and
object of the _whole_ construction? Now, to tell him this, would be
to convey the _idea_,--a principle which resides in Mind, and in Mind
alone;--and, so residing, leads to intelligent adaptation;--that is,
a law or laws apprehended by the active exercise of certain mental
faculties.

Let the intelligent reader ask himself whether _any_ functional
structure can be comprehended on _any_ lower terms?--As however this
latter question will be fully discussed further on, it is unnecessary
to say more respecting it at present.


ADDITIONAL NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER II.


A.--ON THE ABSTRACT REASONINGS INVOLVED IN NATURAL THEOLOGY.

In his discourse on Natural Theology, Lord Brougham writes thus (p.
78):--"The whole reasoning proceeds necessarily upon the assumption
that there exists a being or thing separate from, and independent of,
matter, and conscious of its own existence, which we call _mind_. For
the argument is, 'Had I to accomplish this purpose, I should have used
some such means'; or, 'Had I used these means, I should have thought
I was accomplishing some such purpose.' Perceiving the adaptation of
the means to the end, the inference is, that some being has acted
as we should ourselves act, and with the same views. But when we so
speak, and so reason, we are all the while referring to an intelligent
principle or existence; we are referring to our mind, and not to our
bodily frame."... "The belief that mind exists is essential to the
whole argument by which we infer that the Deity exists. This belief ...
is the foundation of Natural Theology in all its branches; and upon
the scheme of materialism no rational, indeed no intelligible, account
can be given of a first cause, or of the creation or government of the
universe."

In a foot-note, Lord Brougham adds:--"It is worthy of observation that
not the least allusion is made in Dr. Paley's work to the argument here
stated, although it is the foundation of the whole of Natural Theology.
Not only does this author leave entirely untouched the argument _à
priori_ (as it is called), and also all the inductive arguments derived
from the phenomena of mind, but he does not even advert to the argument
upon which the inference of design must of necessity rest--that design
which is the whole subject of his book. Nothing can more evince his
distaste or incapacity for metaphysical researches. He assumes the very
position which alone sceptics dispute. In combating him they would
assert that he begged the whole question; for certainly they do not
deny, at least in modern times, the _fact_ of adaptation. As to the
fundamental doctrine of causation, not the least allusion is ever made
to it in any of his writings,--even in his Moral Philosophy."

It is when reviewing this last-named treatise that Dr. Whewell remarks
(History of Moral Philosophy, p. 169):--

"The fact is that Paley had no taste, and therefore we may be allowed
to say that he had little aptitude, for metaphysical disquisitions.
In this there would have been no blame, if he had not entered into
speculations which, if they were not metaphysically right, must be
altogether wrong. We often hear persons declare that they have no
esteem for metaphysics, and intend to shun all metaphysical reasonings;
and this is usually the prelude to some specimen of very _bad_
metaphysics: for I know no better term by which to designate the
process of misunderstanding and confounding those elements of truth
which are supplied by the relations of our own ideas. That Paley had no
turn or talent for the reasoning which depends on such relations, is
plain enough."

The reader may with little trouble collect for himself what is meant
by bad metaphysics from the following extracts. The first is Lord
Macaulay's criticism on the metaphysics of the Schools, which he
introduces into his essay on Francis Bacon, as follows:--

"By stimulating men to the discovery of useful truth, he" (Bacon)
"furnished them with a motive to perform the inductive process
well and carefully. His predecessors had been, in his phrase, not
interpreters, but anticipators of nature. They had been content with
the first principles at which they had arrived by the most scanty and
slovenly induction. And why was this? It was, we conceive, because
their philosophy proposed to itself no practical end--because it was
merely an exercise of the mind. A man who wants to contrive a new
machine or a new medicine has a strong motive to observe accurately
and patiently, and to try experiment after experiment. But a man who
merely wants a theme for disputation or declamation has no such motive.
He is therefore content with premises grounded on assumption, or on
the most scanty and hasty induction. Thus, we conceive, the schoolmen
acted. On their foolish premises they often argued with great ability;
and as their object was "assensum subjugare, non res" (Nov. Org. I.
Aph. 29), to be victorious in controversy, not to be victorious over
nature, they were consistent. For just as much logical skill could be
shown in reasoning on false as on true premises."[44] Of course, if
any genuine metaphysical philosophy exists at all, its right and real
object must be to try and discover true premises of the more abstract
sort--premises, the truth of which affects the procedure of all the
ancillary series.[45]

Our next quotation contains Hume's sentence of execution rather than
critique upon metaphysics as he saw them in connection with dogmatic
theology. First, for his fiery anathema:--

"When we run over libraries, persuaded of these principles, what havoc
must we make? If we take in our hand any volume of divinity or School
metaphysics, for instance, let us ask, _Does it contain any abstract
reasoning concerning quantity or number?_ No. _Does it contain any
experimental reasoning concerning matters of fact and existence?_ No.
Commit it then to the flames: For it can contain nothing but sophistry
and illusion." (Inquiry concerning Human Understanding, § XII.) Alas
for certain of Hume's own speculations!

The student of Positivism knows how this fierce invective was echoed
and re-echoed by Comte and his followers. They, however, omitted the
qualifying word "School," which Hume prefixed to metaphysics. With
Comte, metaphysic of every kind was "anathema maranatha"; and even
psychology got excommunicated, by way of making "a clean sweep."

Hume, on the contrary, had an idea of what philosophy ought to be, and
thus outlined his preparation for a Metaphysic of the Future:--

"The only method of freeing learning, at once, from these abstruse
questions, is to inquire seriously into the nature of human
understanding, and show, from an exact analysis of its powers and
capacity, that it is by no means fitted for such remote and abstruse
subjects. We must submit to this fatigue in order to live at ease ever
after: and must cultivate true metaphysics with some care, in order to
destroy the false and adulterate. Indolence, which, to some persons,
affords a safeguard against this deceitful philosophy, is, with others,
overbalanced by curiosity; and despair, which at some moments prevails,
may give place afterwards to sanguine hopes and expectations. Accurate
and just reasoning is the only catholic remedy, fitted for all persons
and all dispositions; and is alone able to subvert that abstruse
philosophy and metaphysical jargon, which, being mixed up with
popular superstition, renders it in a manner impenetrable to careless
reasoners, and gives it the air of science and wisdom.

"Besides this advantage of rejecting, after deliberate inquiry, the
most uncertain and disagreeable part of learning, there are many
positive advantages, which result from an accurate scrutiny into the
powers and faculties of human nature. It is remarkable concerning
the operations of the mind, that though most intimately present to
us, yet, whenever they become the object of reflection, they seem
involved in obscurity; nor can the eye readily find those lines and
boundaries which discriminate and distinguish them. The objects are
too fine to remain long in the same aspect or situation, and must be
apprehended, in an instant, by a superior penetration, derived from
nature, and improved by habit and reflection. It becomes, therefore, no
inconsiderable part of science barely to know the different operations
of the mind, to separate them from each other, to class them under
their proper heads, and to correct all that seeming disorder in which
they lie involved, when made the object of reflection and inquiry.
This task of ordering and distinguishing, which has no merit when
performed with regard to external bodies, the objects of our senses,
rises in its value when directed towards the operations of the mind,
in proportion to the difficulty and labour which we meet with in
performing it. And if we can go no farther than this mental geography,
or delineation of the distinct parts and powers of the mind, it is at
least a satisfaction to go so far; and the more obvious this science
may appear (and it is by no means obvious), the more contemptible still
must the ignorance of it be esteemed, in all pretenders to learning and
philosophy." Ibid. Section I.

It seems worth while to consider what the effects might have been, had
Hume been faithful to his own idea.[46] In the first place he would
have remedied the weakness pointed out by Macaulay in the premises of
the schoolmen, which were in fact little better than sententious maxims
often derived from mistranslated passages of Scripture, one-sided
opinions of the Fathers, and other sources of doubtful value. These,
Hume would have abscided altogether, and rested his "true metaphysics"
upon such principles as survived a searching inquiry into the
conditions of Human knowledge. Hence, secondly, he would have rendered
a great service to Divinity itself, which can never be benefited
by such arguments as have been described, but must look for a safe
alliance to a synthesis of Faith and Reason. And in the third place he
might have probably given to his country a critical Philosophy adapted
to English modes of Thought. Kant's mind was fired by a spark of
Hume's kindling, but when we think what might have been the shape and
acceptance of Kant in this country had Hume heralded him by a critique
of Reason, it is impossible to read the great Scotchman's writings
without a feeling of disappointment.[47]

It would however be unjust to omit the fact that Hume did really
entertain a serious intention of dealing with these difficult
questions. Thus much is expressed in his earliest work, and we may
conjecture that literary disappointment was at least one cause of that
later preference for "easy philosophy" which contrasts so strongly with
the programme of his treatise on Human Nature. Few programmes were ever
more vigorously outlined, than the ensuing.

"From hence," he says, "in my opinion, arises that common prejudice
against metaphysical reasonings of all kinds, even amongst those
who profess themselves scholars, and have a just value for every
other part of literature. By metaphysical reasonings, they do not
understand those on any particular branch of science, but every kind of
argument, which is any way abstruse, and requires some attention to be
comprehended. We have so often lost our labour in such researches, that
we commonly reject them without hesitation, and resolve, if we must for
ever be a prey to errors and delusions, that they shall at least be
natural and entertaining. And, indeed, nothing but the most determined
scepticism, along with a great degree of indolence, can justify this
aversion to metaphysics. For, if truth be at all within the reach
of human capacity, 'tis certain it must lie very deep and abstruse;
and to hope we shall arrive at it without pains, while the greatest
geniuses have failed with the utmost pains, must certainly be esteemed
sufficiently vain and presumptuous. I pretend to no such advantage
in the philosophy I am going to unfold, and would esteem it a strong
presumption against it, were it so very easy and obvious."--Treatise on
Human Nature, Introduction, p. 12.

In these sentences Hume has sufficiently condemned the vulgar
objections brought against abstract reasoning. Deep and difficult
questions can be discussed in no other manner; and what is often called
a popular treatise on some subject of philosophic inquiry can never
be more than a statement of its writer's opinions, or possibly of his
sentimental prejudices.

The next paragraph contains Hume's earliest[48] sketch of that critical
inquiry into Human Nature on which he proposed to base all future
philosophy. It is of course deeply interesting.

"'Tis evident that all the sciences have a relation, greater or
less, to human nature; and that however wide any of them may seem to
run from it, they still return back by one passage or another. Even
_Mathematics_, _Natural Philosophy_, and _Natural Religion_, are in
some measure dependent on the science of MAN; since they lie
under the cognizance of men, and are judged of by their powers and
faculties.

"'Tis impossible to tell what changes and improvements we might make in
these sciences were we thoroughly acquainted with the extent and force
of human understanding, and could explain the nature of the ideas we
employ, and of the operations we perform in our reasonings. And these
improvements are the more to be hoped for in natural religion, as it
is not content with instructing us in the nature of superior powers,
but carries its views further, to their disposition towards us, and our
duties towards them; and consequently we ourselves are not only the
beings that reason, but also one of the objects concerning which we
reason."

"If, therefore, the sciences of mathematics, natural philosophy, and
natural religion, have such a dependence on the knowledge of man,
what may be expected in the other sciences, whose connection with
human nature is more close and intimate?... In these four sciences of
_Logic_, _Morals_, _Criticism_, and _Politics_, is comprehended almost
everything which it can any way import us to be acquainted with, or
which can tend either to the improvement or ornament of the human mind.

"Here then is the only expedient, from which we can hope for success in
our philosophical researches, to leave the tedious lingering method,
which we have hitherto followed, and instead of taking now and then a
castle or village on the frontier, to march up directly to the capital
or centre of these sciences, to human nature itself; which being once
masters of, we may everywhere else hope for an easy victory. From this
station we may extend our conquests over all those sciences which more
intimately concern human life, and may afterwards proceed at leisure
to discover more fully those which are the objects of pure curiosity.
There is no question of importance, whose decision is not comprised
in the science of man; and there is none, which can be decided with
any certainty, before we become acquainted with that science. In
pretending, therefore, to explain the principles of human nature, we in
effect propose a complete system of the sciences, built on a foundation
almost entirely new, and the only one upon which they can stand with
any security."[49] Ibid. pp. 13-14.

The present writer has a special interest in citing these passages,
because they do in fact defend as well as describe the procedure of his
very next chapter.

Such then at an early age was Hume's keen-edged critical appreciation
of those intellectual conditions required for a Philosophy of the
Sciences, or as he calls it, the "true Metaphysics." In order to
supplement his clever and clear idea by a very practical delineation
of the metaphysical territory, we turn to another great thinker, the
founder of our modern natural science, the great Lord Verulam.[50]

Bacon divides Philosophy according to its objects, which are
three,--God, Nature, Man. Take, then, Natural Philosophy; it is well
said that the truth of nature lies deeply hidden, and it is also well
said that the Producer imitates Nature. Natural Philosophy divides
itself accordingly into the inquisition of causes and the production
of effects; it is both speculative and operative. There is indeed
an intercourse between causes and effects, and both these kinds of
knowledge. All true and fruitful Natural Philosophy has a double scale
or ladder,--ascendent and descendent; ascending from experiment to
first causes; descending thence to fresh experiment and always fresh
productiveness.[51]

The ascending half is divided into two moieties, of which one is the
science of Physics, the other of Metaphysics. In distinguishing these
two, Bacon so far agrees with antiquity as to say,--"That Physic
supposes in nature only a being and moving and natural necessity;
whereas Metaphysic supposes also a Mind and Idea. For that which I
shall say comes perhaps to this."[52] Or, to put it in another light,
he writes elsewhere:--"Physique, taking it according to the derivation,
and not according to our idiom for medicine, is situate in a middle
term or distance between natural history and Metaphysique. For natural
history describeth the variety of things; Physique, the causes, but
variable or respective causes; and Metaphysique, the fixed and constant
causes."[53]

In order to clear the way for _his_ Metaphysic of the future, Bacon
subjects what had been called by that name to a critical process. He
separates from it a kind of theoretical philosophy, the attainment
of which he considered doubtful, though he desired that it should be
attempted, as the ultimate goal of human wisdom. The object of the
separation is, therefore, to leave his metaphysical science within the
limits of what is certainly attainable,--a fact not to be lost sight of
in its relation to the abstract subjects in which we are now specially
interested. The separated realm of knowledge Bacon calls "First and
Summary Philosophy"; it is a "common ancestor to all knowledge,"[54]
whereas Metaphysic belongs to the philosophy of Nature. It is at the
apex of his pyramid of knowledges,[55]--the basis being a collection of
natural facts--the "stage next the basis," (an investigation of causes
variable and immersed in material existence,) is called "Physique--the
stage next the vertical point is Metaphysique."[56] To enter clearly
into Bacon's meaning, two questions should be answered: one, what was
the wisdom that older Metaphysicians pursued, respecting which he did
not himself feel sanguine? and the other, what remained in his thought
the province of practical Metaphysique?

It is obvious that a wisdom which shall gather up all that every other
realm of wisdom produces, cast it into Thought's winepress, and extract
the rarest vintage of Truth, has been the vision of every age since men
began to inquire and to reason. If this wisdom were possible, it would
become to us an alphabet of the Universe; we should obtain a clear
insight into the world as it is, and the foregone work of its Creator.
Each of us might truthfully say:--

    "Der du die Welt umschweifst,
    Geschäftiger Geist, wie nah' fühl ich mich dir!"

It needs but a glance at Bacon's indefinite outline of a First and
Summary Philosophy,[57] to see that it must always be greeted by two
opposite sentences of condemnation. A large section of its censors
will pronounce the meagreness of its contents "a gentle riddance,"
or perhaps describe the contents themselves still more harshly as
"rubbish shot here." Another section may compare all that it leaves
for Metaphysics to the year without its spring, or Shakespeare's
masterpiece of philosophy with the part of Hamlet left out.

Let us see then how the reserved province was parcelled out.--Bacon
himself remarks:--"It may fairly therefore now be asked, what is left
remaining for Metaphysic? Certainly nothing beyond nature; but of
nature itself much the most excellent part." Most excellent because
"Physic handles that which is most inherent in matter and therefore
transitory, and Metaphysic that which is more abstracted and fixed.
And again, that Physic supposes in nature only a being and moving
and natural necessity: whereas Metaphysic supposes also a mind and
idea."[58]

This search into the Mind of Nature is divided into the investigation
of _two_ kinds of causes, still called the Formal and the Final.
Bacon's doctrine of Forms--the Philosophy in which is embraced "Natura
naturans"--nature engendering nature--the Queen of Art--and the Regent
of Production, constitutes one of the most difficult parts of the
Novum Organum, the Advancement, and the De Augmentis; and may have
been one chief provocative to King James' irreverent similitude. It
might, according to some writers, even now prove a veritable "peace
of God" could we only grasp its full meaning. "From the discovery
of Forms," says Bacon, "results truth in speculation and freedom in
operation."[59] And his latest commentator believes that this field of
discovery has not been truly explored, because its very idea has been
only imperfectly apprehended. The whole question, however, belongs to
a future Chapter of this Essay, where we propose examining the Law of
Production in its most refined and abstract shape. Yet one further
remark may be allowed here. According to Francis Bacon, one "respect
which ennobles this part of Metaphysic, is that it enfranchises the
power of men to the greatest liberty, and leads it to the widest and
most extensive field of operation.... For physical causes give light
and direction to new inventions in similar matter. But whosoever knows
any Form, knows also the utmost possibility of superinducing that
nature upon every variety of matter, and so is less restrained and tied
in operation, either to the basis of the matter or to the condition of
the efficient."[60]

We are more concerned, at the present stage of this Essay, with
the _second_ portion of Bacon's Metaphysique--the Inquiry into
Final Causes. They are described in the Advancement as not having
been neglected before its great Author's time, but as having been
"misplaced." "For they are," he writes in the De Augm. (E. & S. iv.
p. 363) "generally sought for in Physic, and not in Metaphysic. And
yet if it were but a fault in order I should not think so much of it;
for order is matter of illustration, but pertains not to the substance
of sciences. But this misplacing has caused a notable deficience, and
been a great misfortune to Philosophy. For the handling of final causes
in Physics has driven away and overthrown the diligent inquiry of
physical causes."... "And I say this, not because those final causes
are not true and worthy to be inquired in metaphysical speculations;
but because their excursions and irruptions into the limits of physical
causes has bred a waste and solitude in that track. For otherwise, if
they be but kept within their proper bounds, men are extremely deceived
if they think there is any enmity or repugnancy at all between the
two." (Ibid. p. 364.) Bacon's meaning is indeed clear enough to those
who consider his examples. We do not learn how clouds are produced by
being told they serve for watering the earth. It is no history of our
earth itself, to say that its "solidness is for the station and mansion
of living creatures." "To know the actual nature of a thing," observes
an Oxford commentator on the Organum, "we must investigate it in and
for itself, not for its results."[61]

Perhaps one of the most curious facts relating to the "misplacement"
of Final Causes is that few more flagrant instances of that abuse can
be found than some which occur in the field, not of physical but of
moral science. The following remarkable example is from an argument
framed by Mr. James Mill against Sir J. Macintosh, which appears all
the more worthy of quotation, because it is reproduced and approved by
Mr. J. Stuart Mill. The whole argument deserves perusal as showing how
easily an acquired and customary kind of association will sometimes
predominate over free thought; but for our present object a few
passages will suffice. The italics are not Mr. Mill's, but are here
marked for the purpose of guiding the reader's eye to those steps
which lead from _final cause_ (or motive) to _interest_, from interest
to Utility in its grossest form, the artificial creation, namely,
of our spur to interested action, dignified by this author with the
sacred name of Morality, both in essence, _i.e._, what makes an act
to be moral--and in respect of our moral sense, _i.e._, what are the
sentiments with which we regard our own actions and those of other
persons.

"Men make classifications, as they do everything else, for some end.
Now, for what _end_ was it that men, out of their innumerable acts,
selected a class, to which they gave the name of moral, and another
class, to which they gave the name of immoral? What was the motive of
this act? What its final cause?

"Assuredly the answer to this question is the first step, though
Sir James saw it not, towards the solution of his two questions,
comprehending the _whole_ of ethical science; first, what _makes_ an
act to be _moral?_ and, secondly, what are the _sentiments_ with which
we _regard_ it?

"We may also be assured, that it was some very obvious _interest_ which
recommended this classification; for it was performed, in a certain
rough way, in the _very rudest_ states of society.

"Farther, we may easily see how, even in very rude states, men were led
to it, by little less than necessity.... They had no stronger interest
than to obtain the repetition of the one sort, and to prevent the
repetition of the other.... And here we clearly perceive the origin of
that important case of classification, the classification of acts as
_moral_ and _immoral_. The acts, which it was _important_ to other men
that each individual should _perform_, but in which the individual had
not a sufficient _interest_ to secure the performance of them, were
constituted one class. The acts, which it was _important_ to other men
that each individual should _abstain from_, but in regard to which
he had not a personal _interest_ sufficiently strong to secure his
abstaining from them, were constituted another class. The first class
were distinguished by the name _moral_ acts; the second by the name
_immoral_.

"The _interest_ which men had in securing the performance of the one
set of acts, the non-performance of the other, led them by a sort of
necessity to think of the _means_. They had to _create_ an interest,
which the actor would not otherwise have, in the performance of the
one sort, the non-performance of the other. And in proceeding to
this end, they could not easily miss their way. They had two powers
applicable to the purpose. They had a certain quantity of good at
their disposal, and they had a certain quantity of evil.... And this
is the scheme which they adopted; and which, in every situation, they
have invariably pursued. _The whole business of the moral sentiments_,
moral approbation, and disapprobation, has this for its _object_,--the
distribution of the good and evil we have at command, for the
_production_ of acts of the _useful_ sort, the _prevention_ of acts of
the _contrary_ sort. Can there be a nobler _object_?"[62]

Some people may think that all nobleness is here taken away from moral
distinctions. Others may wonder how such refined calculation could
take place "in the very rudest states of Society." Many more will feel
that _this_ factitious interest is _not_ the moral sentiment of which
they are themselves conscious. We defer these points, however, to a
future chapter, and are satisfied now with calling attention to the
"misplacement" of final causes. To any modern versed (as Bacon was)
in the wisdom of the mediæval schools, the following parallel might
appear complete. Ask two questions--what are clouds?--what are moral
distinctions?--let a "why" be substituted for the "what." Both are
classified by men, both may be defined by their subserviency to _human
interests_,--it is sufficient to discover some use in each. Moral
distinctions exist for the benefit of society, clouds are for watering
the earth. An earth-watering contrivance describes not only one use but
the whole nature of a cloud; and for morality can a nobler definition
be found than that of a notion invented and named on Utilitarian
principles and promoting a public interest?[63] Doubtless morality
does benefit mankind--doubtless clouds do water the earth. But in
either case is the good effect its full and comprehensive "why?"--to
say nothing of the desiderated "what?"


Francis Bacon (as we have seen) strongly affirmed that between Physical
Causes and Final Causes "kept within their proper bounds, men are
extremely deceived if they think there is any enmity or repugnancy
at all." The manner in which, according to the Baconian doctrine,
these two sets of causes harmonize and supplement each other, so as
conjointly to subserve the highest purpose of Natural Theology, cannot
be better explained than in the words of Bacon's late lamented Editor,
Mr. R. Leslie Ellis:--

"It is not sufficiently remarked that final causes have often been
spoken of without any reference to a benevolent intention. When it is
said that the final cause of a stone's falling is 'locus deorsum,'
the remark is at least but remotely connected with the doctrine of an
intelligent providence. We are to remember that Bacon has expressly
censured Aristotle for having made use of final causes without
referring to the fountain from which they flow, namely the providence
of the Creator. And in this censure he has found many to concur.

"Again, in any case in which the benevolent intention can be perceived,
we are at liberty to ask by what means and according to what laws
this benevolent intention is manifested and made efficient. If this
question is not to be asked, there is in the first place an end of
physical science, so far as relates to every case in which a benevolent
intention has been or can be recognised; and in the second, the
argument à posteriori founded on the contrivance displayed in the works
of creation is entirely taken away.

"This is, in effect, what Bacon says in the passage of the _De
Augmentis_, in which he complains of the abuse of final causes. If,
he affirms, the physical cause of any phenomenon can be assigned as
well as the final, so far is this from derogating from our idea of
the divine wisdom, that on the contrary it does but confirm and exalt
it."[64]

Before passing from this subject the reader's attention may be drawn
to two notes by the same eminent commentator. Bacon remarks (Nov.
Org. I. 48) that Final Causes are "ex naturâ hominis" _i.e._, have
relation to the nature of Man. "It is difficult," writes Mr. Ellis, "to
assent to the assertion that the notion of the final cause, considered
generally, is more ex naturâ hominis than that of the efficient. The
subject is one of which it is difficult to speak accurately; but it may
be said that wherever we think that we recognise a tendency towards a
fulfilment or realisation of an idea, there the notion of the final
cause comes in. It can only be from inadvertence that Professor Owen
has set the doctrine of the final cause as it were in antithesis to
that of the unity of type: by the former he means the doctrine that the
suitability of an animal to its mode of life is the one thing aimed
at or intended in its structure. It cannot be doubted that Aristotle
would have recognised the preservation of the type as not less truly a
final cause than the preservation of the species or than the well-being
of the individual. The final cause connects itself with what in the
language of modern German philosophy is expressed by the phrase 'the
Idea in Nature.'"[65]

The epigrammatic comparison of a Final Cause to a consecrated
Virgin[66] has been reviewed by numberless disciples as well as critics
of our author. Mr. Ellis annotates the Latin text thus:--"_Nihil
parit_, means simply, _non parit opera_, which though it would have
been a more precise mode of expression would have destroyed the
appositeness of the illustration. No one who fairly considers the
context can, I think, have any doubts as to the limitation with
which the sentence in question is to be taken. But it is often the
misfortune of a pointed saying to be quoted apart from any context, and
consequently to be misunderstood." And this seems to be a scholarly
explanation.[67]

To complete the sketch of Baconian Metaphysic it appears only needful
to add that his respect for the science of Quantity is sufficient to
make him class under this higher philosophy--this near approach to the
apex of his Pyramid--the whole circle of Mathematics.

Our long note will not have been written in vain if the reader bears
its contents in mind when considering the abstract arguments advanced
throughout this Essay. It is well to see what very great authorities
have thought concerning the true use of Metaphysics;--it is well also
to see how they ought to be applied in questions of physical science,
and for the purpose of grounding a science of Natural Theology.


B.--ON THE PHRASE "DESIGN IMPLIES A DESIGNER."

"It has been contended," says Professor Baden Powell, "that in one
sense it is mere tautology to say that Design implies a Designer."
(Connexion of Natural and Divine Truth, p. 183.)

As a matter of fact there can be no doubt that verbal-sounding
phrases, however useful in a system of Mnemonics, and much in favour
as political war-cries, always tend to discredit the sober course of
a philosophic argument. But Paley, though writing popularly, did not
intend a mere _ad captandum_ effect, as may be seen by a reference
to his second chapter. He meant by Design and Contrivance to express
in brief the conditions he had laid down as _characteristic_ of the
intentional adaptation of means to definitely purposed ends,--with
which conditions he appears to have been fully satisfied.

In his 23rd and 24th chapters, where some hasty writer might have said
"law implies a lawgiver," the Archdeacon prefers to state that "a law
pre-supposes an agent," and proceeds to argue the statement on its
merits. "Law," he says, "is only the mode according to which an agent
proceeds: it implies a power, for it is the order according to which
that power acts. Without this agent, without this power, which are both
distinct from itself, the 'law' does nothing; is nothing." (Chapter
23.) He is well satisfied with this argument also, and repeats it
(slightly varied in form) during the course of his next chapter.

In our comparison of Powell with Paley we were led to remark on the
diverse meanings of the word Design, and the facility with which some
authors have glided from one to another among its significations. If
any thinker believes that the examples he adduces are _distinctly_
instances of Foresight, Intention, and Will, he has the Designer full
in mind before he employs the term Design. But if his instances fall
short of thus much _implicit_ force, the argument founded on them is a
worthless verbality.[68]

Those who protest against the popular phrase, "Design proves a
Designer," say it is a temptation to assume this point--(the one point
at issue)--over which it skims with such secure ease. But to any person
in earnest, few things are more irritating than a piece of cool,
thorough-going assumption. It is like catching a cat and persistently
calling it a hare. Many visitors at certain Roman Hotels are aware
that when deprived of ears and tail _more Italico_ and well roasted,
the resemblance between these two animals may give rise to questions
of disputed identity. Imagine, now, a party of cat-catchers, who not
only assume the Identity, but persevere in calling their mongrel curs
harehounds, and themselves huntsmen. No truer claim in reality do
a multitude of Design-hunters possess to any higher title than the
_leguleii_ of Natural Theology. And the blame of their discredit must
in a great degree be laid upon their words. It is easy to say, "A
thrown-stone implies a thrower." But suppose the stone about which you
and I are talking was thrown by the fiery force of a volcano? Must we
hence infer the existence of a Cyclops or a Titan?

This mode of popular speech reached the climax of absurdity when it was
gravely argued that "Evolution implies an Evolver." So it might appear
to the peculiar mind of the speaker; but how about the mind of him who
promulgated the evolution-hypothesis? Stones (as we may observe) fly
from more than one cause, and there is more than one account to be
given of the theory of Evolution.

Enough has been said to show that the phrase commented on in this
note, prejudices the argument it is intended to assist. It wears the
appearance of embodying a foregone conclusion; and gives trouble to the
honest inquirer, who, in order to estimate reasonings at their true
value, must translate them into accurate forms of speech.

We may aptly finish these remarks by a quotation from Whewell's
Aphorisms on the Language of Science. (Aphorism I., Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences, II. 483.) "Words borrowed from common language,
and converted by scientific writers into technical terms, have some
advantages and some disadvantages. They possess this great convenience,
that they are understood after a very short explanation, and retained
in the memory without effort. On the other hand they lead to some
inconvenience; for since they have a meaning in common language, a
careless reader is prone to disregard the technical limitation of this
meaning, and to attempt to collect their import in scientific books, in
the same vague and conjectural manner in which he collects the purpose
of words in common cases. Hence the language of science, when thus
resembling common language, is liable to be employed with an absence of
that scientific precision which alone gives it value. Popular writers
and talkers, when they speak of _force_, _momentum_, _action_, _and
reaction_, and the like, often afford examples of the inaccuracy thus
arising from the scientific appropriation of common terms."

A similar line of reflection led Coleridge to remark (Biog. Lit.,
Chap. x.) that "the language of the market would be in the schools as
_pedantic_, though it might not be reprobated by that name, as the
language of the schools in the market. The mere man of the world, who
insists that no other terms but such as occur in common conversation
should be employed in a scientific disquisition, and with no greater
precision, is as truly a _pedant_ as the man of letters, who, either
over-rating the acquirements of his auditors, or misled by his own
familiarity with technical or scholastic terms, converses at the
wine-table with his mind fixed on his museum or laboratory." And such
pedantry is, we may add, not uncommonly just as perspicuous as the
definition which, says old Glanvill, "was lately given of a _Thought_
in a _University Sermon_--viz. _A Repentine Prosiliency jumping into
Being_." (_Defence of the Vanity of Dogmatizing_, Actio Decima, p. 61,
ed. 1.)


C.--HUME ON THE ANALOGIES OF ART AND NATURE.

[_Referred to in footnote (e) in the preceding Chapter._]

The statement in the text is shaped as a not unfairly urged scientific
objection of the kind which might be raised by some actual craftsman
or producer. An objection identical in essence is thrown by Hume into
a refined semi-metaphysical shape, and made to turn upon our general
acquaintance with Human nature contrasted with our general ignorance of
the Divine. It runs as follows:--

"The infinite difference of the subjects, replied he," (Hume's dramatic
Epicurus,) "is a sufficient foundation for this difference in my
conclusions. In works of _human_ art and contrivance, it is allowable
to advance from the effect to the cause, and returning back from the
cause, to form new inferences concerning the effect, and examine the
alterations which it has probably undergone, or may still undergo. But
what is the foundation of this method of reasoning? Plainly this; that
man is a being, whom we know by experience, whose motives and designs
we are acquainted with, and whose projects and inclinations have a
certain connection and coherence, according to the laws which nature
has established for the government of such a creature. When, therefore,
we find that any work has proceeded from the skill and industry of man;
as we are otherwise acquainted with the nature of the animal, we can
draw a hundred inferences concerning what may be expected from him; and
these inferences will all be founded in experience and observation.
But did we know man only from the single work or production which we
examine, it were impossible for us to argue in this manner; because our
knowledge of all the qualities, which we ascribe to him, being in that
case derived from the production, it is impossible they could point to
anything farther, or be the foundation of any new inference....

"The case is not the same with our reasonings from the works of nature.
The Deity is known to us only by his productions, and is a single
being in the universe, not comprehended under any species or genus,
from whose experienced attributes or qualities, we can, by analogy,
infer any attribute or quality in him." (Enquiry concerning Human
Understanding. Section xi.)

Hume himself gives in his own character a reply partially veiled by the
same half-metaphysical style which characterises the objection:--

"There occurs to me (continued I), with regard to your main topic, a
difficulty which I shall just propose to you without insisting on it,
lest it lead into reasonings of too nice and delicate a nature. In a
word, I much doubt whether it be possible for a cause to be known only
by its effect (as you have all along supposed), or to be of so singular
and particular a nature, as to have no parallel and no similarity with
any other cause or object that has ever fallen under our observation.
It is only when two _species_ of objects are found to be constantly
conjoined, that we can infer the one from the other: and were an effect
presented which was entirely singular, and could not be comprehended
under any known _species_, I do not see, that we could form any
conjecture or inference at all concerning its cause. If experience
and observation and analogy be, indeed, the only guides which we can
reasonably follow in inferences of this nature; both the effect and
cause must bear a similarity and resemblance to other effects and
causes which we know, and which we have found, in many instances, to be
conjoined with each other. I leave it to your own reflection to pursue
the consequences of this principle." (Ibid.)

The consequences which ought in fairness to be deduced may be stated
thus. The effect we contemplate, (_i.e._ Nature,) is _not_ singular
but can be compared with other effects--those of Art. The comparison
is made in respect of certain specific attributes or properties upon
which the Design analogy turns, so that we may reason upwards to
certain specific analogies of Causation. Art manifests the foreseeing
attributes of the human artist, and from comparison of these we
infer in the Creator like attributes,--what Hume elsewhere calls the
_natural_ attributes of the Deity. But this likeness is properly termed
_analogical_, because of the vast difference in the magnitude of the
effects _from_ which we thus reason, and of the causes _to_ which we
reason. As our wisdom and power are proportionable to our earthly
works, so are the Divine wisdom and power proportionable to the whole
majestic Universe. There is, then, a comparison in _species_, but not
in grandeur--the attributes are not _similar_, but _analogical_. As the
Heavens are high above the Earth, so are His thoughts higher than our
thoughts.


D.--THE PANTHEISTIC CONSEQUENCES CHARGED UPON PHYSICAL SPECULATIONS.

The following is the passage from Professor Baden Powell referred to in
note (_h_) of the preceding chapter. Some short extracts were also made
from it on a previous page.

"Nothing but the common confused and mistaken notions as to laws and
causes, could give any colour to the assertion that ... physical
speculations tend to substitute general physical laws in the place of
the Deity; and that scientific statements of the conclusions of Natural
Theology are nothing but ill-disguised Pantheism.

"The utter futility of such inferences is at once seen, when the
smallest attention is given to the plain distinctions above laid down
between 'moral' and 'physical' causation; and to the proper force of
the conclusions from natural science establishing the former by means
of the latter.

"This distinction obviously points to the _very reverse_ of the
assertion that physical action is identical with its moral cause; the
essential difference and contrast between them is the very point which
the whole argument upholds and enforces.

"Of all forms of philosophical mysticism, the idea of Pantheism seems
to me one of the most extravagant. Ever-present _mind_ is a direct
inference from the universal order of nature, or rather only another
mode of expressing it. But of the _mode_ of existence of that mind we
can infer nothing.

"To assert, then, that this universally manifested mind is
_co-existent_, or even to be _identified_, with _matter_, is at best
a mere gratuitous hypothesis, and as such wholly unphilosophical in
itself, and leading to many preposterous consequences. But if further
supposed to apply in any higher sense as to an object of worship,
trust, love, obedience, or the like (as is implied in the term
Pan_theism_), it appears to involve moral contradictions of the most
startling kind.

"There are, however, many who, though rejecting Pantheism as _untrue_,
do not conceive it _absurd_ or _contradictory_. Much, however, will,
in all such cases, depend on the precise _sense_ in which it is
maintained. With some it seems to have been upheld on a fanciful
analogy with the conception of the human frame animated by an
indwelling spirit; as if in a somewhat similar manner the supreme mind
might animate nature. Without disputing this in a certain sense, the
cases surely cannot be considered at all parallel: we do not infer the
existence of the human mind, from the arrangement and adaptation of the
bodily organs, nor is it the moral cause of their organisation.

"If Pantheism were asserted merely in the sense of a kind of vital or
animating principle pervading the material world, I would admit that
such an idea involves _no absurdity_, or _contradiction_, but still I
should regard it as visionary and unphilosophical. I could but class
it with the 'vital forces' which Kepler fancied necessary for keeping
up the motions of the planets, with the 'plastic powers of nature,'
'her abhorrence of a vacuum,' and the like chimæras. But it is when men
elevate such a supposed animating principle into a _Deity_, a being
of supreme wisdom, power, beneficence, and goodness, yet residing in
every atom of matter, and _participating directly_ in every form and
case of material action, that the contradiction arises." _Spirit of the
Inductive Philosophy_, pp. 176-9.


E.--THE EXTENT AND DIVISIONS OF THE SCIENCE OF NATURAL THEOLOGY.

The following passages from Professor Powell's Essay "on the Spirit
of the Inductive Philosophy" will go far to justify the praise and
blame bestowed upon his mode of procedure in the text of the foregoing
chapter. But we would recommend his own pages to the student's
discriminative perusal.

In extract No. 1, Baden Powell shows with equal truth and force that
universal Law must be contemplated as a manifestation of one supreme
Intelligence presiding over the whole Universe. A philosopher who looks
on Nature with this majestic breadth of view does not need for his own
deepest convictions to follow Design through a multitude of smaller
evidences.

If extract No. 2 could be admitted as a _full_ account of the
conditions and limitations of Natural Theology, our science would seem
to result in an obscuration of the magnificently Supreme Power already
accepted. So far as its _letter_ goes, the Creator of the Universe
might appear to be shut out from the world which He has made. We cannot
(as has been said) consent to this narrow consideration of Natural
Theology, nor yet of Powell's meaning.

Extract No. 3 acknowledges what all physical investigators ought to
acknowledge,--that although their sciences contribute very much towards
solving the problem of the Universe, and although their results readily
harmonize with the solution maintained by the Theist--yet there rests
over that vast problem a cloud which the physical sciences cannot
completely dispel. This (as we shall see in Chapter V.) is indeed the
confession of the greatest minds at present engaged upon the philosophy
of Natural Science.

_Extract_ No. 1.--"From the inductive philosophy we derive our belief
in the harmony, order, and uniformity of natural causes, perpetually
maintained in a universally connected chain of dependence. And hence it
is, that we arrive at those sublime ideas of a presiding Intelligence
of which _law_ and _uniformity_, universal mechanism once for all
adjusted, are the proper _external manifestations_.

"To the truly inductive philosopher, _fate_ and _chance_, _necessity_
and _accident_, are words without meaning. To him, the world is made
up of recondite combinations of physical laws, and the existence and
maintenance of those laws are the very indication of a Supreme Mind.
But chance is irreconcilable with laws, fate with mind, regulated and
fixed order with blind destiny, fortuitous accident, or arbitrary
interruption.

"All rational natural theology advances by tracing the immediate
mechanical steps and particular processes in detail, and the physical
causes in which the influences of the Great Moral Cause or Supreme Mind
are manifested. The greater the number and extent of such secondary
steps and intermediate processes through which we can trace it, the
greater the complexity and wider the ramifications of the chain of
causes, the more powerful and convincing the instruction they convey as
to the existence and operation of the Divine wisdom and power.

"Yet it is a common mode of illustration to speak of the _chain_ of
secondary causes reaching up to the First Cause. Or, again, fears are
entertained of tracing secondary causes too far, so as to intrench on
the supremacy of the First Cause. But this is an erroneous analogy: the
maker or designer of a chain is no more at one end of it than at the
other. The length of the chain in no way alters our conviction of its
skilful structure, except to enhance it. If the number of links were
truly _infinite_, so much the more infinite the skill of its framer.

"Mr. F. Newman observes,[69] I think most truly, that the _common_
arguments from what are called 'secondary causes' to the 'First Cause'
are unsatisfactory: and I would trace this to the confused sense in
which those terms are commonly used, as already explained; and which, I
think, might be entirely removed by attention to the distinctions above
laid down. While, on the other hand, I fully acknowledge that those
arguments, when correctly understood, lead only to a _very limited_
conclusion; and one which falls infinitely _short_ of those high moral
and spiritual intuitions on which Mr. F. Newman grounds his religious
system, yet in no way discredits or supersedes them." _Essay_, pp.
151-4.

_Extract_ No. 2.--"In the present state of knowledge, law and order,
physical causation and uniformity of action, are the elevated
manifestations of Divinity, creation and providence. Interruptions of
such order (if for a moment they could be admitted as such) could only
produce a sort of temporary concealment of such manifestations, and
involve the beautiful light shed over the natural world in a passing
cloud. We do not indeed _doubt_ that the sun exists behind the cloud,
but we certainly do not see it; still less can we call the obscuration
a special _proof_ of its presence. The main point in the system of
order and law is its absolute _universality_. Exceptions, if real, must
_pro tanto_ imply a deficiency in the chain of connexion, and might, to
a sceptical disposition, offer a ground of doubt.

"But so overwhelming is the mass and body of proof, that no philosophic
mind would allow such exceptions for a moment to weigh against
it; they would be as dust in the balance. A supreme moral cause
manifested through law, order, and physical causes, is the confession
of science: conflicting operations, arbitrary interruptions, abrupt
discontinuities, are the idols of ignorance, and, if they really
prevailed, would so far be to the philosopher only the exponents of
chaos and atheism; the obscuration (as far as they extend) of the
sensible manifestation of the Supreme Intelligence." _Ibid._ 165, 6.

_Extract_ No. 3.--"The whole tenor of the preceding argument is
directed to show that the inference and assertion of a _Supreme Moral
Cause_, distinct from and above nature, results immediately from the
recognition of the eternal and universal maintenance of the order of
_physical causes_, which are its essential _external manifestations_.

"Of the _mode of action or operation_ by which the Supreme Moral Cause
influences the universal order of physical causes, _we confess our
utter ignorance_. But the _evidence_ of such operation, where nature
exists, can never be lost or interrupted. And in proportion as our
more extended researches exhibit these indications more fully and more
gloriously displayed, we cannot but believe that our contemplations are
more nearly and truly approaching their SOURCE." _Ibid._ 179.

The reader will not grudge the time he may have bestowed upon this
note if it leads him to a distinct apprehension of the true breadth and
compass of our science.

"Natural Theology," says Kant, "infers the attributes and the existence
of an author of the world, from the constitution of, the order and
unity observable in this world, in which two modes of Causality,
together with their laws, must be accepted--that is to say, Nature
and Freedom. Thus Natural Theology rises from this world to a
supreme Intelligence, whether as to the principle of all natural or
of all moral order and perfection. In the former case it is termed
Physico-Theology, in the latter Ethical or Moral Theology." This last
term he explains by adding, "Not theological ethics; for this latter
science contains ethical laws, which _presuppose_ the existence of a
Supreme Governor of the world; while Moral Theology, on the contrary,
is an evidence of the existence of a Supreme Being, an evidence founded
upon ethical laws." _Kant's Kritik der reinen Vernunft Transscendental
Elementarlehre_, s. 7.

It was from the fulness and depth of a personal conviction on this
topic that the present writer ventured to assert in 1870 that "The
conditions under which Natural Theology becomes scientifically
possible, are found when it supplements Natural Science by a science of
Right and Wrong," and also that "for the future Natural Theology ought
to follow this path and no other--unless it wishes to commit suicide."
These assertions were made in a University Sermon[70] on the question,
"Under what Conditions is a Science of Natural Theology possible?" and
they were censured as novel and unprecedented by critics who ought to
have known better.


F.--ON TELEOLOGY.

One consequence of the principle on which this Essay has been framed
is an endeavour to place before the reader's eye different modes of
reasoning in the language of their several authors. The method of
looking at any subject-matter in a diversity of lights naturally leads
to copiousness of quotation. There can, it is evident, be no varieties
of thought so undeniably distinct as those which are the actual
products of diverse minds.

The maxim which has governed the following selection is what Bacon
would call a marshalling Idea. They posit one central thought and throw
light upon it from a circle of separate reflectors.

Let it be observed that such a collection of opinions implies no
appeal to authority in the narrow sense of the word. There is indeed a
manifest distinction between authority and authorities--and our present
appeal is to the latter. No man's _ipse dixit_ can dogmatically settle
questions which belong to an inquirer's responsible self; but it is
surely the wisdom of every one who acknowledges the awful sense of
accountability attendant on the determination of questions affecting
his central beliefs, to weigh the reasonings of others who have felt
the same deep impression of their paramount importance. If any one
is reluctant so to do from an idea that by doing thus much he pays a
wrongful deference to prejudices, he has in truth assumed the whole
issue which he is bound to examine. How otherwise can he certainly
allege that the prejudice is not inherent within himself?

Reluctance of this kind would on the present occasion be thoroughly
misplaced. Authorities as here quoted are neither more nor less than
the opinions of experts who have a title to be heard each in his own
proper department. Throughout the practical conduct of life we all
experience the benefit of laying aside our private spectacles from
time to time and of looking through the glasses of other men. And in
questions such as the one now before us, is it possible to do better
than try whether we can see for ourselves what has been pronounced
discernible by men who contemplated this world of ours with more than
ordinary powers of vision?

The present writer has a personal interest in bringing together the
reflections of many who have reached the same resting-place along
various lines of approach, and who have expressed their conclusions
with some diversity of language. He has ventured himself on viewing the
evidences of Natural Theology from a position by no means identical
with that most commonly occupied by Natural Theologians. The student,
therefore, who takes a wide survey of the field will be the critic best
prepared to examine the latter part of this Essay.

The first authority quoted among our ample citations is Hume, whose
appearance as a witness for Natural Theology may surprise some readers.
As, however, is remarked by an eminent writer in the _Quarterly_,
Hume's hard common sense "enabled him when he liked, to control the
excesses of a speculative imagination and subject it to practical
reason, as he understood reason's verdict." He even went so far as to
say that "The whole frame of Nature bespeaks an Intelligent Author;
and no rational inquirer can, after serious reflection, suspend his
belief a moment with regard to the primary principles of genuine Theism
and Religion." (_Natural History of Religion_, Introduction.) Indeed,
according to Cucheval Clarigny,[71] Hume was an "almost Christian" at
certain periods of his life. The repellant forces that kept him back,
are "not far to seek."

The following passages refer to the illative analogy which forms the
proper shape of the argument from Design.

"That the works of Nature bear a great analogy to the productions of
art, is evident; and according to all the rules of good reasoning,
we ought to infer, if we argue at all concerning them, that their
causes have a proportional analogy. But as there are also considerable
differences, we have reason to suppose a proportional difference
in the causes; and in particular ought to attribute a much higher
degree of power and energy to the supreme cause than any we have
ever observed in mankind. Here then the existence of a DEITY is
plainly ascertained by reason: and if we make it a question whether,
on account of these analogies, we can properly call him a _mind_
or _intelligence_, notwithstanding the vast difference which may
reasonably be supposed between him and human minds; what is this but
a mere verbal controversy? No man can deny the analogies between the
effects: To restrain ourselves from inquiring concerning the causes,
is scarcely possible: From this inquiry, the legitimate conclusion is,
that the causes have also an analogy: And if we are not contented with
calling the first and supreme cause a GOD or DEITY, but desire to vary
the expression; what can we call him but MIND or THOUGHT, to which he
is justly supposed to bear a considerable resemblance?" _Dialogues
concerning Natural Religion_, Part xii. in Essays, Vol. II. p. 526.[72]


"If the whole of Natural Theology, as some people seem to maintain,
resolves itself into one simple, though somewhat ambiguous, at least
undefined proposition, _That the cause or causes of order in the
universe probably bear some remote analogy to human intelligence_.
If this proposition be not capable of extension, variation, or more
particular explication; if it affords no inference that affects human
life, or can be the source of any action or forbearance; and if the
analogy, imperfect as it is, can be carried no farther than to the
human intelligence, and cannot be transferred, with any appearance of
probability, to the other qualities of the mind: If this really be the
case, what can the most inquisitive, contemplative, and religious man
do more than give a plain, philosophical assent to the proposition,
as often as it occurs; and believe that the arguments on which it is
established, exceed the objections which lie against it?" _Ibid._ p.
538.

The following is the opinion of Cleanthes, upon whom Hume confers the
palm in the dialogue;--"Take care, Philo, replied Cleanthes; take care;
push not matters too far: allow not your zeal against false religion to
undermine your veneration for the true. Forfeit not this principle, the
chief, the only great comfort in life; and our principal support amidst
all the attacks of adverse fortune. The most agreeable reflection,
which it is possible for human imagination to suggest, is that of
genuine Theism, which represents us as the workmanship of a Being
perfectly good, wise, and powerful; who created us for happiness; and
who, having implanted in us immeasurable desires of good, will prolong
our existence to all eternity, and will transfer us into an infinite
variety of scenes, in order to satisfy those desires, and render our
felicity complete and durable. Next to such a Being himself (if the
comparison be allowed), the happiest lot which we can imagine, is that
of being under his guardianship and protection." _Ibid._ p.535.[73]

The next three extracts give Hume's opinion on the prevailing principle
disclosed by the analogy--design, purpose, and the recognition of final
causes:--

"Though the stupidity of men, barbarous and uninstructed, be so great,
that they may not see a sovereign author in the more obvious works of
nature, to which they are so much familiarized; yet it scarce seems
possible, that any one of good understanding should reject that idea,
when once it is suggested to him. A purpose, an intention, a design is
evident in everything; and when our comprehension is so far enlarged
as to contemplate the first rise of this visible system, we must
adopt, with the strongest conviction, the idea of some intelligent
cause or author. The uniform maxims, too, which prevail throughout
the whole frame of the universe, naturally, if not necessarily, lead
us to conceive this intelligence as single and undivided, where the
prejudices of education oppose not so reasonable a theory. Even the
contrarieties of nature, by discovering themselves everywhere, become
proofs of some consistent plan, and establish one single purpose or
intention, however inexplicable and incomprehensible." _Natural History
of Religion_ XV.--General Corollary, in _Essays_ II. pp. 422, 3.

"In many views of the universe, and of its parts, particularly the
latter, the beauty and fitness of final causes strike us with such
irresistible force that all objections appear (what I believe they
really are) mere cavils and sophisms; nor can we then imagine how it
was ever possible for us to repose any weight on them." _Dialogues
concerning Natural Religion_, Part X. in _Essays_, II. 509.

"The order and arrangement of nature, the curious adjustment of final
causes, the plain use and intention of every part and organ; all these
bespeak in the clearest language an intelligent cause or author. The
heavens and the earth join in the same testimony. The whole chorus of
nature raises one hymn to the praises of its Creator.... I have found a
Deity; and here I stop my enquiry. Let those go farther who are wiser
or more enterprising." _Ibid._ Part IV. p. 467.

Hume is conspicuous amongst reasoners on Natural Theology for having
distinctly comprehended Human Nature along with Nature in the cycle
of its evidences. "This sentence at least," he writes, "Reason will
venture to pronounce, That a mental world, or universe of ideas,
requires a cause as much as does a material world, or universe of
objects; and, if similar in its arrangement, must require a similar
cause. For what is there in this subject which should occasion a
different conclusion or inference? In an abstract view, they are
entirely alike; and no difficulty attends the one supposition which is
not common to both of them." _Ibid._ Part IV. p. 464.

This statement brings us to the impediments which withheld Hume from
forming a sublime idea of the Divine Being, such an idea as kindles the
enthusiasm of devout men, and inspires even timidly sensitive souls
with deathless confidence in the final triumph of a self-sacrificing
virtue destined to survive the grave. These causes were the opinions he
maintained respecting human nature. We may lay it down as a universal
rule that every one who sees the animal, but not the heaven-aspiring
moral element in his own nature, and in our common nature, will fail
to represent to himself the lineaments or reflection of the Divine
attributes. An acknowledged kinship with brutal passions, the lowering
of society and wedlock to animal gregariousness, of moral principle
and the rule of Right and Wrong to a perception of Utility, are fatal
hindrances in the search after God;--a search arduous to the best
of us, since deep as the far translucent heavens, are the majestic
thoughts of Him after Whom we strive to feel. Now Hume failed to
discern the Godlike in Man. "Human life," he remarks in his _Sceptic_,
"is more governed by fortune than by reason; is to be regarded more as
a dull pastime than as a serious occupation; and is more influenced by
particular humour than by general principles." Morality is no fixed
star in Hume's firmament. To omit the laxity of many moral maxims he
lays down, the very nature and foundations of morality were imperilled
by his analytics.[74]

"He has," writes Mackintosh, "altogether omitted the circumstance on
which depends the difference of our sentiments regarding moral and
intellectual qualities. We _admire_ intellectual excellence, but we
bestow no moral _approbation_ on it." And again--"He entirely overlooks
that consciousness of the _rightful supremacy of the moral faculty_
over every other principle of human action, without an explanation
of which, ethical theory is wanting in one of its vital organs."
_Ethical Philosophy_, pp. 182, 4. "If," says Hume in the _Sceptic_,
"we can depend upon any principle which we learn from philosophy,
this, I think, may be considered as certain and undoubted, that there
is nothing in itself valuable or despicable, desirable or hateful,
beautiful or deformed; but that these attributes arise from the
particular constitution and fabric of human sentiment and affection."
And half a dozen pages afterwards--"Good and ill, both natural and
moral, are entirely relative to human sentiment and affection." So
too, "The necessity of justice to the support of society is," he tells
us, "the SOLE foundation of that virtue;" usefulness, he
explains, "is the SOLE source of the moral approbation paid
to fidelity, justice, veracity, integrity, and those other estimable
and useful qualities and principles." It is also "the source of a
considerable part of the merit ascribed to humanity, benevolence,
friendship, public spirit, and other social virtues of that stamp."
_Principles of Morals_, Sect. III. _sub fin._ With these sentiments it
is not surprising that while he insists on the analogy between human
workmanship and the natural universe he cannot argue analogically
from moral Truth to the Divine attributes--and even goes so far as to
decide that the first causes of the Universe "have neither goodness nor
malice."

The student of Natural Theology cannot direct his attention too soon
or too steadily to the vast share possessed by our moral sentiments
in our apprehension of the Divine nature. It is from our sense of
Responsibility attached to each act of Will and Choice that we deduce
the idea of causation. It is from our intuitions of immutable moral
truth and the irreconcilable antithesis between Right and Wrong that
we behold the Martyr as one who has not lived in vain, but lives truly
and for ever; and are sure that there exists a God who has regard to
the righteous, the oppressed, the fatherless, and the widow. Clear
moral insight appears in Socrates, who chose to die rather than offend
against the eternal laws. But ought the man to be styled moral or
immoral who should balance together two comparative utilities,--that
of preserving his father's life and that of acquiring by a judicious
neglect, without risk to himself, a property which he resolved to
expend usefully? Of one thing we may be sure, God could not be in all
his thoughts whilst making such a calculation.

It is thus that a pure Morality and an elevated conception of the
Divine Being act and react upon each other. And in this way our
speculative and practical Reason become interlaced--the former giving
to the logical understanding an account of those ideas which form the
essential sublimity and moving influence of our practical beliefs--the
springs of our daily and hourly behaviour. There is no more certain
characteristic of a mind so ordered than its ability to deal with a
moral doubt which casuists might long debate, to solve the enigma
within the compass of a moment's thought, and to defend the solution by
fair and honest argument. As regards our present question it makes no
difference by what means such a condition of mind may have been brought
about, but it is plain that a sense of accountability has much to do
with this condition. And the connexion between Responsibility and our
belief in a life immortal, and in a just and veracious God, will form a
subject for future consideration.

Meantime, the reader must take Hume's acceptance of the doctrine of
final causes and the Design-analogy, for what it is worth. No candid
person ought to condemn Hume as he has often been condemned without
remembering the allowance to be made for his excessive vanity,[75]
his extreme love of paradoxical speculation, and the dramatic irony
which runs throughout his writings. These are in fact some of the
qualities which make him an unfit schoolmaster for the young, and a
shrewd exercise for elder men. One useful lesson we gather just now is
learned from the fact that he places a wide gulf between the natural
and moral attributes of the Deity, and draws a veil over the latter,
because the alleged poverty of our moral ideas precludes any analogy to
reason upon, however remote that analogy may appear. Hence Hume's God
of Nature becomes a shadow like Wordsworth's Laodamia, scarce fit for
the Elysian bowers; He is no longer felt by us to be the God of Human
Nature.

We cannot here omit to observe that Hume had no thought of worshipping
the Order of the World, or of erecting a temple to immutable Laws,
blind Force, or any other blank impersonal Necessity. The limit of his
inquiry was what to human reason might appear the easiest and most
probable interpretation of nature.[76] This question he asked and
answered. Whether modern science has added important data on which
to found a more conclusive reply is a further inquiry which we shall
have to consider, but meantime it appears certain that _if_ the most
sceptical theory of the most sceptical scientist were held true, there
would still remain the same necessity for asking Hume's question. For
neither our life, nor the world we live in, nor the wide universe,
have any real cause or aim scientifically assigned them. We should
still have to inquire by what agency and to what purpose we and the All
exist? That we really _are_ is a fact for you, O reader, and for me;
and we cannot but want to discover _whether_ we shall yet _be_, when
this brief yet tedious life is done; and if so, whether our present
acts and choosings must influence our Hereafter? Science has said
nothing to annihilate our interest concerning these topics, nor yet to
finally decide them.

For the truth of what is contained in this last paragraph, we may
cite as witness amongst scientific men, the distinguished President
of the British Association for 1872. Dr. Carpenter spoke at Brighton
in these words:--"There is a great deal of what I cannot but regard
as fallacious and misleading Philosophy--'oppositions of Science
falsely so called'--abroad in the world at the present time. And I
hope to satisfy you, that those who set up _their own conceptions_ of
the Orderly Sequence which they discern in the Phenomena of Nature,
as fixed and determinate _Laws_, by which those phenomena not only
_are_ within all Human experience, but always _have been_, and always
_must be_, invariably governed, are really guilty of the Intellectual
arrogance they condemn in the Systems of the Ancients, and place
themselves in diametrical antagonism to those real Philosophers, by
whose comprehensive grasp and penetrating insight that Order has been
so far disclosed." And again towards the close of his Address:--"With
the growth of the Scientific Study of Nature, the conception of its
Harmony and Unity gained ever-increasing strength. And so among the
most enlightened of the Greek and Roman Philosophers, we find a
distinct recognition of the idea of the Unity of the Directing Mind
from which the Order of Nature proceeds; for they obviously believed
that, as our modern Poet has expressed it--

    "All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
    Whose body Nature is, and God the Soul."

The Science of Modern times, however, has taken a more special
direction. Fixing its attention exclusively on the _Order_ of Nature,
it has separated itself wholly from Theology, whose function it is to
seek after its _Cause_. In this, Science is fully justified, alike by
the entire independence of its objects, and by the historical fact
that it has been continually hampered and impeded in its search for
the Truth as it is in Nature, by the restraints which Theologians have
attempted to impose upon its inquiries. But when Science, passing
beyond its own limits, assumes to take the place of Theology, and sets
up its own conception of the _Order_ of Nature as a sufficient account
of its _Cause_, it is invading a province of Thought to which it has no
claim, and not unreasonably provokes the hostility of those who ought
to be its best friends."

Our next extract is from Sir Benjamin Brodie, and it, too, considers
the absolute permanence of the laws of Nature in relation to Design:--

Crites. "There have been sceptics who have believed that the laws of
nature were, if I may use the expression, self-existent; and that what
we now see around us is but a continuation of a system that has been
going on from all eternity--thus dispensing with the notion of a great
creative Intelligence altogether."

Eubulus. "Under any view of the subject, it seems to me that it would
be very difficult, if not impossible, for any of us practically to
separate the marks of design, and of the adaptation of means to ends,
which the universe affords, but which are more especially conspicuous
in the animal and vegetable kingdoms, from the notion of an intelligent
Cause. There is not one of the sceptics to whom you have alluded, who
would not, if he were asked the question, "What is the use of the eye?"
answer, "that it is intended to be the organ of vision, as the ear is
intended to be that of hearing, and as the nostrils are constructed
for the purpose of smell." But what I said just now requires some
further explanation. When I stated that at the present time there is no
evidence of any deviation from certain established laws of nature--that
if we could thoroughly know and thoroughly appreciate what those laws
really are, we should be able to account for all the phenomena around
us--I was far from intending to say that there has never been a period
when other laws than those which are now in force were in operation,
or that the time may not arrive when the present order of things will
be in a similar manner superseded. Looking at the structure of the
globe, and the changes in its surface which have been disclosed to the
observation of geologists, we recognize the probability that there was
a time when this planet of ours was no better than a huge aërolite,
and in a state quite incompatible with animal or even vegetable life.
The existence of living beings, then, must have had a beginning; yet
we have no evidence of any law now in force which will account for
this marvellous creation."[77] Psychological Inquiries, Part II., pp.
193-4-5.

The great surgeon next discusses the question of "Equivocal Generation"
now known by the terms Archebiosis and Abiogenesis. His opinion,
together with some later information on the topic, will be found in our
additional notes to Chapter III.

When writing his first series of "Inquiries" Sir Benjamin recorded his
judgment regarding our knowledge and conception of the Divine Existence
and in terms which show how closely he connected the general subject of
Mind and its Essence with his idea of the Creator.

Eubulus. "When I contemplate the evidence of intention and design which
present themselves everywhere around us, but which, to our limited
comprehensions, is more especially manifested in the vegetable and
animal creations, I cannot avoid attributing the construction and order
of the universe to an intelligent being, whose power and knowledge are
such that it is impossible for me to form any adequate conception of
them, any more than I can avoid referring the motions of the planets
and stars to the same law of gravitation as that which directs the
motions of our own globe. But no one, I apprehend, will maintain that
the mind of the Deity depends on a certain construction of brain and
nerves; and Dr. Priestley, the most philosophical of the advocates of
the system of materialism, ventures no further than to say that we
have no knowledge on the subject. But, to use the words of Sir Isaac
Newton, 'This powerful ever-living agent being in all places, is more
able to move the bodies within his boundless uniform sensorium, and
thereby to form and reform the parts of the universe, than we are,
by our will, to move the parts of our own bodies.' The remainder of
the passage from which I have made this quotation, is not without
interest, as indicating the view which Newton took of the matter in
question:--'And yet we are not to consider the world as the body of
God, or the several parts thereof as the parts of God. He is an uniform
being, void of organs, members, or parts, and they are his creatures,
subordinate to him, and subservient to him, and he is no more the soul
of them than the soul of man is the soul of the species carried through
the organs of sense into the place of its sensation, where it perceives
them by its immediate presence, without the intervention of any third
thing. The organs of sense are not for enabling the soul to perceive
the species of things in its sensorium, but only for conveying them
thither; and God has no need of any such organs, he being everywhere
present to the things themselves.'"

Ergates. "I entirely agree with you in the opinion that we must admit
the existence of the Deity as a fact as well established as that of the
law of gravitation, and that in doing so we must further admit that
mind may and does exist, independently of bodily organization. Be it
also remembered that _mind_, in its humblest form, is still _mind_,
and that, immeasurable as the distance between them may be, it must
nevertheless be regarded as being of the same essence with that of the
Deity himself. For my own part I find no difficulty in conceiving the
existence of mind independently of corporeal organs." (p. 39, seq.)

Those who have read Professor Huxley's article on the Metaphysics of
Sensation,[78] will feel much interested in the passages selected from
Newton by Sir Benjamin. It seems almost a pity that the accomplished
Professor did not cite any of Dr. Clarke's explanatory remarks
addressed to Leibniz respecting Sir Isaac Newton's expressions. The
similitude above quoted, Clarke explains thus:--"Mr. Newton considère
le cerveau et les organes des sens, comme le moyen par lequel ces
images sont Formées et non comme le moyen par lequel l'âme voit
ou aperçoit ces images, lorsqu'elles sont ainsi formées. Et dans
l'Univers, il ne considère pas les choses, comme si elles étaient des
images formées par un certain moyen ou par des organes; mais comme
des choses réelles, que Dieu lui-même a formées, et qu'il voit dans
tous les lieux où elles sont, sans l'intervention d'aucun moyen. C'est
tout ce que Mr. Newton a voulu dire par la comparaison, dont il s'est
servi, lorsqu'il suppose que l'Espace infini est, pour ainsi dire, le
Sensorium de l'Etre qui est présent partout."

A simpler way of putting the case may be to point out that the
comparison of a Sensorium is intended, like other similitudes we have
reviewed, to hold in only one point. Newton uses it apparently to
localize the idea of _immediate intuition_. In this way all Space, the
whole Universe, with its moving contents, which transcend the farthest
flight of human imagination are,--not distantly,--but immediately
present to the mind of God.

       *       *       *       *       *

Passing from these thoughts which may illustrate, but cannot explain,
a subject dark with excess of splendour, we now enter on a series of
extracts so chosen as to furnish an ample examination of the several
_ideas_ involved in the philosophy of Design, and an estimate of their
several values. It is evidently important that the reader should
possess some means of forming clear conceptions respecting the nature
of these ideas, and the collection now appended, aims at saving him
the trouble of a tedious search. Any points which may have appeared
perplexing or obscure in the preceding Chapter will, it is hoped, be
made sufficiently plain by a perusal of the following pages.

The first in this class of passages is taken from Whewell's Philosophy
of the Inductive Sciences. No one probably was ever much better
fitted by training and attainment than that eminent writer for the
investigation he here undertakes. We must, however, caution the reader
against supposing that Dr. Whewell means to introduce him into a
world of Platonism. The ideas he speaks of may be illustrated in this
way. Suppose a person constructs a right line according to Euclid's
definition and draws it evenly between its extreme points, his mind
has immediately an impression of rightness or straightness, which
he attaches to all lines actually so constructed or conceived of as
theoretically possible. This idea of straightness is absolute and
universal. So, again, looking at two such lines, he knows that they,
cannot, in the nature of things inclose a space, and this idea likewise
is universal and absolutely true.

With the nature of these ideas as a psychological question, the reader
need not concern himself for our present purpose. It is sufficient to
observe they are brought into activity by a practical occasion. Whether
they were wholly or partially pre-existent--or whether they represent
a state of our Reason evoked by the occasion--are points which make no
difference to their exact strength of validity. We find as a matter
of fact in going through life that this particular class of ideas is
so very true that it enables us to gauge the material universe. Yet
notably enough, Hume in his Treatise (I. 247, seq.) reduces applied
mathematics to a species of probability.

Other ideas having various degrees of validity and practical necessity
are involved in the diverse processes which pertain to the inductive
sciences. Dr. Whewell's work was written for the purpose of
elucidating them, which he does at great length. To some such ideas,
principles, and beliefs we shall advert by and bye.

All that seems now necessary is to remark that the distinguished
author's general division (Book IX.) where our extract will be found,
is concerned with the Philosophy of Biology, and that the paragraphs
quoted are sections of its chapter VI., "On the Idea of Final Causes."

"1. By an examination of those notions which enter into all our
reasonings and judgments on living things, it appears that we conceive
animal life as a vortex or cycle of moving matter in which the form
of the vortex determines the motions, and these motions again support
the form of the vortex: the stationary parts circulate the fluids,
and the fluids nourish the permanent parts. Each portion ministers to
the others, each depends upon the other. The parts make up the whole,
but the existence of the whole is essential to the preservation of
the parts. But parts existing under such conditions are _organs_,
and the whole is _organized_. This is the fundamental conception of
organization. 'Organized beings,' says the physiologist,[79] 'are
composed of a number of essential and mutually dependent parts.'--'An
organized product of nature,' says the great metaphysician,[80] 'is
that in which all the parts are mutually ends and means.'

"2. It will be observed that we do not content ourselves with saying
that in such a whole, all the parts are _mutually dependent_. This
might be true even of a mechanical structure; it would be easy to
imagine a framework in which each part should be necessary to the
support of each of the others; for example, an arch of several stones.
But in such a structure the parts have no properties which they derive
from the whole. They are beams or stones when separate; they are no
more when joined. But the same is not the case in an organized whole.
The limb of an animal separated from the body, loses the properties of
a limb and soon ceases to retain even its form.

"3. Nor do we content ourselves with saying that the parts are
_mutually causes and effects_. This is the case in machinery. In a
clock, the pendulum by means of the escapement causes the descent of
the weight, the weight by the same escapement keeps up the motion of
the pendulum. But things of this kind may happen by accident. Stones
slide from a rock down the side of a hill and cause it to be smooth;
the smoothness of the slope causes stones still to slide. Yet no one
would call such a slide an organized system. The system is organized,
when the effects which take place among the parts are _essential to our
conception of the whole_; when the whole would not _be_ a whole, nor
the parts, parts, except these effects were produced; when the effects
not only happen in fact, but are included in the idea of the object;
when they are not only seen, but foreseen; not only expected, but
intended: in short when, instead of being causes and effects, they are
_ends_ and _means_, as they are termed in the above definition.

"Thus we necessarily include, in our idea of Organization, the notion
of an End, a Purpose, a Design; or, to use another phrase which has
been peculiarly appropriated in this case, a _Final Cause_. This idea
of a Final Cause is an essential condition in order to the pursuing our
researches respecting organized bodies....

"5. This has already been confirmed by reference to fact; in the
History of Physiology, I have shown that those who studied the
structure of animals were irresistibly led to the conviction that the
parts of this structure have each its end or purpose;--that each member
and organ not merely produces a certain effect or answers a certain
use, but is so framed as to impress us with the persuasion that it was
constructed _for_ that use;--that it was _intended_ to produce the
effect. It was there seen that this persuasion was repeatedly expressed
in the most emphatic manner by Galen;--that it directed the researches
and led to the discoveries of Harvey;--that it has always been dwelt
upon as a favourite contemplation, and followed as a certain guide, by
the best anatomists;--and that it is inculcated by the physiologists of
the profoundest views and most extensive knowledge of our own time. All
these persons have deemed it a most certain and important principle of
physiology, that in every organized structure, plant or animal, each
intelligible part has its allotted office:--each organ is designed
for its appropriate function:--that nature, in these cases, produces
nothing in vain: that, in short, each portion of the whole arrangement
has its _final cause_; an end to which it is adapted, and in this end,
the reason that it is where and what it is.

"6. This Notion of Design in organized bodies must, I say, be supplied
by the student of organization out of his own mind: a truth which will
become clearer if we attend to the most conspicuous and acknowledged
instances of _design_. The structure of the eye, in which the parts are
curiously adjusted so as to produce a distinct image on the retina, as
in an optical instrument;--the trochlear muscle of the eye, in which
the tendon passes round a support and turns back, like a rope round a
pulley;--the prospective contrivances for the preservation of animals,
provided long before they are wanted, as the milk of the mother, the
teeth of the child, the eyes and the lungs of the foetus:--these
arrangements, and innumerable others, call up in us a persuasion that
Design has entered into the plan of animal form and progress. And if we
bring in our minds this conception of Design, nothing can more fully
square with and fit it, than such instances as these. But if we did not
already possess the Idea of Design;--if we had not had our notion of
mechanical contrivance awakened by inspection of optical instruments,
or pulleys, or in some other way;--if we had never been conscious
ourselves of providing for the future;--if this were the case, we could
not recognize contrivance and prospectiveness in such instances as we
have referred to. The facts are, indeed, admirably in accordance with
these conceptions, when the two are brought together: but the facts and
the conceptions come together from different quarters--from without and
from within.

"7. We may further illustrate this point by referring to the relations
of travellers who tell us that when consummate examples of human
mechanical contrivance have been set before savages, they have appeared
incapable of apprehending them as proofs of design. This shows that
in such cases the Idea of Design had not been developed in the minds
of the people who were thus unintelligent: but it no more proves
that such an idea does not naturally and necessarily arise, in the
progress of men's minds, than the confused manner in which the same
savages apprehend the relations of space, or number, or cause, proves
that these ideas do not naturally belong to their intellects. All men
have these ideas; and it is because they cannot help referring their
sensations to such ideas, that they apprehend the world as existing in
time and space, and as a series of causes and effects. It would be very
erroneous to say that the belief of such truths is obtained by logical
reasoning from facts. And in like manner we cannot logically deduce
design from the contemplation of organic structures; although it is
impossible for us, when the facts are clearly before us, not to find a
reference to design operating in our minds."

It seems well to add here the practical comments made by Müller and
Kant on the passages quoted from them by Dr. Whewell in his first
Paragraph. Professor Müller writes thus (Baly's translation, Vol. I.,
p. 19):--"The manner in which their elements are combined, is not the
only difference between organic and inorganic bodies; there is in
living organic matter a principle constantly in action, the operations
of which are in accordance with a rational plan, so that the individual
parts which it creates in the body, are adapted to the design of the
whole; and this it is which distinguishes organism. Kant says, 'The
cause of the particular mode of existence of each part of a living body
resides in the whole, while in dead masses each part contains this
cause within itself.' This explains why a mere part separated from an
organized whole generally does not continue to live; why, in fact, an
organized body appears to be one and indivisible."

Before proceeding to the great Metaphysician, it may be interesting to
place in connection with this extract from Müller, certain views of
other distinguished physiologists. Sir C. Bell states his own opinions
on the connection of Life and Organization in this manner (_Appendix
to Paley's Natural Theology_ by Sir Charles Bell, commencing with pp.
211-13):--"Archdeacon Paley has, in these two introductory chapters,
given us the advantage of simple, but forcible language, with extreme
ingenuity, in illustration. But for his example, we should have felt
some hesitation in making so close a comparison between design,
as exhibited by the Creator in the animal structure, and the mere
mechanism, the operose and imperfect contrivances of human art.

"Certainly, there may be a comparison; for a superficial and rapid
survey of the animal body may convey the notion of an apparatus of
levers, pulleys, and ropes--which maybe compared with the spring,
barrel, and fusee, the wheels and pinions, of a watch. But if we study
the texture of animal bodies more curiously, and especially if we
compare animals with each other--for example, the simple structure of
the lower creatures with the complicated structure of those higher
in the scale of existence--we shall see, that in the lowest links
of the chain animals are so simple, that we should almost call them
homogeneous; and yet in these we find life, sensibility, and motion.
It is in the animals higher in the scale that we discover parts having
distinct endowments, and exhibiting complex mechanical relations. The
mechanical contrivances which are so obvious in man, for instance, are
the provisions for the agency and dominion of an intellectual power
over the materials around him.

"We mark this early, because there are authors who, looking upon this
complexity of mechanism, confound it with the presence of life itself,
and think it a necessary adjunct--nay, even that life proceeds from
it: whereas the mechanism which we have to examine in the animal body
is formed with reference to the necessity of acting upon or receiving
impressions from, things external to the body--a necessary condition of
our state of existence in a material world.

"Many have expressed their opinion very boldly on the necessary
relation between organization and life, who have never extended their
views to the system of nature. To place man, an intelligent and active
being, in this world of matter, he must have properties bearing
relation to that matter. The existence of matter implies an agency of
certain forces;--the particles of bodies must suffer attraction and
repulsion; and the bodies formed by the balance of these influences
upon their atoms or particles must have weight or gravity, and possess
mechanical properties. So must the living body, independently of its
peculiar endowments, have similar composition and qualities, and
have certain relations to the solids, fluids, gases, heat, light,
electricity, or galvanism, which are around it. "Without these, the
intellectual principle could receive no impulse--could have no agency
and no relation to the material world. The whole body must gravitate
or have weight; without which it could neither stand securely, nor
exert its powers on the bodies around it. But for this, muscular
power itself, and all the appliances which are related to that power,
would be useless. When, therefore, it is affirmed that organization
or construction is necessary to life, we may at least pause in giving
assent, under the certainty that we see another and a different reason
for the construction of the body. Thus we perceive, that as the body
must have weight to have power, so must it have mechanical contrivance,
or arrangement of its parts. As it must have weight, so must it be
sustained by a skeleton; and when we examine the bones, which give
the body height and shape, we find each column (for in that sense a
bone may be first taken) adjusted with the finest attention to the
perpendicular weight that it has to bear, as well as to the lateral
thrusts to which it is subject in the motions of the body."... Again
p. 405, seq.

.... "Mr. Hunter illustrated the subject thus:--Death is apparent or
real. A man dragged out of the water, and to appearance dead, is,
notwithstanding, alive, according to the definition we have given.
The living endowments of the individual parts are not exhausted. The
sensibility may be yet roused; the nerves which convey the impression
may yet so far retain their property, that other motor nerves may be
influenced through them; the muscles may be once more concatenated, and
drawn into a simultaneous action. That vibratory motion which we have
just said may be witnessed in a muscle recently cut out of the body,
may be so excited in a class of muscles--for example, in the muscles
of inspiration--that the apparently dead draws an inspiration. Here is
the first of a series of vital motions which excites the others, and
the heart beats, and the blood circulates, and the sensibilities are
restored; and the mind, which was in the condition of one asleep, is
roused into activity and volition, and all the common phenomena of life
are resuscitated. Such is the series of phenomena which is presented in
apparent death from suffocation; but, if the death has been from an
injury of some vital part, the sensibilities and properties of action
in the rest of the body, though resident for a time, have lost their
relations, and there is a link wanting in that chain of vital actions
which restores animation. Here, then, there can be no resuscitation;
and the death of the individual parts of the body rapidly succeeds the
apparent death of the body.

"We perceive now that our original conception of life and the terms
we use respecting it, in common parlance, are but ill-adapted to this
subject when philosophically considered. We early associate life and
motion so intimately that the one stands for the other. If we then
investigate by anatomy, we find a curious and minute mechanism in
operation, an engine and tubes for circulation, and, in short, an
internal motion of every particle of the frame; and the anatomist is
also led into the error of associating in his mind life with motion and
organization. But when we consider the subject more closely, and divest
ourselves of habits and prejudices associated with words, we perceive
that, without making any vain and even dangerous attempt at definition,
life is first to be contemplated as the peculiarity distinguishing
one of two classes into which all matter must be arranged; the one
class, which embraces all living matter, is subject to a controlling
influence which resists the chemical agents, and produces a series of
revolutions, in an order and at periods prescribed; the other, dead
matter, is subject to lapse and change under chemical agency and the
common laws of matter.

"Let us examine the body of a perfect or a complicated animal. We
find each organ possessed of a different power. But there is as yet
no conventional language adapted to our discourse on this subject,
and that is the source of many mistakes; for when a man even like
Mr. Hunter had his mind illuminated upon this science, how was he to
frame his language, when every word that he used had already a meaning
which had no reference to the discovery he had made--to the distinct
qualities which he had ascertained to belong to the living parts?...

"The difference between dead and living matter will appear to be, that
in the one instance the particles are permanently arranged and continue
to exhibit their proper character, as we term it, until by ingenuity
and practice some means are found to withdraw the arranging or uniting
influence; and then the matter is chemically dissolved: resolves into
its elements, and forms new combinations: whilst the life continues,
not simply to arrange the particles, and to give them the order or
organization of the animal body, but to whirl them in a series of
revolutions, during all which the material is passive, the law being in
the life. The order and succession of these changes and their duration
do not result from the material of the frame, which is the same in
all animals, but from that influence which we term life, and which is
superadded to the material." (_Ibid._ 408.)

Writing on Function Mr. Herbert Spencer discusses the following
question. Its interest to our argument is unmistakable.

"Does Structure originate Function, or does Function originate
Structure? is a question about which there has been disagreement.
Using the word Function in its widest signification, as the totality
of all vital actions, the question amounts to this--Does Life produce
Organization, or does Organization produce Life?

"To answer this question is not easy, since we habitually find the
two so associated that neither seems possible without the other;
and they appear uniformly to increase and decrease together....
There is, however, one fact implying that Function must be regarded
as taking precedence of Structure. Of the lowest Rhizopods, which
present no distinctions of parts, and nevertheless feed and grow and
move about, Prof. Huxley has remarked that they exhibit Life without
Organization....

"It may be argued that on the hypothesis of Evolution, Life necessarily
comes before organization. On this hypothesis, organic matter in a
state of homogeneous aggregation, must precede organic matter in a
state of heterogeneous aggregation. But since the passing from a
structureless state to a structured state, is itself a vital process,
it follows that vital activity must have existed while there was yet
no structure: structure could not else arise. That function takes
precedence of structure, seems also implied in the definition of
Life. If Life consists of inner actions so adjusted as to balance
outer actions--if the actions are the _substance_ of Life, while the
adjustment of them constitutes its _form_; then, may we not say that
the actions to be formed must come before that which forms them--that
the continuous change which is the basis of function, must come before
the structure which brings function into shape? Or again, since
throughout all phases of Life up to the highest, every advance is the
effecting of some better adjustment of inner to outer actions; and
since the accompanying new complexity of structure is simply a means
of making possible this better adjustment; it follows that function is
from beginning to end the determining cause of structure."--_Principles
of Biology_, by Mr. Herbert Spencer, p. 153, seq.

We now return to Kant, from whom Dr. Whewell quoted the sentence--"An
organized product of nature is that in which all the parts are mutually
ends and means." Passing by a metaphysical paragraph expressed in a
manner too technical for the general reader, Kant's practical comment
on this sentence runs as follows:--

"Dass die Zergliederer der Gewächse und Thiere, um ihre Structur zu
erforschen und die Gründe einsehen zu können, warum und zu welchem
Ende solche Theile, warum eine solche Lage und Verbindung der Theile
und gerade diese innere Form ihnen gegeben worden, jene Maxime: dass
nichts in einem solchen Geschöpf UMSONST sey, als unumgänglich
nothwendig annehmen und sie eben so, als den Grundsatz der allgemeinen
Naturlehre: dass NICHTS VON UNGEFÄHR geschehe, geltend machen,
ist bekannt. In der That können sie sich auch von diesem teleologischen
Grundsatze eben so wenig lossagen, als dem allgemeinen physischen,
weil, so wie bei Veranlassung des letzteren gar keine Erfahrung
überhaupt, so bei der des ersteren Grundsatzes kein Leitfaden für die
Beobachtung einer Art von Naturdinge, die wir einmal teleologisch unter
dem Begriffe der Naturzwecke gedacht haben, übrig bleiben würde.

"Denn dieser Begriff führt die Vernunft in eine ganz andere Ordnung
der Dinge, als die eines blossen Mechanism der Natur, der uns hier
nicht mehr genug thun will. Eine Idee soll der Möglichkeit des
Naturproducts zum Grunde liegen. Weil diese aber ein absolute Einheit
der Vorstellung ist, statt dessen die Materie eine Vielheit der Dinge
ist, die für sich keine bestimmte Einheit der Zusammensetzung an
die Hand geben kann, so muss, wenn jene Einheit der Idee, sogar als
Bestimmungsgrund _a priori_ eines Naturgesetzes der Causalität einer
solchen Form des Zusammengesetzten dienen soll, der Zweck der Natur auf
ALLES, was in ihrem Producte liegt, erstreckt werden; weil, wenn wir
einmal dergleichen Wirkung im GANZEN auf einen übersinnlichen
Bestimmungsgrund über den blinden Mechanism der Natur hinaus beziehen,
wir sie auch ganz nach diesem Princip beurtheilen müssen und kein Grund
da ist, die Form eines solchen Dinges noch zum Theil vom letzteren als
abhängig anzunehmen, da alsdann bei der Vermischung ungleichartiger
Principien, gar keine sichere Regel der Beurtheilung übrig bleiben
würde." _Kritik der Urtheilskraft_, Section 65.

For the benefit of those who find Kant's German difficult we subjoin a
neat French Translation from the pen of M. Barni.

"On sait que ceux qui dissèquent les plantes et les animaux pour en
étudier la structure, et pouvoir reconnaître pourquoi et à quelle fin
telles parties leur ont été données, pourquoi telle disposition et
tel arrangement des parties, et précisément cette forme intérieure,
admettent comme indispensablement nécessaire cette maxime que rien
n'existe _en vain_ dans ces créatures, et lui accordent une valeur
égale à celle de ce principe de la physique générale, que _rien
n'arrive par hasard_. Et en effet ils ne peuvent pas plus rejeter ce
principe téléologique que le principe universel de la physique; car,
de même qu'en l'absence de ce dernier il n'y aurait plus d'expérience
possible en général, de même, sans le premier, il n'y aurait plus de
fil conducteur pour l'observation d'une espèce de choses de la nature,
que nous avons une fois conçues téléologiquement sous le concept des
fins de la nature.

"En effet ce concept introduit la raison dans un tout autre ordre de
choses que celui du pur mécanisme de la nature, qui ne peut plus ici
nous satisfaire. Il faut qu'une idée serve de principe à la possibilité
de la production de la nature. Mais comme une idée est une unité
absolue de réprésentation, tandis que la matière est une pluralité de
choses qui par elle-même ne peut fournir aucune unité déterminée de
composition, si cette unité de l'idée doit servir, comme principe _a
priori_, à déterminer une loi naturelle à la production d'une forme de
ce genre, il faut que la fin de la nature s'étende _à tout_ ce qui est
contenu dans sa production. En effet, dès que pour expliquer un certain
effet, nous cherchons, au-dessus de l'aveugle mécanisme de la nature,
un principe supra-sensible et que nous l'y rapportons _en général_,
nous devons le juger tout entier d'après ce principe; et il n'y a pas
de raison pour regarder la forme de cette chose comme dépendant encore
en partie de l'autre principe, car alors, dans le mélange de principes
hétérogènes, il ne resterait plus de règle sûre pour le jugement."
_Critique du Jugement_, Section 65.

Kant is not in any dress the easiest of thinkers to follow--a result
possibly consequent upon the resemblance which his writings bear to
trains of reasoning as they pass from the lips of one who thinks aloud.
The following paragraph from another work of Dr. Whewell's may be
useful to some minds as a comment upon this portion of Kant's teleology.

"There is yet one other Idea which I shall mention, though it is one
about which difficulties have been raised, since the consideration
of such difficulties may be instructive: the Idea of a purpose, or
as it is often termed, a _Final Cause_, in organized bodies. It has
been held, and rightly, that the assumption of a Final Cause of each
part of animals and plants is as inevitable as the assumption of an
efficient cause of every event. The maxim, that in organized bodies
nothing is _in vain_, is as necessarily true as the maxim that nothing
happens _by chance_. I have elsewhere shown fully that this Idea is
not deduced from any special facts, but is assumed as a law governing
all facts in organic nature, directing the researches and interpreting
the observations of physiologists. I have also remarked that it is
not at variance with that other law, that plants and that animals are
constructed upon general plans, of which plans, it may be, we do not
see the necessity, though we see how wide is their generality. This
Idea of a purpose,--of a Final Cause,--then, thus supplied by our
minds, is found to be applicable throughout the organic world. It is
in virtue of this Idea that we conceive animals and plants as subject
to _disease_; for disease takes place when the parts do not fully
answer their _purpose_; when they do not do what they _ought_ to do.
How is it then that we thus find an Idea which is _supplied_ by our
own minds, but which is _exemplified_ in every part of the organic
world? Here perhaps the answer will be readily allowed. It is because
this Idea is an Idea of the Divine Mind. There _is_ a Final Cause in
the constitution of these parts of the universe, and therefore we
can interpret them by means of the Idea of Final Cause. We can _see_
a purpose, because there _is_ a purpose. Is it too presumptuous to
suppose that we can thus enter into the Ends and Purposes of the Divine
Mind? We willingly grant and declare that it would be presumptuous to
suppose that we can enter into them to any but a very small degree.
They doubtless go immeasurably beyond our mode of understanding or
conceiving them. But to a certain extent we _can_ go. We can go so
far as to see that they _are_ Ends and Purposes. It is _not_ a vain
presumption in us to suppose that we know that the eye was made for
seeing and the ear for hearing. In this the most pious of men see
nothing impious: the most cautious philosophers see nothing rash. And
that we can see thus far into the designs of the Divine Mind, arises,
we hold, from this:--that we have an Idea of Design and of Purpose
which, so far as it is merely _that_, is true; and so far, is Design
and Purpose in the same sense in the one case and in the other."[81]

       *       *       *       *       *

It will be well worth while to close this present series of
illustrations by a review of Professor Huxley's last published and best
considered positions on Teleology. He printed, in 1871, an article on
Haeckel's "Natürliche Schöpfungs Geschichte," and has now entitled it
"The Genealogy of Animals," and included it in his recent volume of
Critiques. We may therefore assume that we here find the distinguished
Biologist's deliberate opinions. He says, p. 305, "The Teleology
which supposes that the eye, such as we see it in man or one of the
higher _Vertebrata_,[82] was made with the precise structure which
it exhibits, for the purpose of enabling the animal which possesses
it to see, has undoubtedly received its death-blow. Nevertheless it
is necessary to remember that there is a wider Teleology, which is
not touched by the doctrine of Evolution, but is actually based upon
the fundamental proposition of Evolution. That proposition is, that
the whole world, living and not living, is the result of the mutual
interaction, according to definite laws, of the forces possessed by
the molecules of which the primitive nebulosity of the universe was
composed. If this be true, it is no less certain that the existing
world lay, potentially, in the cosmic vapour; and that a sufficient
intelligence could, from a knowledge of the properties of the molecules
of that vapour, have predicted, say the state of the Fauna of Britain
in 1869, with as much certainty as one can say what will happen to the
vapour of the breath on a cold winter's day.

"Consider a kitchen clock, which ticks loudly, shows the hours,
minutes, and seconds, strikes, cries 'cuckoo!' and perhaps shows the
phases of the moon. When the clock is wound up, all the phenomena which
it exhibits are potentially contained in its mechanism, and a clever
clockmaker could predict all it will do after an examination of its
structure.

"If the evolution theory is correct, the molecular structure of the
cosmic gas stands in the same relation to the phenomena of the world as
the structure of the clock to its phenomena."

Mr. Huxley's comparisons[83] are always amusing, partly because they
are of an unlooked for description. They also keep up the attention of
his readers or hearers. But they have one great fault--the fault we
noticed in explaining the nature of analogical argument--they carry
away the mind too far, and lead the reader often, sometimes the writer
himself, into very serious oversights. Let us take notice how the
Professor carries out his present similitude. "Now let us suppose a
death-watch, living in the clock-case, to be a learned and intelligent
student of its works. He might say, 'I find here nothing but matter and
force and pure mechanism from beginning to end,' and he would be quite
right. But if he drew the conclusion that the clock was not contrived
for a purpose, he would be quite wrong. On the other hand, imagine
another death-watch of a different turn of mind. He, listening to the
monotonous 'tick! tick!' so exactly like his own, might arrive at the
conclusion that the clock was itself a monstrous sort of death-watch,
and that its final cause and purpose was to tick. How easy to point to
the clear relation of the whole mechanism to the pendulum, to the fact
that the one thing the clock did always and without intermission was
to tick, and that all the rest of its phenomena were intermittent and
subordinate to ticking! For all this, it is certain that kitchen clocks
are not contrived for the purpose of making a ticking noise.

"Thus the teleological theorist would be as wrong as the mechanical
theorist, among our death-watches; and, probably, the only death-watch
who would be right would be the one who should maintain that the
sole thing death-watches could be sure about was the nature of the
clock-works and the way they move; and that the purpose of the clock
lay wholly beyond the purview of beetle faculties.

"Substitute 'cosmic vapour' for 'clock,' and 'molecules' for 'works,'
and the application of the argument is obvious." (pp. 306, 7.)

One thing is very obvious here--and that is a flaw. State the case as
a proposition thus--One or both of the two beetles is to the clock
and its maker, as man is to the world and its Maker. A tremendous
assumption--surely as sufficient to have startled Francis Bacon as the
apparition of a new Idol. Is there any possible reason for elevating
a death-watch--thinking in character as a death-watch--into a capable
interpreter of clocks? Moreover, the ground principle of our human
Teleology is that Man holds a lofty relation, not to the Universe only,
but to its Maker likewise. He claims, in a word, the most sublime of
all earthly kinships. The very fact that he can look with intelligent
and admiring appreciation upon the works of God, justifies his belief
that he has a real insight into their excellence, and is so far at
least akin to the mind of God. If Mr. Huxley meant that a proportionate
degree of insight into clock-making was possessed by his beetles,
they would surely have been able to read the clock's dial-plate and
understand the lesson conveyed by its pointers. The death-watch would
at least say "_labuntur horæ_"--and comprehend that time was being
registered--although he might even then fall far short of our human
belief "_pereunt et imputantur_," and fail of knowing that time
registers itself in a record of moral good and evil.

The truth is that all mixing up manlike attributes with brute
animality, and what seems ten times worse, with machines of wood and
metal, can be nothing better than an attempt to produce a sound and
prolific offspring from some ill-assorted and heterogeneous hybridism.

We have adverted to this peculiarity of style before and venture
upon doing so again, because all admirers of Mr. Huxley's great
powers (and who can read his writings without such admiration?) may
surely be justified in wishing that he would discard it at once and
for ever. Its practical effect is apparently to assume the real
point at issue and to cover up the tacit assumption. That he is
really no chance offender in this respect may be gathered from a few
instances noted at random. We have just had a couple of philosophic
death-watches[84]--one a Teleologist, the other a Mechanicist--the
lucubrations of both being neither exactly human, nor yet Coleopterous.
We observed before a righteous clock[85]--regularly moral if regularly
wound up. He has besides a machine, undescribed but endued with a
gift of ratiocination[86]--and more curious still a piano[87] which
listens when it is played upon, and though possessed of only one sense
(hearing) succeeds in building up "endless ideas" of a certain cast
and cogency. From this self-educated instrument much may of course be
looked for, and accordingly we find

    "Its cogitative faculties immersed
    In cogibundity of cogitation,"

till it evolves from the depth of its consciousness something like an
idealistic theory of sound. This hypothesis, Mr. Huxley in reply to
his piano, refutes, first by an appeal to the material substance of
the instrument itself; and secondly to the existence of a musician who
plays upon it. Will he permit us to accept in like manner the fact of
our own nobler subsistence, and also the being of One Who attunes its
secret heart-strings to notes of sublime melody?

The monsters aforecited irresistibly remind us of a repartee of
Goldsmith's. He wittily said that Dr. Johnson would make little fishes
talk like great whales. Had they done so it may be doubted whether the
Doctor's idolatrous biographer would have discovered a minnowy mind
beneath their Johnsonian utterances. And we confess to a difficulty of
our own. The righteous clock is indeed genuinely Huxleian, but what
shall we say of his mechanical logic, his piano, and his death-watches?
By way of illustrating our perplexity let us suppose some rural sexton
to mix up his own instincts with those of a biological burying beetle.
The destiny of all flesh would naturally be determined in the first
place by a decent covering of earth. But what about its final end?
Would that be an aldermanic beetle feast or a _Resurgam_?

Think again how a member of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Animals might breathe a benevolent spirit into a much employed
dissecting knife. The sharp thing would certainly entertain a
repugnance to the horrors of vivisection. There might also be a denial
of its utility based on the scalpel's personal experience, or perhaps
a moral doubt as to whether such means are justified by the ends
proposed. Would Mr. Huxley listen to the remonstrance and undertake to
lift up his powerful voice at Paris or at Berlin besides a few other
remote places which need not be particularized?

Or finally what ear would he lend to a magnifying glass accustomed
to habits of observation and possessed by the soul of Spurzheim.
Suppose it should affirm that a slice of Destructiveness is
recognizably different in structure from a section of Benevolence; and
Acquisitiveness in like manner distinguishable from Ideality! Yet a
humanitarian scalpel or Spurzheim magnifying glass may be thought a
Huxleian phenomenon.

A truce to such mongrel meditations. We gladly turn away from them and
continue our quotations from the Professor's sentiments delivered _in
propria persona_, recommencing at the place where our last extract
broke off. (p. 307.)

"The teleological and the mechanical views of nature, are not
necessarily, mutually exclusive. On the contrary, the more purely a
mechanist the speculator is, the more firmly does he assume primordial
molecular arrangement, of which all the phenomena of the universe
are the consequences; and the more completely is he thereby at the
mercy of the teleologist who can always defy him to disprove that
this primordial molecular arrangement was not intended to evolve the
phenomena of the universe."

We quite agree with Mr. Huxley that Mechanism never can exclude final
causes, and that a thorough-going theory of Evolution (taken apart
from its excrescences) disables the theorist from all real disproof
of intention or Design. As we said before, the question of how the
theorist's primordial arrangement began, is left unprovided for. And if
a beginning, so certainly an _end_. The more steadily the first state
of the Universe conceivable by Science is contemplated, the wider and
more determinate the view thus taken, the more evident it becomes that
the ground occupied by Natural Theology is not fenced off by the iron
pale of Mechanism. The fencer is (as Huxley says) "at the mercy of the
Teleologist."

The Professor's next sentence deserves careful consideration--"On the
other hand, if the teleologists assert that this, that, or the other
result of the working of any part of the mechanism of the universe is
its purpose and final cause, the mechanist can always inquire how he
knows that it is more than an unessential incident--the mere ticking of
the clock, which he mistakes for its function."

How far this criticism holds good of many well-meant treatises
filled with special instances of Design is a question for candid
consideration. Meantime the whole sentence amounts to this
conclusion:--We must distinguish between such wide arguments as Baden
Powell's, and the details of certain writers who have dealt with what
they thought good examples and illustrations of a grand universal
principle. And that such is Mr. Huxley's meaning we may perceive from
another paragraph immediately preceding our first extract. (p. 305.)

"In more than one place, Professor Haeckel enlarges upon the service
which the _Origin of Species_ has done, in favouring what he terms
the 'causal or mechanical' view of living nature as opposed to the
'teleological or vitalistic' view. And no doubt it is quite true that
the doctrine of Evolution is the most formidable opponent of all
the commoner and coarser forms of Teleology. But perhaps the most
remarkable service to the philosophy of Biology rendered by Mr. Darwin
is the reconciliation of Teleology and Morphology, and the explanation
of the facts of both which his views offer."

Now, such being the state of facts, we may refuse to say with Huxley
that the following question (asked p. 307) is "not irrational." "Why
trouble oneself about matters which are out of reach, when the working
of the mechanism itself, which is of infinite practical importance,
affords scope for all our energies?"

We cannot forego our trouble, for two reasons. _First_, according to
the statements before quoted, Mr. Darwin's researches have improved the
case for Teleology. Advocates of Design may therefore take courage,
they have gained a potent alliance. _Secondly_, "the practical working
of the Mechanism itself" is very far, we think, from being our All--so
far, indeed, that it sinks into insignificance compared with the hope
of Immortality. Our highest interest lies in gathering such information
as we can regarding Him with Whom we have to do as the Arbiter of our
future existence. Above all things, we desire Him to be our Father and
our Friend. Perchance His attributes are not matters out of reach. He
may be very near to every one of us, if we are indeed His Offspring.

Another opinion of Professor Huxley's is of great auxiliary value to
the argument from Design. The structures mentioned have to some minds
appeared as its most serious difficulties. "Professor Haeckel," he
explains, "has invented a new and convenient name, 'Dysteleology,'
for the study of the 'purposelessnesses' which are observable in
living organisms--such as the multitudinous cases of rudimentary and
apparently useless structures. I confess, however, that it has often
appeared to me that the facts of Dysteleology cut two ways. If we are
to assume, as evolutionists in general do, that useless organs atrophy,
such cases as the existence of lateral rudiments of toes, in the foot
of a horse, place us in a dilemma. For, either these rudiments are of
no use to the animal, in which case, considering that the horse has
existed in its present form since the Pliocene epoch, they surely ought
to have disappeared; or they are of some use to the animal, in which
case they are of no use as arguments against Teleology." (p. 307.) It
would be hard to overestimate the value of this opinion, still more
hard to overrate its genuine and outspoken honesty.

Mr. Huxley places at the end of his recent volume a passage from Bishop
Berkeley which we will venture to borrow by way of conclusion to this
lengthy note:--

"You see, Hylas, the water of yonder fountain, how it is forced
upwards in a round column to a certain height, at which it breaks and
falls back into the basin from whence it rose; its ascent as well
as its descent proceeding from the same uniform law or principle of
gravitation. Just so, the same principles which, at first view, lead to
scepticism, pursued to a certain point, bring men back to common sense."

_Adsit omen!_ May it be even thus with our large-minded Professor
and with all other sovereign princes of Biology--[Greek: Hileôs'
Asklêpios]!


FOOTNOTES:

[14] See more particularly Chapter V., "Production and its Law."

[15] Most literary people are aware that it was borrowed by Paley
himself. A reference very accessible to ordinary readers may be made
to Knight's English Cyclopædia, Article _Nieuwentyt_. "A work," says
the biographer, "was published by him at Amsterdam in 1715, in one
volume 4to, entitled 'The right use of Contemplating the Works of the
Creator': the object of the author is first to convince atheists of
the existence of a supreme and benevolent Creator, by contemplating
the mechanism of the heavens, the structure of animals, etc.; and,
secondly, to remove the doubts of deists concerning revealed religion.
It was originally published in Dutch, but has passed through several
editions, in German, French, and English. The English editions,
translated by Chamberlayne, under the title of the 'Religious
Philosopher,' appeared at London in 1718-19 and 1730, in three vols.
8vo. This work, as was first pointed out in the _Athenæum_ for 1848,
pp. 803, 907, 930, served as the basis for Paley's 'Natural Theology,'
the general argument and many of the illustrations in that remarkable
work being directly copied--and without the slightest acknowledgment,
though Paley was acquainted with the book--from the 'Religious
Philosopher.'"

Lord Brougham, who does not appear to have seen Bernard Nieuwentyt's
book, believes that Derham supplied the fountain from which Paley drank
so freely. Apparently he used both.

To this note it may be added that the want of Natural Philosophy under
which the Archdeacon himself laboured, has been recently commented on
in the following terms:--

"Paley kicked his foot unconcernedly against the stone he found on
the heath; for anything he knew, he says, it might have been there
for ever. Geology was then a practically unknown science, or he might
have found epochs of history in the stone, and evidence of all manner
of special creations for man's benefit. But Paley was no natural
philosopher, only a half-learned theologian, who skimmed over all
difficulties, and produced a book which has done immense harm in
leading Englishmen to anthropomorphic conceptions of God."--_Report of
an Address by A. J. Ellis, President of the Philological Society, in an
American Newspaper_ (_the Index_) _for August 10th, 1872_.

[k] So Hume (Inquiry, Section IV.): "A man, finding a watch or any
other machine in a desert island, would conclude that there had once
been men in that island." And again (Id. Section V.): "A man who should
find in a desert country the remains of pompous buildings, would
conclude that the country had in ancient times been cultivated by
civilized inhabitants but did nothing of this nature occur to him, he
could never form such an inference." The inference is, as Hume says,
from effect to cause--a subject which he is here investigating _more
suo_. To the nature of this inference I have found reason for recurring
more than once.

[16] A striking peculiarity of this skeleton is thus described by
Professor Huxley ("Manual of the Anatomy of Vertebrated Animals,"
p. 217). "In many _Lacertilia_ (_Lacertæ_, _Iguanæ_, _Geckos_) the
caudal vertebræ have a very singular structure, the middle of each
being traversed by a thin, unossified, transverse septum. The vertebra
naturally breaks with great readiness through the plane of the septum,
and when such lizards are seized by the tail, that appendage is pretty
certain to part at one of these weak points."

[l] "God," says Dogberry, "is a good Man." So others besides Dogberry.

Curiously enough, the charge of Anthropomorphism has been brought by
a most eminent naturalist against the greatest authorities on Natural
Selection.

M. Edouard Claparède writes as follows in the "Archives des Sciences
Physiques et Naturelles" for 1870:--

"Mon but est seulement de montrer que les armes dont M. Wallace se sert
victorieusement pour attaquer le duc d'Argyll, se retournent contre
lui-même. Sans doute, c'est un pur anthropomorphisme que de supposer
chez un Créateur un sentiment du Beau entièrement semblable au nôtre,
et une telle hypothèse n'a rien à faire avec la science. Mais cet
autre anthropomorphisme par lequel les Darwinistes supposent chez les
oiseaux un sens du Beau identique au nôtre, est il plus justifié? Soit
M. Darwin, soit M. Wallace, expliquent la formation de la belle voix
et du beau plumage chez les oiseaux mâles par sélection sexuelle. Les
femelles sont censées donner toujours la préférence aux mâles, qui,
au point de vue humain, ont la plus belle voix et les plus brillantes
couleurs. Au contraire, chez toutes les espèces à cri désagrèable
pour l'oreille humaine et à couleur sombre, la nature du cri comme de
la couleur a dû sa formation à une autre forme de sélection que la
sélection sexuelle. Quel oubli de l'antique dicton: _De gustibus et
coloribus non est disputandum_! Si ce dicton a été reconnu vrai chez
toutes les nations civilisées, il acquiert une force bien autrement
grande lorsqu'il s'agit de son application à des oiseaux. Serait il
absurde de supposer chez certains oiseaux un goût prononcé pour les
couleurs sombres, comme ce goût existe chez beaucoup d'hommes? Et alors
ne devient-il pas possible, contrairement à MM. Darwin et Wallace,
d'expliquer la couleur terne de certaines espèces par sélection
sexuelle? N'en peut-il pas être de même pour la voix criarde de tel ou
tel volatile? Certes, il est dangereux de baser un édifice sur quelque
chose d'aussi subjectif qu'un sentiment, quelque soit du reste la
nature de l'être chez lequel on le suppose plus ou moins gratuitement,
oiseau ou Créateur!" (pp. 175-6.)

[m] If any one desires to see how early and how persistently this
difficulty attached itself to the Design Analogy, I may be permitted to
refer him to a thin volume of my own, entitled "Right and Wrong," pp.
17-22 (text and notes), and Appendix, pp. 58-60.

A similar Dualism (coupled with the charge of Anthropomorphism) is
frequently urged against Natural Theology at the present day. The
alternative proposed has been called Monism. The fixed unyielding realm
of Abiology (inorganic nature) is taken as the type of the universe.
The sole supposable Divine principle (or Spirit) is identified with
its law, which is in turn pronounced identical with philosophical
necessity--that is to say, a necessity not imposed by or flowing from
the Divine will, but a necessity which annihilates the possibility of
all will. The Divine principle thus supposed is simply that law or
force which is embodied in the mechanism of the universe.

Professor Haeckel of Jena is the author of a book which has been styled
in Germany, "The Bible of Darwinism." The following passages will show
how he treats the subject under consideration in the text. He writes
(Generelle Morphologie der Organismen, Book II. cap. vi. sec. 2, "On
Creation") to the following effect:--

"THE CONCEPTION OF CREATION is either altogether unimaginable,
or at least perfectly inconsistent with that pure intuition of Nature
founded on an empirical basis. In Abiology a creation is no longer
anywhere spoken of at all, and it is in Biology only that people are
still closely wrapped up in this error. The conception of creation
is perfectly unimaginable, if by it is understood 'an origination of
something out of nothing.' This acceptation is quite incompatible
with one of the first and chiefest of Nature's laws--one, indeed,
universally acknowledged--namely, with the great law, that ALL
MATTER IS ETERNAL." (Vol. i. p. 171.)

There is one general reflection which may fairly strike the honest
and ingenuous mind respecting the difficulties thus "Now if the
conception of such an immaterial force, discoverable exterior to
matter, independent of, yet nevertheless acting upon it, is absolutely
inadmissible and inconceivable in itself, then so, too, becomes the
conception of a creative power from our point of view; and all the
more so, since with it are united the most untenable teleological
conceptions, and the most palpable Anthropomorphism."... "In all these
teleological conceptions, and similarly in all histories of creation
which the poetical phantasy of men has produced, gross Anthropomorphism
is so evident, that we may leave the denial of this Creation-idea
to the insight of any general reader who thinks for himself, and is
not too far involved in traditional prejudices."... "A creation of
organisms is, therefore, partly quite unimaginable, partly in such
complete contradiction to all knowledge of nature empirically gained,
that we cannot in any case allow ourselves to end by accepting this
hypothesis. There remains, consequently, nothing else but to suppose a
spontaneous origination of the simplest organisms, from which all more
perfect ones developed themselves by gradual metamorphosis--that is to
say, a self-forming or self-configuration of matter into organization,
which is generally called primordial production or spontaneous
generation (_generatio æquivoca_). (Ibid. 173-4.)

Haeckel commences his section upon Dualism and Monism (Book I. cap. iv.
section 6), with the following quotation from August Schleicher (die
Darwinische Theorie und die Sprachwissenschaft: Weimar, 1863, p. 8):--

"The tendency of modern thought is undeniably towards _Monism_.
_Dualism_--whether you are pleased to define it as the contrast of
spirit and nature, of contents and form, of appearance and reality--is
no longer a firm ground to stand upon, if we wish to survey the
field of modern science. To the latter there is no matter without
spirit (_i.e._ without the unavoidable necessity that governs it),
nor, on the other hand, is there any spirit without matter. We might
say, perhaps, that there is neither matter nor spirit in the usual
acceptation of the words, but only a something which is the one and
the other at the same time. To charge this view--which is founded on
observation--with materialism, is equally unjust as to lay it at the
door of spiritualism."

Haeckel concludes this section by avowing an unalterable conviction of
the truth of Monism, with which his mind is thoroughly penetrated.

The extracts above given will explain the value of those distinctions
respecting Law and Causation, which are drawn in the latter part of
this chapter. The wider subject pertains, however, to Chapter V., where
it is discussed at some length.

[17] Many readers may be pleased by a perusal of Lord Brougham's
"Dissertation on the Origin of Evil." It gives an account of
various hypotheses, and ends with some interesting remarks. See his
"Dissertations on Subjects of Science connected with Natural Theology,"
vol. ii.

[18] Even Lord Brougham, whom no one will accuse of a too ardent
addiction to metaphysical pursuits, chides Paley very severely for
this neglect. Dr. Whewell's censure is more grave. Passages from these
criticisms are given in Additional Note A, with some explanations which
may conduce to a clear insight of what is meant by bad metaphysics,
particularly in relation to the subject before us.

[19] Compare the figure employed in Rev. xxi. 1.

[n] There seems little doubt that the popular phrase "Design proves
a Designer" has given rise to an extensive distrust of the Design
argument _in toto_. Compare Additional Note B.

[o] Another shape of the objection is stated and examined in Additional
Note C.

[20] Essay on the "Spirit of the Inductive Philosophy," Ed. 2, p. 174.
The italics and capitals are Professor Powell's.

[p] Were Paley now alive, he might plead the example of Mr. Darwin,
whose practice it is to speak of any incidental chasm occasioned by
the link sometimes missing from his premises, as "not a long step."
"Mr. Darwin's argument," says a reviewer of his "Descent of Man," "is
a continuous conjugation of the potential mood. It rings the changes
on 'can have been,' 'might have been,' 'would have been,' 'should
have been,' until it leaps with a wide bound into 'must have been.'"
(_Times_, April 8, 1871.) Any similarity between the reasonings of
the Archdeacon and the Naturalist may appear noteworthy. But the
coincidence ends here. Paley, though reproved by a Lord Chancellor, had
the good fortune to be excused by a Bishop. There is a short account
of both censure and defence in the notes to Powell's "Connection of
Natural and Divine Truth," pp. 287-9.

[21] P. 177.

[22] Ibid.

[23] Ibid.

[24] Pp. 175-6.

[25] Putting aside workmanship exercised on given material, we may
perceive a gliding of thought from the idea of plan, form, or fashion,
to adaptation, and so onwards to purpose and intention--that is,
conscious adaptation to a designed end.

[26] "Sämmtliche Werke," vol. II., pp. 51, 52.

[27] "Connexion of Natural and Divine Truth," pp. 183-4.

[28] See the work last quoted, pp. 287-9. The Professor substantially
agrees with Lord Brougham's censure before referred to, and considers
Dr. Turton's defence of Paley an insufficient apology.

[29] "Essays and Reviews," 8vo. p. 125.

[q] The general reader may reasonably feel a difficulty in assigning
their proper meaning to terms used in senses so technical. He may
possibly be assisted by looking over the field of view thus:--A Force
is visible to us as a movement in Nature;--when we try to formulate it
intelligently to ourselves, its mental equivalent is Law. If, then,
we wish to describe an intelligent præ-conception of Law (such as
distinctly involves the Foresight of its operation) we call the Law
a Creative Idea, or (less definitely) a Design. Tracing the chain of
causation in the reverse or downward direction, the Idea when put in
movement appears to our mind's eye as Law; and when we wish to include
its actual working upon the realm of Nature we term it a Force.

Both James Mill and his son (a truly affectionate annotator), are
careful to point out that the essence of moral causation involves
Intention--that is (as Mr. Mill explains), Foresight, or expectation of
consequences.--"Analysis of the Human Mind," II., 400, 401.

It should be observed that in many branches of Natural Science the
word Law is so employed as to include the conception of Force. Law
is in this usage not merely a logical formula expressive of realized
facts, but it involves the idea of the coercion or impellent motion
which brought those facts into being. "Thus, then," says Dr. Carpenter,
"whilst no Law, which is simply _a generalisation of phenomena_, can be
considered as having any _coercive_ action, we may assign that value
to Laws which express _the universal conditions of the action of a
Force_, the existence of which we learn from the testimony of our own
consciousness." He had before remarked that "it is the substitution of
the Dynamical for the mere Phenomenal idea, which gives their highest
value to our conceptions of the Order of Nature."--_Address to British
Association at Brighton, August, 1872._ This _Order_ of Nature, as the
learned President says in conclusion, is no "sufficient account of its
_Cause_."

[30] See how the matter appears to a Satirist:--"By the great variety
of theories here alluded to, every one of which, if thoroughly
examined, will be found surprisingly consistent in all its parts; my
unlearned readers will perhaps be led to conclude that the creation
of a world is not so difficult a task as they at first imagined. I
have shown at least a score of ingenious methods in which a world
could be constructed; and I have no doubt that had any of the
philosophers above quoted the use of a good manageable comet, and the
philosophical warehouse, _chaos_, at his command, he would engage
to manufacture a planet as good, or, if you will take his word for
it, better than this we inhabit." Such is the dictum of the profound
Knickerbocker,--"History of New York," 8vo, p. 16. His variety
of theories concludes with that of "the renowned Dr. Darwin," of
Lichfield. If the history were brought down to our day, additional
variety might be given to this part of it.

[r] It is upon this confusion that Powell charges Pantheistic theories
in which physical speculations are mistakenly supposed to have their
natural termination. See Additional Note D, where the passage to which
more than one reference has already been made, is given _in extenso_.
Compare also our Chapter VI. on Causation.

[31] Essay as above, p. 165.

[32] The signification attached by the Professor to Law and Cause may
be most readily explained by a similitude. Let the physical series of
antecedents and consequents be represented by a chain of which we see
the present links, but both its beginning and its end are invisible.
Physical law is this chain. Cause must not be considered its first
link, for Cause differs in _kind_ from the series, is in truth _sui
generis_, and can be illustrated by no physical phenomenon, but by
the fact of our own Moral Volition. Cause, therefore, is external to
the chain, and originates, not only the first, but every link of it.
Each and all--nay, the universal chain in its entirety--may be viewed
as owing its existence to one single fiat of an absolute moral Cause.
Compare on this subject Chapters VI. and VII. ensuing.

[33] Essay, pp. 155, 173. It should, however, be observed that
Sterling's language has been interpreted two opposite ways, and
therefore the obscurity may be verbal. Coleridge's expressions have
regard to certain "so-called _Demonstrations_." His own judgment as to
the cumulative proofs of Theism was that "there are so many convincing
reasons for it, within and without--a grain of sand sufficing, and
a whole universe at hand to echo the decision!--that for every mind
not devoid of all reason, and desperately conscience-proof, the
Truth which it is the least possible to prove, it is little less
than impossible not to believe; only indeed just so much short of
impossible, as to leave some room for the will and the moral election,
and thereby to keep it a truth of religion, and the possible subject of
a commandment."--_Aids to Reflection_, Edition 1843, Vol. I. p. 135.
First and rare edition, p. 177.

[34] "There is thus no alternative, but either to abandon the inquiry
after an immediate intuition of power, or to seek for it in _mind
as determining its own modifications_; a course open to those who
admit an immediate consciousness of self, and to them only. My first
and only presentation of power or causality is thus to be found in
my consciousness of _myself as willing_. In every act of volition,
I am fully conscious that it is in my power to form the resolution
or to abstain; and this constitutes the presentative consciousness
of free-will and of power. Like any other simple idea, it cannot
be defined; and hence the difficulty of verbally distinguishing
causation from mere succession. But every man who has been conscious
of an act of will, has been conscious of power therein; and to one
who has not been so conscious, no verbal description can supply the
deficiency."--_Prolegomena Logica_, p. 151.

[s] It seems singular that this rise of thought has of late years
seldom been explicitly put forward as the natural continuation and
necessary extension of the argument from Design. "He that planted the
ear, shall He not hear? He that formed the eye, shall He not see?... He
that teacheth man knowledge, _shall not He know?_" In other words, if
we may argue from the structure of the eye and ear to an Intelligence
which comprehends our sense-perceptions, their conditions, and their
activities, may we not always argue from the reason of man to an
Intelligence comprehending our highest human endowments?

If so, we reflect these attributes back upon our explanation of the
natural world. We say, further, that such a Creator would never make a
mere _machine_. Humanity was a necessary complement of all that is set
under Man. And thus Francis Bacon's aphorism may be applied in a double
sense,--Man not only interprets Nature to himself--but he affords in
himself a text for her more complete interpretation. Nature and Human
Nature are two correlatives.

[35] Take, as example, the scientific theories on Insanity and its
melancholy accompaniments. How many theorizers seem to justify Sir
William Ellis's old observation, that few of his medical brethren ever
got much notion of Mind?

[36] "Natural Theology attempts to demonstrate the existence of a
personal First Cause, supreme Reason, and Will. The relations of
mankind towards such a Being are called Natural Religion."--_Right and
Wrong_, p. 58.

[37] If any one wishes to convince himself that other meanings proposed
are open to serious objections, let him peruse Max Müller's first
Lecture on the Science of Religion.

[38] Compare Additional Note E, on the extent and divisions of the
Science of Natural Theology.

[39] The Soul, p. 32, seq.

[40] Any strictures of ours on the language employed by Natural
Theologians must be understood as appeals from individual or peculiar
usage to world-wide acceptation and old established custom:--

    "Quem penes arbitrium est et jus et norma loquendi."


[41] As regards another important word illustrated in this chapter,
it may be useful to add that the term Analogy is often employed in
a wide or rather vague signification; not only by careless writers,
but by philosophers. There is an important passage in Bacon's Plan of
the Instauratio (prefixed to the Novum Organon) which Wood translates
thus:--"The testimony and information of the senses bears always a
relation to man, and not to the universe, and it is altogether a great
mistake to assert that our senses are the measure of things.

The Latin original for "bears a relation" is "est ex analogiâ," but
Mr. Ellis prefers rendering it by "has reference to," and confirms his
decision by comparing two other Latin phrases;--one, "Materia non est
cognoscibilis nisi _ex analogiâ_ formæ"--the other, "Materia non est
scibilis nisi _in ordine_ ad formam;--ut dicit" (adds Thomas Aquinas)
"Philosophus in primo Physicorum." Mr. Ellis subjoins "That the meaning
of the word Analogy was misconceived by S. Thomas, by Duns Scotus, and
by the schoolmen in general, is pointed out by Zabarella, _De prim.
rerum materiâ_, I. 4."

"Philosophus" means Aristotle, who, however, in the passage referred to
is faithful to his own correct definition of Analogy, and his instance
may readily be stated in four terms, as will appear on reference to the
passage (Ed. Bekker 191, a. 8). Argyropylus translates by "similitudine
rationis," and St. Hilaire explains "analogia" for the benefit of the
general reader by "rapport proportionnel"--(Leçons de Physique I. 8, s.
18).

That Bacon was really thus vague in his use of "ex analogiâ" may be
gathered from his substitution of "in ordine ad" as an equivalent in
the closely related passage, Nov. Org. II. 20. Such being the case with
so great a writer, some little allowance may be made for difference of
phrase employed by ordinary reasoners on Natural Theology.

[42] By way of assisting the young student to a clear perception of
what is involved in our Science, we illustrate its ground-work at
considerable length in an additional note (marked F) on Teleology.

[43] "Die rechte Erkenntniss kann sich erst dann einfinden wenn man
weiss wie man erkennt d. h. wenn man seine eigene Natur begriffen hat."
Page 5 of "Ueber den Ursprung der Sprache," von W. H. J. Bleek.

[44] Macaulay's Essays. Ed. 1852, p. 401.

[45] The division of Sciences into ancillary and "architectonic" is
Aristotelian. It seems also founded in the nature of things. That real
science tends to ground itself, strives after unification with kindred
sciences, and, by so doing, rises into philosophy, is a fact visible
in every line and letter of Faraday; and the general reader will find
it exemplified throughout many fascinating pages of Dr. Tyndall's
_Fragments of Science for Unscientific People_, particularly in his
articles on Vitality, the use of the Imagination, and the life of
Faraday, not to mention his own book on the great inductive philosopher.

[46] It is interesting to compare the French-Scotch, and German-Scotch
types of intellect. The former flowered in the Stuart men and in
David Hume. The latter produced such diversely graven characters
as Sir William Hamilton and Mr. Carlyle. Hume's natural acuteness
received a subtle refinement from his Jesuit educators at La Flêche.
But his intellectual bent and determination was given by the French
parlour-philosophy, which heralded Rousseau and Robespierre. Hume's
well-known face is a truthful index to his mind. If compared with
Kant's, the lesson is obvious to even an unskilled physiognomist.
Self-complacency beams over every feature.

[47] No doubt the actual course of Hume's philosophising was determined
by his zeal against everything he deemed superstitious. It was this
dominant motive which made him less a calm philosopher than a skilful
advocate, and laid him open to the influences of the French Deism of
his period. How strong the tendency was we may infer from the following
anecdote, which occurs in an account of his declining days by his
friend and admirer, Dr. Adam Smith (pp. 47-50):--

Hume had been "reading a few days before, Lucian's Dialogues of the
Dead: among all the excuses which are alleged to Charon for not
entering readily into his boat, he could not find one that fitted
him. He then diverted himself with inventing several jocular excuses,
which he supposed he might make to Charon, and with imagining the very
surly answers which it might suit the character of Charon to return to
them. 'Upon further consideration,' said he, 'I thought I might say to
him, Good Charon, I have been correcting my works for a new edition.
Allow me a little time that I may see how the Public receives the
alterations.' But Charon would answer, 'When you have seen the effect
of these, you will be for making other alterations. There will be no
end of such excuses; so, honest friend, please step into the boat.'
But I might still urge, 'Have a little patience, good Charon; I have
been endeavouring to open the eyes of the Public. If I live a few years
longer, I may have the satisfaction of seeing the downfall of some of
the prevailing systems of superstition.' But Charon would then lose all
temper and decency. 'You loitering rogue, that will not happen these
many hundred years. Do you fancy I will grant you a lease for so long a
term? Get into the boat this instant, you lazy loitering rogue!'"

[48] The "Treatise" was written during his youthful three years'
residence in France, chiefly at La Flêche. Hume was twenty-seven years
old when he published it. See "Life," pp. 6 and 7, and Burton's _Life
of Hume_, Vol. I. pp. 57-124.

[49] This work, the least known of all Hume's writings, but not the
least original, is here cited in the not uncommon reprint 2 vols. 8vo,
1817.

[50] It is curious to compare with both Hume and Bacon a brief
dictum of S. T. Coleridge. Biog. Lit., last chapter. "Poor unlucky
Metaphysics! And what are they? A single sentence expresses the object
and thereby the contents of this science. [Greek: Gnôthi seauton]: et
Deum quantum licet et in Deo omnia scibis. Know thyself: and so shalt
thou know God, as far as is permitted to a creature, and in God all
things. Surely there is a strange--nay, rather a too natural--aversion
in many to know themselves." "People," says Guesses at Truth, "can
seldom brook contradiction, except within themselves."

[51] Compare Advancement. B. II. with De Augmentis. B. III. Chap. iii.

[52] De Augmentis. B. III. Chap. iv.

[53] Advancement. B. II. (Ed. Basil Montague, Vol. II. p. 134). It is
generally an advantage to quote from the enlarged Treatise, the De
Augmentis, but in some places the Advancement is more simple and more
full.

[54] De Augmentis. B. III. Chap. iv. init.

[55] De Augmentis. B. III. Chap. iv. Ellis and Spedding, iv. 362.

[56] "The cone and vertical point" itself is "the work which God
worketh,"--("summariam nempe Naturæ legem")--and "it may fairly be
doubted whether man's inquiry can attain to it. But these three are
the true stages of knowledge." De Augmentis, as before. So too in his
_Valerius_ he speaks of this "highest generality of motion or summary
law of Nature" as reserved by God "within His own curtain."

[57] The great thinker speaks of it as made up in part "of the common
principles and axioms which are promiscuous and indifferent to
several Sciences;" in part "of the inquiry touching the operation of
the relative and adventitious conditions of Essences, as quantity,
similitude, diversity, possibility, and the rest." These he terms
"Transcendentals," and they form a highest kind of philosophical
arrangements, "with this distinction and provision, that they be
handled as they have efficiency in Nature and not logically."

His instances of common principles show how very vaguely this idea
of the first division floated before his mind. Some of them are
axioms mathematically certain and true in more than one province of
philosophy, others are generalized truths obtained by experience or by
comparison of objects diverse in appearance, but to his mind identical
or very similar. Among these latter occurs his celebrated saying, that
"the delight of the quavering upon a stop in music is the same with
the playing of light upon the water";--a thought that haunts us by the
seaside and on the shore of mountain lakes while listening to some
sweet voice or clear-toned instrument.

From his philosophical arrangements Bacon takes away inquiries into the
One, the Good, and the Divine, and assigns them to Natural Theology.

[58] Translation of the De Augmentis in Ellis and Spedding. Vol. iv. p.
346.

[59] Nov. Org. E. and S., iv. 120.

[60] De Augmentis. E. and S., iv. 362.

[61] Kitchin. Nov. Org. p. 134. But Mr. Kitchin believes that could
Bacon have witnessed the actual progress of science, it would have
led him to recognize the usefulness of Final Causes, in the field of
physical inquiry, and by way of illustration proceeds to quote "the
famous case of Harvey's discovery of the circulation of the blood from
the consideration of the Final Causes of the valves in the veins of the
animal body." (Ibid. p. 135.)

[62] Mill's Analysis of the Human Mind. Vol. ii. pp. 310, 11.

[63] In a volume of philosophical Romance some unknown Gulliver
of the 19th century bestows many pages of pleasant satire on the
Utilitarian principle, assumed as a maxim of social life and pushed
to its ultimate conclusions. The author travels into the country of
Nowhere (Erewhon), and learns by personal experience, first in a
prison, and next in the house of a princely swindler Senoj Nosnibor
(_alias_ Jones Robinson) those true laws of Sociology which best
subserve the great final end--the noble object laid down by Mr. Mill.
Ill-health is made criminal. Immorality counts as being out of sorts.
The former is an object of penal justice, the latter of condolence
joined with alterative discipline. The swindler sends for his family
"straightener," and gets well amidst the sympathy of his friends;
the consumptive is condemned to imprisonment and hard labour for the
rest of his miserable days. And this is reasonable in itself, and
justified by the results,--the Erewhonians possess the finest physique
in the world, and rob and embezzle only when they happen to feel
tempted. Our traveller himself, though full of old-fashioned moral
prejudices, becomes convinced by contemplating the great final cause.
"That dislike," he observes, "and even disgust should be felt by the
fortunate for the unfortunate, or at any rate for those who have been
discovered to have met with any of the more serious and less familiar
misfortunes, is not only natural, but desirable for any society,
whether of man or brute: what progress either of body or soul had been
otherwise possible?"--and again, "I write with great diffidence, but
it seems to me that there is no unfairness in punishing people for
their misfortunes or rewarding them for their sheer good luck: it is
the normal condition of human life that this should be done, and no
right-minded person will complain at being subjected to the common
treatment. There is no alternative open to us. It is idle to say that
men are not responsible for their misfortunes. What is responsibility?
Surely to be responsible means to be liable to have to give an answer
should it be demanded, and all things which live are responsible for
their lives and actions, should society see fit to question them
through the mouth of its authorised agent. What is the offence of a
lamb that we should rear it, and tend it, and lull it into security,
for the express purpose of killing it? Its offence is the misfortune
of being something which society wants to eat, and which cannot defend
itself. This is ample. Who shall limit the right of society except
society itself? And what consideration for the individual is tolerable
unless society be the gainer thereby?" Erewhon, pp. 85, 86, and 100,
101.

These sentiments considered, the reader will not be surprised to learn
that our author, after a preparatory college training in the main
doctrines of Self-interest--to wit, Evasion and Inconsistency--ends
happily and usefully for himself by the successful abduction of his
host's daughter--and by advertising a propaganda of certain European
manners and observances unknown in Erewhon, to be carried out by
kidnapping its healthy inhabitants and training them properly on our
sugar plantations. What genuine disciple of Utilitarianism can conceive
a brighter moral triumph than the union of private self-interest with
the interested aims of a great sugar-growing people? Matter-of-fact
Baconians may argue that Utility substitutes a misplaced and one-sided
"why" for the "what" required by Moralists,--but our traveller's
answer is plain--he argues on _data_;--given the premises--his is the
inevitable conclusion. The defence of the former will be an interest
to plenty of people--philosophic and unphilosophic. Leave the data to
them; or if necessary make a further appeal to the religious aims of
society. In Erewhon the great feminine Divinity Ydgrun is supreme; she
is sovereign amongst ourselves also;--only we twist her name and call
the Goddess "Grundy."

[64] Preface to the Philosophical Works. pp. 56, 57.

[65] Works. Vol. i. p. 167.

[66] De Augmentis. iii. 5. init.

[67] Dr. Whewell rises into poetry--yet is not more poetical than
the philosopher on whom he thus comments. "If he" (Bacon) "had had
occasion to develop his simile, full of latent meaning as his similes
so often are, he would probably have said, that to these final causes
barrenness was no reproach, seeing they ought to be, not the mothers
but the daughters of our natural sciences; and that they were barren,
not by imperfection of their nature, but in order that they might
be kept pure and undefiled, and so fit ministers in the temple of
God."--_Bridgewater Treatise._ B. III. Ch. vii. sub. fin.

[68] It is a pleasure to confirm this paragraph by a definition of
Design taken from a writer who must be frequently quoted in these
pages, because his philosophy is of unusually wide scope, and embraces
the mixed sciences employed by a natural theologian:--"We direct our
thoughts to an action which we are about to perform; we _intend_ to
do it: we make it our _aim_: we place it before us, and act with
_purpose_ (_propositum_): we _design_ it, or mark it out beforehand
(_designo_)."--_Whewell's Elements of Morality_, Book I., Chap. i., p.
7.

[69] The Soul, p. 35.

[70] _Right and Wrong_, p. 31.

[71] Dans plusieurs passages de ses écrits, quand il insiste avec le
plus de force sur l'impossibilité où est la raison humaine d'atteindre
à la certitude, il semble tout près d'accepter la révélation divine
comme source de certaines grandes verités que nous ne saurions
repousser, quoiqu'il ne nous soit pas possible de les démontrer. Un
soir qu'à Paris il soupait chez le baron d'Holbach, on vint à parler de
la religion naturelle; Hume déclara que pour sa part il n'avait jamais
rencontré d'athée. On sait la réponse de son hôte. "Parbleu, vous avez
de la chance; pour la première fois vous en rencontrez dix-sept du même
coup." Hume ne demanda point à être compté comme le dix-huitième. Dix
ans auparavant, il se trouvait à Londres lorsque lui arriva la nouvelle
de la mort de sa mère; son ami Boyle, frère du comte de Glasgow, témoin
de la douleur profonde où le jeta cette perte, exprima le regret qu'il
ne pût trouver de consolation dans les croyances chrétiennes sur la
destinée des justes et sur la vie future. "Ah! mon ami," dit Hume
en sanglotant, "je peux bien publier mes spéculations pour occuper
les savans et les métaphysiciens; mais ne croyez pas que je sois si
loin que vous le supposez de penser comme le reste des hommes." _Deux
Mondes_, 1856, Vol. VI., pp. 118, 19. The latter anecdote will be found
in _Burton_ at rather greater length. Vol. I. 293, 4.

[72] These Dialogues were posthumously published in obedience to their
author's will. Hume had kept the MS. by him for twenty-seven years,
and had corrected it from time to time, yet had delayed publication
from deference to the judgment of his friends. He directed his literary
executor, Adam Smith, to publish the Dialogues within two years of his
death; but, in consequence of Smith's distaste for the task, this duty
devolved upon Hume's nephew. They were printed in 1779 translated into
German in 1781, and commented on by Jacobi in 1787.

Lowndes states that these Dialogues were not republished with the
"Essays," but is mistaken in saying so. They appear at the end of
Vol. II. in the 8vo. Edition of 1788. As this is not an uncommon or
expensive book, I quote its paging. The quantity of matter extends only
through 113 8vo. pages, and reference will not be difficult in any
other Edition.

It seems true that the Dialogues were withdrawn from later reprints
of the Essays. They appear to have been considered particularly
objectionable; but there is no doubt that they express Hume's most
deliberate and matured convictions, and thus become to fair inquirers
particularly valuable. It must, however, be added that Hume valued
himself on a conservatism of opinion. Comparing, when forty years old,
his recent Essays with his Treatise "planned before I was twenty-one
and composed before twenty-five," he says, "The philosophical
principles are the same in both; but I was carried away by the heat of
youth and invention to publish too precipitately." _Burton_, I. 337.

[73] There can be no doubt that Cleanthes is meant for the
representative man, both from the tenor of the Dialogue itself and
from a letter to Sir Gilbert Elliot, of Minto, given by _Burton_, I.
331-6. The following extracts may be acceptable to the reader:--"You
would perceive by the sample I have given you, that I make Cleanthes
the hero of the dialogue: whatever you can think of, to strengthen that
side of the argument, will be most acceptable to me. Any propensity you
imagine I have to the other side, crept in upon me against my will; and
'tis not long ago that I burned an old manuscript book, wrote before
I was twenty, which contained, page after page, the gradual progress
of my thoughts on that head. It began with an anxious search after
arguments, to confirm the common opinion; doubts stole in, dissipated,
returned; were again dissipated, returned again; and it was a perpetual
struggle of a restless imagination against inclination, perhaps against
reason.... I could wish Cleanthes' argument could be so analyzed, as
to be rendered quite formal and regular. The propensity of the mind
towards it,--unless that propensity were as strong and universal
as that to believe in our senses and experience,--will still, I am
afraid, be esteemed a suspicious foundation. 'Tis here I wish for your
assistance; we must endeavour to prove that this propensity is somewhat
different from our inclination to find our own figures in the clouds,
our faces in the moon, our passions and sentiments even in inanimate
matter. Such an inclination may, and ought to be controlled, and can
never be a legitimate ground of assent.

"The instances I have chosen for Cleanthes are, I hope, tolerably
happy, and the confusion in which I represent the sceptic seems
natural, but--si quid novisti rectius, etc.... He (Cleanthes)
allows, indeed, in part 2nd, that all our inference is founded on
the similitude of the works of nature to the usual effects of mind,
otherwise they must appear a mere chaos. The only difficulty is, why
the other assimilations do not weaken the argument; and indeed it would
seem from experience and feeling, that they do not weaken it so much as
we might naturally expect."

It seems clear on the whole, that, so far as _Physico-Theology_ went,
Hume was not ill qualified for a Natural Theologian. All the more so
perhaps, because, while seeing the difficulties which attach themselves
to this kind of argument, he pronounced it to hold conclusively at last.

[74] The following quotation is from the _Treatise_ "composed before
twenty-five":--"Nor does this reasoning only prove, that morality
consists not in any relations, that are the objects of science; but
if examined, will prove with equal certainty, that it consists not in
any _matter of fact_, which can be discovered by the understanding.
This is the _second_ part of our argument; and if it can be made
evident, we may conclude, that morality is not an object of reason.
But can there be any difficulty in proving, that vice and virtue are
not matters of fact, whose existence we can infer by reason?... So
that when you pronounce any action or character to be vicious, you
mean nothing, but that from the constitution of your nature you have a
feeling or sentiment of blame from the contemplation of it. Vice and
virtue, therefore, may be compared to sounds, colours, heat and cold,
which, according to modern philosophy, are not qualities in objects,
but perceptions in the mind: and this discovery in morals, like that
other in physics, is to be regarded as a considerable advancement of
the speculative sciences; though, like that too, it has little or no
influence on practice." _Treatise_, Book III., part 1, Vol. II., 170, 1.

This 3rd Book of the _Treatise_ was not printed till Hume was in his
30th year; and he felt some hesitation respecting the latter paragraph.
"Is not this," he asks Hutcheson, "laid a little too strong? I desire
your opinion of it, though I cannot entirely promise to conform myself
to it. I wish from my heart I could avoid concluding, that since
morality, according to your opinion, as well as mine, is determined
merely by sentiment, it regards only human nature and human life.... If
morality were determined by reason, that is the same to all rational
beings; but nothing but experience can assure us that the sentiments
are the same. What experience have we with regard to superior beings?
How can we ascribe to them any sentiments at all? They have implanted
those sentiments in us for the conduct of life like our bodily
sensations, which they possess not themselves." (_Burton_, I. 119.) The
paragraph was, however, published; and helped by consequence to foster
in its author's mind that Utilitarian theory of morals respecting
which many late writers have been only Hume's copyists. In this very
_Treatise_ he did in fact apply that theory to the most important of
Social questions (see same Bk., Pt. II. Sec. 12, more especially p.
299), and was thus led into lax conclusions respecting those bonds
between Man and Woman which underlie the other foundations of Society.
Hume shares this blame with his disciples; for leading Utilitarians are
apt to shew by their own domestic relations that the principle, _when
applied_, results in maxims lower than our present English tone of
thought upon this subject.

But let us suppose that Hume had lived to analyze Rousseau's
Confessions. Would he not have urged with the force of truth, that
to animalize a Man is to destroy his Manhood, to weaken his judgment
and impair his Moral sense? Would he not have argued from Rousseau
the depraved boy, to Rousseau the shopman and footman, and pointed
out that in such cases Truth, Honesty, and Gratitude become mere
names and shadows?--No one could have replied that Hume was wrong in
fact and experience, but some might have said that _all_ which lowers
the supremacy of the Moral sense lowers the Manhood of Man. As Hume
admitted the fact of a Moral sense, he might possibly have felt the
cogency of this argument.

[75] No one who reads Hume's account of his own motives on various
occasions will think it untrue to say that his judgment was largely
influenced by his vanity. Compare for example his well-known letter to
Dr. Blair of December 20th, 1765, with another to the same, dated 1st
July, 1766;--the first a panegyric on the "celebrated Rousseau," the
second a fierce invective against that "blackest and most atrocious
villain." Who can help seeing that the motives of the eulogy are
derived from a series of self-gratulations;--while the cause of the
invective is a sharp wound given to the philosopher's self-love?

[76] In the _Inquiry concerning Human Understanding_, Section XI.,
he puts this case: "As the universe shows wisdom and goodness, we
infer wisdom and goodness. As it shows a particular degree of these
perfections, we infer a particular degree of them, precisely adapted
to the effect which we examine. But farther attributes or farther
degrees of the same attributes, we can never be authorized to infer or
suppose, by any rules of just reasoning." The argument of this section
upon which Hume's limitations are based, is put into the mouth of a
representative Epicurus; it is acute even to extreme subtlety, but it
is also suicidal. The restraints applied to what he explains as the
argument from effects to cause, and conversely down again from cause
to other effects, cannot be maintained without dealing a death blow
at the Inductive Philosophy. How little do we know of the material
Universe, yet we apply the principle of gravitation to the Whole, seen
and unseen. By its aid we find masses of radiant matter previously
unknown, and predict events long before they are phenomenally apparent.
The vast power of _extending_ knowledge which the Inductive principle
asserts, will occur for our investigation in Chapter IV. Another
Epicurean position contained in this same Section XI. has been quoted
in a previous note, together with Hume's own reply to it; see pp. 101,
2 _ante_.

A criticism of Hume's Tenth and Eleventh sections occupies a long note
appended by Lord Brougham to his "Discourse on Natural Theology"--a
volume I suppose accessible to almost all students of the science.

[77] The word Creation must here be construed strictly, so as to
signify a true Beginning;--the idea that is of a law-governed _materies
mundi_, a substantial force, and movement evoked into primary Existence.

The prospect of final change yet to be, is thus similarly connected by
a living philosopher (Helmholtz) with the history of our world's Past:--

"We estimate the duration of human History at 6,000 years; but
immeasurable as this time may appear to us, what is it in comparison
with the time during which the earth carried successive series of
rank plants and mighty animals, and no men; during which in our
neighbourhood the amber-tree bloomed, and dropped its costly gum on
the earth and in the sea; when in Siberia, Europe, and North America
groves of tropical palms flourished; where gigantic lizards, and after
them elephants, whose mighty remains we still find buried in the
earth, found a home? Different geologists, proceeding from different
premises, have sought to estimate the duration of the above-named
creative period, and vary from a million to nine million years.----The
time during which the earth generated organic beings is again small
when compared with the ages during which the world was a ball of fused
rocks. For the duration of its cooling from 2,000° to 200° Centigrade
the experiments of Bishop upon basalt show that about 350 millions of
years would be necessary.----And with regard to the time during which
the first nebulous mass condensed into our planetary system, our most
daring conjectures must cease. The history of man, therefore, is but
a short ripple in the ocean of time.----For a much longer series of
years than that during which he has already occupied this world, the
existence of the present state of inorganic nature favourable to the
duration of man seems to be secured, so that for ourselves and for
long generations after us we have nothing to fear. But the same forces
of air and water, and of the volcanic interior, which produced former
geological revolutions, and buried one series of living forms after
another, act still upon the earth's crust. They more probably will
bring about the last day of the human race than those distant cosmical
alterations of which we have spoken, forcing us perhaps to make way for
new and more complete living forms, as the lizards and the mammoth have
given place to us and our fellow-creatures which now exist.

"Thus the thread which was spun in darkness by those who sought a
perpetual motion has conducted us to a universal law of nature, which
radiates light into the distant nights of the beginning and of the
end of the history of the universe. To our own race it permits a long
but not an endless existence; it threatens it with a day of judgment,
the dawn of which is still happily obscured. As each of us singly
must endure the thought of his death, the race must endure the same.
But above the forms of life gone by, the human race has higher moral
problems before it, the bearer of which it is, and in the completion
of which it fulfils its destiny." Helmholtz, _Popular Lectures on
Scientific Subjects_, p. 191, seq.

The distinguished German had just before observed, "Even though the
force store of our planetary system is so immensely great ... still
the inexorable laws of mechanics indicate that this store of force,
which can only suffer loss and not gain, must be finally exhausted."
On the subject of such vast cosmical changes, the reader may like to
peruse the remarks of _Littré_ in his most recent volume--"Les choses,
ou, pour mieux dire, nos choses sont d'hier, dût cet hier comporter de
prodigieuses durées.

"Cette nouveauté est un témoignage que notre monde, notre univers,
auront une fin. Ce qui a commencé doit finir, la raison le dit, et
toutes nos connaissances physiques le confirment. Le soleil et les
étoiles se refroidissent incessamment, versant dans les espaces une
chaleur qui ne leur revient jamais. Quelque chauds qu'ils soient,
ils le sont chaque jour un peu moins, le calorique s'y épuisera;
ils s'éteindront, comme déjà leurs planètes se sont éteintes. Que
deviendront ces masses animées d'un mouvement rapide? Nul ne peut le
dire. Mais il suffirait d'un choc entre elles pour y transformer un
prodigieux mouvement en une prodigieuse incandescence, et y renouveler
un cycle de chaleur et d'expansion.

"Ce serait se perdre en vaines et gratuites hypothèses, que de spéculer
sur ce que deviendra notre univers quand il aura pris fin, comme de
spéculer sur ce qu'il fut avant qu'il eût pris commencement." Littré,
_La Science_, pp. 560, 1.

There are thinkers who believe that these cycles, immeasurable to Man,
took their governing laws from a supreme Designer. They will be aided
by Helmholtz and Littré in shaping their ideas of His far-reaching
wisdom and power. There are also thinkers who find within their own
inward Being a consciousness of kinship with the Source of Causation,
so infinitely beyond cycles apparently infinite. How great then the
value of human Spirits bearing His likeness, and with it a promise
of surviving the period when our world's cycles shall vanish away in
Space--to be replaced by other hereditary cycles, or to be remembered
no more for ever!

[78] This article has been lately reprinted in a volume of "Critiques
and Addresses," and Leibniz's censure of Newton will be found on p.
323. It may be convenient for some readers to be informed that the
Correspondence between Clarke and Leibniz to which I have referred will
be found at the end of Erdmann's Opera Leibnitii (Berlin, 1840), a
portable and useful Edition. The sentences quoted by me are on page 747.

[79] J. Müller.

[80] Kant.

[81] Philosophy of Discovery, Chap. XXX. 23, pp. 369-70.

[82] It is necessary to observe the Professor's limitations.

[83] They have been noted before. In this place it is necessary to
examine the following instances.

[84] Critiques, p. 306.

[85] Lay Sermons, p. 373.

[86] Critiques, p. 281.

[87] Ibid. 349.




