Chapter 24


Peter sat on the rug with his legs crossed, Isle in a bundle
beside him, and together they listened to Kate's soothing voice
mingle with the sound of the light rainfall outside.

Ivy came into the room, humming softly.

"Is she asleep?"

"Not quite. I think she's sorta wired. She's had a tough day. You
too."

"You three," Ivy said.

Peter stood up. "Thanks for letting her stay here tonight. I'll
bring her over tomorrow afternoon, if that's okay."

"Sure," Ivy said. "A deal's a deal."

"Thanks."

Peter had offered to marry Ivy, but she had declined. In their
out of court settlement, Peter had agreed to child-support
payments, and Ivy had granted him visitation rights.

For the rights to her ISLE hardware and software design, ICP paid
Ivy six million dollars.

They hugged, and then she was gone.

He sat back down beside Isle and she stirred. He took her in his
arms.

"You miss Grandma Gracie and Grandpa Byron already?" he said,
pretending she understood every word. "Me too," he said.

Byron and Grace had left a few hours ago for Maine, to take care
of some things and plan their move west. They intended to find a
vacation home in California, where they would reside for however
long Byron managed Wallaby.

Peter's own home now felt like it used to, before Isle. Quiet,
empty. Yet at this moment, it was more full of life than ever.
But this, he had to keep reminding himself, was temporary. That
was the deal. But it was better than nothing at all. Better than
being completely alone.

The next song started playing on the disc player. Kate's voice
chased away the silence, replaced it with the missing element.

"When you're a little older," he told Isle, "I'm going to teach
you how to sing just like that."

"And who's going to teach you?"

Peter spun around.

Kate stood there in the doorway, smiling, wearing a raincoat and
carrying a garment bag.

"I let myself in," she said as he jumped to his feet.

"Hello, babies," she said, shrugging off of her wet coat. She
dropped her bag on the floor and set her purse on the coffee
table.

"I can't believe it's you," Peter said excitedly. "What are you
doing here?"

She bent, hands on her knees, and smiled brightly at Isle.

"Look at you, little girl. This is the first time I've seen you
in person." She looked up at Peter. "Hey, what kind of welcome is
that? I thought you'd be happy to see me."

"I am, I am!" he said touching her arm. "I just can't believe
you're really here."

"Congratulations," she said, retrieving a copy of the "Los
Angeles Times" from her purse. "And to you, too," she said waving
the front page of the business section at Isle. Beneath the
headline was a picture of Peter holding Isle, flanked by Byron
and Ivy.

"Back to Wallaby," Kate said. "Sure surprised me." She opened her
hands before Isle. "May I?"

"Of course," he said, placing Isle gently in Kate's arms. "Be
careful, you have to support her head. Like this," he said,
taking Kate's hand and carefully cradling it beneath Isle's neck.
"That's right."

For a few precious moments he let his hand remain beneath Kate's
before pulling away. Watching her holding the infant Peter felt a
swell in his throat, wishing it could be like this between them
again, always.

Kate sat down on the sofa.

"So, is it true?"

"Is what true?"

Freeing a hand, she picked up the newspaper and scanned the
article. "Here it is," she said. "Quote: 'I'm not going to work
as much as I used to. There are more important things in my life
now.' End quote."

"True," he said. "Totally."

"What about Ivy?"

He explained the arrangement they had made and the deal with ICP.

"Good for her. She's earned it."

Peter agreed, then sat quiet for a few moments, unsure how to say
what he wanted to say.

"What about us? You. I mean, is there any way I can earn you
back?"

Kate looked at him and smiled. She took his hand and held it in
her own, beneath Isle.

They sat there in silence for a while, adjusting to feeling one
another again after so long apart. After a minute or so it felt
to Peter as though they were breathing as one, the way they used
to, and along with this feeling his heart stirred, declaring
itself in an unfamiliar way, and he tensed.

"What is it?" she said.

"I'm scared," he said.

They kissed.











