PART V


Chapter 21


He had not slept all night.

It was not because he missed sleeping in the same bed with Greta.
That, of course, had ended. Nor was it because he missed sleeping
with Laurence. At almost exactly the same time Wallaby started
its merger negotiations with ICP, Laurence had taken a temporary
leave of absence to, she said, care for her ill father. It was
just as well, considering what had happened to Greta and
everything that had followed. Besides, the majority of his
speaking engagements had been postponed or canceled, and he spent
his time attending meeting after meeting, and putting together
piece of the business plan, which consumed most of his waking and
sleeping hours. Relentlessly, he studied ICP's complex corporate
structure and product line. Once more his favorite bed partner
was paperwork - binders, reports, analyses, and technical
documents, a courtship that all led up to today.

Today. The reason he had not been able to sleep all night. He
climbed out of the bed and strolled leisurely through the dark
house, crossing through the living room. A few months ago, after
Greta's accident, he had moved the sofa and furniture against the
wall, among the many stacked boxes that occupied the room.

Today was the most important day of his life. After more than
three long and arduous years of cultivation, he was about to
harvest his greatest achievement. The merger of ICP and Wallaby.
Finally his monumental plan would reach its climax. And afterward
he would begin his new plan -  But not so fast, he warned
himself. One step at a time.

The emerging dawn lit up the kitchen with a dull gray. He opened
the refrigerator, considered making breakfast, then decided
against it. He had no appetite. Instead he poured himself a glass
of milk and gazed out the kitchen window while he sipped,
pondering his new and exciting future.

His presence would be required in both New York and California.
Maybe he would set up his primary residence in New York, and find
something smaller in California, perhaps even in San Francisco.
Such a commute would be trivial, for with ICP's takeover, the
issue of highway miles would disappear and he would do his work
on his rides between office and residence in the chauffeured
limousine he would be entitled to.

A rush of elation coursed through him, and he decided to go for a
run. Besides, it was too early to leave, and a run would pass the
time until he had to get ready and meet William Harrell at the
announcement.

He placed his glass in the sink and left the kitchen, changed
into sweats. He needed to be at the hall by nine o'clock. He tied
his sneaker and stretched through a few warm-up exercises, then
collected his house keys.

Just as he was about to leave, the telephone rang.

He checked his jogging watch and picked up the handset. It was
William Harrell. They exchanged greetings, and William asked
Matthew if they could meet for breakfast before the announcement.

"I was just going to go out for a run, but sure."

"Go for your run," William told him. "I'll meet you at the Good
Earth restaurant at seven-fifteen."

"Will do," Matthew said, and asked William what was so pressing
that they needed to meet before the event.

But William had already hung up, leaving Matthew do presume that
his business partner probably wanted to go over a few last-minute
details before the big show.

Although he had no way of knowing it, he had presumed correctly.
There was indeed one minor detail left to go over.


* * *


When she heard him leave the second time, after his run, Greta
climbed out of bed.

She too had not slept very well. She was too excited. She
stretched and considered climbing onto her exercise cycle for a
quick workout. Checking the clock however, she decided to skip
it. She would rather use whatever spare time she had to make sure
she had not forgotten to pack anything that the shipping company
would later send to France.

Standing at the window, she gazed out at the dawning day. Across
the lake she could see Jean-Pierre's cottage. The lights were
off. She pictured him in her mind, sleeping peacefully. No more
would she sleep alone, she thought to herself, letting go of the
curtain.

She took eggs and ham from the refrigerator and set to making
herself breakfast. Marie didn't usually arrive until eight
o'clock, and besides, she thought dreamily as she cracked the
eggs into a bowl, it was good practice for the big country
breakfasts she would make for Jean-Pierre and herself.

While she prepared her eggs, the pictures he had shown her when
he returned from France last week flashed through her mind. It
had taken him a while, but he had finally found them the ranch of
her dreams. How she had missed him! It had been a long and
painful two months, she reflected, but today would finally signal
the end of her suffering with Matthew.

After what he had done to her, nearly killing her that day they
had fought over her bowl, he ended his resistance to her request
for a divorce. On the contrary, because of what he had done, her
case against him was even stronger, and he had no choice but to
agree to her lawyer's terms. The final papers would be drawn up
any day.

She seated herself at the breakfast table. While she ate she
checked the list she had been keeping. Everything she wanted
shipped was checked on the list. Her clothes were already packed,
and their plane tickets were the only unchecked item on the list.
Jean-Pierre had taken care of them. Still, she would ask him to
show her the tickets when she arrived at his cottage in the
limousine. Just to be safe.

She looked at the clock again and saw that it was a good thing
she had gotten out of bed early. Somehow she had managed to spend
nearly a half hour sitting just there dawdling, daydreaming. The
car was due to arrive at eight o'clock sharp, and now she would
have to hurry.

She left her dirty dishes for the housekeeper and trotted briskly
to her room, noticing outside the clouds darkening the sky. It
had rained all week but last night's weather report for today had
promised a possible break in the showers. She prayed they
wouldn't have to take off under stormy conditions, for it would
be a miserable way to start off on their new life together.


