Chapter 15


"Hello, Matthew," Greta said coolly, settling her coffee cup onto
its saucer.

"Hi," Matthew said brightly. He dropped his garment bag and
briefcase in the doorway, strolled past her without so much as a
glance, and went to the kitchen, where he poured himself a glass
of orange juice, drank it in one gulp, and set the glass on the
countertop.

"Has Marie been sick or something?" he said, striking up
conversation as he strolled into the breakfast area, peeling the
paper wrapper off a muffin.

"I gave her a few days off," Greta said. "She'll be back this
afternoon."

"How come the time off?" Matthew said, without much interest. He
ate his muffin and pulled apart the newspaper, folded it on the
table, scanned the page, then glanced across it to his wife.

"I didn't want her around. I wanted to be alone."

He nodded, as if respecting her wish for privacy, then started
reading yet another article reporting yesterday's Wallaby and ICP
New York City announcement.

"Matthew," Greta said abruptly.

"Hmm?" he replied, his eyes never leaving the article.

"We need to talk."

He looked up distractedly for a moment at his wife, then returned
his attention to the newspaper. "Okay. Do we have yesterday's
'Examiner'?" He looked around the room. "I couldn't find one in
New York."

"Over there. Next to the sofa," she said, indicating the pile of
papers in the sitting room. He went to the stack and picked up
the topmost issue and sat down on the sofa. "What were you
saying?"

She studied him, instantly oblivious to her again as he read
about himself and yesterday's news. In an odd way she was glad
that he was behaving like this, poring over himself in the
newspaper, for it solidified her determination and kicked up the
heat of her anger a few more notches. There he sat, holding in
his hands the cause for their breakup, smiling proudly at his own
picture of himself and his damned machine. Should she feel any
guilt or remorse for having taken a lover, for calling the lawyer
yesterday to inform him that she wanted to divorce Matthew, when
there he sat beaming at his engagement announcement to a stupid
little computer?

Well then, let's see how he liked her newsbreak announcement. She
stood up from the table walked over to where he sat, crossed her
arms and waited for him to acknowledge her.

"I'm sorry," he said, folding the newspaper and tossing it to the
floor, "I just wanted to see what they said locally." Rubbing his
hands together, he settled back comfortably into the sofa. "Now,
what was it you were saying?"

It was plain to see that he was being perfunctory, that he
couldn't wait to be done with whatever it was she wanted to talk
about so he could rush off to the office, where, having just
flown in from New York, he'd squeeze in a few more hours of work.
She pictured him on the plane, skipping the meal so he wouldn't
have to sacrifice the workspace of his tray table. It was just
the sort of image she needed to complete her anger and loathing.

She said, "I want a divorce." The words rolled off her tongue
easily and she nearly smiled to herself. So simple. She tucked
her fist in her robe pockets as he stood, hands open at his
sides.

"Honey? What do you mean?"

"Shall I get you a dictionary?"

"Greta," he said cautiously, clasping his hands together. "I know
I've been busy, but it's all been for this." He tapped the pile
of newspapers with his foot.

"My oh my, the papers are right, you are smart. Yes, it has all
been for that," she agreed, stamping her foot over the picture of
his face.

"But honey," he said, wrongfully interpreting her sarcasm, "I've
changed my mind. I sent a message to William before leaving New
York calling the whole thing off! I don't want Wallaby and ICP to
merge as we had originally planned. This way I - I mean, Wallaby
- will have more power because now we're going to grow at a
phenomenal rate, all because of yesterday's announcement." His
eyes were shining. "The plan is off!" he said, and gripped her
shoulders.

"And so are we!" she spat, shrugging from his touch.

"But Greta, wait. I mean, I know we've had our problems, but that
doesn't mean we should just throw away our lives together."

"Together?" she said, astonished. "What lives, Matthew? What
together?" She shook her head sadly at his photograph smiling up
at her from the newspaper. "There's your together."

"Greta? What is it? What have I done? What can I do? Is there
something you want?"

"No, Matthew, not from you." She touched her finger to her
horseshoe charm, slid it from side to side. "This time, I've
gotten what I want all by myself."

This seemed funny to him. "Oh?" he said grandly. "And what's
that, honey?"

"Love."

That wasn't what he'd had in mind. He blinked several times
rapidly. His eyes locked on a point in the ceiling. All the
clowning was gone from his face. He had expected something
amusing, like a new hobby or craft, but this took him by complete
surprise. "An affair?" he asked, catching her eye. She looked
away. He tugged the cuffs of his shirtsleeves, composed himself,
all business. "An affair," he repeated. "I see."

"It's your fault."

He was thoughtful for a moment, then cleared his throat. "Yes. I
suppose it is."

Matthew's first reaction was to tell her about Laurence. He cared
very much for the girl, and telling his wife so would at least
give him the satisfaction of equally offending the fidelity they
had promised one another when they married. He wanted to tell his
wife how Lauri had helped him build his confidence the way she
once had, and too how the girl brought him pleasure in ways she,
his wife, never had. But what would that accomplish? She was
having an affair, he thought absently as he perused the room,
eyes stopping here and there. He might be having an affair with
Laurence, but he was not in love with her, and he certainly had
no desire to marry her. He was not in love with his own wife
either, but, he quickly calculated in his mind, he could not bear
a divorce. It was a matter of economics. Quite simply, if he
agreed, she would be entitled to at least half of his assets,
over fifteen million dollars, give or take a million. His
alternative: appease her, make her feel better, no matter what
the investment. A weekend cottage in Monterey? A trip around the
world? Whatever she wanted, he would give it to her - he would
think of it as an insurance policy.

"Darling, I'm so sorry," he said with pleading eyes. "It really
is my fault. What with my obsession over Wallaby all this time,
letting things get this far away from me. From us. However, I
don't think divorce is the right answer. We should try to work
this out."

She smiled. "Do you think I don't know what you're thinking? Oh
yes, half of this is mine. And that's the law. Darling."

He swallowed. She knew him too well, could read him so easily. He
couldn't hide from her his fear of losing half of his wealth. He
had to try a different angle.

"But you're the one having an affair. You admitted it. How do you
think that will hold up?"

"It doesn't matter. California still splits the pot."

"This is bullshit."

"You should know, you're so full of it."

"Don't challenge me on this, Greta."

"Too late. I called Mitchell yesterday, and told him - "

Matthew cut her short. "You what?" His voice was a disbelieving
rasp. "You called my friend and told him we wanted a divorce?"

"No. I said I wanted it. But yes," she said with a shrug,
unafraid, "that's what I did."

"How dare you contact my lawyer when I knew nothing of this! Are
you crazy?"

"Why, yes, darling. That's exactly what I am, crazy. Driven mad
by Mr. Chips. At least that's what I'm ready to tell the court,
if I decide I'd like more than half. In fact, I think I need to
lie down, I'm feeling sort of suicidal again. All the stress I've
been under since this happened." She stuck her four-fingered hand
out at him.

He smacked it away. "I'll fight you on this, Greta."

"Try. You'll only make matters worse for yourself," she said,
kicking the newspapers. "It doesn't matter what they might say
about me in the papers. But you, my dear - you better think twice
before you make your next move, or it's going to cost you a hell
of a lot more than you can afford."

It was true. The press would turn this kind of thing into a
circus. He had seen this expression on her face before, this same
expression he had once found so alluring, so sure and empowering,
so certain of his success, their success. When working on his
behalf, this look had once charged him with excitement,
confidence. Now he saw the face of his opponent from across the
ring, and she looked fanatical in the way she said she was - in
the way she would convince the court she was, and possibly all
but wipe him out.

He needed time. This was too much to handle right now, especially
in light of his change of heart with ICP. He had to make a deal
with her, come to some sort of understanding, at least for a
short while until he could deal with this properly.

"What about a trial period?" he said. "Just give me a little
time, and we'll work out some sort of settlement between us. In
the meantime, I'll leave you alone. You can have whatever you
need to go away on your own if you'd like. Let's just not do
anything hasty. Please, Greta. I'm asking nicely. Just give me
some breathing room to sort through this."

She thought for a moment about what Jean-Pierre had told her.
First, he was going to travel to France to look at properties for
them. That would take some time. And once he found something, she
would have to pack, and with all the logistics involved in
moving, especially to another country, that too would take
awhile. Either way, she would be in California for at least a few
more months while she and Jean-Pierre made their plans. There was
no real hurry, and, she suddenly realized, they had not even
discussed marriage. Would they marry? She felt an unexpected
chill along her neck. Perhaps it was best to play it cool, she
told herself, while the arrangements for France were being made.

She said, "I may choose to travel, get away for while. Maybe even
stay somewhere else."

What could that cost? Matthew asked himself. Compared to what she
might get if they were to proceed with a divorce, setting her up
in her own place amounted to a pinch of salt. For now.

"Fine. Whatever you need. Let's see what happens when things
settle down in a few months."

"Ha ha, that's what you think. Please, take a good look at
yourself. With you it will never settle down, Matthew. You're
married to Wallaby, not me. You think you've replaced Peter Jones
as some sort of hotshot smart aleck, but now you're as sickly
attached to that company as he ever was. You didn't want him out
of your way so you could run the business - no, you were after
more. You were after his lover. And you got it." She shot him a
mean laugh and turned her head in disgust. And began to cry.

If only right now he would come to her and hold her, and tell her
everything would be all right, and kiss her, really kiss her, the
way he once had, full of need and desire, then she would go back
to him, make their marriage work again. Somehow. As happy as
Jean-Pierre made her feel, she understood that she had only begun
her affair with him because Matthew had rejected her. If he
wanted her back, he could have her. But it was now or never.

Matthew turned away. "Fine," he said flatly, then lifted his
briefcase and walked out of the house, got in his car, and drove
away.

And along with him went all of her hopes of ever realizing the
plan for happiness they had made before moving to California. It
was really over. She was now in control of her own plan. She was
scared, but she was determined. To hell with him. With her share
of the money, she could live the rest of her life without a care.
She hugged herself tightly inside the sleeves of her robe, and an
eerie thought entered her mind. She shivered, and the hairs on
her arms stood up. Glancing around the room, at their things, she
understood for the very first time that everything she ever
associated with Matthew - money, power, luxury - all of a sudden
didn't matter anymore. She was angry with herself for thinking
she should go back to him. Was she going mad? Had he really made
her crazy? How could she in one instant wish to go back to him,
and in the next wonder if he had ever really mattered? Had he
been an instrument to her, just as she had been to him? It sure
looked that way now. She had used him to acquire more and more
things, but she no longer needed these tokens of power and
prestige. There was only one thing she needed now, the love of
her attractive Frenchman. Nothing else mattered anymore.

Feeling free for the first time of the man to whom she had felt
so dependent, Greta calmly sat down on the sofa. Yes, it would be
worth waiting a little longer while Jean-Pierre created their new
world.

After all, she told herself, she had nothing to lose.


