Chapter 19


"Then we have a tentative agreement," William said with plain
satisfaction in his voice. Isle lay slanted across his knees, her
tiny hand now and then batting his tie.

Peter and Byron, seated on a sofa, both nodded in agreement.

"Wonderful," William said. "You hear that, young lady? Your name
is going to be famous!" As if on cue the baby yawned, and
everyone laughed.

"Speaking of tired, you men must be working yourselves to the
bone with all the progress you've made," William said, handling
Isle to Peter. "When do you expect to have a final design?"

Byron considered for a moment. "The hardware design is nearly
complete. We've got a lot of software work to do. Six months?"
Byron ventured, turning to Peter.

"If you say so, chief," Peter said. "We'll need some engineers,
administrative support, that kind of stuff."

William assured the men that he would get them whatever they
needed to see their project through to completion as quickly as
possible.

Peter was nearly satisfied, but there was one last thing he
wanted to clarify. "What about the strategic alliance?"

"That stays, for now." William said, then: "But when the ISLE
system is ready for production, we'll be less dependent on
Wallaby. There's an important difference between what we've got
with Wallaby, and what we are proposing for ISLE. With this, ICP
will have invested hard cash in your baby. So don't worry, we'll
see to it that she's a success."

 "Then we're on," Byron said.

William beamed. "Excellent," he said. He checked his watch. "I'd
better get moving if I'm going to catch my plane." The trio
walked to the door together. They shook hands, and William
departed.

"You see, Petey," Byron said after closing the door, "the big
guys aren't all so bad after all, eh?"

"I like him," Peter admitted.

"Man, we've sure got our work cut out for us. I just hope we
don't have any setbacks."

"How did it go?" Grace asked.

Byron kissed her on the cheek. "Like a charm."

"Congratulations," she said. "Peter, this man called while you
guys were out in the yard." She traded a Post-it note for Isle.
There was a name written on it that Peter did not recognize, and
a phone number. "Thanks. I'll call him later. Let's go tell the
guys the good news."


* * *


"Did Greta find you?" Eileen asked, rising from her chair as
Matthew returned from lunch.

"She found me, all right," Matthew said, winded, rushing past her
and into his office. He gathered his pen and notepad and hurried
to the boardroom. There was only a minute to spare before the
meeting began.

The entire Wallaby executive staff was seated around the table.
"Good afternoon," Matthew said, sweeping the group with a smile.
For an instant their inexpressive faces reminded him of the day
they had voted Peter Jones from the company, and the hairs on the
back of his neck tingled as he seated himself at the head of the
table.

All eyes drifted to the assistant chairman, Hank Towers.

"Matthew," he started affably, "we're all pleased with the large
volume of sales orders for the new Joey II."

A few heads nodded. A smile here, another there. The room seemed
to loosen a little, and Matthew smiled broadly. Laurence had been
correct. The meeting had been called to applaud his success with
the Joey II, and the strategic alliance with ICP.

"Thank you," Matthew said modestly. Then he became serious,
scanning the room expertly, locking briefly on each person's
eyes. "But I couldn't have done it without all of you."

Nods. A few brief smiles of genuine affection. Then all eyes
gravitated once more to Hank Towers. There was an unsettling air
of deference, protocol.

"Matthew, you've been very busy with the ICP alliance," Hank
said, "which is perfectly understandable. So the executives and I
have been working on our three-year plan."

Matthew nodded.

"However," Hank said, "there is some concern among us,
particularly in the area of future product engineering."

Matthew glanced at Alan Parker, who had been Matthew's assistant
in getting the Joey division back on track after Peter's
ejection. Alan had directed the reorganization of the Mate and
Joey divisions, and managed the day-to-day development
operations, while Matthew had championed the project's overall
mission of delivering the new Joey Plus, then the Joey II, to the
public. At present, Parker seemed to be very interested in his
disposable pen.

"What kind of concerns?" Matthew said, relieved to hear that his
own voice sounded authoritative.

Hank said, "With the work we've all done, focusing on the Joey
Plus, and especially the II, none of us had much time to think
about the future. Now that you've gotten the Joey II out the
door, we've come to an important realization. Matthew, the truth
of the matter is we have no realistic three-year plan."

 "What do you mean no plan?" Matthew said, his voice splintering
in mid-sentence. It was as if he were being shaken awake while in
the midst of a pleasurable dream, suddenly confronted with the
bafflement that comes with the knowledge that it was just that, a
dream. Because he had spent all his time securing the alliance
with ICP, he had never considered what Wallaby would think about
after the relationship was announced.

Actually, he thought in the silence of the room, that was not
altogether correct. In truth, he had not cared about what Wallaby
would face after the ICP strategic alliance, because after that,
according to the original plan, ICP would have bought Wallaby,
and the future strategy would have become their concern. At that
stage he would have been protected behind his big desk in his
luxurious, apartment-sized office. How could he have made such a
simple oversight? After contacting William to cancel the final
stage of the eventual merger, hadn't he realized that following
the Joey II, there would have to come new, future products from
the innovative Wallaby?

Sometime during his reverie, the meeting had resumed.

"...among us is an awareness that we're all but succumbing to ICP
as a maker of compatible systems. Our days as a radical portable
computer company, a company for the people, may be over."

As Matthew considered this implication, that he had crumbled
their fairy-tale company by moving them successfully into big
business, he felt as though he were somehow slipping back in
time, to the meeting in which he had forced out Peter Jones. Only
this time, he was playing the part of Peter. Wasn't that what he
had always wanted?

"Each one of you," he charged, sweeping his index finger around
the table, "approved our plan to build systems that could tie-in
to ICP's computers and share the same information!" He stood up,
shoved his hands into his pockets.

"We did," Hank said calmly, speaking on the group's behalf. "As
well as granting you the authority to run the shop. And all this
room wants to hear is that you've got a product strategy, a
vision, that goes beyond where we are today."

"Of course I have a plan," Matthew said indignantly. "We will
evolve the Joey II, incorporating more powerful features." His
voice turned shrill. "ICP is at our mercy. Think about it! The
orders indicate that we are now the maker on the rise, that Joey
is the one that people want for doing their work and accessing
other systems, if even those systems are ICP's!"

"Matthew, be realistic," Hank said. "ICP could drop our
arrangement at a moment's notice and introduce their own system."
His manner became grave. "Or worse."

Matthew pressed his hands flat on the table, ready to challenge
the group's faithlessness. "Worse? What worse?"

"Denise?" Hank said with a deferential nod to Denise Campbell,
Wallaby's chief financial officer.

"There's a rumor circulating" Denise said. "Supposedly one of our
engineers heard from his former colleague, Paul Trueblood, that
Jones was demonstrating some new product to an official from ICP
today."

Matthew paled. ICP? William Harrell? Was it possible that William
had teamed with Peter in the few short months since Matthew had
pulled the plug on the acquisition plan?

"That's what could be worse," Hank said. "In my estimation, it's
possibly the worst thing that could happen to Wallaby. Our own
founder leaves and builds a product that directly competes with
his own invention."

They all stared at him, waiting. If he didn't think quickly,
there was going to be another vote. "But the ICP alliance is our
vision," Matthew said, groping for a solution.

Hank met this revelation with a gentle shake of his head. He
looked down at his leather portfolio, at some notes. "Matthew,"
he started, sounding very tired.

If he didn't come up with something in the next few seconds,
Matthew knew they would be asked to place their ballots.
Resorting to the thing that had brought him to Wallaby in the
first place, he decided his only chance was to resurrect his
original secret plan.

"Wait," he blurted, cutting off Hank before he could continue. "I
have a solution," he said, trying to sound confident. "I propose
that we merge with ICP."

Their faces around the table disclosed either total confusion or
total shock. Hank gave an astonished chuckle. "What on earth
makes you think we would do a crazy thing like that? Or that they
would?"

"They would, and they will," Matthew said firmly. "When we
announced the strategic alliance, William Harrell had expressed
ICP's interest in possibly merging our companies. I told him we
weren't interested," he said, shifting the details to accommodate
his story. A funny feeling hit him just then. That regardless of
today's outcome, the act of finally revealing his compulsion felt
like a great weight off his shoulders. At least his original plan
was no longer a secret.

"Why weren't we told of this?" Hank demanded.

"I didn't seriously think it would be something any of us would
want," Matthew said. "Harrell knew he couldn't acquire us without
our consent, so I never feared a hostile takeover. An attempt to
create a monopoly would be prevented by the FTC, and more
seriously, the employees would rally against it, and our culture
would be lost."

"But that's just it, Matthew," Hank said. "Without any real
future products in the pipeline our culture is essentially
doomed. You've succeeded in convincing the employees that
coexisting with ICP was the right thing to do. No one has given
back their profit-sharing checks, for crying out loud."

"Hank, this is business, not a fraternity. Business is sales, and
we're finally making them, big time. Why not go all the way with
it? We're a grown-up company now, in with the big boys."

If Wallaby were to merge with ICP, no one seated around the table
would have a financial care in the world. Their stock options
would stack additional millions upon the millions most of them
had already accrued. And looking around the room, at the
calculating faces, he knew that that was exactly what each was
thinking. All except Hank.

"Now then," Matthew said, "I propose we vote. How many people
would agree to the initiation of a merger with ICP?"

"It would mean the end of Wallaby," Hank said gravely.

"No, Hank," Matthew countered, turning to face him. "It's just
the beginning. ICP would sell millions more Joeys then we ever
could."

"Agreed," Hank said. "You just said it yourself. ICP would sell.
No more Wallaby."

As far as Matthew was concerned, it was all the same. He would
assuredly be named president of the Wallaby subsidiary, just as
he and William had planned almost three years ago. And the
thought of eventually taking over William's role at ICP held
enormous appeal again, as it once had. He locked onto this as his
new goal.

"All in favor of me contacting William Harrell and proposing the
merger of ICP and Wallaby, please raise your hands." His own hand
stretched so high it hurt his side.

"We'll have to get full board approval," Hank warned, one last
effort to counter Matthew's proposition.

Matthew said, "When they find out that Peter has been talking to
ICP, I don't see how they can object. Now, all in favor, please
raise your hands."

The room teetered on the edge of absolute stillness.

Then, slowly at first, hands rose. One after another, every
person in the room raised his or her hand - except Hank Towers.

Once more, all eyes were on him.

Slowly, he lifted his open palm, held it there briefly, then
stood and left the room.

"Very well," Matthew said and lowered his hand. The others
followed suit then silently gathered their things and left the
room.

All alone now, he lowered himself to a chair with an exhausted
sigh. He had done it again. First Peter. Then the strategic
alliance. Now the merger. An agreeable sensation of vengeance
washed through him when he thought about Peter Jones and whatever
plan he had up his own sleeve. For the second time he had voted
Peter out, crushing whatever his secret scheme with ICP might
have been.

But then he was hit by a sudden troubling thought. What if
Peter's new project actually was superior to Joey? What if
William no longer wanted Wallaby? What if the two had already
decided to do business together?

He bolted from his chair and raced from the board room. He had to
hurry and try to reach William after he was through with Peter
Jones, even if that meant intercepting him at the airport.


* * *


She had considered driving straight to Jean-Pierre's after
finishing her business with the bank, but decided instead to drop
the car at home first and walk to his cottage. The stroll and the
fresh air would calm her.

In her tight fist she carried the receipt from the funds
transferred to Jean-Pierre's Swiss account. Transaction complete.
Very soon she would find herself strolling to their own stable on
their own ranch, with as many horses as she wanted. She
envisioned a large property with a simple, stately home, the
stable not far from her own back door, nestled among the rolling
hills where she and Jean-Pierre would ride.

She rounded the bend of the path that opened onto the ranch.
There were a few riders tramping out to the hills, a trainer in
the ring was instructing a young student. Jennifer spotted her
and waved from her doorstep just before going inside. Greta
returned the greeting with a wide, happy sweep of her arm.

She doesn't even know, Greta thought. For that matter, no one
knew about her and Jean-Pierre. They had been discreet with the
affair, seeing each other when Matthew was out of town, which had
been often in the past months. She still rode almost every
morning, and often Jean-Pierre joined her. Together they would
hunt out a secluded spot in the hills with a beautiful view,
dismount from their horses, and make love.

Yes, that was how it would be almost every day in her new life
with Jean-Pierre. As she approached the rear of his cottage, she
noticed the drawn curtains on his bedroom window. Was he napping?
She knocked, but there was only silence.

She twisted the doorknob. It was unlocked, and she decided to let
herself in - just as the door was jerked from her hand as it
swung inward.

The girl from the sushi restaurant stood there, shocked.

"You!" Greta screeched.

Laurence took a terrified step backward and attempted to swing
the door shut in Greta's face.

Greta charged and trapped the girl between herself and the
kitchen table. "What are you doing here?" she screamed.

Laurence lifted her hands to protect herself, just as Jean-Pierre
rushed in from the other room and stepped between them.

"Greta, wait," he pleaded, grabbing Greta by the shoulder.
"Laurence is one of my students."

"What?" Greta said, turning to him with a confused and
exasperated expression, the girl temporarily forgotten.

"Yes," he said. "In fact, it was your husband who referred her to
the ranch, knowing that you kept your horse here. Please, let go
of her darling. Come inside. Let me get you something? He spoke
as if he were entertaining guests, three old friends gathering
for lunch.

Laurence had managed to extricate herself from the threesome, and
was presently collecting her bag.

"She" Greta said, "is having an affair with my husband."

"I know," Jean-Pierre said indifferently.

"You knew?"

"No, I said I know. She just told me now. She was so upset that
she stopped off to tell me she wasn't going to take her lesson
this evening, because of what happened at the restaurant."

"And she'll be leaving, right now," Greta said.

"I was just going," Laurence said with a show of dignity.

"I've had enough of your face for one day," Greta said, edging
toward her.

"The feeling is mutual, Mrs. Locke," Laurence replied with a
smirk. Then, "I must say, after finally meeting you in person, I
can stop feeling guilty about my relationship with Matthew." She
brushed a long wayward lock of hair from her face. "You, madam,
and I use the term generously, are a quintessential bitch."

Greta's mouth gaped. "You little tramp!" She lunged for
Laurence's throat.

"Stop," Jean-Pierre commanded, catching Greta by the waist just
in time. "Go," he said to Laurence.

"I don't ever want to see you again!" Greta shouted after the
girl.

Laurence climbed into her car and slammed the door shut, started
the engine, and rolled down the window. She look as though she
were about to shout a retort, but then she thought the better of
it. Or so it seemed, until she lifted her closed fist and ever so
slowly raised her middle finger at Greta.

Greta made another lunge for the girl but Jean-Pierre's hold on
her was too strong to break away.

Laurence laughed heartily at this little show of helplessness,
then gunned the engine and she raced away in her BMW, kicking up
a great cloud of dust in her wake.

Jean-Pierre pulled Greta inside and closed the door. Before she
could say anything, his mouth was on hers. She struggled out of
his grip and fixed her shoulders squarely against the door.

"What is this - what the hell is going on here, Jean-Pierre? I
don't like the way this looks."

He considered her with some amusement, gave her his sexy look.

"What the hell's so funny?" she said. He touched his finger to
her little horseshoe charm and her breath caught and held, and
she felt at once like she wanted to hit him and kiss him.

"You are, Greta. You are overreacting," he said, leaning closer.
He kissed the charm, his breath hot on her throat, then lower.

His touch was distorting whatever semblance of perspective she
had - she was so confused. She shook herself from him and pressed
him back with both fists. "Wait. Stop. Just what do you expect me
to think? One minute that little bitch is sucking tuna fish off
my husband's fingers, the next she's traipsing out your front
door!"

"I don't expect you to think what you're thinking," he said
calmly. Too calm, she was beginning to see, to be guilty.

"But Jean-Pierre," Greta said, still not sure, "why haven't you
told me about her?"

He shrugged. "What is there to tell?" He took her wrists in his
hands. "Do you really think she and I are something?"

"She's very pretty," Greta said. "And very young."

"Not as beautiful as you are to me," he said, kissing away the
creases on her forehead. "Greta. I live here, and I make love to
you. Ms. Maupin, who, as you are now aware, is your husband's
lover, lives in San Francisco. How many times, Greta, has he told
you he's working late at the office? Do you ever check on him
when he goes away? Are you so certain he isn't just fifty miles
from home and at her place, not where he says he's going." He
touched his finger to her chin. "Need I go on?"

She met his eyes. "No," she said quietly, and he kissed her.
Well, Matthew, she thought, tit for tat, and told herself to let
it go. Then she remembered how this whole crazy afternoon had
started.

She held up the receipt.

"When do I start packing?" she said and gave the form a little
shake.

He took it and opened it and smiled and wrapped his arms around
her waist and kissed her chest and lifted her off the ground.
"We're going home!" he hooted.

Then he grimaced and made a pained sound and nearly dropped her.

"Darling! What is it? Your shoulder?"

He nodded, closed his eyes to fight off the pain.

"Oh, you poor thing. When we go we've got to get that fixed for
you, first thing. I don't care what it costs."

He shook his head. "It's very expensive," he said.

"I don't care. Now I want you to promise me you'll let me do that
for you. Promise?"

"Yes," he said, "I promise."

"Good," Greta said, and began unbuttoning her blouse.


