Chapter 9


"Hey, you ready yet?" Kate said, appearing in the bathroom
doorway.

Peter stood leaning over the sink, cautiously dragging a razor
across his face.

"Hallelujah!" Kate shouted, watching as the beard that had grown
long and scraggy over the past few months disappear into the
sink. Peter paused for a moment and winked at her in the mirror,
his face white and foamy, then returned his concentration to the
razor.

She leaned a shoulder against the edge of the door frame and
stood watching him. "I like your face smooth, it feels better on
me."

"Ouch!" Peter said, jerking the razor from his face. A dot of red
instantly formed on his chin.

"So, Lancelot," Kate said, hanging her robe on the door hook,
"what do I wear?"

"Whatever you want , it's just a neighborly thing." Peter rinsed
his face, then pulled the skin on his neck taut and inspected his
work. He saw that she was still watching him, and he took in her
full naked reflection before turning to face her.

"I think it's more than that," she said.

"What's more?"

"The dinner. I think this Mr. Holmes is probably excited that
he's met you, and wants to get to know your better."

"Well, me too. I could use a friend here. I only see you for two
or three days at a time." He crossed his arms, resting his rear
against the sink, and studied her up and down with a playful,
approving grin. "You know, for a forty-year-old lady, you're
still quite a knockout."

"Oh yeah? Well for a thirty-something boy, you're not so bad
yourself." She came over to him and slid her fingertips beneath
the waistband of his jockey shorts at the small of his back,
rubbed her cheek softly against his. "Mmm, this does feel
better." They stood there for a while, holding one another.

He pulled away from her a little so he could look into her eyes.
"What is it about us?" he said. "What makes it work?"

She considered for a moment. "Well, we're a lot alike," she said,
lightly kissing his nose. "And a lot unalike."

He nodded and bowed his head, focusing on their touching hips.
"Do you think maybe we should be together more?"

"Maybe."

"More permanently?"

"Maybe."

"Maybe?" His eyes widened a little as they sought hers.

"Petey, we work because we both have things in our lives that we
believe in."

"Had," he mumbled.

"Have," she said, lifting his chin with her hand. "You're just a
little dry right now. You have to give yourself some time to let
things happen inside here." She knocked his head lightly with her
knuckles. "It doesn't all just suddenly change overnight, Petey."

"I know. But I've been thinking." He hesitated for an instant.
"What about maybe if I were to settle down a little, split some
time between here and California, take it easy."

Her expression was full of attention and love, but not without a
small and knowing frown. They had had the conversation before,
usually when he was feeling depressed, and they both knew that
neither was fully ready to settle down.

"And what if you and I, you know..." he said, his voice trailing
off, his hands brushing her shoulders.

"No."

"But - "

"Petey," she said, pressing her fingertips to his lips. "You know
that once you get something zipping around in that carnival-quick
head of yours, you're going to be flying at a million miles an
hour."

He smirked. "Okay, maybe not marriage, but how about...I don't
know. I've been thinking more and more about the feeling I get
when I remember back to the first time I saw a kid use a Mate
computer." His voice became a whisper. "Maybe a child in my life,
a baby, our baby." He stressed his grip on her waist and pulled
her closer.

"You know I can't have a baby," she said. Her eyes were
glistening. "I'm too old, and I told you I tried long before we
met," she said. "You know that. And yet you suggest it." Taking
his index finger, she lightly poked her taut belly in an attempt
to make light of the situation. "Closed for business. Sorry." She
trembled.

He pressed her head against his chest and rubbed the back of her
neck. "Hey, I'm sorry." He kissed her eyelids. "That wasn't nice
of me to bring up again. I'm really sorry. Okay?"

She nodded and he wiped his thumb under her eyes.

"Petey, trust me. You just need a little time to think. You're
thinking right now about what is today, and you're not giving
yourself a chance to just take it easy."

Now it was he who nodded and lowered his head to hers, and she
hugged him. "It'll come, Petey, I know it will. It will come
again."

"Promise?"

"Cross my heart. Now put some clothes on," she said, slapping his
rear. "I'm getting cold and hungry, and we don't want to be late
for your new friend." She turned and strolled to the bedroom.

Suddenly his underwear whizzed past her head, grazing her hair
before landing on the bed. She stopped in place and set her hands
on her hips and turned around with a playful grin on her face.

"Isn't it fashionable to be late?"


* * *


"Dinner is ready," Greta said from Matthew's office door, just
off the library.

"I'll just be a minute," he said, turning to acknowledge her, but
she was already gone.

He finished typing his e-mail message to William Harrell, then
clicked the send button. Piled on his desk were notes, charts,
and schedules, each a vital facet of the overall ICP Strategic
Alliance report he had been working on all day. Another Saturday
devoted to work, but that was nothing new. Glancing at his watch
he figured he could probably finish most of the outline by
morning, so long as he hurried through dinner.

Leaving the light of his library office, he strolled through the
uncharacteristically dark house. He padded down the long hallway
and passed the closed dining room door, crossed the foyer, and
rounded the corner to the family room and kitchen area. The room
was dark and there were no plates, glasses or utensils on the
table where they usually ate, just outside the kitchen and facing
the family room with its big-screen television. Only the day's
mail rested on the table, where he had left it several hours
earlier.

"Greta?" he called, turning toward the kitchen. In the minimal
illumination of the dimmed track lights he saw pots and pans
resting with their lids ajar, a few gooey spoons. Having had a
moment to adjust to the darkness, he caught the flickering glow
coming from the dining room, which was accessed either by the
foyer or through the doorway in the kitchen.

"In here," came his wife's voice softly.

He rounded the turn and was a little surprised to see Greta
seated at the formal dining table, facing him. The room was dark
except for the gentle radiance from two candles. Silverware
shimmered and crystal glasses sparkled in the soft light. Poached
vegetables and steaming new red potatoes in delicate china bowls
sat beside a covered serving dish. Between the candles, in a
large vase in the center of the table, were pussy willow
branches, fuzzy and in full bloom. When he had walked in the door
with them yesterday, she had thought for a moment that he had
remembered. But then he explained that someone from the office
had brought in bunches for everyone.

"Oh," was all he managed to say before he seated himself.

"I gave Marie the rest of the afternoon off," Greta said. "I
fixed it myself."

"It smells wonderful," Matthew said, smiling but puzzled. They
only ate in the dining room when entertaining guests. Why so
formal all of the sudden?

She poured him a glass of wine and handed it to him, then lifted
her own glass and held it out to him. But he had already taken a
sip and was lifting the lid off of the covered dish. She
hesitated, almost said something, and sighed instead. She tasted
her wine and watched him for any sign of recollection, any hint
of awareness.

Matthew placed the covered lid aside. "Wow, my favorite dinner,"
he said.

"I know," she said, clearing her throat.

He gestured for her plate and selected one delicate hen for her,
two for himself. He ladled sauce over his birds and vegetables,
took another sip of his wine, and dug in. Barely ten seconds into
his meal, and Greta could see that his mind was already somewhere
else.

No, she admitted to herself, he had not remembered. And with this
knowledge came a strange aching feeling, a throbbing, in her left
hand, where what had once symbolized their marriage used to be.
The doctors had told her that that would sometimes happen. That
at odd times it would feel as though everything were in its right
place, like normal. The same was true, she thought in silent
agony, of her marriage. At odd times it had felt as though it was
all still there. But not now. Plain and painfully simple, he had
forgotten.

After a minute or two, as if remembering that she was there,
Matthew looked up from his dinner.

She sat staring at him with shimmering eyes, her utensils still
resting untouched beside her plate. Before he could say anything,
she spoke.

"Happy anniversary, Matthew," she said. A weighty tear dropped
down her face.

His body slackened. He set down his utensils. All at once he saw
the brightness of her lips, the accents around her eyes, the
fine, glimmering pattern in the silk dress. He became acutely
aware of her perfume lingering among the aromas of the meal. Her
tears were painting dark trails down her cheeks. He gazed down
into his plate, their anniversary dinner, and let loose a guilty
sigh.

"Greta, I'm sorry. I'm, so, so sorry. With all the work and
everything..." He lifted his hands a bit. "I just, well, I just
forgot."

She reached her gloved hand across the table and touched his
wrist. "It's all right, Matthew," she said with a resigned smile.
She wiped her cheek with her napkin and lifted her fork.

"It is delicious," Matthew said enthusiastically.

She speared a few vegetables, chewed slowly, put down her fork,
and took a long drink of wine, all the while watching her
husband's hurried consumption.

"Matthew, can you slow down? Please, can't we enjoy our dinner
together tonight?"

"I'm sorry, honey. It's just that, you see, I've got more work to
do," he said, then tentatively added, "for the trip."

"What trip?"

"Tomorrow. New York. I told you I was meeting with Harrell on
Monday, didn't I?"

"No, Matthew, you did not."

"Hmm. Funny, I thought I said something. Sorry. See what I mean.
I'm so overwhelmed these days."

"Matthew, you're changing in unpleasant ways. And there's nothing
funny about it."

"I beg your pardon?"

"However selfish you were before getting rid of Peter Jones, you
were at least considerate and apologetic. Genuinely. Or so you
seemed."

"I said I was sorry about forgetting. You're upset, and you're
basing your criticism on that."

"No, Matthew. That's exactly what I'm talking about. This new way
you're behaving. You say you are meeting with 'Harrell' -
whatever happened to 'William,' your friend?"

"He's not my friend, Greta. He's a business partner."

"Oh, of course. Pardon me. And is that what we are too, Matthew?
Business partners?"

He shook his head as if to say he'd had enough. In fact, she
thought, that was what was wrong, that he'd had enough of them,
of the dead end that their marriage had turned into.

With an disgusted huff she poured herself more of the good French
wine, held the glass beneath her nose and she gazed out the
window at the reflecting pond beyond the foot of their estate.

"Maybe, Matthew, we should talk. Don't you think, especially
since tonight is our anniversary, that we should talk? What's
happened to us?"

"Dear, I can't," he said, pausing to wash down a mouthful of food
with a swallow of wine. "I'm going to be up until six in the
morning as it is. And I've got an early flight. I'll just be able
to jog and shower."

He ate and she drank in silence for a few minutes, until she
could stand it no more.

"Matthew, is it going to stop? Is it going to change? Ever?"

"What, honey? Will what stop?"

Any remorse he may have felt for forgetting their anniversary was
obviously gone now she could see, forgotten with everything else,
as if a switch had been thrown, his mind saturated once again
with his work. "Matthew, do you understand that you are obsessed
with Wallaby? Really, you are worse than Peter ever was."

"It's not an easy job," he said, wiping a piece of bread in the
last smear of sauce on his plate. "Replacing him."

"We never see each other anymore. Even when you two had your
falling-out, you saw him more than you see me now. Every morning
you're up at five-thirty, then you're at work all day, and I
never talk to you - "

"Meetings."

"Then you come home and gobble down your dinner, barely a word
between us, or if you do have anything to say it's about that
damn company, then you're off into your library until late at
night until you come to bed and fall asleep." Her breathing had
become panicky.

"Look, I've got to do my job," he said, irritated now.

She leaned forward with her hands flattened on either side of her
full plate. She didn't care that her gloved left hand was there
for him to contend with. Maybe that was the problem, that she had
never really forced him to deal with it.

"Matthew, I'm all alone. You're all I've got. It's not that I
mind being here all day, but when you come home, it's worse
because then you're here but we're still not together, and on the
weekends, like today, you work all day in the library."

She intended to force him into battle if that was what it took.
But what he did next completely disarmed her: He placed a hand
over hers, the left one, and met her eyes with compassion. She
felt suddenly hopeful. She had finally gotten through to him.

"Greta," he said gently, "everything I'm doing is for us. The
things I'm making happen at work are very complex and important,
and these things will change our lives forever." He patted her
hand and smiled. "Soon it will slow down a little," he said,
tossing down the rest of his wine.

But his words sounded shallow and condescending. Her hopes of
understanding disintegrated and the throb in her left hand
returned with renewed force. She snatched her glass and finished
her wine in one quick swallow. She poured another. Was there no
way to get through to him? To make him see how close he was
coming to destroying them? "Matthew, it's ruining us, and you're
letting it happen." Nothing. She went for broke. "Don't you see,
I'm trying not to let anything bad happen to us."

He seemed undaunted by her warning. Wiping his lips with his
napkin, he got up, walked around behind her chair and placed his
hands on her shoulders.

"Darling," he said, "I have to get back to work now. Nothing bad
will happen to us. I won't let it." Then he kissed the top of her
head and left the room.

She turned her head and looked out at the pond again, and
whispered to her reflection in the window.

"Then I will."


* * *


"Poppyshit!" Byron shouted, waving his glass at Peter, who sat
across the table. "The problem with kids today is their parents!"
He set his glass down firmly as if challenging anyone to dispute
his opinion.

"Dear," Grace interrupted, gently touching her napkin to her
upper lip with raised eyebrows at her husband.

"What? Huh?" he mumbled, confused. "Oh," he exclaimed, dabbing
his lips with his napkin, wiping away a small piece of
sauerkraut.

Grace smiled and shook her head, her grin spreading wider when
Kate smiled back.

Peter had chosen the subject of children to start the table
discussion. "I don't think that's a fair judgment, Byron," Peter
said. "I think it's more than just what goes on in the home. It's
everything, all of society. Kids are hardly given a good example
by their parents, their friends. Movies. Television," he said.
"It's like they've turned into MTV lemmings."

The foursome ate at an antique Shaker table, situated near the
living room hearth. The home was decorated in simple and warm
country style. A charming, homey combination. Like Byron and
Grace Holmes themselves.

Kate and Peter had both felt instantly comfortable when they
arrived a few minutes late wearing jeans and sweaters, which fit
in nicely with Byron's work shirt and khakis, and Grace's simple
cable-knit sweater and flannel slacks. Dock lamps dotted the
inlet outside, and boats bobbed silently in the bay, glowing with
a fuzzy luminescence in the moonlight. Peter and Kate's own
vacation home was situated a few hundred yards down the inlet.
Their dock was similar to the Holmes's, though they did not own a
boat.

"We had primarily invented the Mate computer with no one in mind
but ourselves, computer guys," Peter said. "But within a short
time, parents were buying them like crazy for their kids.

"We want," he started, then paused for an instant to correct
himself, "wanted computers to be especially great for kids, to
lure them away from the TV set. When some of the software
developers created really great learning games, it all took off
from there." His eyes were shining with the clarity that comes
when you talk about something you deeply care about.

They were silent for a moment then Byron looked up from his plate
with a frown. "That's all well and good. And you're right about
it, that children especially benefit from computers, and not by
television. Now," he said, pointing to Peter's plate with his
mustard-smeared knife, "how about you eat that bratwurst before
it gets cold."

Grace broke the silence. "They have a computer at the foster home
where I volunteer a few hours a week, one of yours I think," she
said, smiling at Peter. "Those little kids, and the bigger ones
too, they sit there for hours and play games on it, and do
homework, and talk about all sorts of things I don't understand,
in a language all their own. It's lovely how such a thing could
bring these children together and give them a family of sorts."

The discussion carried on some more. Peter had not resumed
eating, so Grace got up and began to clear the table.

"Let me help you," Kate said.

"You get no dessert if you don't finish your meal, boy," Byron
said. He rubbed his hands across his chest in post-Thanksgiving
dinner fashion.

"Everything was delicious, Grace," Peter said. "It's just that I
haven't had a very good appetite lately."

"That's all right. You can take home leftovers if you'd like."

"Too late," Byron said, spearing the remaining half of sausage
from Peter's plate.

When Kate and Grace were out of earshot, Byron leaned across the
table. "You're a lucky fellow," he whispered. "She's a pretty
lady." He dropped a big wink.

"I know it," Peter agreed, looking out at the water. There was a
stirring in his chest, and he quickly turned his thoughts to
other things.

"Come on," Byron said, pushing away from the table. "Let's get
some air while the ladies fuss and giggle."

Peter had to laugh at that one. The thought of Kate "fussing"
about with Grace in the kitchen made Peter both happy and sad at
the same time. It was what he wanted now, yet it was what she
would not be for him. How could she be so sure they weren't ready
to settle down? As far as children were concerned, they could
adopt. Talking about kids, and knowing that there were none in
his and Kate's near future, had turned his dark mood of late even
darker.

As they headed out onto the deck, Byron pulled a small pouch from
his pants pocket, and from his shirt pocket he produced a briar
pipe. He filled the pipe in silence as they strolled along the
dock. When they reached the end, Byron lit up. The glow of his
match reflected back in the black water. That is just what I
need, Peter thought, a spark to go off inside my head.

"You know, boy," Byron said, shaking out the match, "I like you."
He inhaled on the pipe, regarding Peter for a moment.

"Thanks," Peter said. "You're a good guy, too."

"That's what my wife tells me," Byron said, exhaling a cloud of
blue smoke. "You and I ought to take a float out on this baby,"
he said, poking his pipe at his boat, the "Net Work." He sat
down, dangling his feet above the low tide, and Peter sat down
beside him. "Listen, I'm gonna tell you something, and I want you
to promise me you'll think about it. Okay?"

"Sure."

"You're a bright fella. But you're walking around like a little
boy who lost his old dog and hates the world for it," he said.

Peter exhaled, his breath forming a faint mist in the cool air,
and looked down into the water.

"Son, everything dies. It's how life goes on. Your pooch, he's
gone. It's time to go pick a new puppy, and train it, and love
it, and make it great."

"That's easy for you to say. You've done it all and it lasted
longer for you, most of your life, and you have a wife now and
you're happy."

"Poppyshit!" Byron said. "Do you think the 990 was the only thing
I ever did with ICP? No way. I did all sorts of things with them,
but the difference is that I stayed on board, and times were
different then. I was trained to do the things I did. You're
different."

"How so?"

"You're a rebel. I was too, but in a different sort of way.
You're a real risk-taker, but not for the sake of taking risks.
You do it because it's the only way you know how to be."

Peter nodded.

"You've got to understand and accept that it just takes a little
healing, over time. Time. I can tell you this because I've been
through it myself. I almost died once, had that heart attack I
mentioned to you the other day. Got it from not letting go.
Almost lost my life. But worse, after I got out of the hospital,
I almost lost my wife. Ah, I don't want to get into all that.
Just understand something mister, that this isn't the last time
it's going to happen to you. You have to know that now, while
things are germinating up here." He tapped a finger to his head.
"When the next thing comes, when you start out all clumsy and
getting into it all over again, even if it's way back in the back
of your heart, you have to accept that someday it's going to
change, end, and then you start all over again. And again and
again. You keep doing it. Over and over. And it gets better and
better with age. Just like they say."

Peter felt choked up listening to Byron so candidly share his
experience. "But," Peter started with a little more than a quiet
puff from his lips. "But it hurts."

"Of course it hurts," Byron said. "But you pick up, dust yourself
off, and go at it again. Where do you think all this age-old
advice comes from? It's truth, friend, that's why you're hearing
it from me. Sure thing."

"I don't know. It's not all the same, you've got more that
matters," Peter said, hitching his thumb absently in the
direction of Byron's home.

"Hah, boy's blind, too. I see a lady in there who looks at you
with real fancy in her eye. She's standing by you strong, I know
it."

Byron took his pipe from his mouth and looked thoughtfully into
its bowl. "I'll give you something to think about, and you let it
roll around in your head a bit." He sniffed. "Thing is, is I've
been bored lately. Yeah, I love it here, and our home in
Connecticut, and Gracie, and we've been talking about maybe
traveling again this winter," he said, waving his pipe in the
general direction of everywhere in the world, "but I've been
feeling sort of itchy. Like I gotta do something. You ask me, I
think there was a reason for us running into each other the way
we did."

"How's that?"

"I don't know why. Not yet, anyway. I suspect it has something to
do with our difference in thinking. I mean that in a good way. We
come from different worlds, yet we we're not such different
beings. If you and I put our heads together, I bet we could
really show the rest of 'em a thing or two."

"Think so?"

Byron winked. "I know so," he said, patting Peter on the leg.
"Now come on," he said, rising to his feet. "Let's go get us a
slice of that apple pie."


* * *


She set the dirty dishes in the sink, wrapped the leftovers in
foil. On the counter, there sat a cranberry and apple crumble she
had made for dessert. The bourbon sauce, which was to be warmed
and drizzled over the piping dessert, sat in a saucepan on the
stove, a gloppy mess. She dumped it down the drain and left the
dishes in the sink for Marie to deal with in the morning.

Matthew was back in his office working, and Greta stood with the
last of the wine in her glass gazing out the kitchen window at
the valley beyond.

When was it going to end, she had asked him. But she knew the
answer to that question. There were two answers, really. The
first was that it was never going to end, and the second was that
it already had. She had tried - for the last time? - to break
through the wall he had over the years erected between them. But
she knew now, after tonight's dinner, that the wall would only
grow higher, thicker. After Matthew turned Wallaby into what he
wanted, then sold it to ICP, it would be no different when he was
promoted to a higher rank within ICP, perched atop his
ever-growing blockade. Maybe they would stay in California, but
probably they would have to go back to New York, to ICP's
headquarters. Though she sometimes missed New York, the thought
or returning held little appeal. There her friends were all wives
of the other International Foods executives, and out here,
regardless of all she had heard about the nice people in
California, the women were still the same, robots who yessed
their husbands at social occasions and dinner parties, while
behind their backs they, and their husbands, engaged in
extramarital affairs.

That wasn't how Greta wanted to end up living her life. But would
she?

She finished her wine and set the glass on the counter - a little
too firmly. The crystal base shattered into little bits with a
high resonating tinkle, yet the bowl of the glass remained intact
in her hand.

"Shit," she cried, the sound breaking a dam in her, releasing a
flood of tears. She tossed the unbroken half into the sink, which
echoed the same tinkling sounds, even louder this time. She held
her breath, wondering if he had heard, wondering if would come to
see if she had injured herself. She waited, holding on to this
fragile hope with all of her breath.

If he had heard, he wasn't letting her know. She let out a great
sigh. Jesus, was that her life with Matthew? Shattered, broken
beyond repair? It was too much to consider at this moment. She
needed to get out of the house for a little while, to go for a
walk in the pretty night and clear her head.

She snatched her windbreaker from the coat hook beside the door
to the garage and stepped outside into the evening's coolness.
She wandered down the sloping hill to the high, solid gate. She
stepped through the gateway and hiked down the trail to the edge
of the pond with its narrow dirt path.

Eventually, if she followed it, the path would lead her to the
horse stables. Sometimes she rode Mighty Boy along here, circling
the entire pond and back around to the stable, passing her own
home on the way. Quickly and steadfastly she strode through the
twisted, tree-lined path in the moonlight. The stables lay a
half-mile ahead.

It was supposed to have been her night to celebrate the memories
of her marriage, but now she found herself thinking about the
scene that had taken place in Mighty Boy's stall the other day.
For better or worse, she had stopped him. She had admitted to him
that she and Matthew were having problems, but they were still
married, and even though she had desperately wanted him to go on,
she said she could not let herself be with him. He had released
her, and assured her that it would not happen again. Unless, he
said, she came to him. Since that day she had not gone back to
the ranch.

She slowed for a moment, then stopped. She absently stroked her
left hand with her right hand as she examined her present state
of mind. What was she going to do, just knock on the door of his
cottage? She turned and looked back up the hill to her home. A
few lights glowed - Matthew's office. She swallowed, and her left
hand throbbed some more.

Yes, she decided, that was exactly what she was going to do.

She moved on, her pace quickening, her heart pumping. Shortly the
stables came into view, illuminated by both the light of the moon
and by the floodlights surrounding the property. Trailing along
the border of light, just beyond its edge, she grew excited and
reckless, like an inexperienced burglar. Her brisk walk had
warmed her and she unzipped her jacket as she stealthily slipped
around the stable.

She passed the main house, where the ranch's owner lived alone.
Purple-blue light flickered from an upstairs window. About fifty
yards from where she stood were two small cottages. She had
passed them many times while riding. Jean-Pierre lived in one of
those cottages, and though she had never been invited inside, she
knew which one was his because he had mentioned once that it
afforded a beautiful view of the pond from his bedroom window,
through which he could see her home and its rear upstairs light
glowing late at night. Though her home was too high and far away
for him to see inside, she was excited by the thought of him
lying in his dark bedroom, fixated on her bedroom window. Had he
ever glimpsed her passing the window, closing the curtains?

The sound of a car engine starting suddenly broke through the
quiet evening. A second later a swath of light beamed just a foot
beside her and beyond, as far as she could see, into the woods.
She ducked behind a small wooden utility shed stationed alongside
the drive. White light pierced through the tiny cracks and seams
of the shed. Cautiously she peeked around its edge. A car
appeared from between the cottages, its light sweeping past the
shed as it steered onto the drive. Greta flattened herself
against the side of the small building and crept around the
corner once the car had completely passed.

Was he going out for the night? The sound of the engine grew
distant, then came a high squealing noise when the car reached
the end and turned onto the main road. Once more, the sounds of
the night and her own pulse were all she could hear. She left her
cover and pressed on.

No, she saw at once, it hadn't been Jean-Pierre because his MG
was parked in front of the cottage. Avoiding the light cast by
the lamp outside the front door, she circled around to the back
of the small house. She peered into the bedroom window. The room
was lit by a small lamp beside an empty bed with twisted sheets.
The sight caused her breath to catch. She rushed to the back
stoop and halted before the door, flexed her hands a few times.
Feeling the night's coolness breezing through the silken material
of her gloves, she absently wiped them on her dress and turned
and faced the pond for a moment to collect her thoughts.

Could she really go through with this? Her eyes searched across
the small shining lake, along to the narrow shore and the trail's
edge, up the hill. Her home. She could see the very window where
she had stood just minutes earlier, and she could see too the
damned glow coming from Matthew's office, where, on their
anniversary night, he was fondling his true love, Wallaby.

Yes, she could go through with this, and would. She turned and
knocked three times on the Dutch door, so loudly that she
startled herself. She heard the short, hollow tamp of footsteps,
the clacking sound of the door latch. For an instant it felt as
if her wedding band had tightened around her finger. Irrational.

The top half of the door swung open, and there he stood, wearing
only jeans and wire-framed reading glasses. His expression bore
no surprise. A knowing smile formed on his full lips. She started
breathing again. Plumes of mist danced around her head as the
warmth of the cottage bled outside into the chilly air. He
removed his glasses and closed the top door for a moment, then
the entire door opened and he stepped back, his arm extended. She
quickly and nervously glanced around the room as she went inside,
taking in at once its simple furnishings and his things. There
were boots beside the front door, a black T-shirt tossed over the
back of the couch, a beer bottle beneath the shaded lamp, a
wineglass beside the bottle, a pair of brown leather gloves
beside the glass. She heard her own blood pulse in her ears, felt
dizzy and a little buzzed by the wine, the rush of activity, and
now the stillness.

Following her gaze, Jean-Pierre quickly stepped into the tiny
living room. He picked up the gloves. They were women's gloves,
she could see that now. Everything was happening so fast.

His shoulders sagged. "You saw them," he said.

Her eyes quickly jumped to the bottle, to the glass, to the
gloves, back to the glass. She thought of the car that had just
gone. She looked into his eyes. "What?" she said, her voice not
sounding like her own.

He held the gloves out to her. "I wanted to wrap them and
surprise you."

She blinked. "For me?"

"Of course."

She accepted the gloves in her right hand. There were a few
small, barely noticeable scratches on them, but the stitching was
clean and new. She wanted to say something, but when she looked
into his eyes again, whatever she had thought she wanted to say
vanished, and in its place was desire, like what she had felt
when he kissed her in the stall.

"Thank you," she managed as she absently watched him take back
the gloves and carefully fold them over, then tuck them into her
jacket pocket.

He took her by the shoulders and kissed her. Her eyes were still
closed and lips slightly parted when he pulled his face away. She
had come to him, and now she needed him to guide her.

He stepped aside and indicated the way to the bedroom. She moved
and he trailed her holding one of her hands in his, the one she
would let him hold. Had he figured it out yet, she wondered,
about the other one. She stopped beside the bed, facing the pond.
He switched off the lamp and placed his hands on her shoulders.
She struggled to see clearly, but could not. He pressed his hard
body against her back. The air was all made of his scent,  musky,
sexy, alive. She wanted to be tumbled and spun in the tangled
sheets that lay before her, to move her hands between their
softness and his firmness, to flop into the pillows, his weight
hard on her, his mouth on hers. She closed her eyes. Yes, his
mouth, which was now gently kissing the back of her neck, his
lips pulling the small hairs at the base of her skull. She
twisted her head into the warmth of his hot and chilling breath.
A small sound escaped her as he slid her windbreaker from her
shoulders. It fell to the ground with a soft rustle. She closed
her eyes and reached her good hand to her left shoulder, placing
it over his hand. She leaned back into his hardness and he
pressed himself against her more firmly. The wine had helped to
numb her feelings, and now the charged atmosphere of his bedroom
melted her into yielding. Even her left hand felt normal.

I tried, God as my witness, I tried, she thought with a shudder
as he wrapped his arms around her and across her breasts. He held
her until her trembling subsided, then he began to unzip her
dress, very slowly. She opened her eyes. Her vision had adjusted
to the silvery light, which now sharpened the edges of everything
and cast ambiguous shadows.

And there, across the pond, she saw Matthew's lamp.

"No," she said, reaching behind for her zipper.

He gripped her wrist.

"Yes," he breathed hotly in her ear.

She challenged his hold. Unable to resist, she yielded, spun
fiercely, and sought his lips. He held her head between his hands
and kissed her, pushing against her so intensely she felt she
would burst into flames. Her hands slid up his chest and across
his shoulders, his broad back. This hardness, I want this on me,
was all she could think, I have to have this in me.

But again, as if burning into her back, Matthew's library lamp
broke her, mocked her. With a cry, she twisted around. "No. I
can't. Not with him right there."

"We'll pull the shade," Jean-Pierre said. He nuzzled his nose in
her hair.

"No," she said, planting herself firmly. "Not now. Not with him
this close."

"Then when, Greta? When?"

This had been a mistake. She had to get away. "Tomorrow," she
said, pulling away from him. "Tomorrow, Jean-Pierre." She tugged
at her dress, putting some more distance between them as she
rearranged herself. Her expression was final, forbidding. She
wanted to remember him just like this, standing before her with
his arms at his sides, his bright white teeth and eyes, the
silvery sharp edges of his muscled chest.

"Where?" he asked, taking her by the elbows.

"Matthew is going to New York. I'll call you." Afraid that the
gentle yet firm and alluring touch of his powerful hands would
stall her, she forced herself to pull away.

He handed her her jacket, and followed her into the light of the
living room. She opened the door, turned around, and slipped on
her jacket, zipping it firmly.

He clasped one hand on the door's edge. With the other he gripped
her wrist and pulled her close. She gasped. He kissed her long
and deeply. The cold night air chilled her back, while the heat
of his mouth warmed her insides. She drew away with a frustrated
moan.

He raised her good hand to his lips and brushed it lightly. The
stubble of his beard on the silken material caused a sound that
had an extraordinary effect on her lower regions. She pressed her
upper thighs together.

"Tomorrow," he said, and released her.

She nodded, then was off and back into the night, back to her
home.

Running through the chilly night she remembered the gloves in her
pocket. She stopped and removed her silk gloves and put on the
pair he had given her. They made her feel secure and warm, but
not all the way. Perhaps they would feel right once she had the
left one tailored to accommodate her shortcoming.

Whatever it takes, she solemnly vowed, whatever it takes.


