Chapter 6


William Harrell's meeting with his advisers had been taxing. Both
had recommended that ICP begin the accelerated development of the
prototype BPX ultra-portable computer - a product, were William
to give its development the go-ahead, that they felt could
compete directly with the advanced features of Wallaby's Joey.
And, his technology adviser stressed, the BPX wouldn't suffer
from the problem that currently plagued the Joey, of too few
available third-party software applications. ICP's magnitude
could garner pre-announcement commitment from software
developers, said the adviser, to begin creating BPX programs for
the computer immediately.

If he hadn't had his secret plan in place, William would have
been mad not to heed his advisers' advice and implement exactly
what they had presented. But he'd had it all figured out for a
long time. What he wanted now, more than anything, was for them
to leave his office so that he could go home and check his
e-mail.

When he uttered his response, "We'll continue evolving the
current BP design," he could see in their expressions that they
thought he was crazy. Both stared at him with incredulity. His
business adviser flapped pages of figures and charts that
projected the market penetration Wallaby could achieve if it were
successful in getting the rumored Joey Plus computer to market
within three months. According to one chart, Wallaby could begin
by tapping some of ICP's largest customer accounts, which could
lead to sizable market penetration over the next three years.
Within five years, another chart predicted, the Joey Plus's
superior design could earn half of ICP's portable computer market
share for Wallaby.

William held firmly to his decision. What they were telling him
was precisely what he and his secret partner, Matthew Locke,
already knew. What his advisers didn't know was that their fears
of Wallaby gaining monumental market share would hardly be a
worry to ICP in the not-too-distant future. On the contrary, it
would be cause for celebration.

Returning to his palatial home, he proceeded straight to his
impressive office. He exhaled an appreciative sigh as he powered
on his Wallaby Joey and sat before it, quite literally on the
edge of his seat. Matthew had sent William the computer when it
was introduced last year. They had made arrangements before
Matthew had moved to California as to how they would communicate
the progress of their secret merger plan, which the men had
originally formulated here in William's home. It would stun the
business world, William reflected for the hundredth time. He'd
experienced so many moments of pleasant anticipation since the
course had been set two years ago.


After the jolting squash match with Rolland Worthy, William had
returned to his office and had his secretary cancel his remaining
meetings. He asked his driver to take him to Central Park. He
intended to force himself to relax and think through the possible
effects that Worthy's news could have on ICP's future portable
computer strategy. During the short trip, William watched the
miniature television in the passenger compartment, hopeful that
the commercials and nonsense soap opera dialogue would lighten
his frame of mind. Just before getting out of the car, he caught
a commercial that froze him in his seat for its duration. A
notion flashed in his mind. An instant later, the breadth of it
nearly bowled him over in its force and irony, and he was
thankful to be sitting down. The spark that ignited the idea was
the infamous Remington electric shaver commercial, in which
Victor Kiam says, "I liked the product so much, I bought the
company." William's heart doubled its cadence, and wave after
wave of adrenaline coursed through his system like gasoline
spurting onto an open flame. His brain was a bonfire. Of course!
That was it! He would buy Wallaby, for the very same reason Kiam
had wanted Remington, because he really did like Wallaby's
product so much. From his car phone he placed a call to Matthew
Locke's office at International Foods. Matthew's secretary
informed him that Matthew was out of the office for two days, but
said that she would have him call when he returned.

In his excitement he had forgotten what Rolland Worthy told him,
that Matthew was in California right now, visiting Wallaby.

William spent the next two days devising a plan. Rarely was there
an occasion in which he had the pleasure of acting on impulse.
Everything at ICP was planned several years in advance. The
jubilation he felt over the merger idea was no less than a gift
from above - the first diversion to come along that was powerful
enough to ease his grieving over the loss of his wife Martha, who
had passed away eight months ago, after a blessedly short battle
with pancreatic cancer.

After losing Martha, William had secluded himself, inviting no
one into his home. His new idea would change all that. He sank
into his idea with pure obsession.

Matthew Locke accepted William's dinner invitation after
returning from California. The two businessmen sat with drinks in
the library. Perfunctory conversation planted the seeds that they
carried to the dinner table. Once the first two courses were
completed, William got the real discussion underway.

"As I told you on the phone, Rolland mentioned to me that you
were visiting Wallaby in California as a candidate for
president."

Matthew had his own preface: "Rolland has been my mentor at
International Foods for more than ten years. I don't feel any ill
will toward him for telling you, as long as you respect the fact
that my trip was confidential."

"Of course," William said, and took a drink of water. Then he
began. "Matthew, an unusual feeling swept over me when I heard
this." Already his enthusiasm was quickening. "I realized that
Wallaby must be up to something really big if they were calling
on someone of your caliber. It's been a long time since Peter
Jones has made any brash statements about us, the industry, or
anything. Too long.

"I thought it would be interesting to meet you when you returned.
You see, a plan began to unfold in my mind, one that you may find
interesting." A smile lighted William's face, and he leaned
forward a little. In a lowered voice he revealed the heart of the
matter: "I've always had a strong admiration for Wallaby. But of
course it's the sort of thing one must keep in check at ICP.

"Sure, we currently have a great portable computer. But we're not
innovative the way Wallaby is. And I suspect that they're up to
something new. Something exciting."

Matthew saw the purity of William's candor and honesty. His
intuition was waking, and he was beginning to understand where
this conversation would take them. With this sureness, he offered
a teaser.

"I don't think I'm giving away any secrets by saying yes, you're
correct. They're up to something. And yes, it is something very
exciting."

William pushed his untouched plate aside. The two men shared a
moment of heavy silence, each considering his own tactics.
Maintaining a hint of a smile, William was the first to make a
move. "Matthew, I would like to suggest a possible business
arrangement."

Matthew gave an agreeable nod.

"ICP is gigantic. Everything we do is planned many years into the
future. Although our personal computers are outselling Wallaby's
Mate system, I suspect that whatever they have coming down the
pipeline will be completely unexpected and radical."

"Correct."

"Yes," William said. "That's what I figured." He paused
thoughtfully. When he spoke, his voice was casual and revealing,
the way a man's voice becomes when he is dead certain of the
object of his desire.

"I've always envied Peter Jones and his company. But of course
I've got my own company to worry about. For my own entertainment,
I've been looking for some time at Wallaby as a case study. I've
toyed with the idea of spinning out a rebellious group of
engineers and forming a new subsidiary with the charter to build
radical new portable computers. However, members of the board to
whom I've casually mentioned this have not responded positively.
They're focused on bigger systems and desktops, which, along with
service, account for most of our business. I must concede that I
understand their lack of enthusiasm. We are an East Coast
company. We're buttoned-down numbers people. Out west, they do
things differently. Profits follow passions."

Matthew's eyes narrowed. "I think I'm beginning to catch your
drift."

 "I'll get to the point, then. Wallaby's products are not
compatible with our systems. Ours take a lot of time to learn how
to use. Granted, Wallaby's Mate isn't a whole lot better, but
there's something about it that makes it friendlier, and it's
certainly easier to lug around."

"You ain't seen nothing yet," Matthew quipped.

"Right. So I'm not going to beat around the bush. I've got
nothing to lose by sharing my fantasy with you." He took another
gulp of water, then went for it. "Matthew, I really like Wallaby.
I think it has created, and will keep creating, exciting
technologies. Peter Jones has an absolute vision of what small
computers should be. We at ICP can't do that. We are a big
company, with big computers." William's hands unfolded before
him. It was a gesture of offering. "So what if Peter Jones and
Wallaby became a part of ICP, but were left alone in California
to do their thing?"

Matthew was speechless.

"Say you, Matthew, were to go into Wallaby, the strong leader
that you are, and begin bending Jones and the company toward
becoming compatible with ICP's systems? Then, when the company is
oriented in a compatible direction, so that Wallaby's computers
can work with our big systems, ICP and Wallaby merge, but let
Wallaby maintain its freedom as an independently operated
subsidiary."

Matthew's mind raced at the prospect of this outrageous coup. If
it were successful, it could be bigger than anything he ever
dreamed could happen at International Foods. He had a million
questions to ask, and his eagerness was written all over his
face. But before he could utter a word, William raised his hands.


"Wait. Just one more thing to think about. For you it would
eventually mean the opportunity to move into the highest ranks of
ICP." In earnest, he said, "My expiration date isn't too far off
into the future." There, William thought, he'd said his piece. He
felt himself relax a little. There was nothing more he could say.
While respecting Matthew's silent deliberation, he stole a woeful
glance at a portrait of his beloved Martha, smiling from where
she sat framed in silver on the antique china closet. I need
this, my dear, he said to her silently, I need to have this.

Her sanction came out when Matthew spoke: "It's brilliant."

William breathed a silent sigh.

Matthew advanced his own view of the overall premise, and when he
finished he sat back and clasped his hands in his lap, his face
glowing with certainty.

Any concerns William might have had for Matthew's strategic
ability and comprehension now departed. "Bravo," William said.
"Of course, there's much we'd have to discuss." Then, cautiously:
"And this plan must remain a secret between us. You and I will
guide it along privately through its early stages, until we reach
the point where a merger makes perfect sense." He studied
Matthew's expression for any sign of consternation, and was
pleased to find none.

"You know, its funny," Matthew said, with no hint of humor in his
voice, "The big concern I've had about considering this job at
Wallaby was ICP. Now your big concern and my big concern may very
well wind up becoming the computer industry's single biggest
concern ever."

"Quite," said William, raising his glass to toast his new secret
partner.


The touch-tone sound of the computer's modem brought William back
to the present.

As planned, Matthew had sent him an e-mail message that validated
the decision he had voiced earlier to his advisers.

However, when he read the last part of the message, about Peter
Jones's possible departure from the company, he felt a shiver.
Granted, he was relieved now that Matthew had won support, and
that the secret merger plan could proceed. He favored a scenario
whereby Jones stayed with Wallaby and continued to lead the
development of the company's future products.

Pondering this, he studied his finger on the Joey's trackpad.
Sliding his fingertip across the smooth surface felt natural and
intuitive, a genius design. Peter Jones's genius design. Without
the trackpad, the Joey would not function as it did. Elegant.
Silky. Smooth. Right.

Staring at the small flat black space beneath his finger, a dark
thought prodded his sense of certainty. Without Peter Jones,
could Wallaby operate as smoothly and naturally as a peripheral
of ICP?


* * *


Peter blinked awake in the room's gauzy afternoon brightness.

Whiffing a good, familiar smell, he shut his eyes for a little
while, listened to her moving around, moving things around.

"Hi."

He opened his eyes. Kate was crouched before him. He propped
himself up on one elbow.

"Oh," he moaned, touching his fingers to his temple.

"How you doing?"

He shrugged and his eyes met hers, then shifted past her
shoulder. Several pieces of luggage sat by the doorway. "What's
all that for?"

"We're going away for a bit."

He yawned. "We are?"

"Yep. I'm taking you to the Maine house for a little while."

"Okay," he said, offering no argument.

"First, we're going to treat you to a nice hot shower. Come on."
She gently helped him up and out of the room.

In the bathroom she went about undressing him.

He stood before her naked, watching her dip her hand in and out
of the shower, adjusting its temperature.

"Kate," he said, his voice rubbery.

"Hmm?"

"You're an artist."

"Mm-hmm."

 "Well, I was wondering. About when you've created something.
When it's something really good. You know, like a new CD. And
when it's all done, you have it and hold it in your hands. And
there it is. All said and done. You can keep going back to it,
but no matter how great it is, it's past. History. So. What I
want to know is, do you ever feel like you'll never be able to do
it again? Do anything again?"

"All the time, love." She took his chin in her hand and kissed
his forehead. "But no matter how hard it seems at the time, if
you did it once, you can do it again."

"Promise?"

"You know it."

"Good. Will you come in here with me?"

"Yes."



