PART III


Chapter 12


Four months had passed since William Harrell and Matthew Locke
had traded secrets in New York...and since Matthew and Laurence
Maupin had met on her bed.

They were together again now, backstage at Lincoln Center in New
York City, preparing for the announcement of ICP and Wallaby's
strategic alliance before an audience of executives from both
companies, and industry partners, customers, and the press.

"Matthew, you seem a little nervous, and that will show to the
audience," Laurence said, standing before Matthew, who sat
backstage in a dressing room. A makeup attendant patted his
forehead and cheeks with flesh-tone powder.

"I'm just excited," he said.

"Smile. Make sure you smile," Laurence urged, trailing Matthew as
they moved along the rear hallway to the stage area. They stopped
behind the curtain's edge, and Matthew checked his watch.

"Hello, Matthew," William Harrell said warmly, joining them.
Though they were dressed similarly, William appeared very cool,
very calm, very much in control, the very opposite of how Matthew
was feeling.

A man appeared wearing a microphone and earpiece headset. He
nodded to Laurence then faced Matthew. "Mr. Locke, you're on in
one minute, as soon as the music stops."

"Good luck," William said, shaking Matthew's hand. He stepped
aside, opening a clear path to the stage.

The auditorium grew silent as the overhead lights dimmed and the
piped-in classical music dissolved. An announcer's voice greeted
the audience and a large screen unrolled, on which a slide
projector beamed the Wallaby logo.

"Good luck," Laurence whispered, squeezing his hands. A spotlight
focused on the podium gaped wide and bright.

The announcer boomed: "Please welcome the Chairman, President,
and Chief Executive Officer of Wallaby, Incorporated, Matthew
Locke."

Applause sounded when Matthew appeared. He traversed the distance
to the podium with clear composure and stood before the audience
a few moments, allowing them to take in his dark gray suit, his
confident air. He graced the audience with a sweeping smile, then
focused his attention at the center of the auditorium, just above
the heads of his audience, as his mistress and tutor had taught
him.

"Thank you, and good morning. Today will mark a very important
day in Wallaby's history. As you know, Wallaby is a company that
has always been focused on empowering individuals with portable
computer technology. Many of you today, stowing your own Joey or
Joey Plus in your briefcases and folios, have first hand
experience with Wallaby's products, and today we'd like to take
that experience to the next level."

In sync with his speech, the slides Matthew had shown the
executive staff just four months ago, when he first proposed the
strategic alliance with ICP, flashed behind him on the high
screen.

"What we are about to show you will enable Wallaby to continue to
deliver on its original vision of powerful portable computing,
but with more flexibility than ever. That means customers who
were previously locked out of the Joey platform because of its
incompatibility with other systems can finally hop on the
bandwagon and benefit from the Joey's advanced technology, and
continue to access files and documents created on those other
systems, simply and easily."

At this the crowd stirred. It was exactly the kind of reaction
Matthew had hoped for. Barely able to contain his smile, he
pressed on.

"Today, Wallaby announces a new and friendly personality in
compatible computing." The spotlight on Matthew faded to a dim
glow, and a second circle of light appeared, center stage.

"But rather than standing here and telling you about our exciting
news, why don't I let the new Joey II show you."

The excited audience silenced. On drum roll cue a shrouded,
remote-controlled box about the size of a shopping cart glided
from stage right to center stage, into the spotlight. The drum
roll intensified.

The entire auditorium went black for a few seconds, then cymbals
crashed loudly. The shroud was gone, and there, bathed in intense
light, was a dark gray prototype Joey II computer.

Matthew himself joined in the thunderous applause. He felt as
though an intense wave of heat had just washed over him. For the
first time in Wallaby's history, someone other than Peter Jones
was revealing a new product before a cheering audience.

Seconds later the computer's screen, controlled by an automated
script, came to life, and its image was projected, via video
output, to the overhead screen for all the audience to watch.

The screen cleared and then the Joey II went into a six-minute
animated presentation demonstrating the system's new features,
including a new slot for plugging in a local area network card, a
larger hard disk, faster fax sending and receiving, and built-in
file translation software for reading documents and other files
directly from ICP's formerly incompatible BP desktop and portable
computers.

When it was over, cymbals crashed and the audience applauded
wildly, thrilling Matthew to the bone. He stole a quick glance to
his left, offstage and behind the curtains. Laurence signaled
with a thumbs-up gesture.

He turned back to the audience and waited for the applause to
finish.

"Today you just saw a prototype of the new Joey II computer, the
first engineering collaboration between International Computer
Products and Wallaby.

"When the Joey II is available in six months, Wallaby and ICP
will begin a co-selling relationship. For the first time in
history, two former rivals, Wallaby salespeople and ICP
salespeople will share and support the same customers.

"This is a non-financial arrangement, and represents a first-ever
strategic alliance between our companies, enabling Wallaby to
continue to develop exciting and powerful portable computers, now
with built-in ICP compatibility that makes the Joey II the
perfect companion to ICP's line of BP desktop computers."

The presentation continued, and Matthew detailed the specific
markets and technologies that each of the companies had agreed to
develop together. Afterward, as Matthew and Laurence were
collecting their notes and briefcases, William strolled into the
press room.

"Well done, Matthew," William said, smiling politely to Laurence.

"Thank you."

"May I have a word with you?" William said. "It will only take a
minute."

"Sure," Matthew said, shutting his briefcase. "I'll be right
back, Lauri," he said, and followed William from the room.

"In here," William said, pushing into an empty dressing room. The
light from the hallway fanned into the room and aided their
search for the wall switch.

Finding none, Matthew switched on one of the makeup tables
mirrors. Twenty light bulbs lit up around the mirror's rim, and
he turned around the chair facing it and seated himself. William
pulled up a small stool and sat down.

"It all went very well, Matthew," William said. "I just wanted a
moment alone with you to tell you how happy I am, especially
after the shakiness we've experienced over the past few months."

"Thank you. And I understand. We've both had our own concerns,
you on one side, me on the other."

"Yes," William agreed. "I sometimes didn't believe we would make
it to this day, but we did, and now we're ready to move into the
final phase." The final phase: ICP acquires Wallaby, and Matthew
comes under William's command. "And they bought your response
with nary a doubt," William said. "That was good. Because they're
going to have a big surprise in a couple of months."

He was referring to the reporter's question that had been
directed to Matthew minutes ago: "With this 'strategic
alliance,'" the reporter had said, affecting a difficulty with
the definition of the agreement, "aren't you afraid, Mr. Locke,
of a possible ICP takeover of Wallaby in the future? Or is this
perhaps something you may want?"

Despite the dead-on accuracy of the reporter's speculation,
Matthew had not wavered in his response, explaining, with a
discernible hint of Peter Jones's once-infamous arrogance, that
today's strategic alliance announcement was as close as Wallaby
intended to get to ICP. To further squash the theory, he threw in
a nugget about takeovers, and how FTC regulations would prevent
ICP from subsuming Wallaby as long as Wallaby continued to build
portable computers.

However the reason his response had sounded so believable to
everyone, and to himself especially, because it was the truth.

Was.

Right then, as he had answered the reporter's question, a new
plan, a revised plan, had crystallized in Matthew's mind: There
would be no eventual merger between ICP and Wallaby.

"It's back to the office for me," William said, checking his
watch.

Matthew said good-bye and turned to face himself in the mirror.
He felt different, felt he looked different. Younger. More alive
than ever. He pinched back a smile as he whispered the words he
would say if it were Peter rather than himself looking him in the
eye right now: "I told you so." He said it again, and this time
broke into a huge self-satisfied grin, his laughing eyes piercing
back from the mirror into his own.

"Matthew?" Laurence stepped into the room. "Who are you talking
to? Is everything okay?"

This somehow stuck him as funny and he let out a burst of
laughter. "Fine. Great. Super," he said. He whisked his fingers
through his hair and inhaled a deep breath.

Ironically, he at once understood that Wallaby -  no, that he -
now had ICP in a precarious position. William himself had told
Matthew that he had not approved any new portable computer
designs, banking everything on today's announcement, so that
ultimately he could acquire Wallaby with its now-compatible
technology. The way Matthew saw it, Wallaby - delightfully modest
and manageable, both in size and volume compared to ICP - now
held at least a two-year technology advantage over the world's
biggest computer company. And the thought of having them by the
tail delighted Matthew beyond any dream he ever had of merging
the companies as one.

"Good," Laurence said. "Come on, let's go play in the city." She
shook her rental car keys at him. "I've got the keys."

"Wrong," Matthew said, and with a playful look in his eye
produced his hotel room key and twirled it on his finger. "It
looks like I'm holding the only key we'll need."


