Chapter 23


The cyanide pill.

It was all Matthew could think of as he sat at the breakfast
table with his head in his hands. It was over. His work. His
love. His life. All gone.

Everything had been going according to plan. Or so he had
thought.

But in the final plan, Matthew had not been included. Once more
he replayed the scene that had taken place just an hour before.


Pulling into the Good Earth restaurant's parking lot, Matthew was
surprised to see an exact duplicate of his own car. Of course it
could be anyone's, but Matthew could not help but think that it
was Peter's black BMW coupe parked beside the limousine. What
were the chances of Peter happening to be here at the same time?
One in a thousand. And Peter Jones was the last person he needed
to see today. Matthew would simply ask the host to find William's
table, and ask him to come outside. They would take their
breakfast meeting elsewhere.

He parked his car at the other end of the lot and walked around
the back of the building. He went inside, looking around
cautiously. At first he had not really noticed the two Wallaby
security guards standing near the hostess station. Seeing him,
guards left the station and went into the restaurant.

Positioning himself out of sight of the dining room, he motioned
for the hostess

"I'd like to ask a favor, please," he said. "There's a man I'm
meeting here. His name is Mr. Harrell, and he's - "

Just then William appeared, the two guards flanking him on either
side.

"We can't stay here," Matthew said. "Peter Jones is in there
somewhere."

"Yes, I know."

"But I'd rather not see him. Today especially. I haven't seen him
since he left the company."

 "Matthew," William said calmly, "please come inside."

Bewildered, Matthew followed.

"William, I'd much rather we go elsewhere," he said, then halted
abruptly when he saw Peter, dressed in an oxford shirt and jeans
and sitting in one of the booths. Seated beside him was an older
man wearing dark slacks and a tie.

William pressed him onward, directing him right toward Peter.

Peter looked up, and for the first time since the boardroom
showdown, their eyes met. His face bore no surprise, no
expression whatsoever.

To Matthew's astonishment, William led him right up to the booth
that Peter occupied. The older man rose and seated himself on the
other side of the table.

"Matthew, sit down please," William said, indicating the vacant
seat beside Byron.

Matthew looked at Peter uneasily, but Peter said nothing, he just
sat there quietly and watched Matthew.

Adding yet another element to Matthew's confusion, Hank Towers
materialized and joined the surprise party. Positively
astonished, Matthew turned to William for an explanation. "What's
going on? What the hell is the meaning of all this?"

"I'll get right to the point," William said. "Matthew, the
Wallaby board and the executive staff decided to vote on whether
you are suited to maintain your position at Wallaby."

Matthew struggled to keep his voice down. "What? This is absurd.
How could you do this?"

"Matthew, I did it," Hank said.

Matthew stared at Hank with disbelieving eyes.

"I initiated the vote," Hank said, "after several of the
executives and board members came to me with their concerns."

"Why?" Matthew said breathlessly.

"Because in your effort to make the company successful, you acted
with negligence and selfishness. What's more, you have no
long-term strategy for our product line. And in order for us to
survive and continue innovating our company must have a plan."

Instantly, Matthew put the pieces together in his mind. He turned
his blanched face to Peter and met the dark, unwavering eyes of
his nemesis with hateful resignation.

"So that's it. Now, after I've turned the company around, you
come back to run the show?"

Peter kept quiet.

"Not exactly," William said. "Byron Holmes here," he said,
indicating the man seated beside Matthew, "will temporarily take
over as Wallaby's president."

Matthew was deeply shocked.

William said, "Peter has decided to rejoin Wallaby in an at-large
position, working on our future products. However he'll only come
back if you leave." William produced a folded document from his
coat pocket. "I'm sorry, Matthew, but I have to ask you to
resign."

"I will not," Matthew protested loudly.

Several diners, most of them Wallaby employees, turned their
heads in the group's direction.

"Matthew," William said, his voice empathetic now, "I'm afraid
you have no choice." He unfolded the document and placed it
before Matthew. "We've put together a first-rate severance
package for you."

For what felt like a long time, Matthew was unable to do anything
but sit there and stare down at the document that spelled out the
rewards of his terrific failure. His brain sizzled as he
attempted to focus on the details. He saw numbers and lots of
parenthesized paragraphs. There was a long line at the bottom,
with his name printed beneath it.

He raised his head and looked across the table at Peter. "Why?
Why didn't you just agree with me when I suggested all this? It
would have had the same outcome."

"Sorry, Matthew, but it was never that simple."


But it could be now, Matthew thought, sitting there at the
breakfast table, clutching tightly in his fist the little
circular thing he had been hiding in his briefcase for so many
years.

He was completely spent, used up. Alone. There was no one for him
now. No one he could call on. William had informed him that
Laurence had arranged for a transfer to an ICP office in France.
And, effective immediately, Eileen, his former secretary, was
Byron Holmes's personal assistant.

And then there was Greta.

He opened his fist and looked at the gold object in his palm. It
rolled out of his hand onto the tabletop.

He twirled Greta's wedding band round and round with his
fingertip. On that awful day years ago, he had retrieved the ring
from the boat deck before kicking her severed finger into the
ocean. Unable to face the horror of what had happened to her, to
her hand, he had hidden the ring in his briefcase ever since.

She was the only person in the world who had ever truly supported
him, the only person who would know just what to say right now.
And she was gone. He had destroyed her, too, with his damnable,
selfish dream. A dream that had become a nightmare. One from
which there would be no waking. It was all over. Really and truly
through.

Ah, but the cyanide pill. It was his grandest plan ever. He wiped
his nose on his shirtsleeve and straightened, contemplating the
details of his new plan. Had Greta left anything in the medicine
cabinet? Sleeping pills? What about the garage, in that damned
car? He lowered his head to his folded arms again, considered his
options.

He was awakened by the sound of the doorbell.

As everything came back to him all at once, his first reaction
was paranoia. The press. Reporters and photographers. They had
scaled the gate, and they were coming for him, coming to mock
him.

"Go away," he shouted.

But instead of leaving him alone, they resorted to pounding,
screaming his name. They rang again, more pounding.

He called for Marie and ordered her to send them away. The
housekeeper came back a moment later and told him who it was at
the door.

He grabbed the ring and leaped up from his chair, tears finally
coming as he staggered down the foyer.

He twisted the lock and swung open the door.

And there she stood. A sobbing Greta, wearing, he noticed at once
and unmistakably, the very gloves he had bought for Laurence.
Pigskin, and fit for a queen. His queen.

Yes, she was wearing them now, and didn't that then mean that he
had bought them for her, really? That they belonged together?


