Chapter 22


"Ladies and gentlemen, please find your seats," the announcer's
voice boomed through the bustling auditorium.

The seating was already jammed to nearly full capacity as
thousands of Wallaby employees filled the auditorium. A few front
rows remained vacant, reserved for VIPs and the press. The stage
was illuminated with a bright circle of light focused on an empty
podium.

Backstage, William Harrell parted the curtain an inch and peered
out at the gabby crowd. Hank Towers squeezed in beside him and
also surveyed the crowd.

"I've never given a speech to so many people dressed like that,"
William remarked.

Beyond the first few dark rows, wave after wave of bodies clad in
T-shirts and jeans stretched all the way to the back of the
auditorium.

William stepped away from the curtain and rearranged his tie.

Hank patted him on the shoulder and laughed. "You look like
you've gained twenty pounds," he joked privately.

"They're going to witness the world's fastest weight-loss
program," William said with a cunning grin, referring to the
surprise he had prepared for today's announcement.

"Get ready, William," Martin Cohn said, gesturing for everyone to
move away from the curtains.

The announcer's voice filled the auditorium: "Ladies and
gentlemen, vice president and general counsel, Martin Cohn."

Amid quick applause and murmurs, Martin greeted the audience. The
Wallaby logo appeared, projected brightly behind him on a huge
screen hanging above center stage.

"This day will mark an important juncture in Wallaby's history,"
Martin said. "A few months ago we announced a strategic alliance
with International Computer Products, the world's largest
manufacturer of computer products."

The ICP initials materialized beside the Wallaby logo.

"As a result of our announcement, sales of the Joey II computer
have skyrocketed, exceeding in just two months the previous
year's total sales."

The audience applauded, and the screen changed to a picture of
the Joey II sitting beside an ICP desktop computer.

"Today we have an announcement that will ensure that both Wallaby
and ICP continue to grow and profit together."

There was a dead silence, and a photo of William Harrell's
smiling face filled the overhead screen. "Now it's my pleasure to
introduce William Harrell, chairman of International Computer
Products."

A murmur ensued throughout the audience. Though Martin Cohn
usually started off the meetings, it was always to introduce
Matthew Locke.

Martin stepped aside, and William crossed the stage. The audience
applauded mildly and stopped once William arrived at the podium.

"Thank you, Martin. And thank you," William said, sweeping the
audience with a heartfelt smile. "I've always been envious of you
guys out here in California. I look out there and all I see are
T-shirts, jeans, and sneakers."

There was some mild laughter, and William knew the crowd was
probably a little thrown off by his being up here and not Matthew
Locke. He went right into his presentation.

"Maybe it's this kind of environment in which you work at Wallaby
that lets you create products as spectacular as the Joey
computer."

On the screen an older picture of the original Joey team
appeared, a younger Peter Jones kneeling in the center of the
group, his arms wrapped around a Joey poised on his knee. The
audience applauded with pride and appreciation.

"A few months ago, your company and ICP joined forces to work
together to offer our customers powerful hybrid systems. On that
day a dream came true for me. Finally, users of ICP's line of
computers had an easy way to access our difficult operating
systems, actually working smarter because of the Joey. Now,
that's a big deal to us starched shirts at ICP," he confided,
"because we've been playing catch-up with Wallaby, trying to
figure out how to build portable computers and personal
information assistant software as great as the Joey.

"You see, the truth is is I've always been envious of the Joey
and Wallaby. Jealous that we, the biggies, hadn't been the one to
invent an equally breakthrough design."

It was time for him to pull his prank, which he hoped would act
as the perfect segue to the real announcement. Pulling off his
tie, he stepped away from the podium and strolled to center
stage.

A strip-tease song started playing on the big speakers throughout
the auditorium, and the audience was mute with wonder as William
began unbuttoning his shirt. Next he unzipped his pants, and
dropped them to the floor. Underneath, he wore faded jeans. He
pulled off his shirt and flung it aside. He raised his arms, and
turned around so the audience could see the graphic on his back.
It showed the joey kangaroo as always, but this time the pocket
it climbed out of was embroidered with the ICP logo.

The audience applauded and cheered as he sauntered back to the
podium.

"Oh, wait a minute, I forgot something," he said, then crouched
behind the podium. A moment later his black wingtip shoes clunked
hollowly out onto the stage, and he produced a pair of worn-out
sneakers. Encouraged by cheers and laughter, he fumbled comically
with the running shoes and laced them up.

"Now, dressed like this, you'd think I could probably do some of
the thinking you guys do to make amazing computers, right?"

"Right!" the audience echoed, playing along with his skit.

"Wrong," he said. "To have the systems you folks have, guys like
me have to leave it to you, the experts."

Here goes. He felt his heart pounding wildly, and he took a deep
breath.

"What I'm about to announce may at first come as a shock to you,"
he warned, serious now, "but please," he said emphasizing with
his hands, "before you throw your chairs, give me a moment to
explain."

As he had feared, an anxious murmur started up in the crowd. He
had to act fast.

"Today," he said, raising his voice, "I'm very excited and proud
to announce the merger of Wallaby and International Computer
Products.

Mayhem exploded throughout the audience.

"Wait, please!" William shouted with raised palms, his voice
barely audible in the angry cacophony. "Wait. Please, let me
explain..." he said, moving across the stage, closer to the
incensed crowd.


* * *


The limousine driver collected Greta's Louis Vuitton suitcases
and boxes and bags and carried them to the car. He set them at
the rear for a moment then ran to open her door. She jumped in
and wiped the light drizzle from her face with a scarf.

The trunk slammed shut and the driver climbed in and started the
car. As they drove through the gate she looked over her shoulder
at the house. She thought of her house keys, which she had left
behind on the breakfast table. She would never need them again.
It was really ending. With her things packed and ready to be
shipped to France, there was no reason to ever come back. She
chased away any leftover sentiments, and thought only of
Jean-Pierre and their new ranch, their new lives.

Glancing out the window as they turned from the driveway onto the
road, she spotted Matthew's approaching car. What was he doing
back so soon? She turned her head away from the window and shut
her eyes. She did not want his face to be her last memory of her
life in California.

The driver switched on the radio, just as a news brief was being
announced. "...and in Silicon Valley this morning, in a coup that
has stunned the business world, International Computer Products,
the world's largest computer company, and Wallaby Computer, have
announced the merger of their two companies, as well as - "

"Shut it off!" Greta snapped, pressing her hands to her ears.
"Please!"

The looked at her in the rearview mirror and apologized. A minute
later they were bouncing along the ranch's bumpy dirt driveway,
and she directed the driver past the main house, to the cottages.
She smoothed her lavender Chanel dress over her legs and touched
the lapel of her Gucci raincoat.

Her heart stopped for an instant. Jean-Pierre's car was gone.

Of course, she rationalized, scolding herself for being so
anxious. He's probably arranged to have it shipped back to
France. Or did he say he was going to sell it? She couldn't
remember.

The driver stopped the car.

"We'll only be a minute," Greta said, pulling on her gloves as
she climbed out before the driver could reach her door. Ducking
in the light drizzle, she shrouded her scarf over her head and
went up the steps to his front door. She rang the bell, then
glanced back to the limousine for a moment.

Silence.

She pressed the bell again, once, twice, and at the same time
scanned the barn and the training ring for any sign of him. The
stable doors were shut. Could he have overslept? She checked her
watch then pounded the door, growing more worried with each
moment that passed without his answering the door. She had
planned for them to get to the airport early, and even if he was
asleep they could still certainly make their flight as long as
they hurried.

She turned and raised her hand at the driver, signaling for him
to wait. She hurried off the small porch and ran around to the
back of the house. She looked into his bedroom window. The bed
was made, and rising on her toes, she could see through the
bedroom door into the living room. He wasn't inside.

She climbed the small rear steps and frantically pounded her fist
against the door, oblivious to the pain she was causing herself.

"Jean-Pierre!" she called. "Open up! Jean-Pierre!"

She held her breath and listened.

More of nothing.

She felt a chilling wave of nausea and told herself not to panic,
that he was around here somewhere and tending to some last-minute
things.

Rounding the house, she wagged her finger at the driver again and
bolted for the barn, her raincoat whipping in the wind.

Maybe he was at Jennifer's house, she considered, saying good-bye
to his former employer. She would check that after she searched
the stable. Or was he with Mighty Boy? Yes, that was probably it.
He was probably saying good-bye to Mighty Boy for her, so kind of
him, because he knew that she could not face saying good-bye
herself because they were unable to transfer the animal to their
ranch.

She heaved the stable door open with a grunt and raced down the
center of the long and dark dirt throughway, shouting out
Jean-Pierre's name. As she neared the end, Mighty Boy whinnied.
She pushed the horse's head to one side and went inside the
stall, encountering only the animal. Did she really think he
would be in here with her horse? No, he had to be outside
somewhere. Her stomach tightened at the thought of missing their
flight.

She turned and started to run back up the throughway, when
suddenly she stopped dead in her tracks. There!

"Jean-Pierre," she cried, laughing now as she hurled herself
toward the shadowy, darkly-clad figure looming just inside the
stable.

She froze in her tracks when she realized her error.

"Oh!" she moaned.

Jennifer, the ranch's owner, pulled back the hood of her raincoat
and approached her cautiously. A bewildered expression creased
her face as she took in Greta's disheveled appearance.

"Mrs. Locke, my goodness," she said with a wary smile. "It's a
bit wet for a ride today, don't you think?"

"Where is he?" Greta demanded, her chest heaving. "Where is
Jean-Pierre?"

"Jean-Pierre? Why, he's gone." Jennifer wiped her brow with the
back of her hand. "Oh, it's getting ugly out there," she said,
wincing at the sound of the building downpour rattling down on
the metal roof.

Greta grabbed the older woman's raincoat sleeve and roughly spun
her around, screaming: "What do you mean he's gone?"

Jennifer leaped back with astonishment. "He's gone. He left, Mrs.
Locke. For France."

"No! That's wrong," Greta cried. That's not possible, I'm going
with him! Do you hear me? He can't be gone!"

Jennifer was mortified and hastily tried to explain. "Mrs. Locke,
I gave him a ride to the airport myself. Last night. He informed
me at the very last moment, yesterday afternoon, that he was
returning to France. With her."

"Her? Her who?"

"Why, his fiancee, Ms. Maupin."

Dear God, she thought, suddenly comprehending what Jennifer was
saying. He was gone. Gone without her. He had lied to her. Had
tricked her. It had all been a game. A scam. The girl had
probably been in on it all along. A double seduction. And they
had gotten away with the money. And with more than the money.
They had gotten away with the only happiness she had known in a
very long time. It was all coming too quickly, and she felt
suddenly faint.

Jennifer caught her by the arm just before she collapsed. "Mrs.
Locke, come inside with me. You're trembling. I'll make you some
tea and - "

"No!" Greta cried, shaking free. She stumbled in the dirt,
landing on her gloved hands. She unsteadily got to her feet and
fled from the barn. The driver leaped out of the car and rushed
to open her door. She had soiled her dress, and her face was
wild.

She dove into the back of the car and stumbled to the floor. She
managed to struggle up onto the seat and the driver closed the
door and climbed in up front.

"Ma'am?" he called gently through the open partition. She did not
reply, and he turned around in his seat to look at her.

She sat huddled with her knees drawn up, elbows pressed into her
stomach. Her face was hidden behind muddy gloves, and she made
noises like she was injured.

He started the car. "To the airport, ma'am?"

She began rocking back and forth against the door, facing away
from the ranch.

"Ma'am?" the driver asked again, braking as he came to the end of
the ranch driveway.

"Home," she whispered, and burst into tears.


* * *


William shouted into the microphone again, "Wait! Please! Listen,
please!"

The cacophony of protest continued. A pen flew by dangerously
close to his head. It was useless. There was no way he could get
them to settle down so he could explain the announcement. After
ducking another flying object, William turned and made for the
curtains. In just a moment the thing would fix itself.

The house lights went out and then a spotlight illuminated center
stage. The curtains parted.

And Peter Jones emerged.

The audience went wild.

Peter took a few steps to the edge of the stage, grinning from
ear to ear. The crowd whistled and cheered and rose all at once,
welcoming their champion with a standing ovation that lasted and
lasted, earsplitting in its intensity.

"Thank you," Peter said fanning his hands at the audience. "And
thank you, William," he said, looking offstage.

The audience returned to their seats, some still applauding, but
low enough so that he could be heard.

"It's good to be back," he said. This lifted the applauding
audience from their seats once more. He strolled to the podium,
wiped his forehead with the back of his hand, and waited. When
the audience settled down he continued.

"Today," he said, his voice a little shaky, "I've become ICP's
newest employee, in their new subsidiary, Wallaby. I have to
admit," he said with a laugh, "it's kind of weird being re-hired
by the company you started!"

There was quick laughter, then rapt attention.

"When I left Wallaby, I had a lot of time to do some thinking. I
found a new friend, and we started working on a new portable
computer, one that stretched our imaginations to the limits.
Then, a few months ago, we were contacted by William Harrell. He
had heard that we were up to something really neat. We decided to
let him have a look at what we had come up with, and he loved it.

"At that point ICP became a silent investor in our computer,
which is called ISLE. We finalized our design and developed a
prototype. Now I'd like to show you your newest computer."

Peter stepped into the middle of the stage. A large, shrouded
table rolled before him, controlled remotely from backstage.

The lights intensified and the tabletop was projected on the
overhead screen, for all to see.

"This," said Peter, whisking the shroud from the bumpy shapes on
the table, "is ISLE." The prototype model was sleek and black, as
thin as a notebook.

The audience applauded wildly, then hushed when the computer's
screen came to life.

"Now I'd like to let ISLE show you what she's made of," he said.

The auditorium darkened. Two large projection screens, mirroring
the ISLE's screen on stage, lowered from the ceiling. Peter
picked up the prototype and gave a demonstration like the one he
had given to William several months ago. When the demonstration
was over the audience stood and cheered with thunderous applause.

"Thank you," Peter said. "I never thought I'd say this, but I'm
very happy about this merger of Wallaby and ICP," he said. "I'll
be working in the engineering and development labs, finalizing
the ISLE design, and overseeing its integration with the Joey and
BP systems.

"Earlier I mentioned a new friend, my partner, the man who helped
design the ISLE computer. Some of you may recognize his name
because he is the father of ICP's first mainframe computer. I've
also made two other very important friends. One is the inventor
of ISLE, and the other is its future.

"Please give a warm welcome to my friends Byron Holmes and Ivy
Green." Peter stepped away from the podium, and Byron and a
beaming Ivy emerged, cradling the baby Isle in her arms. Peter
shook Byron's hand and kissed Ivy on the cheek.

Byron took the microphone and greeted the audience. A chart
appeared on the overhead screen, and Byron explained the new
organization. When he finished, William Harrell returned to the
stage and conducted the remainder of the session - he also
announced Matthew Locke's decision to resign, for personal
reasons.

Backstage, Byron hugged his wife and Peter and Ivy and Isle all
in one cluster. "We did it!"

Isle yawned.

"You can say that again," Ivy said with a chuckle and kissed her
baby on the nose.

"Come on," Peter laughed. "Let's go home."


