PART II


Chapter 7


Eating breakfast in the cafe had become part of Peter's daily
routine. The waitress greeted him as he sat with his usual pile
of newspapers. She returned with a cup of coffee, a scone, and a
glass of orange juice.

He was grateful for the privacy his vacation home offered. It was
Matthew who had introduced him to the quaint town of Camden,
Maine, a place popular in the summer with executives and their
families from Boston, Philadelphia, and New York, and over the
last three months he had been recognized by only a few executives
around town. Today, however, anyone reading the "Wall Street
Journal" would see on the front page of the business section a
small picture of Peter's face, positioned three paragraphs below
one of Matthew Locke's face. Perhaps, after giving it a little
thought, the reader would realize that he or she had seen him
there in the cafe or in one of the town's small shops, or walking
along the inlet. And after reading the story, the next time they
spotted him they might even feel a pang of sympathy.

It read:

- - - - - - - - - -


WALLABY ANNOUNCES IMPROVED PORTABLE COMPUTER

SUNNYVALE, CA - Wallaby, Inc., creators of the first all-in-one
portable computer, announced today an improved and more powerful
version of its Joey computer, introduced just one year ago.
Wallaby's founder, the young and mercurial Peter Jones, was the
inventor of the company's first computer, the Mate, nine years
ago and was the driving force behind both the Joey and the
enhanced version unveiled today, the Joey Plus. The new version
is easier to program, offers a faster processor, and boasts more
built-in memory configuration for running more powerful software
programs, which are now becoming available. It also features a
slim, built-in CD-ROM drive for accessing multimedia titles and
reference works, a faster 14.4K data/fax modem, and a brighter
backlit active-matrix display, all for the same price as the
original Joey, which the new model replaces.

Analysts view the introduction of the Joey Plus as a feather in
the cap of Wallaby Chairman and CEO Matthew Locke, who took the
company reins from Jones after a boardroom showdown three months
ago.

"This demonstrates Locke's ability to manage a new products
company," said Michael Kolohan of Quest Market Research, Inc.

"We're very excited about the Joey Plus computer," Locke said in
a telephone interview. "Now there are no hurdles between
developers and users in offering powerful applications that
compare to those available for ICP computer users, our
value-added being the easier to use design of the Joey Plus, and
its more attractive, more convenient form factor."

In his new role as leader of Wallaby, Locke reorganized the
formerly separate engineering groups, consolidating resources on
the Joey Plus project, which accelerated the device's
introduction to market by three months. To enlist the support of
software developers, Locke took to the road, evangelizing with
prototypes of the powerful new Joey Plus to stimulate new
software development prior to today's announcement.

One developer, PowerBase, Inc. of Cupertino, California, will
soon introduce an program for compound document and forms
processing, and advanced communications abilities. Said Paul
Kupiec, president of PowerBase, "Wallaby really delivered with
the new Joey Plus. We're ecstatic, now that it's got so much room
for bigger applications, which means corporate clients we could
not previously appeal to are now more apt to consider Wallaby
over ICP.

"We were all worried when Jones left the company," Kupiec
continued, "but Locke came to our offices in person with his
engineering managers and offered us an early prototype unit of
the new Plus. We dropped everything and already have ninety-eight
percent of our program completed, which we ported from our ICP BP
version. I think he [Locke] may fare well in his new role."

Jones, on sabbatical in New England, was offered a "visionary at
large" role after being ousted by Locke and the company's board
of directors, according to one source. However, Wallaby officials
declined to comment on Jones's plans for returning in his new
non-management role. "Matthew Locke hopes that Peter will return
to Wallaby soon," said Wallaby spokesperson Laurence Maupin. "We
all miss him and look forward to having him back at work soon."

Jones could not be reached for comment.

- - - - - - - - - -


Peter folded the newspaper and sipped his orange juice. The sun
was hot and the air smelled fresh and clean. All around him,
people in summer dress clothes walked leisurely about the
village, and the news of Silicon Valley felt very, very far away.
He closed his eyes...and a moment later he sensed a shadow
blocking the direct sunlight.

"Think you'll go back?" asked the elderly man standing before
him. Beneath his arm was a folded copy of the "Journal."

Peter eyed the stranger. "I don't know."

The man placed his large, tanned and weathered hand on the back
of the vacant chair beside Peter. "Okay if I join you?"

"Sure," Peter said, leaning back in his own chair.

The man removed his cap and signaled the waitress. He fixed his
gaze on Peter for an instant. "Congratulations on the new
product," he said with a wink. He unfolded his own newspaper and
laid it over Peter's copy. "Your whiskers threw me for a second
or two, but I used to slack off now and then on the shave -
though not because I was masquerading."

"It wasn't my product introduction," Peter said, stroking his
light beard unconsciously.

The man pulled a pen from his pocket, then lifted his thumb and
winked one eye shut like an artist gauging his subject. "Hold
still. I want to get this right." He proceeded to draw a mustache
and beard on Peter's picture in the newspaper.

Peter was beginning to feel amused.

"Well," said the old man, taking up their conversation without
looking up from his artwork, "you weren't there for the show, but
it is your product just the same. Good work, son."

"Thanks."

The waitress arrived. His portrait completed, the man shoved the
paper across the table for the waitress to see. "What do you
think? Look like him?"

She looked at the photo and smiled politely, unaware that it was
really Peter in person and in the newspaper. "A mineral water?"
she said.

"Thank you, my dear. Anything for you, Mr. Jones?"

"No thanks."

The man closed his eyes and turned his smiling face into the sun.
As Peter studied him, he felt a dim glow of recognition. Had he
met him before, perhaps seen a photo of him somewhere? There was
something about the cynicism in the man's eye. No doubt he was a
former businessman well into his retirement, for with his eyes
closed, he looked maybe seventy-five.

"Here you are, Mr. Holmes," the waitress said.

With his eyes open, however, the man suddenly looked ten years
younger. Pouring the mineral water over the ice cubes in the
glass, he fixed his gaze on Peter. "It isn't easy walking away
from something you've given birth to, is it?" He squeezed some
juice from the lime slice floating in the glass.

"No. It sure isn't," Peter said. Except for Kate's weekend trips
away from Los Angeles, Peter had been completely alone for the
past three months in Maine. During this period he had spoken with
hardly anyone, except when necessary - ordering food in
restaurants, paying for goods at the general store, or collecting
his bundles of forwarded mail at the post office. He had
forgotten how good it could feel to talk to someone, even a
stranger. Especially a stranger. But Peter sensed that this
wasn't just any stranger.

"Yep. Same thing happened to me. Gave them fifty years. Started
when I was twenty, not that different from you. Yes sir, I
remember how it felt."

"How?"

"Like someone ripped my heart out and chopped a chunk off it."
For a few moments the man's gaze turned introspective as he poked
at the lime in his drink. "Sound about right?" His lively blue
eyes revealed sympathy, understanding.

This man knows, Peter thought. He managed a small smile and a
nod.

"Son, you're a bright boy. I know all about you. How old can you
be, thirty?"

"Thirty-two."

"Hell," the man said with a guffaw, "when I was that age I'd just
got going."

Crossing his arms over his chest, Peter considered the man with
curiosity and puzzlement. What had the waitress called him?

"Yes sir. That's how old I was when I invented a new system
design that went on to become our standard for the next many,
many years." He took another sip from his glass. "Still is," he
said, jutting his lower lip out proudly.

"What design was that?" Peter asked. But before the man answered,
Peter deduced that there was only one computer standard that had
been in existence that long, and that was -

"The 990."

Peter tossed his head back, and for the first time in months he
let go a huge, cleansing laugh. Of course! Byron Holmes, inventor
of ICP's 990 series, which had become, and still formed the
foundation of, the architecture upon which all of ICP's mainframe
computers were built. Byron Holmes, son of Jonathan Holmes,
founder of ICP.

"What's so damn funny?"

Peter touched the man's arm in apology. "I was just thinking how
funny it is for us to meet. Go on, please. What did you do after
the 990?"

"Revise, revise, revise."

"Things moved more slowly back then, didn't they?"

"Back then? You make it sound like I figured out how to add three
wheels to one, so that families could take kids to the dinosaur
races."

Peter could see that the man was enjoying this as much as he was.
He became wholly attentive and invigorated.

"You kids from the Valley think your teensy computers are going
to replace our Goliath machines someday, don't you?"

"I wouldn't know anymore. I'm out of the business."

"Poppyshit!" Holmes said, rapping his hand down on the table.
"Don't give me that sour-faced hurt-boy story. Doesn't fly with
me."

"I made that company what it is," Peter said, instantly somber.
"And then it was taken away from me."

"That's craziness," Byron said, moving his chair closer. "Boy,
I'll tell you something. After I made the 990 what it is, they
moved me into big management. Sure, it was my dad's company. But
I had the right education for it, so I could have done it anyway
if my heart had been in it. But it wasn't. All I wanted to do was
make those big, beautiful machines. After a short while I stepped
down, moved in another fella, a guy that managed the schedule and
all that stuff. Kept our friendship golden after all these years.
Now he's the big cheese there.

"I stuck around for a long time. I was vice chairman, and spent
years evolving the 990 design into what it is now, which'll
probably see them through to the year 2000. As I was nearing the
age everyone says is the time to leave, I had a heart attack.
Guess I thought I was still a youngster. I retired, and me and my
wife have been enjoying ourselves and playing around like kids
ever since. Not bad for seventy-four years young, eh?"

"But it's not the same. I could have run the company. With all
due respect, you inherited yours. I started mine from scratch.
They just didn't give me a chance," Peter said.

The older man discounted the younger with a wave of his arm.
"Nah. You'll come around eventually. Can't have both, you know."

"I could."

The older man's tone turned serious. "That's just pure,
one-hundred percent poppyshit, is all." He pointed his finger at
Peter with rigid authority. "You need to squeegee all that anger
out of your system so you can get back out there and do
something. Again."

Just then a handsome smiling woman appeared at the table, dressed
in a light, summery outfit. In one hand she held her wide-brimmed
hat, in the other a bag of vegetables and groceries. Byron's face
brightened at her arrival.

"Is this man filling your ear with World War II stories?" She
handed the bag to Byron.

"I haven't even gotten to those yet," Byron said as he stood.
"Another day."

He made introductions. "Gracie, this boy is the one who invented
all those pesky little computers littering everyone's desks out
there," Byron said. "He's also been the best conversation I've
had here in awhile. Mr. Jones, it's been nice talking to you."

"Likewise," said Peter. The two men shook hands.

"Why don't you come by our house for dinner. Saturday night."
Byron said, tapping his shirt pocket for his pen.

"Thank you, that's very kind. But I've been sticking pretty much
to myself, and I'm not much company - "

"Nonsense! Eight o'clock," Byron said, scribbling his address on
a paper napkin.

"All right then, I'll be there. But I have a friend coming. Would
it be okay if I brought her?"

"Can she dance?"

"No, but she can sing."

"Of course," Grace said. "Please bring her along." The couple
said good-bye and then strolled off holding hands.

With some amusement, Peter settled into his chair and thought
about the irony of meeting Byron Holmes here. It wasn't all that
unusual, since Camden was where so many men like Byron spent
their summers. Yet, of all the people in the world, he'd never
guessed he'd shake hands with the man whose surname was
synonymous with the world's first tabulating machines. Small
world, Peter thought. No, he corrected himself, I'm from the
small world, and he's from the big world. But, as he'd just
learned, it didn't seem to matter how big or small your baby.
When it's yours, it's yours. And this man understood that.


* * *


The horses walked side by side, each carrying a rider through the
secluded wooded path.

"I don't believe you, that the only love you have ever felt has
been for horses. Nonsense," Greta said.

"It is true," said Jean-Pierre, crossing his heart with his
finger.

"Ridiculous."

"Greta, I tell no lie when I say that I have been in love only
with horses. Nothing has ever come between us," he said, patting
his beast's neck affectionately.

"Frenchmen," she said with a dismissing wave of her gloved hand.
"Such talkers." Had he noticed? She took a breath, reminding
herself to keep her left hand on the saddle.

And, she wondered, had he noticed her color when he'd crossed his
heart? Unless he was psychic, she knew that he could not see what
was going on inside her when he spoke of things such as his
country and horses.

"Your husband, he is doing something very important today, no?"

"Yes. It's important. To him. Some new computer."

"Indeed. I read about it in the paper. You must be very proud,
Greta. Yes?"

"Yes, of course. He's done very well since he's been in control.
Very busy," she said. She wished this topic to go no further. She
let herself look at him, into his eyes.

"Yes," Jean-Pierre replied with a nod that said, without words,
that he understood. It was the same look he had given her when
they'd first met after they had shaken hands, when his arm had
been in a sling.

They continued along in silence at a trot, and Greta renewed
their conversation with enthusiasm. "Jean-Pierre, tell me more
about your country. Is the French countryside similar to Northern
California, as everyone here seems to think?"

"Ah, it is beautiful," Jean-Pierre said. "All year is green out
in the countryside where I was born. And clean when you inhale,
and pretty, all fresh and tingling in your nose, in your heart.
You ride on and on and see no one for very long stretches of
time. Here and there, children are playing or doing chores, you
see a woman carrying a basket, a man with an ax. They wave when
they see you." Smiling, he waved to her as if to illustrate, but
all at once his expression changed into a grimace, as though he
were suddenly in great pain.

"What is it?" Greta asked.

"This damned shoulder. If I cannot even lift it to wave, how will
I ever hold a mallet again?"

"Isn't there anything you can do about it?"

"Oh, sure. There are procedures. Surgery."

"Then why don't you get it fixed?"

"It is complicated."

"Yes, but it's worth a try, isn't it? Wouldn't it be better to
try to save it, so you could play again, rather than give up your
livelihood?"

"It's not that simple."

"Why? People get things like that fixed all the time, don't they?
You're a champion. How can you just stop playing?"

"That's not what I mean. I don't want it to be like this."

She persisted. "I still don't understand. What's so complicated
about your case?"

Abruptly he reined his horse to a halt and she brought her horse
around. He was looking off into the hills. For all of his
broadness and strength, his maleness, she saw that she had
unknowingly struck a sensitive chord in him. "Jean-Pierre," she
said, trying to catch his eye, "I didn't mean to upset you. If I
have, I'm sorry."

"No. That's not it. You see," he said with a faint smile, "I am
an independent."

"I'm sorry, really. You don't have to go on if you don't want
to."

"But I do. I do want to go on. Right now, in Deauville, where I
have lived most of my life as a polo player, the tournament is
underway. Eight teams converge to compete for fifteen cups. The
most coveted is the Coupe d'Or. There is money as well. I, of
course, was on the French team. I had a sponsor for the
tournament, but because of this damned thing, I had to drop out."

"But if you get it taken care of, can't you play again, and make
next year's competition?"

"That is the problem, getting it taken care of. It costs money.
And because I am an independent and I had to drop out, I lost my
sponsorship. What I am saying, Greta, is that I cannot afford the
surgery and therapy. That is why I agreed to come here as a
consultant to look into developing a polo club. I need the
money."

"Jean-Pierre," Greta said, "I understand how you feel." She felt
compelled to tell him about her own suffering. However, glancing
down at her gloved left hand, she couldn't bring herself to go
on. Hers was no common ailment. Granted, he was suffering, losing
the use of his shoulder, but her loss, she could not help
feeling, was greater. It was not the same. It was worse. And, she
feared, it might repulse him, and end the acquaintance they had
begun.

They continued along the trails leading back to the stable, back
from her escape.

For the past three months she had gone riding every couple of
days with Jean-Pierre. It had started with his insisting that she
try some jumping, but she dashed that idea at once. However, she
did agree to go riding with him once, and had continued ever
since. The early mornings frequently found her on these paths
with Jean-Pierre, before he began his day. In addition to his
polo club project, he trained a number of students. With each day
they spent together, riding along the lush trails, she acquired
more knowledge of horses and Europe, and of things she had never
imagined before - most of all attraction, for the first time
since her marriage to Matthew, for another man. While she knew he
was here to research the potential for a polo club, he was not
specific about the details of his private life. Whenever she
pressed him for more information, he turned the conversation back
to her, or went into one story or another that was full of
adventure and intrigue. He told her that, like most polo players,
he was a thrill-seeker; his attitude was that all of life was a
game, one big gamble, there for the playing. When she asked him
how long he thought he would stay, he told her he was not really
sure. All she wanted, she reminded herself continually, was to be
able to keep spending a precious hour or two with him each day
riding. But lately, when she left him after their ride, she had
begun to allow herself a little more; she had now and then found
herself thinking about him during her midmorning bath, or just
staring out the bedroom window, across the treetops and off into
the near distance, at the ranch's gable rooftop. And sometimes,
after a morning ride, she would awaken on her bed, not
remembering having lain down, his face the first image to appear
to her, her mind studying and touching him before opening her
eyes and getting on with the day. Although she relished these
moments in his company, she could hardly wait to be away from him
today, to be alone with him in her secret way.

"I have thought how good it would be to go back to France after
my project is through here, taking my meager savings, and my
meager arm, and finding a small ranch in the country."

She tightened her grip on the reins. "Well, if you want it badly
enough, you'll find a way to get back into the game."

"Yes, maybe. But for now I am a slave to this project. It's
paying the bills, as Americans are fond to say."

With mild dread, she knew he would be gone sooner than she wanted
to admit. Of course it would be better if he were gone, she told
herself. She was married to a very successful man, and that meant
security and stability.

Yet as if to discourage her rational thinking, a burst of
enthusiasm whipped through her. "Let's race," she shouted, then
pressed her heels into Mighty Boy's sides. Before Jean-Pierre
could answer, her horse bolted forward.

"Cheater!" he hollered, and gained on her quickly. They rounded a
turn in the path and flew past wild calla lily flowers, the tall
stems batting their horses' legs. She looked over her shoulder,
excited, and pressed Might Boy harder. Jean-Pierre narrowed the
distance between them and his horse fell into a synchronized
gallop with Mighty Boy. She laughed at him and saw that he was
hiding something behind his back. He saw that she saw.

"Not until you slow," he said, reining his horse to a trot.

She obeyed, dropping beside him. He leaned from his saddle and
handed her a single calla lily. She felt touched and overwhelmed,
and closed her eyes for a moment, forgetting he was there riding
right beside her. Then, suddenly aware of her obvious pleasure,
she felt embarrassed. Carefully she tucked the flower between her
leg and the saddle, then raced off for the final stretch, hoping
the distance would allow her a moment to regain her composure.

He called after her, yet, when she turned once, she saw that he
was letting the stretch widen between them, as if he had seen her
flustered condition and had, once again, understood what she was
feeling.

The soft black path turned dusty as she neared the barn. Her car
was parked in the lot. Jennifer's truck, parked in front of her
house, was the only other vehicle there.

She brought Mighty Boy to a halt before the stable entrance and
wiped her brow with the sleeve of her chambray shirt. Carefully
holding the flower, she lowered herself from the horse.
Jean-Pierre had dismounted by the far ring and was walking toward
the barn. Normally, the horses would be hosed down, to both clean
and cool them, but the groom had not yet arrived, so they allowed
some time for the horses to cool down a little in the chilly
morning air.

"I'd better be going," Greta said after some time had passed,
taking Might Boy's bridle in her hand.

In silence, they led the horses into the barn. The animal bodies
were lathered with sweat, and the fine layer of dust that covered
their muscles was beginning to dry and crinkle in the shadowed
coolness. She reached behind her head and unclipped her barrette,
allowing her hair to fall loosely over her shoulders. It was as
if everything had changed as they walked through a near-dark
silence, like day into night. Her senses sharpened, like those of
a nocturnal creature. She knew he was looking at her, and she
felt awkwardly exposed. She glanced quickly at him. His eyes
gazed at her with peaceful, deliberate regard. She maintained her
lead into the barn with Mighty Boy, then Jean-Pierre stopped at
his own horse's stall, and she hastened her task at hand, in an
attempt to be done and out of the stall before he had a chance to
come to hers. But as she worked with Mighty Boy's halter, she
felt his presence at the entrance of the stall. He pulled the
double door shut behind him as he entered, closing them in
together in nearly complete darkness.

Her insides tightened as he slowly approached, the very act of
breathing becoming more difficult the closer he came. She blinked
to adjust her vision, and busied herself with releasing the girth
of Mighty Boy's saddle, but she was clearly having problems; she
had not thought to simply put down the flower for a moment while
she worked with the snaps. And, as always, there was her hand,
which forever burdened even the simplest tasks.

He came to her rescue, and she froze at the touch of his large
strong hands on hers. And before she had to even consider
retracting her flawed hand, he moved her aside and set about
unfastening the girth and removing the saddle, leaving her to
just stand there and watch, holding the flower.

Time stopped. Even Mighty Boy was still. His stare was on her
again, but she willed her gaze to remain fixed on the hay-strewn
floor. If she looked up into his eyes, there was no telling what
would happen. Yet she made no effort to alter what was happening.
Instead she shut her eyes, and tried not to think about how much
time was passing between them without words. What were his
thoughts? Were they the same as her own? What were hers? She
could not focus on any of these blind musings. Unaware of her own
action she had raised her head, as though all of him would become
clearer if she trained her closed lids in his direction. She
opened her eyes. Nothing in her mind could prepare her for what
she faced. The emerald intensity of his eyes pierced through her,
instantly warming her neck, her nipples, her loins.

"Come," he said, motioning to her with one hand, the other flat
against the horse's side. "Feel this."

She allowed him to lift her right hand and pull her closer. He
made her feel the animal's hot, damp flank, flattening his own
hard hand over hers. She focused on his dusty manicured nails,
his long fingers, weathered knuckles, and tanned skin. This was
the hand she had fantasized about, touching her as it was now,
and more.

"The strength of this animal, it can all be felt through his
heartbeat. So strong," he whispered. She felt his breath on her
forehead, and inhaled to try to bring it inside of her.

Mighty Boy stood steady as she experienced the bold breathing and
strong heartbeat drumming beneath her hand. "Yes," she managed,
barely, willing her hand to stop trembling beneath his.

He slowly lifted her hand from the horse and turned her so that
they were facing each other. The flower fell from her free hand.
He removed the glove from the hand he was holding, then he
reached for her other hand.

"No," she said, a little panicked. "Not that one."

He nodded to let her know that he understood, then guided the
ungloved hand beneath his shirt. He pressed her palm to his
chest, over his heart. "It is no different," he said. Then she
had the other, gloved hand in his shirt. She felt his insistent
heartbeat, so powerful in its pounding, the pulse of his life
beneath her hands. She raked her fingers over his muscles. The
wild scent of horses mingled sharply with his spiciness. She
closed her eyes and took a deep, heady breath, and experienced a
wave of pleasant dizziness.

He gripped her wrists and pressed her against Mighty Boy, touched
his lips to her ear. "Perhaps this attraction I feel for you is
the first to come between me and my love for horses," he said
with a little laugh.

She shifted her head back. A bead of sweat jiggled on his chin,
beside a tiny flake of hay. She dabbed the droplet with the back
of her bare hand, touched the hay flake away and pulled it past
his lips, yet did not let herself touch them. He took her hand
from his cheek, then curled her fingers into his own. He inhaled
the fragrance on her wrist, kissed it.

She began trembling as he lowered his arm around her waist and
pressed her harder into Mighty Boy, layering her between the heat
of two powerful bodies. She pulled her fingers free of his grip
and plunged her hands into his long hair and down his neck,
across the hard muscles of his shoulders.

Then, just as their lips drew near, Greta reeled her head away
with a shake, as if snapping awake from frightening dream - he
had taken her gloved hand in his own.

"No," she said, struggling.

He tightened his hold on her. "What are you hiding, Greta? What
is it you are so afraid to show me?" Then suddenly, Matthew's
image appeared in her mind's eye.

An agonized moan escaped her, and she let out a small, frustrated
cry. She had to leave, at once. "I can't," she said, bringing her
lips closer to his. "Do you hear me, I can't."

Or could she? Could she just once, to have him completely in her
memory forever? Yes, just this one time. Quickly, she thought,
before Matthew returns and makes it impossible for her to go any
further.

Lips parting ardently, she hungrily drew in his breath as their
mouths joined.


