Chapter 13


It was on days like this, bright and sunny with a slight morning
chill, that she felt happier than ever. With Matthew in New York
on business, Greta had given the housekeeper the past three days
off, letting her know that she could handle her own meals. But
that was hardly the reason why it was better for Marie to be out
of the house.

She gripped the handlebars firmly, admiring her own hands without
ill feelings. The gears of her exercise cycle spun quietly, crisp
air breezing in through the open balcony doors. Her breathing was
heavy but controlled, just as he had taught her.

She heard the shower stop and checked the cycle's timer. Another
quarter mile before she was through. That would work out almost
perfectly, giving her a few minutes to cool down before he was
all finished in the bathroom.

The cool winter air whispered across her face, and with each
misty exhale puffing from her nostrils she imagined the sensual
air of France, of Europe, so much there for them to see and do
together, an afternoon ride in dewy green hills, pedaling along
right behind him with his strong back in view, the bobbing of the
red and white checkered tablecloth peeking out from the picnic
basket strapped to his bicycle...

"Darling, are you going to pedal all the way to Alaska?"
Jean-Pierre said, glancing at the accumulated mileage on the
cycle's odometer.

Greta laughed heartily. "I stopped looking and...I guess...I
just...kept...going."

"To the hospital is where I'll be going," Jean-Pierre said.
Hitching his towel around his waist, he went to the balcony doors
and closed them. "With pneumonia!"

"Oh, darling, I'm sorry," she said, lifting her feet from the
pedals. She dropped her head into her crossed arms over the
handlebars and regulated her breathing as she cooled down. The
machine's flywheel slowed to a stop and she shook herself
briskly. "I feel so good!" she shouted.

For the past four months, since the beginning of their affair,
she had exercised every day. Though Jean-Pierre had been the one
to suggest the calisthenics, she had become obsessed with her
daily workout and needed no encouragement to get on her cycle and
go every morning. With each strained breath she pictured herself
becoming more slender, more youthful, more attractive and
beautiful and sexy for him.

Clad in undershorts, Jean-Pierre stood combing his long hair
before Matthew's bureau mirror. He swung his head back, collected
his mane with both hands behind his head, and worked an elastic
band over the ponytail.

Greta tugged off her headband and playfully pulled it over his
head. "Now you look like an Indian."

He smiled and tugged the band off. As he reached for his shirt
hanging on the bedpost, she grabbed his wrist and roughly pulled
him beside her on the bed. She flattened his hand against her
chest, his middle finger settled over the horseshoe charm he had
given her. "Are you an Indian giver?" she said suggestively,
moving his hand from the charm to her breast.

He leaned forward and kissed her on the forehead. When her grip
loosened he stepped back and stood before her with his hands on
her hips. "Greta," he warned her, "I must get ready. I have a
nine o'clock lesson, and already I am going to be late."

She stretched, "Okay, okay, no pow-wow for now."

"Besides, darling," he said to her reflection in the mirror, "you
too have a busy day ahead of you."

"Yes, yes, I know," she said with an unpleasant expression. "I'll
call as soon as I get out of the shower."

He sat beside her, boots in hand. "Maybe you should call now," he
said, "so I can be here with you."

"After the shower. I promise." She stood and unzipped her
athletic top.

He tugged on his second boot. "It is just that they can be so
pushy and overwhelming."

"He is a friend of ours, Jean-Pierre. Well, of Matthew's anyway.
But I trust he'll be straight with me," she said, sounding not
totally certain.

"I am just trying to help," Jean-Pierre said, tucking in his
shirt.

She slid her little horseshoe charm back and forth on its chain.
Should she call now? Perhaps with Jean-Pierre here it would be
easier. And if she really was going to go through with this, she
might as well do it with him here. He was, after all, the reason
why she had made up her mind in the first place.

"Wait," she said, as he was zipping his suede jacket. "Pass me my
little address book. It's over there next to my wallet." She
flipped through the book and found the number she wanted and
dialed the telephone.

Jean-Pierre stood with his arms crossed, broad shoulders pressed
squarely against the wall. He gave her an encouraging look.

She turned her attention to her free hand, the left, which she
had kept ungloved since she and Jean-Pierre had made love the
first time. Somehow it seemed only fitting that she stare at
where her finger once was while making this call. On the second
ring a young woman's voice greeted her.

 "This is Greta Locke," she said, and after a moment's
hesitation, "Matthew Locke's wife." She met Jean-Pierre's intense
stare. "I'd like to speak with Mitchell, please." A pause, then:
"Mitchell, hello. Yes, he's fine, thank you." Her expression
turned serious as she smiled through the last of the lawyer's
greeting.

"Actually, Mitchell, things aren't exactly perfect," she said,
twisting the phone cord in her hand. Her eyes went to Jean-Pierre
for a moment, taking him in from head to toe, his boots. The
ranch, she reminded herself, boosting her courage. This was all
for their ranch. She took a deep breath and plunged on. "I'm
calling you, Mitchell, because I want a divorce." Pinpoint dots
of sweat had formed on her upper lip.

"I'm sorry?" she said, shaking her gaze from Jean-Pierre. "No,
Matthew and I have not talked about it yet." Another pause. "No,
I don't know if it's what Matthew wants. It's what I want." She
swallowed a deluge of conflicting emotions, her eyes pleading
with her lover for support.

Jean-Pierre dropped before her and rested his head in her lap.

"Yes, I will," she said, and placed her hand on Jean-Pierre's
head. "Yes, as soon as he gets home from New York, yes."

Jean-Pierre lifted his face. He was silently mouthing a word, but
she could not understand him.

"No, I can't think of anything. I'm sure by the time I call you
back I'll have - oh, wait." She cupped her hand over the
mouthpiece.

"Property," Jean-Pierre whispered.

"Oh yes, Mitchell, I do have one question." She held the phone
with both hands and looked out the window. "Mitchell, I'm not
clear on a few things in these matters. The property. The house.
Assets. Those sorts of things."

Jean-Pierre held her around the waist with both arms. In the
distance she could see his small cottage, the ranch, a few horses
being led from the stable.

"It is half, then," she said softly. Her hand dropped to
Jean-Pierre's head and slid down to his shoulder. She held on
tight. "Half of everything," she uttered, feeling as if her lips
were suddenly anesthetized.

"Okay," she said, her voice different now, smaller. "Thank you,
Mitchell. I'll contact you soon." She placed the handset on its
cradle and closed her eyes.

Jean-Pierre seated himself beside her and wrapped his arms around
her and held her tight. He whispered to her soothingly, to
breathe slowly, relax.

She opened her mouth, tried to form words, but they would not
come. After a minute she regained some control. "My God,
Jean-Pierre," she managed, hiding her face in her trembling
hands. "That amounts to millions."

"Greta," he said, pulling her from him, "You have earned your
share. You have worked for it."

"Yes," she said. "Yes," an emphatic whisper. "I have worked hard
for it, haven't I?"

"Yes," Jean-Pierre assured her, petting her hair. He smiled. "You
have indeed."


* * *


"That's right, as much of it as I can sell," Peter said into the
telephone. With a disbelieving expression he shook his head at
Byron, who crossed his arms and shot him a mildly disturbed look.

"Okay, Peggy, thanks," Peter said, then hung up the phone.

"You sure you want to do that?" Byron said carefully, turning his
coffee cup in his palm.

"You bet I am! Byron, I can't believe this! I can't believe
Matthew has formed an alliance with them!" Peter said, batting
his hand at the "Wall Street Journal," whose headline announced,
"ICP, Wallaby Announce Strategic Venture."

"Petey, don't forget that 'them' is where this old timer comes
from."

"I know, I know. I'm sorry. I don't mean to disparage you, or
where you're from. I'm just astonished Matthew has actually done
what he was trying to get me to agree to do. To sell out Wallaby
to ICP."

"He's not selling out, boy. He's upping Wallaby's market.
Probably triple it in a few years because of that two-step he
pulled today."

Peter folded his arms. "All the more reason for me to sell my
share in Wallaby and invest it in what we're working on. You
know, I'm in the mood for a little shopping spree. I think my
mind is made up about those couple of acquisitions we've been
talking about. The net browser. The compression routines. And
definitely that knock-out handwriting recognition kernel. Yes
indeed, it's time to do a little spending."

The two men had turned the extra bedroom in Byron's Maine home
into a lab and workroom. Scattered all around were diagrams of
circuit boards, tools, and assorted computer and electronic
parts. A flowchart of the software that Byron was engineering,
based on the design the two men had come up with in the last four
months, was spread out on the table before them.

"Well, that's settled then," Byron said. "Good. Now what do you
say you wipe that little snarl off your face and we get back to
work. Come on." He patted the stool beside him and Peter, still
plainly agitated by the news, returned to his seat beside his
partner.

"This is what I changed last night," Byron said, pointing at a
series of boxes indicating the user interface portion of the
code. "It's what's going to make this baby different from every
other portable doohickey out there."

Peter leaned over the table, following Byron's finger. He shook
his head. "No."

"No? No what?"

Peter roughly took Byron's hand in his. "This!" he said,
encircling the entire drawing with the other man's finger and, in
doing so, pulling Byron from his stool and practically stretching
him across the table.

"Hey!" Byron yelled. "If you want to dance, just say so, but be
careful, boy, I prefer the floor to tables!"

"I'm sorry," Peter said. He let go of Byron's hand, and gently
patted it.

Byron tugged at his sweater sleeve and flexed his arm.

"But look at this," Peter said. "All of this!" he continued,
gesturing in a frenzy now with both hands at the entire table,
the scattered parts, the room.

Byron casually fished his tobacco pouch from his shirt pocket.

"Don't you see what's wrong with all this stuff you're talking
about?"

"Why don't you tell me," Byron said. He crossed his legs and
began packing his pipe.

"First, with all respect to your history," Peter started, "it's
too complicated."

Byron took a few glowing tokes from his pipe than shook out the
wooden match. His motions were slow, unruffled. He exhaled a
plume of smoke, then strolled slowly around the table, eyeing the
diagram from over the rim of his glasses. "Well, now that you
mention it, she is kind of a little monster, ain't she?"

"Little? Hah! If we were to code this thing as it is we'd need an
army of programmers. We need to break it down into smaller,
smarter chunks. Objects. Maybe we should snap up that little
object system those kids from Cal Poly showed us last week. Hell,
looking at this, two million doesn't sound like that much
anymore."

"Mmm, that would definitely let us break her down to a more
manageable size. And adding features would be trivial. Okay,
let's call them back and have another look, make sure it'll do
what we want," Byron said.

"There's something else."

"Such as?" Byron said, squinting through the rising smoke trails.

"I'm not sure what it is, though. I mean, everything we've got
worked out with the agent software is right on. All the
cross-referencing between the applications, the net-savvy
look-ups and updates and all. But when I step back and look at
this, at how it's going to actually look and operate when it's
done, I feel like it's missing something. Under the hood we're
doing things no one has done before. But on the surface, as nice
as it will look, it doesn't seem, well, new enough to me.
Different enough. What can we do to make ours really different
from the others that are cropping up out there. They've all got
styluses now. And there's that Sony slate computer that came out
last week with a track pad almost exactly like the Joey's, so
that's caught on too. All of it has. The add-on keyboards.
CD-ROMs. Modems. PC Cards. The whole works. I don't know. Other
than the smart software agents we're putting in, what can we do
to make ours the all-out winner. The really intelligent
assistant."

"Mmm," Byron hummed.

"What we need is a new paradigm. A bigger-picture metaphor that
goes beyond what's already out there, taking this whole business
to not just the next possible step, but two or three steps ahead.
Something that really get the juices flowing. I mean, this is all
well and good, but is it good enough?" He knocked his fist gently
on the flowchart and stared intently at Byron.

"I'm with you."

Staring intensely at the drawing, Peter let out an exasperated
sigh. "I just don't know what it should be. And that's the
frustrating part."

Grace appeared at the doorway with a tray in her hands, holding
sandwiches, French fries, two glasses of milk. "Time for a break,
boys."

"Ah, relief," Byron said, rubbing his hands together. "Honey, we
got any vinegar for those fries?"

"Coming right up," Grace said, handing the tray to her husband.

"Now, while we eat," Byron said, blowing on a hot French fry,
"you can give your head a rest for a few minutes, and I promise
you, while your stomach is doing some work of its own, your
brain'll be busy too."

"I'm not so sure," Peter said. He took a sip of his milk.

The telephone rang.

"I'll get it," Grace said, returning from the kitchen with a
bottle of cider vinegar. Byron made a beckoning gesture for the
bottle.

"I got it," Peter said. "Holmes residence," he said, wiping his
lips on his sleeve. "Hi, Peggy. What's up? Wait, let me guess, a
problem with my stock sale already," Peter said with a smirk and
a roll of his eyes at Byron.

"His secretary," Byron said, identifying the caller to his wife.

"What?" Peter shouted, eyes suddenly wide with panic.

"What is it?" Byron asked, coming to Peter's side.

"Hello?" a voice called softly, from inside the house.

"All right, yes," Peter said. "I'll get there as soon as I can."
He hung up the phone and stared at the handset.

"Hi," Kate said, bounding cheerfully into the room. "I let myself
in." She froze in place when she took in Peter's aghast
expression as he turned away and faced the wall. He locked his
hands behind his neck and looked up at the ceiling.

"What the hell's wrong?" Byron said.

"What's going on?" Kate asked Grace, who replied with upturned
palms. "Peter?" Kate gripped his arm. "What is it?"

"Something back home," Peter said, avoiding every set of staring
eyes.

"Is it the stock sale, boy?"

He shook his head.

"Then what?" Kate asked, tugging his arm to make him face her.

He turned around and took her hands. "Something happened. I have
to go home." He studied their interlocked fingers. "I can't tell
you about it right now." He looked her straight in the eye. It
was the wine, he thought grimly.

He let go of her hands. "I need to get to the airport right
away," he said to Byron.

"Okay," Kate said, "let's go," taking his arm.

Peter's feet remained planted.

"Peter?"

"I have to go alone," he said, leaving no room for disagreement.

Grace discreetly nudged her husband.

"Okay," Byron said, settling his hands on both Kate's and Peter's
shoulders. "Put your coat on. I'll take you to the airport." He
gave Kate a reassuring look and a wink.

"Don't you want to pack some things?" Kate said.

"There isn't time," Peter said. "I'll call," he said, unable to
look her in the eye again, then turned and left the room.

"Be back in a bit," Byron said, kissing his wife on the cheek.
"Keep those fries in the oven please, dearest." He turned to Kate
and gently squeezed her arm. "It's going to be okay." Then he
turned and went after Peter.

Hearing Byron's words of reassurance as he waited outside the
workroom, Peter felt the thing in his heart come fully awake. It
had been hibernating all through the winter and he had forgotten
about it. But now it was time to for it to reemerge.

A knot of contradiction swelled in his throat when he remembered
back to the premonition he'd had on that fateful night, more than
half a year ago, that he was going to lose everything close to
his heart, everything that ever mattered. It was starting, he
reasoned, and by the looks of it, Kate would be the first piece
to fall away.


