CHAPTER XXXV.
THE VENGEANCE OF MOPO AND HIS FOSTERLING


It chanced that on this day of Nada’s death and at that same hour of
dawn I, Mopo, came from my mission back to the kraal of the People of
the Axe, having succeeded in my end, for that great chief whom I had
gone out to visit had hearkened to my words. As the light broke I
reached the town, and lo! it was a blackness and a desolation.

“Here is the footmark of Dingaan,” I said to myself, and walked to and
fro, groaning heavily. Presently I found a knot of men who were of the
people that had escaped the slaughter, hiding in the mealie-fields lest
the Slayers should return, and from them I drew the story. I listened
in silence, for, my father, I was grown old in misfortune; then I asked
where were the Slayers of the king? They replied that they did not
know; the soldiers had gone up the Ghost Mountain after the
Wolf-Brethren and Nada the Lily, and from the forest had come a howling
of beasts and sounds of war; then there was silence, and none had been
seen to return from the mountain, only all day long the vultures hung
over it.

“Let us go up the mountain,” I said.

At first they feared, because of the evil name of the place; but in the
end they came with me, and we followed on the path of the impi of the
Slayers and guessed all that had befallen it. At length we reached the
knees of stone, and saw the place of the great fight of the
Wolf-Brethren. All those who had taken part in that fight were now but
bones, because the vultures had picked them every one, except Galazi,
for on the breast of Galazi lay the old wolf Deathgrip, that was yet
alive. I drew near the body, and the great wolf struggled to his feet
and ran at me with bristling hair and open jaws, from which no sound
came. Then, being spent, he rolled over dead.

Now I looked round seeking the axe Groan-Maker among the bones of the
slain, and did not find it and the hope came into my heart that
Umslopogaas had escaped the slaughter. Then we went on in silence to
where I knew the cave must be, and there by its mouth lay the body of a
man. I ran to it—it was Umslopogaas, wasted with hunger, and in his
temple was a great wound and on his breast and limbs were many other
wounds. Moreover, in his hand he held another hand—a dead hand, that
was thrust through a hole in the rock. I knew its shape well—it was the
little hand of my child, Nada the Lily.

Now I understood, and, bending down, I felt the heart of Umslopogaas,
and laid the down of an eagle upon his lips. His heart still stirred
and the down was lifted gently.

I bade those with me drag the stone, and they did so with toil. Now the
light flowed into the cave, and by it we saw the shape of Nada my
daughter. She was somewhat wasted, but still very beautiful in her
death. I felt her heart also: it was still, and her breast grew cold.

Then I spoke: “The dead to the dead. Let us tend the living.”

So we bore in Umslopogaas, and I caused broth to be made and poured it
down his throat; also I cleansed his great wound and bound healing
herbs upon it, plying all my skill. Well I knew the arts of healing, my
father; I who was the first of the _izinyanga_ of medicine, and, had it
not been for my craft, Umslopogaas had never lived, for he was very
near his end. Still, there where he had once been nursed by Galazi the
Wolf, I brought him back to life. It was three days till he spoke, and,
before his sense returned to him, I caused a great hole to be dug in
the floor of the cave. And there, in the hole, I buried Nada my
daughter, and we heaped lily blooms upon her to keep the earth from
her, and then closed in her grave, for I was not minded that
Umslopogaas should look upon her dead, lest he also should die from the
sight, and because of his desire to follow her. Also I buried Galazi
the Wolf in the cave, and set the Watcher in his hand, and there they
both sleep who are friends at last, the Lily and the Wolf together. Ah!
when shall there be such another man and such another maid?

At length on the third day Umslopogaas spoke, asking for Nada. I
pointed to the earth, and he remembered and understood. Thereafter the
strength of Umslopogaas gathered on him slowly, and the hole in his
skull skinned over. But now his hair was grizzled, and he scarcely
smiled again, but grew even more grim and stern than he had been
before.

Soon we learned all the truth about Zinita, for the women and children
came back to the town of the People of the Axe, only Zinita and the
children of Umslopogaas did not come back. Also a spy reached me from
the Mahlabatine and told me of the end of Zinita and of the flight of
Dingaan before the Boers.

Now when Umslopogaas had recovered, I asked him what he would do, and
whether or not I should pursue my plots to make him king of the land.

But Umslopogaas shook his head, saying that he had no heart that way.
He would destroy a king indeed, but now he no longer desired to be a
king. He sought revenge alone. I said that it was well, I also sought
vengeance, and seeking together we would find it.

Now, my father, there is much more to tell, but shall I tell it? The
snow has melted, your cattle have been found where I told you they
should be, and you wish to be gone. And I also, I would be gone upon a
longer journey.

Listen, my father, I will be short. This came into my mind: to play off
Panda against Dingaan; it was for such an hour of need that I had saved
Panda alive. After the battle of the Blood River, Dingaan summoned
Panda to a hunt. Then it was that I journeyed to the kraal of Panda on
the Lower Tugela, and with me Umslopogaas. I warned Panda that he
should not go to this hunt, for he was the game himself, but that he
should rather fly into Natal with all his people. He did so, and then I
opened talk with the Boers, and more especially with that Boer who was
named Ungalunkulu, or Great Arm. I showed the Boer that Dingaan was
wicked and not to be believed, but Panda was faithful and good. The end
of it was that the Boers and Panda made war together on Dingaan. Yes, I
made that war that we might be revenged on Dingaan. Thus, my father, do
little things lead to great.

Were we at the big fight, the battle of Magongo? Yes, my father; we
were there. When Dingaan’s people drove us back, and all seemed lost,
it was I who put into the mind of Nongalaza, the general, to pretend to
direct the Boers where to attack, for the Amaboona stood out of that
fight, leaving it to us black people. It was Umslopogaas who cut his
way with Groan-Maker through a wing of one of Dingaan’s regiments till
he came to the Boer captain Ungalunkulu, and shouted to him to turn the
flank of Dingaan. That finished it, my father, for they feared to stand
against us both, the white and the black together. They fled, and we
followed and slew, and Dingaan ceased to be a king.

He ceased to be a king, but he still lived, and while he lived our
vengeance was hungry. So we went to the Boer captain and to Panda, and
spoke to them nicely, saying, “We have served you well, we have fought
for you, and so ordered things that victory is yours. Now grant us this
request, that we may follow Dingaan, who has fled into hiding, and kill
him wherever we find him, for he has worked us wrong, and we would
avenge it.”

Then the white captain and Panda smiled and said, “Go children, and
prosper in your search. No one thing shall please us more than to know
that Dingaan is dead.” And they gave us men to go with us.

Then we hunted that king week by week as men hunt a wounded buffalo. We
hunted him to the jungles of the Umfalozi and through them. But he fled
ever, for he knew that the avengers of blood were on his spoor. After
that for awhile we lost him. Then we heard that he had crossed the
Pongolo with some of the people who still clung to him. We followed him
to the place Kwa Myawo, and there we lay hid in the bush watching. At
last our chance came. Dingaan walked in the bush and with him two men
only. We stabbed the men and seized him.

Dingaan looked at us and knew us, and his knees trembled with fear.
Then I spoke:—

“What was that message which I sent thee, O Dingaan, who art no more a
king—that thou didst evil to drive me away, was it not? because I set
thee on thy throne and I alone could hold thee there?”

He made no answer, and I went on:—

“I, Mopo, son of Makedama, set thee on thy throne, O Dingaan, who wast
a king, and I, Mopo, have pulled thee down from thy throne. But my
message did not end there. It said that, ill as thou hadst done to
drive me away, yet worse shouldst thou do to look upon my face again,
for that day should be thy day of doom.”

Still he made no answer. Then Umslopogaas spoke:—

“I am that Slaughterer, O Dingaan, no more a king, whom thou didst send
Slayers many and fierce to eat up at the kraal of the People of the
Axe. Where are thy Slayers now, O Dingaan? Before all is done thou
shalt look upon them.”

“Kill me and make an end; it is your hour,” said Dingaan.

“Not yet awhile, O son of Senzangacona,” answered Umslopogaas, “and not
here. There lived a certain woman and she was named Nada the Lily. I
was her husband, O Dingaan, and Mopo here, he was her father. But,
alas! she died, and sadly—she lingered three days and nights before she
died. Thou shalt see the spot and hear the tale, O Dingaan. It will
wring thy heart, which was ever tender. There lived certain children,
born of another woman named Zinita, little children, sweet and loving.
I was their father, O Elephant in a pit, and one Dingaan slew them. Of
them thou shalt hear also. Now away, for the path is far!”

Two days went by, my father, and Dingaan sat bound and alone in the
cave on Ghost Mountain. We had dragged him slowly up the mountain, for
he was heavy as an ox. Three men pushing at him and three others
pulling on a cord about his middle, we dragged him up, staying now and
again to show him the bones of those whom he had sent out to kill us,
and telling him the tale of that fight.

Now at length we were in the cave, and I sent away those who were with
us, for we wished to be alone with Dingaan at the last. He sat down on
the floor of the cave, and I told him that beneath the earth on which
he sat lay the bones of that Nada whom he had murdered and the bones of
Galazi the Wolf.

On the third day before the dawn we came again and looked upon him.

“Slay me,” he said, “for the Ghosts torment me!”

“No longer art thou great, O shadow of a king,” I said, “who now dost
tremble before two Ghosts out of all the thousands that thou hast made.
Say, then, how shall it fare with thee presently when thou art of their
number?”

Now Dingaan prayed for mercy.

“Mercy, thou hyena!” I answered, “thou prayest for mercy who showed
none to any! Give me back my daughter. Give this man back his wife and
children; then we will talk of mercy. Come forth, coward, and die the
death of cowards.”

So, my father, we dragged him out, groaning, to the cleft that is above
in the breast of the old Stone Witch, that same cleft where Galazi had
found the bones. There we stood, waiting for the moment of the dawn,
that hour when Nada had died. Then we cried her name into his ears and
the names of the children of Umslopogaas, and cast him into the cleft.

This was the end of Dingaan, my father—Dingaan, who had the fierce
heart of Chaka without its greatness.




CHAPTER XXXVI.
MOPO ENDS HIS TALE


That is the tale of Nada the Lily, my father, and of how we avenged
her. A sad tale—yes, a sad tale; but all was sad in those days. It was
otherwise afterwards, when Panda reigned, for Panda was a man of peace.

There is little more to tell. I left the land where I could stay no
longer who had brought about the deaths of two kings, and came here to
Natal to live near where the kraal Duguza once had stood.

The bones of Dingaan as they lay in the cleft were the last things my
eyes beheld, for after that I became blind, and saw the sun no more,
nor any light—why I do not know, perhaps from too much weeping, my
father. So I changed my name, lest a spear might reach the heart that
had planned the death of two kings and a prince—Chaka, Dingaan, and
Umhlangana of the blood royal. Silently and by night Umslopogaas, my
fosterling, led me across the border, and brought me here to Stanger;
and here as an old witch-doctor I have lived for many, many years. I am
rich. Umslopogaas craved back from Panda the cattle of which Dingaan
had robbed me, and drove them hither. But none were here who had lived
in the kraal Duguza, none knew, in Zweete the blind old witch-doctor,
that Mopo who stabbed Chaka, the Lion of the Zulu. None know it now.
You have heard the tale, and you alone, my father. Do not tell it again
till I am dead.

Umslopogaas? Yes, he went back to the People of the Axe and ruled them,
but they were never so strong again as they had been before they smote
the Halakazi in their caves, and Dingaan ate them up. Panda let him be
and liked him well, for Panda did not know that the Slaughterer was son
to Chaka his brother, and Umslopogaas let that dog lie, for when Nada
died he lost his desire to be great. Yet he became captain of the
Nkomabakosi regiment, and fought in many battles, doing mighty deeds,
and stood by Umbulazi, son of Panda, in the great fray on the Tugela,
when Cetywayo slew his brother Umbulazi.

After that also he plotted against Cetywayo, whom he hated, and had it
not been for a certain white man, a hunter named Macumazahn,
Umslopogaas would have been killed. But the white man saved him by his
wit. Yes, and at times he came to visit me, for he still loved me as of
old; but now he has fled north, and I shall hear his voice no more.
Nay, I do not know all the tale; there was a woman in it. Women were
ever the bane of Umslopogaas, my fostering. I forget the story of that
woman, for I remember only these things that happened long ago, before
I grew very old.

Look on this right hand of mine, my father! I cannot see it now; and
yet I, Mopo, son of Makedama, seem to see it as once I saw, red with
the blood of two kings. Look on—

Suddenly the old man ceased, his head fell forward upon his withered
breast. When the White Man to whom he told this story lifted it and
looked at him, he was dead!

