CHAPTER XVIII.

CONSTERNATION AND CONSPIRACY OF TYRANTS.


But scarcely had the solemn voice of liberty and equality resounded
through the earth, when a movement of confusion, of astonishment, arose
in different nations. On the one hand, the people, warmed with desire,
but wavering between hope and fear, between the sentiment of right and
the habit of obedience, began to be in motion. The kings, on the other
hand, suddenly awakened from the sleep of indolence and despotism, were
alarmed for the safety of their thrones; while, on all sides, those
clans of civil and religious tyrants, who deceive kings and oppress the
people, were seized with rage and consternation; and, concerting their
perfidious plans, they said: Woe to us, if this fatal cry of liberty
comes to the ears of the multitude! Woe to us, if this pernicious spirit
of justice be propagated!

And, pointing to the floating banner, they continued:

Consider what a swarm of evils are included in these three words! If all
men are equal, where is our exclusive right to honors and to power? If
all men are to be free, what becomes of our slaves, our vassals, our
property? If all are equal in the civil state, where is our prerogative
of birth, of inheritance? and what becomes of nobility? If they are
all equal in the sight of God, what need of mediators?--where is the
priesthood? Let us hasten, then, to destroy a germ so prolific, and so
contagious. We must employ all our cunning against this innovation. We
must frighten the kings, that they may join us in the cause. We
must divide the people by national jealousies, and occupy them with
commotions, wars, and conquests. They must be alarmed at the power
of this free nation. Let us form a league against the common enemy,
demolish that sacrilegious standard, overturn that throne of rebellion,
and stifle in its birth the flame of revolution.

And, indeed, the civil and religious tyrants of nations formed a general
combination; and, multiplying their followers by force and seduction,
they marched in hostile array against the free nation; and, surrounding
the altar and the pyramid of natural law, they demanded with loud cries:

What is this new and heretical doctrine? what this impious altar, this
sacrilegious worship? True believers and loyal subjects! can you suppose
that truth has been first discovered to-day, and that hitherto you have
been walking in error? that those men, more fortunate than you, have the
sole privilege of wisdom? And you, rebel and misguided nation, perceive
you not that your new leaders are misleading you? that they destroy the
principles of your faith, and overturn the religion of your ancestors?
Ah, tremble! lest the wrath of heaven should kindle against you; and
hasten by speedy repentance to retrieve your error.

But, inaccessible to seduction as well as to fear, the free nation kept
silence, and rising universally in arms, assumed an imposing attitude.

And the legislator said to the chiefs of nations:

If while we walked with a bandage on our eyes the light guided our
steps, why, since we are no longer blindfold, should it fly from our
search? If guides, who teach mankind to see for themselves, mislead and
deceive them, what can be expected from those who profess to keep them
in darkness?

But hark, ye leaders of nations! If you possess the truth, show it to
us, and we will receive it with gratitude, for we seek it with ardor,
and have a great interest in finding it. We are men, and liable to be
deceived; but you are also men, and equally fallible. Aid us then in
this labyrinth, where the human race has wandered for so many ages; help
us to dissipate the illusion of so many prejudices and vicious habits.
Amid the shock of so many opinions which dispute for our acceptance,
assist us in discovering the proper and distinctive character of truth.
Let us this day terminate the long combat with error. Let us establish
between it and truth a solemn contest, to which we will invite the
opinions of men of all nations. Let us convoke a general assembly of the
nations. Let them be judges in their own cause; and in the debate of all
systems, let no champion, no argument, be wanting, either on the side
of prejudice or of reason; and let the sentiment of a general and common
mass of evidence give birth to a universal concord of opinions and of
hearts.



CHAPTER XIX.

GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE NATIONS.


Thus spoke the legislator; and the multitude, seized with those emotions
which a reasonable proposition always inspires, expressed its applause;
while the tyrants, left without support, were overwhelmed with
confusion.

A scene of a new and astonishing nature then opened to my view. All that
the earth contains of people and of nations; men of every race and of
every region, converging from their various climates, seemed to assemble
in one allotted place; where, forming an immense congress, distinguished
in groups by the vast variety of their dresses, features, and
complexion, the numberless multitude presented a most unusual and
affecting sight.

On one side I saw the European, with his short close coat, pointed
triangular hat, smooth chin, and powdered hair; on the other side the
Asiatic, with a flowing robe, long beard, shaved head, and round turban.
Here stood the nations of Africa, with their ebony skins, their woolly
hair, their body girt with white and blue tissues of bark, adorned with
bracelets and necklaces of coral, shells, and glass; there the tribes
of the north, enveloped in their leathern bags; the Laplander, with his
pointed bonnet and his snow-shoes; the Samoyede, with his feverish body
and strong odor; the Tongouse, with his horned cap, and carrying his
idols pendant from his neck; the Yakoute, with his freckled face; the
Kalmuc, with his flat nose and little retorted eyes. Farther distant
were the Chinese, attired in silk, with their hair hanging in tresses;
the Japanese, of mingled race; the Malays, with wide-spreading ears,
rings in their noses, and palm-leaf hats of vast circumference;* and the
tattooed races of the isles of the southern ocean and of the continent
of the antipodes.** The view of so many varieties of the same species,
of so many extravagant inventions of the same understanding, and of so
many modifications of the same organization, affected me with a thousand
feelings and a thousand thoughts.*** I contemplated with astonishment
this gradation of color, which, passing from a bright carnation to a
light brown, a deeper brown, dusky, bronze, olive, leaden, copper, ends
in the black of ebony and of jet. And finding the Cassimerian, with his
rosy cheek, next to the sun-burnt Hindoo, and the Georgian by the side
of the Tartar, I reflected on the effects of climate hot or cold, of
soil high or low, marshy or dry, open or shaded. I compared the dwarf of
the pole with the giant of the temperate zones, the slender body of
the Arab with the ample chest of the Hollander; the squat figure of
the Samoyede with the elegant form of the Greek and the Sclavonian; the
greasy black wool of the Negro with the bright silken locks of the Dane;
the broad face of the Kalmuc, his little angular eyes and flattened
nose, with the oval prominent visage, large blue eyes, and aquiline nose
of the Circassian and Abazan. I contrasted the brilliant calicoes of the
Indian, the well-wrought stuffs of the European, the rich furs of the
Siberian, with the tissues of bark, of osiers, leaves and feathers of
savage nations; and the blue figures of serpents, flowers, and
stars, with which they painted their bodies. Sometimes the variegated
appearance of this multitude reminded me of the enamelled meadows of the
Nile and the Euphrates, when, after rains or inundations, millions of
flowers are rising on every side. Sometimes their murmurs and their
motions called to mind the numberless swarms of locusts which, issuing
from the desert, cover in the spring the plains of Hauran.

     * This species of the palm-tree is called Latanier.  Its
     leaf, similar to a fan-mount, grows upon a stalk issuing
     directly from the earth.  A specimen may be seen in the
     botanic garden.

     ** The country of the Papons of New Guinea.

     *** A hall of costumes in one of the galleries of the Louvre
     would, in every point of view, be an interesting
     establishment.  It would furnish an admirable treat to the
     curiosity of a great number of persons, excellent models to
     the artist, and useful subjects of meditation to the
     physician, the philosopher and the legislator.

     Picture to yourself a collection of the various faces and
     figures of every country and nation, exhibiting accurately,
     color, features and form; what a field for investigation and
     enquiry as to the influence of climate, customs, food, etc.
     It might truly be called the science of man!  Buffon has
     attempted a chapter of this nature, but it only serves to
     exhibit more strikingly our actual ignorance. Such a
     collection is said to have been begun at St. Petersburg, but
     it is also said at the same time to be as imperfect as the
     vocabulary of the three hundred languages.  The enterprise
     would be worthy of the French nation.

At the sight of so many rational beings, considering on the one hand the
immensity of thoughts and sensations assembled in this place, and on the
other hand, reflecting on the opposition of so many opinions, and the
shock of so many passions of men so capricious, I struggled between
astonishment, admiration, and secret dread--when the legislator
commanded silence, and attracted all my attention.

Inhabitants of earth! a free and powerful nation addresses you with
words of justice and peace, and she offers you the sure pledges of her
intentions in her own conviction and experience. Long afflicted with the
same evils as yourselves, we sought for their source, and found them
all derived from violence and injustice, erected into law by the
inexperience of past ages, and maintained by the prejudices of the
present. Then abolishing our artificial and arbitrary institutions,
and recurring to the origin of all right and reason, we have found
that there existed in the very order of nature and in the physical
constitution of man, eternal and immutable laws, which only waited his
observance to render him happy.

O men! cast your eyes on the heavens that give you light, and on the
earth that gives you bread! Since they offer the same bounties to you
all--since from the power that gives them motion you have all received
the same life, the same organs, have you not likewise all received the
same right to enjoy its benefits? Has it not hereby declared you all
equal and free? What mortal shall dare refuse to his fellow that which
nature gives him?

O nations! let us banish all tyranny and all discord; let us form but
one society, one great family; and, since human nature has but one
constitution, let there exist in future but one law, that of nature--but
one code, that of reason--but one throne, that of justice--but one
altar, that of union.

He ceased; and an immense acclamation resounded to the skies. Ten
thousand benedictions announced the transports of the multitude; and
they made the earth re-echo JUSTICE, EQUALITY and UNION.

But different emotions soon succeeded; soon the doctors and the chiefs
of nations exciting a spirit of dispute, there was heard a sullen
murmur, which growing louder, and spreading from group to group, became
a vast disorder; and each nation setting up exclusive pretensions,
claimed a preference for its own code and opinion.

You are in error, said the parties, pointing one to the other. We alone
are in possession of reason and truth. We alone have the true law,
the real rule of right and justice, the only means of happiness and
perfection. All other men are either blind or rebellious.

And great agitation prevailed.

Then the legislator, after enforcing silence, loudly exclaimed:

What, O people! is this passionate emotion? Whither will this quarrel
conduct you? What can you expect from this dissension? The earth has
been for ages a field of disputation, and you have shed torrents of
blood in your controversies. What have you gained by so many battles
and tears? When the strong has subjected the weak to his opinion, has he
thereby aided the cause of truth?

O nations! take counsel of your own wisdom. When among yourselves
disputes arise between families and individuals, how do you reconcile
them? Do you not give them arbitrators?

Yes, cried the whole multitude.

Do so then to the authors of your present dissensions. Order those who
call themselves your instructors, and who force their creeds upon
you, to discuss before you their reasons. Since they appeal to your
interests, inform yourselves how they support them.

And you, chiefs and governors of the people! before dragging the masses
into the quarrels resulting from your diverse opinions, let the reasons
for and against your views be given. Let us establish one solemn
controversy, one public scrutiny of truth--not before the tribunal of a
corruptible individual, or of a prejudiced party, but in the grand forum
of mankind--guarded by all their information and all their interests.
Let the natural sense of the whole human race be our arbiter and judge.



