CHAPTER IX.

ORIGIN OF GOVERNMENT AND LAWS.


In fact, it soon happened that men, fatigued with the evils they
reciprocally inflicted, began to sigh for peace; and reflecting on their
misfortunes and the causes of them, they said:

"We are mutually injuring each other by our passions; and, aiming to
grasp every thing, we hold nothing. What one seizes to-day, another
takes to-morrow, and our cupidity reacts upon ourselves. Let us
establish judges, who shall arbitrate our rights, and settle our
differences! When the strong shall rise against the weak, the judge
shall restrain him, and dispose of our force to suppress violence;
and the life and property of each shall be under the guarantee and
protection of all; and all shall enjoy the good things of nature."

Conventions were thus formed in society, sometimes express, sometimes
tacit, which became the rule for the action of individuals, the measure
of their rights, the law of their reciprocal relations; and persons were
appointed to superintend their observance, to whom the people confided
the balance to weigh rights, and the sword to punish transgressions.

Thus was established among individuals a happy equilibrium of force and
action, which constituted the common security. The name of equity and of
justice was recognized and revered over the earth; every one, assured
of enjoying in peace, the fruits of his toil, pursued with energy the
objects of his attention; and industry, excited and maintained by the
reality or the hope of enjoyment, developed, all the riches of art
and of nature. The fields were covered with harvests, the valleys with
flocks, the hills with fruits, the sea with vessels, and man became
happy and powerful on the earth. Thus did his own wisdom repair the
disorder which his imprudence had occasioned; and that wisdom was only
the effect of his own organization. He respected the enjoyments of
others in order to secure his own; and cupidity found its corrective in
the enlightened love of self.

Thus the love of self, the moving principle of every individual, becomes
the necessary foundation of every association; and on the observance
of that law of our nature has depended the fate of nations. Have the
factitious and conventional laws tended to that object and accomplished
that aim? Every one, urged by a powerful instinct, has displayed all
the faculties of his being; and the sum of individual felicities has
constituted the general felicity. Have these laws, on the contrary,
restrained the effort of man toward his own happiness? His heart,
deprived of its exciting principle, has languished in inactivity, and
from the oppression of individuals has resulted the weakness of the
state.

As self-love, impetuous and improvident, is ever urging man against
his equal, and consequently tends to dissolve society, the art of
legislation and the merit of administrators consists in attempering
the conflict of individual cupidities, in maintaining an equilibrium of
powers, and securing to every one his happiness, in order that, in the
shock of society against society, all the members may have a common
interest in the preservation and defence of the public welfare.

The internal splendor and prosperity of empires then, have had for
their efficient cause the equity of their laws and government; and their
respective external powers have been in proportion to the number of
persons interested, and their degree of interest in the public welfare.

On the other hand, the multiplication of men, by complicating their
relations, having rendered the precise limitation of their rights
difficult, the perpetual play of the passions having produced incidents
not foreseen--their conventions having been vicious, inadequate, or
nugatory--in fine, the authors of the laws having sometimes mistaken,
sometimes disguised their objects; and their ministers, instead of
restraining the cupidity of others, having given themselves up to
their own; all these causes have introduced disorder and trouble into
societies; and the viciousness of laws and the injustice of governments,
flowing from cupidity and ignorance, have become the causes of the
misfortunes of nations, and the subversion of states.



CHAPTER X.

GENERAL CAUSES OF THE PROSPERITY OF ANCIENT STATES.


Such, O man who seekest wisdom, such have been the causes of revolution
in the ancient states of which thou contemplatest the ruins! To whatever
spot I direct my view, to whatever period my thoughts recur, the same
principles of growth or destruction, of rise or fall, present themselves
to my mind. Wherever a people is powerful, or an empire prosperous,
there the conventional laws are conformable with the laws of nature--the
government there procures for its citizens a free use of their
faculties, equal security for their persons and property. If, on the
contrary, an empire goes to ruin, or dissolves, it is because its laws
have been vicious, or imperfect, or trodden under foot by a corrupt
government. If the laws and government, at first wise and just, become
afterwards depraved, it is because the alternation of good and evil is
inherent to the heart of man, to a change in his propensities, to his
progress in knowledge, to a combination of circumstances and events; as
is proved by the history of the species.

In the infancy of nations, when men yet lived in the forest, subject to
the same wants, endowed with the same faculties, all were nearly equal
in strength; and that equality was a circumstance highly advantageous
in the composition of society: as every individual, thus feeling himself
sufficiently independent of every other, no one was the slave, none
thought of being the master of another. Man, then a novice, knew neither
servitude nor tyranny; furnished with resources sufficient for his
existence, he thought not of borrowing from others; owning nothing,
requiring nothing, he judged the rights of others by his own, and formed
ideas of justice sufficiently exact. Ignorant, moreover, in the art
of enjoyments, unable to produce more than his necessaries, possessing
nothing superfluous, cupidity remained dormant; or if excited, man,
attacked in his real wants, resisted it with energy, and the foresight
of such resistance ensured a happy balance.

Thus original equality, in default of compact, maintained freedom of
person, security of property, good manners, and order. Every one
labored by himself and for himself; and the mind of man, being occupied,
wandered not to culpable desires. He had few enjoyments, but his wants
were satisfied; and as indulgent nature had made them less than his
resources, the labor of his hands soon produced abundance--abundance,
population; the arts unfolded, culture extended, and the earth, covered
with numerous inhabitants, was divided into different dominions.

The relations of man becoming complicated, the internal order of
societies became more difficult to maintain. Time and industry having
generated riches, cupidity became more active; and because equality,
practicable among individuals, could not subsist among families, the
natural equilibrium was broken; it became necessary to supply it by a
factitious equilibrium; to set up chiefs, to establish laws; and in
the primitive inexperience, it necessarily happened that these
laws, occasioned by cupidity, assumed its character. But different
circumstances concurred to correct the disorder, and oblige governments
to be just.

States, in fact, being weak at first, and having foreign enemies to
fear, the chiefs found it their interest not to oppress their subjects;
for, by lessening the confidence of the citizens in their government,
they would diminish their means of resistance--they would facilitate
foreign invasion, and by exercising arbitrary power, have endangered
their very existence.

In the interior, the firmness of the people repelled tyranny; men had
contracted too long habits of independence; they had too few wants, and
too much consciousness of their own strength.

States being of a moderate size, it was difficult to divide their
citizens so as to make use of some for the oppression of others. Their
communications were too easy, their interest too clear and simple:
besides, every one being a proprietor and cultivator, no one needed to
sell himself, and the despot could find no mercenaries.

If, then, dissensions arose, they were between family and family,
faction and faction, and they interested a great number. The troubles,
indeed, were warmer; but fears from abroad pacified discord at home. If
the oppression of a party prevailed, the earth being still unoccupied,
and man, still in a state of simplicity, finding every where the same
advantages, the oppressed party emigrated, and carried elsewhere their
independence.

The ancient states then enjoyed within themselves numerous means of
prosperity and power. Every one finding his own well-being in the
constitution of his country, took a lively interest in its preservation.
If a stranger attacked it, having to defend his own field, his own
house, he carried into combat all the passions of a personal quarrel;
and, devoted to his own interests, he was devoted to his country.

As every action useful to the public attracted its esteem and gratitude,
every one became eager to be useful; and self-love multiplied talents
and civic virtues.

Every citizen contributing equally by his talents and person, armies
and funds were inexhaustible, and nations displayed formidable masses of
power.

The earth being free, and its possession secure and easy, every one
was a proprietor; and the division of property preserved morals, and
rendered luxury impossible.

Every one cultivating for himself, culture was more active, produce more
abundant; and individual riches became public wealth.

The abundance of produce rendering subsistence easy, population was
rapid and numerous, and states attained quickly the term of their
plenitude.

Productions increasing beyond consumption, the necessity of commerce
arose; and exchanges took place between people and people; which
augmented their activity and reciprocal advantages.

In fine, certain countries, at certain times, uniting the advantages
of good government with a position on the route of the most active
circulation, they became emporiums of flourishing commerce and seats of
powerful domination. And on the shores of the Nile and Mediterranean, of
the Tygris and Euphrates, the accumulated riches of India and of Europe
raised in successive splendor a hundred different cities.

The people, growing rich, applied their superfluity to works of common
and public use; and this was in every state, the epoch of those works
whose grandeur astonishes the mind; of those wells of Tyre, of those
dykes of the Euphrates, of those subterranean conduits of Media,* of
those fortresses of the desert, of those aqueducts of Palmyra, of those
temples, of those porticoes. And such labors might be immense, without
oppressing the nations; because they were the effect of an equal and
common contribution of the force of individuals animated and free.

     * See respecting these monuments my Travels into Syria, vol.
     ii. p. 214.

From the town or village of Samouat the course of the Euphrates is
accompanied with a double bank, which descends as far as its junction
with the Tygris, and from thence to the sea, being a length of about a
hundred leagues, French measure. The height of these artificial banks
is not uniform, but increases as you advance from the sea; it may be
estimated at from twelve to fifteen feet. But for them, the inundation
of the river would bury the country around, which is flat, to an extent
of twenty or twenty-five leagues and even notwithstanding these banks,
there has been in modern times an overflow, which has covered the whole
triangle formed by the junction of this river to the Tygris, being
a space of country of one hundred and thirty square leagues. By the
stagnation of these waters an epidemical disease of the most fatal
nature was occasioned. It follows from hence, 1. That all the flat
country bordering upon these rivers, was originally a marsh; 2. That
this marsh could not have been inhabited previously to the construction
of the banks in question; 3. That these banks could not have been the
work but of a population prior as to date; and the elevation of Babylon,
therefore, must have been posterior to that of Nineveh, as I think
I have chronologically demonstrated in the memoir above cited. See
Encyclopedia, vol. xiii, of Antiquities.

The modern Aderbidjan, which was a part of Medea, the mountains of
Koulderstan, and those of Diarbekr, abound with subterranean canals, by
means of which the ancient inhabitants conveyed water to their parched
soil in order to fertilize it. It was regarded as a meritorious act
and a religious duty prescribed by Zoroaster, who, instead of preaching
celibacy, mortifications, and other pretended virtues of the monkish
sort, repeats continually in the passages that are preserved respecting
him in the Sad-der and the Zend-avesta:

"That the action most pleasing to God is to plough and cultivate the
earth, to water it with running streams, to multiply vegetation and
living beings, to have numerous flocks, young and fruitful virgins, a
multitude of children," etc., etc.

Among the aqueducts of Palmyra it appears certain, that, besides those
which conducted water from the neighboring hills, there was one which
brought it even from the mountains of Syria. It is to be traced a long
way into the Desert where it escapes our search by going under ground.


Thus ancient states prospered, because their social institutions
conformed to the true laws of nature; and because men, enjoying liberty
and security for their persons and their property, might display all the
extent of their faculties,--all the energies of their self-love.



