CHAPTER 1.

OF THE LAW OF NATURE.


Q. What is the law of nature?

A. It is the constant and regular order of events, by which God governs
the universe; an order which his wisdom presents to the senses and
reason of men, as an equal and common rule for their actions, to guide
them, without distinction of country or sect, towards perfection and
happiness.

Q. Give a clear definition of the word law.

A. The word law, taken literary, signifies lecture,* because originally,
ordinances and regulations were the lectures, preferably to all others,
made to the people, in order that they might observe them, and not incur
the penalties attached to their infraction: whence follows the original
custom explaining the true idea.

The definition of law is, "An order or prohibition to act with the
express clause of a penalty attached to the infraction, or of a
recompense attached to the observance of that order."

     * From the Latin word lex, lectio.  Alcoran likewise
     signifies lecture and is only a literal translation of the
     word law.

Q. Do such orders exist in nature?

A. Yes.

Q. What does the word nature signify?

A. The word nature bears three different significations.

1. It signifies the universe, the material world: in this first sense
we say the beauties of nature, the riches of nature, that is to say, the
objects in the heavens and on the earth exposed to our sight;

2. It signifies the power that animates, that moves the universe,
considering it as a distinct being, such as the soul is to the body;
in this second sense we say, "The intentions of nature, the
incomprehensible secrets of nature."

3. It signifies the partial operations of that power on each being, or
on each class of beings; and in this third sense we say, "The nature of
man is an enigma; every being acts according to its nature."

Wherefore, as the actions of each being, or of each species of beings,
are subjected to constant and general rules, which cannot be infringed
without interrupting and troubling the general or particular order,
those rules of action and of motion are called natural laws, or laws of
nature.

Q. Give me examples of those laws.

A. It is a law of nature, that the sun illuminates successively the
surface of the terrestrial globe;--that its presence causes both light
and heat;--that heat acting upon water, produces vapors;--that those
vapors rising in clouds into the regions of the air, dissolve into rain
or snow, and renew incessantly the waters of fountains and rivers.

It is a law of nature, that water flows downwards; that it endeavors
to find its level; that it is heavier than air; that all bodies tend
towards the earth; that flame ascends towards the heavens;--that it
disorganizes vegetables and animals; that air is essential to the life
of certain animals; that, in certain circumstances, water suffocates and
kills them; that certain juices of plants, certain minerals attack
their organs, and destroy their life, and so on in a multitude of other
instances.

Wherefore, as all those and similar facts are immutable, constant, and
regular, so many real orders result from them for man to conform himself
to, with the express clause of punishment attending the infraction of
them, or of welfare attending their observance. So that if man pretends
to see clear in darkness, if he goes in contradiction to the course of
the seasons, or the action of the elements; if he pretends to remain
under water without being drowned, to touch fire without burning
himself, to deprive himself of air without being suffocated, to swallow
poison without destroying himself, he receives from each of those
infractions of the laws of nature a corporeal punishment proportionate
to his fault; but if on the contrary, he observes and practises each of
those laws according to the regular and exact relations they have to him
he preserves his existence, and renders it as happy as it can be: and
as the only and common end of all those laws, considered relatively to
mankind, is to preserve, and render them happy, it has been agreed
upon to reduce the idea to one simple expression, and to call them
collectively the law of nature.



CHAPTER II.

CHARACTERS OF THE LAW OF NATURE.


Q. What are the characters of the law of nature?

A. There can be assigned ten principal ones.

Q. Which is the first?

A. To be inherent to the existence of things, and, consequently,
primitive and anterior to every other law: so that all those which
man has received, are only imitations of it, and their perfection is
ascertained by the resemblance they bear to this primordial model.

Q. Which is the second?

A. To be derived immediately from God, and presented by him to each man,
whereas all other laws are presented to us by men, who may be either
deceived or deceivers.

Q. Which is the third?

A. To be common to all times, and to all countries, that is to say, one
and universal.

Q. Is no other law universal?

A. No: for no other is agreeable or applicable to all the people of the
earth; they are all local and accidental, originating from circumstances
of places and of persons; so that if such a man had not existed, or such
an event happened, such a law would never have been enacted.

Q. Which is the fourth character?

A. To be uniform and invariable.

Q. Is no other law uniform and invariable?

A. No: for what is good and virtue according to one, is evil and vice
according to another; and what one and the same law approves of at one
time, it often condemns at another.

Q. Which is the fifth character?

A. To be evident and palpable, because it consists entirely of facts
incessantly present to the senses, and to demonstration.

Q. Are not other laws evident?

A. No: for they are founded on past and doubtful facts, on equivocal and
suspicious testimonies, and on proofs inaccessible to the senses.

Q. Which is the sixth character?

A. To be reasonable, because its precepts and entire doctrine are
conformable to reason, and to the human understanding.

Q. Is no other law reasonable?

A. No: for all are in contradiction to the reason and the understanding
of men, and tyrannically impose on him a blind and impracticable belief.

Q. Which is the seventh character?

A. To be just, because in that law, the penalties are proportionate to
the infractions.

Q. Are not other laws just?

A. No: for they often exceed bounds, either in rewarding deserts, or in
punishing delinquencies, and consider as meritorious or criminal, null
or indifferent actions.

Q. Which is the eighth character?

A. To be pacific and tolerant, because in the law of nature, all men
being brothers and equal in rights, it recommends to them only peace and
toleration, even for errors.

Q. Are not other laws pacific?

A. No: for all preach dissension, discord, and war, and divide mankind
by exclusive pretensions of truth and domination.

Q. Which is the ninth character?

A. To be equally beneficent to all men, in teaching them the true means
of becoming better and happier.

Q. Are not other laws beneficent likewise?

A. No: for none of them teach the real means of attaining happiness; all
are confined to pernicious or futile practices; and this is evident from
facts, since after so many laws, so many religions, so many legislators
and prophets, men are still as unhappy and ignorant, as they were six
thousand years ago.

Q. Which is the last character of the law of nature?

A. That it is alone sufficient to render men happier and better, because
it comprises all that is good and useful in other laws, either civil or
religious, that is to say, it constitutes essentially the moral part of
them; so that if other laws were divested of it, they would be reduced
to chimerical and imaginary opinions devoid of any practical utility.

Q. Recapitulate all those characters.

A. We have said that the law of nature is,

     1.  Primitive;     6.  Reasonable;
     2.  Immediate;     7.  Just;
     3.  Universal;     8.  Pacific;
     4.  Invariable;    9.  Beneficent: and
     5.  Evident;      10.  Alone sufficient.

And such is the power of all these attributes of perfection and truth,
that when in their disputes the theologians can agree upon no article of
belief, they recur to the law of nature, the neglect of which, say they,
forced God to send from time to time prophets to proclaim new laws; as
if God enacted laws for particular circumstances, as men do; especially
when the first subsists in such force, that we may assert it to have
been at all times and in all countries the rule of conscience for every
man of sense or understanding.

Q. If, as you say, it emanates immediately from God, does it teach his
existence?

A. Yes, most positively: for, to any man whatever, who observes with
reflection the astonishing spectacle of the universe, the more he
meditates on the properties and attributes of each being, on
the admirable order and harmony of their motions, the more it is
demonstrated that there exists a supreme agent, a universal and identic
mover, designated by the appellation of God; and so true it is that the
law of nature suffices to elevate him to the knowledge of God, that all
which men have pretended to know by supernatural means, has constantly
turned out ridiculous and absurd, and that they have ever been obliged
to recur to the immutable conceptions of natural reason.

Q. Then it is not true that the followers of the law of nature are
atheists?

A. No; it is not true; on the contrary, they entertain stronger and
nobler ideas of the Divinity than most other men; for they do not
sully him with the foul ingredients of all the weaknesses and passions
entailed on humanity.

Q. What worship do they pay to him?

A. A worship wholly of action; the practice and observance of all the
rules which the supreme wisdom has imposed on the motion of each being;
eternal and unalterable rules, by which it maintains the order
and harmony of the universe, and which, in their relations to man,
constitute the law of nature.

Q. Was the law of nature known before this period:

A. It has been at all times spoken of: most legislators pretend to adopt
it as the basis of their laws; but they only quote some of its precepts,
and have only vague ideas of its totality.

Q. Why.

A. Because, though simple in its basis, it forms in its developements
and consequences, a complicated whole which requires an extensive
knowledge of facts, joined to all the sagacity of reasoning.

Q. Does not instinct alone teach the law of nature?

A. No; for by instinct is meant nothing more than that blind sentiment
by which we are actuated indiscriminately towards everything that
flatters the senses.

Q. Why, then, is it said that the law of nature is engraved in the
hearts of all men.

A. It is said for two reasons: first, because it has been remarked, that
there are acts and sentiments common to all men, and this proceeds from
their common organization; secondly, because the first philosophers
believed that men were born with ideas already formed, which is now
demonstrated to be erroneous.

Q. Philosophers, then, are fallible?

A. Yes, sometimes.

Q. Why so?

A. First, because they are men; secondly, because the ignorant call all
those who reason, right or wrong, philosophers; thirdly, because those
who reason on many subjects, and who are the first to reason on them,
are liable to be deceived.

Q. If the law of nature be not written, must it not become arbitrary and
ideal?

A. No: because it consists entirely in facts, the demonstration of which
can be incessantly renewed to the senses, and constitutes a science as
accurate and precise as geometry and mathematics; and it is because the
law of nature forms an exact science, that men, born ignorant and living
inattentive and heedless, have had hitherto only a superficial knowledge
of it.



