CHAPTER VII.

ON CONTINENCE.


Q. Does the law of nature prescribe continence?

A. Yes: because a moderate use of the most lively of pleasures is not
only useful, but indispensable, to the support of strength and health:
and because a simple calculation proves that, for some minutes of
privation, you increase the number of your days, both in vigor of body
and of mind.

Q. How does it forbid libertinism?

A. By the numerous evils which result from it to the physical and the
moral existence. He who carries it to an excess enervates and pines
away; he can no longer attend to study or labor; he contracts idle
and expensive habits, which destroy his means of existence, his
public consideration, and his credit; his intrigues occasion continual
embarrassment, cares, quarrels and lawsuits, without mentioning the
grievous deep-rooted distempers, and the loss of his strength by
an inward and slow poison; the stupid dullness of his mind, by the
exhaustion of the nervous system; and, in fine, a premature and infirm
old age.

Q. Does the law of nature look on that absolute chastity so recommended
in monastical institutions, as a virtue?

A. No: for that chastity is of no use either to the society that
witnesses, or the individual who practises it; it is even prejudicial to
both. First, it injures society by depriving it of population, which
is one of its principal sources of wealth and power; and as bachelors
confine all their views and affections to the term of their lives, they
have in general an egotism unfavorable to the interests of society.

In the second place, it injures the individuals who practise it, because
it deprives them of a number of affections and relations which are
the springs of most domestic and social virtues; and besides, it often
happens, from circumstances of age, regimen, or temperament, that
absolute continence injures the constitution and causes severe diseases,
because it is contrary to the physical laws on which nature has founded
the system of the reproduction of beings; and they who recommend
so strongly chastity, even supposing them to be sincere, are in
contradiction with their own doctrine, which consecrates the law of
nature by the well known commandment: increase and multiply.

Q. Why is chastity considered a greater virtue in women than in men?

A. Because a want of chastity in women is attended with inconveniences
much more serious and dangerous for them and for society; for, without
taking into account the pains and diseases they have in common with
men, they are further exposed to all the disadvantages and perils that
precede, attend, and follow child-birth. When pregnant contrary to law,
they become an object of public scandal and contempt, and spend the
remainder of their lives in bitterness and misery. Moreover, all the
expense of maintaining and educating their fatherless children falls on
them: which expense impoverishes them, and is every way prejudicial to
their physical and moral existence. In this situation, deprived of the
freshness and health that constitute their charm, carrying with them an
extraneous and expensive burden, they are less prized by men, they
find no solid establishment, they fall into poverty, misery, and
wretchedness, and thus drag on in sorrow their unhappy existence.

Q. Does the law of nature extend so far as the scruples of desires and
thoughts.

A. Yes; because, in the physical laws of the human body, thoughts and
desires inflame the senses, and soon provoke to action: now, by another
law of nature in the organization of our body, those actions become
mechanical wants which recur at certain periods of days or of weeks, so
that, at such a time, the want is renewed of such an action and such a
secretion; if this action and this secretion be injurious to health, the
habitude of them becomes destructive of life itself. Thus thoughts and
desires have a true and natural importance.

Q. Should modesty be considered as a virtue?

A. Yes; because modesty, inasmuch as it is a shame of certain actions,
maintains the soul and body in all those habits useful to good order,
and to self-preservation. The modest woman is esteemed, courted, and
established, with advantages of fortune which ensure her existence,
and render it agreeable to her, while the immodest and prostitute are
despised, repulsed, and abandoned to misery and infamy.



CHAPTER VIII.

ON COURAGE AND ACTIVITY.


Q. Are courage and strength of body and mind virtues in the law of
nature?

A. Yes, and most important virtues; for they are the efficacious and
indispensable means of attending to our preservation and welfare. The
courageous and strong man repulses oppression, defends his life, his
liberty, and his property; by his labor he procures himself an abundant
subsistence, which he enjoys in tranquillity and peace of mind. If he
falls into misfortunes, from which his prudence could not protect him,
he supports them with fortitude and resignation; and it is for this
reason that the ancient moralists have reckoned strength and courage
among the four principal virtues.

Q. Should weakness and cowardice be considered as vices?

A. Yes, since it is certain that they produce innumerable calamities.
The weak or cowardly man lives in perpetual cares and agonies; he
undermines his health by the dread, oftentimes ill founded, of attacks
and dangers: and this dread which is an evil, is not a remedy; it
renders him, on the contrary, the slave of him who wishes to oppress
him; and by the servitude and debasement of all his faculties, it
degrades and diminishes his means of existence, so far as the seeing his
life depend on the will and caprice of another man.

Q. But, after what you have said on the influence of aliments, are not
courage and force, as well as many other virtues, in a great measure the
effect of our physical constitution and temperament?

A. Yes, it is true; and so far, that those qualities are transmitted by
generation and blood, with the elements on which they depend: the most
reiterated and constant facts prove that in the breed of animals of
every kind, we see certain physical and moral qualities, attached to
the individuals of those species, increase or decay according to the
combinations and mixtures they make with other breeds.

Q. But, then, as our will is not sufficient to procure us those
qualities, is it a crime to be destitute of them?

A. No, it is not a crime, but a misfortune; it is what the ancients
call an unlucky fatality; but even then we have it yet in our power to
acquire them; for, as soon as we know on what physical elements such
or such a quality is founded, we can promote its growth, and hasten its
developments, by a skillful management of those elements; and in this
consists the science of education, which, according as it is directed,
meliorates or degrades individuals, or the whole race, to such a pitch
as totally to change their nature and inclinations; for which reason it
is of the greatest importance to be acquainted with the laws of nature
by which those operations and changes are certainly and necessarily
effected.

Q. Why do you say that activity is a virtue according to the law of
nature?

A. Because the man who works and employs his time usefully, derives from
it a thousand precious advantages to his existence. If he is born poor,
his labor furnishes him with subsistence; and still more so, if he is
sober, continent, and prudent, for he soon acquires a competency, and
enjoys the sweets of life; his very labor gives him virtues; for, while
he occupies his body and mind, he is not affected with unruly desires,
time does not lie heavy on him, he contracts mild habits, he augments
his strength and health, and attains a peaceful and happy old age.

Q. Are idleness and sloth vices in the law of nature?

A. Yes, and the most pernicious of all vices, for they lead to all the
others. By idleness and sloth man remains ignorant, he forgets even
the science he had acquired, and falls into all the misfortunes which
accompany ignorance and folly; by idleness and sloth man, devoured
with disquietude, in order to dissipate it, abandons himself to all the
desires of his senses, which, becoming every day more inordinate, render
him intemperate, gluttonous, lascivious, enervated, cowardly, vile, and
contemptible. By the certain effect of all those vices, he ruins his
fortune, consumes his health, and terminates his life in all the agonies
of sickness and of poverty.

Q. From what you say, one would think that poverty was a vice?

A. No, it is not a vice; but it is still less a virtue, for it is by far
more ready to injure than to be useful; it is even commonly the result,
or the beginning of vice, for the effect of all individual vices is to
lead to indigence, and to the privation of the necessaries of life; and
when a man is in want of necessaries, he is tempted to procure them by
vicious means, that is to say, by means injurious to society. All
the individual virtues tend, on the contrary, to procure to a man an
abundant subsistence; and when he has more than he can consume, it
is much easier for him to give to others, and to practice the actions
useful to society.

Q. Do you look upon opulence as a virtue?

A. No; but still less as a vice: it is the use alone of wealth that
can be called virtuous or vicious, according as it is serviceable or
prejudicial to man and to society. Wealth is an instrument, the use and
employment alone of which determine its virtue or vice.



