CHAPTER XVI.

A FREE AND LEGISLATIVE PEOPLE.


Considering that all public power was now suspended, and that the
habitual restraint of the people had suddenly ceased, I shuddered with
the apprehension that they would fall into the dissolution of anarchy.
But, taking their affairs into immediate deliberation, they said:

It is not enough that we have freed ourselves from tyrants and
parasites; we must prevent their return. We are men, and experience
has abundantly taught us that every man is fond of power, and wishes
to enjoy it at the expense of others. It is necessary, then, to guard
against a propensity which is the source of discord; we must establish
certain rules of duty and of right. But the knowledge of our rights,
and the estimation of our duties, are so abstract and difficult as to
require all the time and all the faculties of a man. Occupied in our
own affairs, we have not leisure for these studies; nor can we
exercise these functions in our own persons. Let us choose, then, among
ourselves, such persons as are capable of this employment. To them we
will delegate our powers to institute our government and laws. They
shall be the representatives of our wills and of our interests. And in
order to attain the fairest representation possible of our wills and our
interests, let it be numerous, and composed of men resembling ourselves.

Having made the election of a numerous body of delegates, the people
thus addressed them:

We have hitherto lived in a society formed by chance, without fixed
agreements, without free conventions, without a stipulation of rights,
without reciprocal engagements,--and a multitude of disorders and evils
have arisen from this precarious state. We are now determined on forming
a regular compact; and we have chosen you to adjust the articles.
Examine, then, with care what ought to be its basis and its conditions;
consider what is the end and the principles of every association;
recognize the rights which every member brings, the powers which he
delegates, and those which he reserves to himself. Point out to us the
rules of conduct--the basis of just and equitable laws. Prepare for us a
new system of government; for we realize that the one which has
hitherto guided us is corrupt. Our fathers have wandered in the paths
of ignorance, and habit has taught us to follow in their footsteps.
Everything has been done by fraud, violence, and delusion; and the true
laws of morality and reason are still obscure. Clear up, then, their
chaos; trace out their connection; publish their code, and we will adopt
it.

And the people raised a large throne, in the form of a pyramid, and
seating on it the men they had chosen, said to them:

We raise you to-day above us, that you may better discover the whole of
our relations, and be above the reach of our passions. But remember that
you are our fellow-citizens; that the power we confer on you is our own;
that we deposit it with you, but not as a property or a heritage; that
you must be the first to obey the laws you make; that to-morrow you
redescend among us, and that you will have acquired no other right but
that of our esteem and gratitude. And consider what a tribute of glory
the world, which reveres so many apostles of error, will bestow on the
first assembly of rational men, who shall have declared the unchangeable
principles of justice, and consecrated, in the face of tyrants, the
rights of nations.



CHAPTER XVII.

UNIVERSAL BASIS OF ALL RIGHT AND ALL LAW.


The men chosen by the people to investigate the true principles of
morals and of reason then proceeded in the sacred object of their
mission; and, after a long examination, having discovered a fundamental
and universal principle, a legislator arose and said to the people:

Here is the primordial basis, the physical origin of all justice and of
all right.

Whatever be the active power, the moving cause, that governs the
universe, since it has given to all men the same organs, the same
sensations, and the same wants, it has thereby declared that it has
given to all the same right to the use of its treasures, and that all
men are equal in the order of nature.

And, since this power has given to each man the necessary means of
preserving his own existence, it is evident that it has constituted them
all independent one of another; that it has created them free; that no
one is subject to another; that each one is absolute proprietor of his
own person.

Equality and liberty are, therefore, two essential attributes of man,
two laws of the Divinity, constitutional and unchangeable, like the
physical properties of matter.

Now, every individual being absolute master of his own person, it
follows that a full and free consent is a condition indispensable to all
contracts and all engagements.

Again, since each individual is equal to another, it follows that the
balance of what is received and of what is given, should be strictly in
equilibrium; so that the idea of justice, of equity, necessarily imports
that of equality.*

     * The etymology of the words themselves trace out to us this
     connection: equilibrium, equalitas, equitas, are all of one
     family, and the physical idea of equality, in the scales of
     a balance, is the source and type of all the rest.

Equality and liberty are therefore the physical and unalterable basis
of every union of men in society, and of course the necessary and
generating principle of every law and of every system of regular
government.*

     * In the Declaration of Rights, there is an inversion of
     ideas in the first article, liberty being placed before
     equality, from which it in reality springs.  This defect is
     not to be wondered at; the science of the rights of man is a
     new science: it was invented yesterday by the Americans,
     to-day the French are perfecting it, but there yet remains a
     great deal to be done.  In the ideas that constitute it
     there is a genealogical order which, from us basis, physical
     equality, to the minutest and most remote branches of
     government, ought to proceed in an uninterrupted series of
     inferences.

A disregard of this basis has introduced in your nation, and in every
other, those disorders which have finally roused you. It is by returning
to this rule that you may reform them, and reorganize a happy order of
society.

But observe, this reorganization will occasion a violent shock in
your habits, your fortunes, and your prejudices. Vicious contracts and
abusive claims must be dissolved, unjust distinctions and ill founded
property renounced; you must indeed recur for a moment to a state of
nature. Consider whether you can consent to so many sacrifices.

Then, reflecting on the cupidity inherent in the heart of man, I thought
that this people would renounce all ideas of amelioration.

But, in a moment, a great number of men, advancing toward the pyramid,
made a solemn abjuration of all their distinctions and all their riches.

Establish for us, said they, the laws of equality and liberty; we will
possess nothing in future but on the title of justice.

Equality, liberty, justice,--these shall be our code, and shall be
written on our standards.

And the people immediately raised a great standard, inscribed with
these three words, in three different colors. They displayed it over the
pyramid of the legislators, and for the first time the flag of universal
justice floated on the face of the earth.

And the people raised before the pyramid a new altar, on which they
placed a golden balance, a sword, and a book with this inscription:


TO EQUAL LAW, WHICH JUDGES AND PROTECTS.


And having surrounded the pyramid and the altar with a vast
amphitheatre, all the people took their seats to hear the publication
of the law. And millions of men, raising at once their hands to heaven,
took the solemn oath to live equal, free, and just; to respect their
reciprocal properties and rights; to obey the law and its regularly
chosen representatives.


A spectacle so impressive and sublime, so replete with generous
emotions, moved me to tears; and addressing myself to the Genius, I
exclaimed: Let me now live, for in future I have everything to hope.



