CHAPTER XII.

DEVELOPMENT OF THE SOCIAL VIRTUES.


Q. Explain how the social virtues are derived from the law of nature.
How is charity or the love of one's neighbor a precept and application
of it?

A. By reason of equality and reciprocity; for when we injure another,
we give him a right to injure us in return; thus, by attacking the
existence of our neighbor, we endanger our own, from the effect of
reciprocity; on the other hand, by doing good to others, we have room
and right to expect an equivalent exchange; and such is the character of
all social virtues, that they are useful to the man who practises them,
by the right of reciprocity which they give him over those who are
benefited by them.

Q. Charity is then nothing but justice?

A. No: it is only justice; with this slight difference, that strict
justice confines itself to saying, "Do not to another the harm you would
not wish he should do to you;" and that charity, or the love of one's
neighbor, extends so far as to say, "Do to another the good which you
would wish to receive from him." Thus when the gospel said, that this
precept contained the whole of the law and the prophets, it announced
nothing more than the precept of the law of nature.

Q. Does it enjoin forgiveness of injuries?

A. Yes, when that forgiveness implies self-preservation.

Q. Does it prescribe to us, after having received a blow on one cheek,
to hold out the other?

A. No; for it is, in the first place, contrary to the precept of loving
our neighbor as ourselves, since thereby we should love, more than
ourselves, him who makes an attack on our preservation. Secondly, such
a precept in its literal sense, encourages the wicked to oppression
and injustice. The law of nature has been more wise in prescribing a
calculated proportion of courage and moderation, which induces us to
forget a first or unpremediated injury, but which punishes every act
tending to oppression.

Q. Does the law of nature prescribe to do good to others beyond the
bounds of reason and measure?

A. No; for it is a sure way of leading them to ingratitude. Such is the
force of sentiment and justice implanted in the heart of man, that he
is not even grateful for benefits conferred without discretion. There is
only one measure with them, and that is to be just.

Q. Is alms-giving a virtuous action?

A. Yes, when it is practised according to the rule first mentioned;
without which it degenerates into imprudence and vice, inasmuch as it
encourages laziness, which is hurtful to the beggar and to society;
no one has a right to partake of the property and fruits of another's
labor, without rendering an equivalent of his own industry.

Q. Does the law of nature consider as virtues faith and hope, which are
often joined with charity?

A. No; for they are ideas without reality; and if any effects result
from them, they turn rather to the profit of those who have not those
ideas, than of those who have them; so that faith and hope may be called
the virtues of dupes for the benefit of knaves.

Q. Does the law of nature prescribe probity?

A. Yes, for probity is nothing more than respect for one's own rights
in those of another; a respect founded on a prudent and well combined
calculation of our interests compared to those of others.

Q. But does not this calculation, which embraces the complicated
interests and rights of the social state, require an enlightened
understanding and knowledge, which make it a difficult science?

A. Yes, and a science so much the more delicate as the honest man
pronounces in his own cause.

Q. Probity, then, shows an extension and justice in the mind?

A. Yes, for an honest man almost always neglects a present interest, in
order not to destroy a future one; whereas the knave does the contrary,
and loses a great future interest for a present smaller one.

Q. Improbity, therefore, is a sign of false judgment and a narrow mind?

A. Yes, and rogues may be defined ignorant and silly calculators; for
they do not understand their true interest, and they pretend to cunning:
nevertheless, their cunning only ends in making known what they are--in
losing all confidence and esteem, and the good services resulting from
them for their physical and social existence. They neither live in
peace with others, nor with themselves; and incessantly menaced by their
conscience and their enemies, they enjoy no other real happiness but
that of not being hanged.

Q. Does the law of nature forbid robbery?

A. Yes, for the man who robs another gives him a right to rob him; from
that moment there is no security in his property, nor in his means of
preservation: thus in injuring others, he, by a counterblow, injures
himself.

Q. Does it interdict even an inclination to rob?

A. Yes; for that inclination leads naturally to action, and it is for
this reason that envy is considered a sin?

Q. How does it forbid murder?

A. By the most powerful motives of self-preservation; for, first, the
man who attacks exposes himself to the risk of being killed, by the
right of defence; secondly, if he kills, he gives to the relations and
friends of the deceased, and to society at large, an equal right of
killing him; so that his life is no longer in safety.

Q. How can we, by the law of nature, repair the evil we have done?

A. By rendering a proportionate good to those whom we have injured.

Q. Does it allow us to repair it by prayers, vows, offerings to God,
fasting and mortifications?

A. No: for all those things are foreign to the action we wish to repair:
they neither restore the ox to him from whom it has been stolen, honor
to him whom we have deprived of it, nor life to him from whom it has
been taken away; consequently they miss the end of justice; they are
only perverse contracts by which a man sells to another goods which do
not belong to him; they are a real depravation of morality, inasmuch
as they embolden to commit crimes through the hope of expiating them;
wherefore, they have been the real cause of all the evils by which
the people among whom those expiatory practices were used, have been
continually tormented.

Q. Does the law of nature order sincerity?

A. Yes; for lying, perfidy, and perjury create distrust, quarrels,
hatred, revenge, and a crowd of evils among men, which tend to their
common destruction; while sincerity and fidelity establish confidence,
concord, and peace, besides the infinite good resulting from such a
state of things to society.

Q. Does it prescribe mildness and modesty?

A. Yes; for harshness and obduracy, by alienating from us the hearts of
other men, give them an inclination to hurt us; ostentation and vanity,
by wounding their self-love and jealousy, occasion us to miss the end of
a real utility.

Q. Does it prescribe humility as a virtue?

A. No; for it is a propensity in the human heart to despise secretly
everything that presents to it the idea of weakness; and self-debasement
encourages pride and oppression in others; the balance must be kept in
equipoise.

Q. You have reckoned simplicity of manners among the social virtues;
what do you understand by that word?

A. I mean the restricting our wants and desires to what is truly useful
to the existence of the citizen and his family; that is to say, the man
of simple manners has but few wants, and lives content with a little.

Q. How is this virtue prescribed to us?

A. By the numerous advantages which the practice of it procures to the
individual and to society; for the man whose wants are few, is free at
once from a crowd of cares, perplexities, and labors; he avoids many
quarrels and contests arising from avidity and a desire of gain; he
spares himself the anxiety of ambition, the inquietudes of possession,
and the uneasiness of losses; finding superfluity everywhere, he is the
real rich man; always content with what he has, he is happy at little
expense; and other men, not fearing any competition from him, leave him
in quiet, and are disposed to render him the services he should stand
in need of. And if this virtue of simplicity extends to a whole people,
they insure to themselves abundance; rich in everything they do not
consume, they acquire immense means of exchange and commerce; they work,
fabricate, and sell at a lower price than others, and attain to all
kinds of prosperity, both at home and abroad.

Q. What is the vice contrary to this virtue?

A. It is cupidity and luxury.

Q. Is luxury a vice in the individual and in society?

A. Yes, and to that degree, that it may be said to include all the
others; for the man who stands in need of many things, imposes thereby
on himself all the anxiety, and submits to all the means just or unjust
of acquiring them. Does he possess an enjoyment, he covets another; and
in the bosom of superfluity, he is never rich; a commodious dwelling is
not sufficient for him, he must have a beautiful hotel; not content with
a plenteous table, he must have rare and costly viands: he must have
splendid furniture, expensive clothes, a train of attendants, horses,
carriages, women, theatrical representations and games. Now, to supply
so many expenses, much money must be had; and he looks on every method
of procuring it as good and even necessary; at first he borrows,
afterwards he steals, robs, plunders, turns bankrupt, is at war with
every one, ruins and is ruined.

Should a nation be involved in luxury, it occasions on a larger scale
the same devastations; by reason that it consumes its entire produce,
it finds itself poor even with abundance; it has nothing to sell to
foreigners; its manufactures are carried on at a great expense, and
are sold too dear; it becomes tributary for everything it imports; it
attacks externally its consideration, power, strength, and means of
defence and preservation, while internally it undermines and falls
into the dissolution of its members. All its citizens being covetous
of enjoyments, are engaged in a perpetual struggle to obtain them; all
injure or are near injuring themselves; and hence arise those habits
and actions of usurpation, which constitute what is denominated moral
corruption, intestine war between citizen and citizen. From luxury
arises avidity, from avidity, invasion by violence and perfidy; from
luxury arises the iniquity of the judge, the venality of the witness,
the improbity of the husband, the prostitution of the wife, the obduracy
of parents, the ingratitude of children, the avarice of the master, the
dishonesty of the servant, the dilapidation of the administrator, the
perversity of the legislator, lying, perfidy, perjury, assassination,
and all the disorders of the social state; so that it was with a
profound sense of truth, that ancient moralists have laid the basis of
the social virtues on simplicity of manners, restriction of wants, and
contentment with a little; and a sure way of knowing the extent of
a man's virtues and vices is, to find out if his expenses are
proportionate to his fortune, and calculate, from his want of money, his
probity, his integrity in fulfilling his engagements, his devotion to
the public weal, and his sincere or pretended love of his country.

Q. What do you mean by the word country?

A. I mean the community of citizens who, united by fraternal sentiments,
and reciprocal wants, make of their respective strength one common
force, the reaction of which on each of them assumes the noble and
beneficent character of paternity. In society, citizens form a bank of
interest; in our country we form a family of endearing attachments; it
is charity, the love of one's neighbor extended to a whole nation. Now
as charity cannot be separated from justice, no member of the family can
pretend to the enjoyment of its advantages, except in proportion to his
labor; if he consumes more than it produces, he necessarily encroaches
on his fellow-citizens; and it is only by consuming less than what
he produces or possesses, that he can acquire the means of making
sacrifices and being generous.

Q. What do you conclude from all this?

A. I conclude from it that all the social virtues are only the habitude
of actions useful to society and to the individual who practices them;
That they refer to the physical object of man's preservation; That
nature having implanted in us the want of that preservation, has made
a law to us of all its consequences, and a crime of everything that
deviates from it; That we carry in us the seed of every virtue, and of
every perfection; That it only requires to be developed; That we are
only happy inasmuch as we observe the rules established by nature for
the end of our preservation; And that all wisdom, all perfection, all
law, all virtue, all philosophy, consist in the practice of these axioms
founded on our own organization:


Preserve thyself; Instruct thyself; Moderate thyself; Live for thy
fellow citizens, that they may live for thee.





VOLNEY'S ANSWER TO DR. PRIESTLY.*

     * In 1797, Dr. Priestly published a pamphlet, entitled,
     "Observation on the increase of infidelity, with
     animadversions upon the writings of several modern
     unbelievers, and especially the Ruins of Mr. Volney." The
     motto to this tract was:

"Minds of little penetration rest naturally on the surface of things.
They do not like to pierce deep into them, for fear of labor and
trouble; sometimes still more for fear of truth."

This Letter is an answer from Volney, taken from the Anti-Jacobin Review
of March and April, 1799.


SIR.--I received in due time your pamphlet on the increase of
infidelity, together with the note without date which accompanied it.*
My answer has been delayed by the incidents of business, and even by
ill health, which you will surely excuse: this delay has, besides, no
inconvenience in it. The question between us is not of a very urgent
nature: the world would not go on less well with or without my answer
as with or without your book. I might, indeed, have dispensed with
returning you any answer at all; and I should have been warranted in
so doing, by the manner in which you have stated the debate, and by the
opinion pretty generally received that, on certain occasions, and with
certain persons, the most noble reply is silence. You seem to have been
aware of this yourself, considering the extreme precautions you have
taken to deprive me of this resource; but as according to our French
customs, any answer is an act of civility, I am not willing to concede
the advantage of politeness--besides, although silence is sometimes
very significant, its eloquence is not understood by every one, and
the public which has not leisure to analyze disputes (often of little
interest) has a reasonable right to require at least some preliminary
explanations; reserving to itself, should the discussion degenerate into
the recriminative clamors of an irritated self-love, to allow the right
of silence to him in whom it becomes the virtue of moderation.

     * Dr. Priestly sent his pamphlet to Volney, desiring his
     answer to the strictures on his opinions in his Ruins of
     Empires.

I have read, therefore, your animadversions on my Ruins, which you are
pleased to class among the writings of modern unbelievers, and since you
absolutely insist on my expressing my opinion before the public, I shall
now fulfill this rather disagreeable task with all possible brevity,
for the sake of economizing the time of our readers. In the first place,
sir, it appears evidently, from your pamphlet, that your design is less
to attack my book than my personal and moral character; and in order
that the public may pronounce with accuracy on this point, I submit
several passages fitted to throw light on the subject.

You say, in the preface of your discourses, p. 12, "There are, however,
unbelievers more ignorant than Mr. Paine, Mr. Volney, Lequino, and
others in France say," &c.

Also in the preface of your present observations, p. 20. "I can
truly say that in the writings of Hume, Mr. Gibbon, Voltaire, Mr.
Volney--there is nothing of solid argument: all abound in gross mistakes
and misrepresentations." Idem, p. 38--"Whereas had he (Mr. Volney)
given attention to the history of the times in which Christianity was
promulgated . . . he could have no more doubt . . . &c., it is as much
in vain to argue with such a person as this, as with a Chinese or even a
Hottentot."

Idem, p. 119--"Mr. Volney, if we may judge from his numerous quotations
of ancient writers in all the learned languages, oriental as well as
occidental, must be acquainted with all; for he makes no mention of any
translation, and yet if we judge from this specimen of his knowledge of
them, he cannot have the smallest tincture of that of the Hebrew or even
of the Greek."

And, at last, after having published and posted me in your very title
page, as an unbeliever and an infidel; after having pointed me out in
your motto as one of those superficial spirits who know not how to find
out, and are unwilling to encounter, truth; you add, p. 124,
immediately after an article in which you speak of me under all these
denominations--

"The progress of infidelity, in the present age, is attended with a
circumstance which did not so frequently accompany it in any former
period, at least, in England, which is, that unbelievers in revelation
generally proceed to the disbelief of the being and providence of God
so as to become properly Atheists." So that, according to you, I am a
Chinese, a Hottentot, an unbeliever, an Atheist, an ignoramus, a man of
no sincerity; whose writings are full of nothing but gross mistakes and
misrepresentations. Now I ask you, sir, What has all this to do with the
main question? What has my book in common with my person? And how can
you hold any converse with a man of such bad connexions? In the second
place, your invitation, or rather, your summons to me, to point out
the mistakes which I think you have made with respect to my opinions,
suggest to me several observations.

First. You suppose that the public attaches a high importance to your
mistakes and to my opinions: but I cannot act upon a supposition. Am I
not an unbeliever?

Secondly. You say, p. 18, that the public will expect it from me: Where
are the powers by which you make the public speak and act? Is this also
a revelation?

Thirdly. You require me to point out your mistakes. I do not know that I
am under any such obligation: I have not reproached you with them; it
is not, indeed, very correct to ascribe to me, by selection or
indiscriminately, as you have done, all the opinions scattered through
my book, since, having introduced many different persons, I was under
the necessity of making them deliver different sentiments, according to
their different characters. The part which belongs to me is that of a
traveler, resting upon the ruins and meditating on the causes of the
misfortunes of the human race. To be consistent with yourself you ought
to have assigned to me that of the Hottentot or Samoyde savage, who
argues with the Doctors, chap. xxiii, and I should have accepted it; you
have preferred that of the erudite historian, chap. xxii, nor do I look
upon this as a mistake; I discover on the contrary, an insidious design
to engage me in a duel of self-love before the public, wherein you would
excite the exclusive interest of the spectators by supporting the cause
which they approve; while the task which you would impose on me,
would only, in the event of success, be attended with sentiments of
disapprobation. Such is your artful purpose, that, in attacking me
as doubting the existence of Jesus, you might secure to yourself,
by surprise, the favor of every Christian sect, although your own
incredulity in his divine nature is not less subversive of Christianity
than the profane opinion, which does not find in history the proof
required by the English law to establish a fact: to say nothing of
the extraordinary kind of pride assumed in the silent, but palpable,
comparison of yourself to Paul and to Christ, by likening your labors to
theirs as tending to the same object, p. 10, preface. Nevertheless, as
the first impression of an attack always confers an advantage, you
have some ground for expecting you may obtain the apostolic crown;
unfortunately for your purpose I entertain no disposition to that of
martrydom: and however glorious it might be to me to fall under the arm
of him who has overcome Hume, Gibbon, Voltaire and even Frederick II., I
find myself under the necessity of declining your theological challenge,
for a number of substantial reasons.

1. Because, to religious quarrels there is no end, since the prejudices
of infancy and education almost unavoidably exclude impartial reasoning,
and besides, the vanity of the champions becomes committed by the very
publicity of the contest, never to give up a first assertion, whence
result a spirit of sectarism and faction.

2. Because no one has a right to ask of me an account of my religious
opinions. Every inquisition of this kind is a pretension to sovereignty,
a first step towards persecution; and the tolerant spirit of this
country, which you invoke, has much less in view to engage men to speak,
than to invite them to be silent.

3. Because, supposing I do hold the opinions you attribute to me, I wish
not to engage my vanity so as never to retract, nor to deprive myself
of the resource of a conversion on some future day after more ample
information.

4. And because, reverend sir, if, in the support of your own thesis, you
should happen to be discomfited before the Christian audience, it would
be a dreadful scandal; and I will not be a cause for scandal, even for
the sake of good.

5. Because in this metaphysical contest our arms are too unequal; you
speaking in your mother tongue, which I scarcely lisp, might bring forth
huge volumes, while I could hardly oppose pages; and the public, who
would read neither production, might take the weight of the books for
that of reasoning.

6. And because, being endowed with the gift of faith in a pretty
sufficient quantity, you might swallow in a quarter of an hour more
articles than my logic would digest in a week.

7. Because again, if you were to oblige me to attend your sermons, as
you have compelled me to read your pamphlet, the congregation would
never believe that a man powdered and adorned like any worldling, could
be in the right against a man dressed out in a large hat, with straight
hair,* and a mortified countenance, although the gospel, speaking of the
pharisees of other times, who were unpowdered, says that when one fasts
he must anoint his head and wash his face.**

     * Dr. Priestly has discarded his wig since he went to
     America, and wears his own hair.  Editor A. J. Reveiw.

     ** St. Matthew, Chapter VI. verses 16 and 17.

8. Because, finally, a dispute to one having nothing else to do would be
a gratification, while to me, who can employ my time better, it would be
an absolute loss.

I shall not then, reverend sir, make you my confessor in matters of
religion, but I will disclose to you my opinion, as a man of letters, on
the composition of your book. Having in former days, read many works of
theology, I was curious to learn whether by any chemical process you had
discovered real beings in that world of invisibles. Unfortunately, I am
obliged to declare to the public, which, according to your expression,
p. 19, "hopes to be instructed, to be led into truth, and not into error
by me," that I have not found in your book a single new argument,
but the mere repetition of what is told over and over in thousands of
volumes, the whole fruit of which has been to procure for their authors
a cursory mention in the dictionary of heresies. You everywhere lay down
that as proved which remains to be proved; with this peculiarity,
that, as Gibbon says, firing away your double battery against those who
believe too much, and those who believe too little, you hold out your
own peculiar sensations, as to the precise criterion of truth; so that
we must all be just of your size in order to pass the gate of that
New Jerusalem which you are building. After this, your reputation as
a divine might have become problematical with me; but recollecting the
principle of the association of ideas so well developed by Locke, whom
you hold in estimation, and whom, for that reason I am happy to cite to
you, although to him I owe that pernicious use of my understanding which
makes me disbelieve what I do not comprehend--I perceive why the public
having originally attached the idea of talents to the name of Mr.
Priestly, doctor in chemistry, continued by habit to associate it with
the name of Mr. Priestly, doctor in divinity; which, however, is not the
same thing: an association of ideas the more vicious as it is liable
to be moved inversely.* Happily you have yourself raised a bar of
separation between your admirers, by advising us in the first page
of your preface, that your present book is especially destined for
believers. To cooperate, however, with you, sir, in this judicious
design, I must observe that it is necessary to retrench two passages,
seeing they afford the greatest support to the arguments of unbelievers.

     * Mr. Blair, doctor of divinity, and Mr. Black, doctor in
     chemistry, met at the coffee house in Edinburg: a new
     theological pamphlet written by doctor Priestly was thrown
     upon the table, "Really," said Dr. Blair, "this man had
     better confine himself to chemistry, for he is absolutely
     ignorant in theology:"--"I beg your pardon," answered Dr.
     Black, "he is in the right, he is a minister of the gospel,
     he ought to adhere to his profession, for in truth he knows
     nothing of chemistry."

You say, p. 15, "What is manifestly contrary to natural reason cannot be
received by it;"--and p. 62, "With respect to intellect, men and brute
animals are born in the same state, having the same external senses,
which are the only inlets to all ideas, and consequently the source of
all the knowledge and of all the mental habits they ever acquire."

Now if you admit, with Locke, and with us infidels, that every one has
the right of rejecting whatever is contrary to his natural reason, and
that all our ideas and all our knowledge are acquired only by the inlets
of our external senses; What becomes of the system of revelation, and of
that order of things in times past, which is so contradictory to that
of the time present? unless we consider it as a dream of the human brain
during the state of superstitious ignorance.

With these two single phrases, I could overturn the whole edifice of
your faith. Dread not, however, sir, in me such overflowing zeal. For
the same reason that I have not the frenzy of martyrdom, I have not that
of making proselytes. It becomes those ardent, or rather acrimonious
tempers, who mistake the violence of their sentiments for the enthusiasm
of truth; the ambition of noise and rumor, for the love of glory; and
for the love of their neighbor, the detestation of his opinions, and the
secret desire of dominion.

As for me, who have not received from nature the turbulent qualities of
an apostle, and never sustained in Europe the character of a dissenter,
I am come to America neither to agitate the conscience of men, nor to
form a sect, nor to establish a colony, in which, under the pretext of
religion, I might erect a little empire to myself. I have never been
seen evangelizing my ideas, either in temples or in public meetings. I
have never likewise practiced that quackery of beneficence, by which
a certain divine, imposing a tax upon the generosity of the public,
procures for himself the honors of a more numerous audience, and the
merit of distributing at his pleasure a bounty which costs him nothing,
and for which he receives grateful thanks dexterously stolen from the
original donors.

Either in the capacity of a stranger, or in that of a citizen, a sincere
friend to peace, I carry into society neither the spirit of dissension,
nor the desire of commotion; and because I respect in every one what
I wish him to respect in me, the name of liberty is in my mind nothing
else but the synonyma of justice.

As a man, whether from moderation or indolence, a spectator of the world
rather than an actor in it, I am every day less tempted to take on me
the management of the minds or bodies of men: it is sufficient for an
individual to govern his own passions and caprices.

If by one of these caprices, I am induced to think it may be useful,
sometimes, to publish my reflections, I do it without obstinacy or
pretension to that implicit faith, the ridicule of which you desire
to impart to me, p. 123. My whole book of the Ruins which you treat so
ungratefully, since you thought it amusing, p. 122, evidently bears this
character. By means of the contrasted opinions I have scattered through
it, it breathes that spirit of doubt and uncertainty which appears to me
the best suited to the weakness of the human mind, and the most adapted
to its improvement, inasmuch as it always leaves a door open to new
truths; while the spirit of dogmatism and immovable belief, limiting our
progress to a first received opinion, binds us at hazard, and without
resource, to the yoke of error or falsehood, and occasions the most
serious mischiefs to society; since by combining with the passions, it
engenders fanaticism, which, sometimes misled and sometimes misleading,
though always intolerant and despotic, attacks whatever is not of
its own nature; drawing upon itself persecution when it is weak, and
practising persecution when it is powerful; establishing a religion of
terror, which annihilates the faculties, and vitiates the conscience:
so that, whether under a political or a religious aspect, the spirit
of doubt is friendly to all ideas of liberty, truth, or genius, while a
spirit of confidence is connected with the ideas of tyranny, servility,
and ignorance.

If, as is the fact, our own experience and that of others daily teaches
us that what at one time appeared true, afterwards appeared demonstrably
false, how can we connect with our judgments that blind and presumptuous
confidence which pursues those of others with so much hatred?

No doubt it is reasonable, and even honest, to act according to our
present feelings and conviction: but if these feelings and their causes
do vary by the very nature of things, how dare we impose upon ourselves
or others an invariable conviction? How, above all, dare we require this
conviction in cases where there is really no sensation, as happens
in purely speculative questions, in which no palpable fact can be
presented?

Therefore, when opening the book of nature, (a more authentic one and
more easy to be read than leaves of paper blackened over with Greek or
Hebrew,) and when I reflected that the slightest change in the material
world has not been in times past, nor is at present effected by the
difference of so many religions and sects which have appeared and still
exist on the globe, and that the course of the seasons, the path of the
sun, the return of rain and drought, are the same for the inhabitants
of each country, whether Christians, Mussulmans, Idolaters, Catholics,
Protestants, etc., I am induced to believe that the universe is governed
by laws of wisdom and justice, very different from those which human
ignorance and intolerance would enact.

And as in living with men of very opposite religious persuasions, I
have had occasion to remark that their manners were, nevertheless, very
analogous; that is to say, among the different Christian sects, among
the Mahometans, and even among those people who were of no sect, I have
found men who practise all the virtues, public and private, and that too
without affectation; while others, who were incessantly declaiming of
God and religion, abandoned themselves to every vicious habit which
their belief condemned, I thereby became convinced that Ethics,
the doctrines of morality, are the only essential, as they are only
demonstrable, part of religion. And as, by your own avowal, the only end
of religion is to render men better, in order to add to their happiness,
p. 62, I have concluded that there are but two great systems of religion
in the world, that of good sense and beneficence, and that of malice and
hypocrisy.

In closing this letter, I find myself embarrassed by the nature of the
sentiment which I ought to express to you, for in declaring as you
have done, p. 123, that you do not care for the contempt of such as me*
(ignorant as you were of my opinion), you tell me plainly that you do
not care for their esteem. I leave, therefore, to your discernment and
taste to determine the sentiment most congenial to my situation and your
desert.

     * "And what does it do for me here, except, perhaps, expose
     me to the contempt of such men as Mr. Volney, which,
     however, I feel myself pretty well able to bear?" p. 124.
     This language is the more surprising, as Dr. Priestly never
     received anything from me but civilities.  In the year 1791
     I sent him a dissertation of mine on the Chronology of the
     Ancients, in consequence of some charts which he had himself
     published.  His only answer was to abuse me in a pamphlet in
     1792.  After this first abuse, on meeting me here last
     winter, he procured me an invitation to dine with his friend
     Mr. Russell, at whose house he lodged; after having shown me
     polite attention at that dinner, he abuses me in his new
     pamphlet.  After this second abuse he meets me in Spruce
     Street, and takes me by the hand as a friend, and speaks of
     me in a large company under that denomination.  Now I ask
     the public, what kind of a man is Dr. Priestly?

C. F. VOLNEY.

Philadelphia, March 10, 1797.

P. S. I do not accompany this public letter with a private note to Dr.
Priestly, because communications of that nature carry an appearance of
bravado, which, even in exercising the right of a necessary defence,
appear to me imcompatible with decency and politeness.



THE ZODIACAL SIGNS AND CONSTELLATIONS.

(Compiled by the publisher from recognized authorities.)


The Zodiac is an imaginary girdle or belt in the celestial sphere, which
extends about eight degrees on each side of the Ecliptic. It is divided
into twelve portions, called the signs of the Zodiac, within which all
the planets make their revolutions. The Zodiac is so called from the
animals represented upon it, and is supposed to have originated
in remote ages and in latitudes where the camel and elephant were
comparatively unknown. This pictorial representation of the zodiac was
probably the origin, as M. Dupuis suggests, of the Arabian and Egyptian
adoration of animals and birds, and has led in the natural progress of
events to the adoration of images by both Christians and pagans.

"The Signs of the Zodiac, (says Godfrey Higgins in The Anacalypsis) with
the exception of the Scorpion, which was exchanged by Dan for the
Eagle, were carried by the different tribes of the Israelites on their
standards; and Taurus, Leo, Aquarius, and Scorpio or the Eagle--the
four signs of Reuben, Judah, Ephriam, and Dan--were placed at the four
corners, (the four cardinal points), of their encampment, evidently
in allusion to the cardinal points of the sphere, the equinoxes and
solstices, when the equinox was in Taurus. (See Parkhurst's Lexicon.)
These coincidences prove that this religious system had its origin
before the bull ceased to be an equinoctial sign, and prove also, that
the religion of Moses was originally the same in its secret mysteries as
that of the Heathen, or, if my reader likes it better, that the Heathen
secret mysteries were the same as those of Moses."

The Ecliptic, a great circle of the sphere, (shown on the preceding map
by two parallel lines), is supposed to be drawn through the middle of
the Zodiac, cutting the Equator at two points, (called the Equinoctial
points), at an angle with the equinoctial of 23 degrees 28 minutes, (the
sun's greatest declination), and is the path which the earth is supposed
to describe amidst the fixed stars in performing its annual circuit
around the sun. It is called the Ecliptic because the eclipses of the
sun and moon always occur under it.

The Signs are each the twelfth part of the Ecliptic or Zodiac, (30
degrees,) and are reckoned from the point of intersection of the
ecliptic and equator at the vernal equinox. They are named respectively
Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius,
Capricornus, Aquarius, Pisces. These names are borrowed from
the constellations of the zodiac of the same denomination, which
corresponded when these divisions were originally made; but in
consequence of the precession, recession, or retrocession of the
equinoxes, (about 50 1/10" yearly, at the rate of about 72 years to a
degree, displacing an entire sign in about 2152 years, and making
an entire revolution of the equinoctial in about 25,868 years), the
positions of these constellations in the heavens no longer correspond
with the divisions of the ecliptic of the same name, but are in advance
of them. Thus, the constellation Aries is now in that part of the
ecliptic called Taurus, and the stars of Taurus are in Gemini, those of
Gemini in Cancer, and so on throughout the ecliptic.

The relative positions of the signs and constellations in the zodiac and
ecliptic seem thus to have gradually changed with the revolving years;
and the worship of the three constellations, Taurus, Aries, and Pisces,
with which Christianity is so intimately connected, seems to have
changed in a corresponding degree. The worship of the bull of Egypt--the
celestial Taurus--has given place to that of the lamb of Palestine--the
celestial Aries; and under the astronomical emblem Pisces--the twelfth
sign of the zodiac--the dominant faith of to-day was appropriately
taught by the twelve apostolic fishermen.

It is from one of these chosen fishermen, St. Peter, that the Pope of
Rome claims to have derived his arbitrary power for binding and loosing
on earth those who are to be bound and loosed in heaven. (Matt. xvi,
19.) The grave responsibility of wielding with justice and equity this
tremendous power over the future destiny of mankind, seems never to have
disconcerted any of the successors of St. Peter. They have all proved
to be equally arrogant and intolerant, zealous for both temporal and
spiritual domination, and merciless to those who have opposed their
pretensions. The present incumbent of the papal chair, who modestly
claims the attribute of infallibility, seems proud of his inherited
title, The Great Fisherman! and hopes in the progress of time, with the
assistance of his monks, bishops, and cardinals, to entangle all nations
in his net of faith, and to dictate with unquestioned authority the
religious worship of the entire human race.

As the precession of the equinoxes still continues as of yore, and as
the masses still continue credulous and devout, they may in succeeding
ages be again called upon to worship the god Apis, when the sign of
Taurus shall again coincide in the zodiac and the ecliptic; and Aries,
"the lamb of God," may again be offered in the "fullness of time" as a
sacrifice for mankind, again be crucified, and again shed his redeeming
blood to wash away the sins of a believing world.

M. Dupuis has satisfactorily shown in The History of all Religions that
the twelve labors of the god and saviour Hercules were astronomical
allegories--the history of the passage of the sun through the twelve
signs of the zodiac--and these labors are so similar to the sufferings
of Jesus, that the Rev. Mr. Parkhurst has been obliged, much against
his inclination, to acknowledge that they "were types of what the
real Saviour was to do and suffer." (Parkhurst, p.47.) An intimate
connection, if not identity, is thus shown between ancient and modern
belief--between the paganism of the past and the orthodoxy of the
present.



THE ZODIACAL SIGNS.


ARIES, the Ram: (marked [symbol for ARIES])--A northern constellation,
usually named as the first sign in the zodiac, into which, when the sun
enters at the vernal equinox in March, the days and nights are of equal
length. Aries has been regarded by the devout during many ages as the
celestial representative, visible in the heavens, of "the Lamb of God
that taketh away the sins of the world."

TAURUS, the Bull:(marked thus, [symbol for TAURUS])--The second sign in
the zodiac, which by the Arabians is called Ataur. This constellation
was worshipped for ages by the idolatrous Egyptians as the heavenly
representative of their god Osiris; and derives its name, according to
Grecian fable, from the bull into which Jupiter transformed himself
in order to carry Europa over into Crete; but the constellation was
probably so named by the Egyptians to designate that period of the year,
(April), in which cows mostly bring forth their young.

"The Rev. Mr. Maurice in his work on the antiquities of India, has shown
that the May-day festival and the May-pole of Great Britain with its
garlands, etc., are the remains of an ancient festival of Egypt and
India, and probably of Phoenicia, when these nations, in countries
very distant, and from times very remote, have all, with one consent,
celebrated the entrance of the sun into the sign of Taurus at the vernal
equinox."

GEMINI, the Twins: (marked thus, [symbol for GEMINI])--A zodiacal
constellation, visible in May, containing the two bright stars Castor
and Pollux, the fabled sons of Leda and Jupiter, who during their lives
had cleared the Hellespont and neighboring seas of pirates, and were
therefore deemed the protectors of navigators and sailors.

CANCER, the Crab: (marked thus, [symbol for CANCER])--Is the fourth
sign of the zodiac, which the sun enters on the 21st day of June, and is
thence called the summer solstice. According to Grecian fable, the crab
was transported to heaven at the request of Juno, after it had been
slain by Hercules during his battle with the serpent Python, but the
evident design of the name is to represent the apparent backward motion
of the sun in June, which is said to resemble the motions of a crab.

LEO, the Lion: ([symbol for LEO]).--Is the fifth sign in the zodiac,
and contains one star of the first magnitude, called Regulus, or Cor
Leonis--the Lion's Heart. The fervid heat of July, when the sun has
attained its greatest power, is now symbolized in our almanacs by
the figure of an enraged lion; and the feasts or sacrifices formerly
celebrated among the ancients during this month, in honor of the sun,
(which they also represented under the form of a lion,) were called
Leonitica. The priests who performed the sacred rites were called
Leones. This feast was sometimes called Mithriaca, because Mithra was
the name of the sun among the Persians. The sacred writings abound with
references to the "king of beasts;" among the most interesting of which
is the story of the battle between the lion and Samson, the Jewish
Herculus; while the most wonderful example of animal evolution on record
is found in the sixty-fifth chapter of Isaiah, where we are gravely
informed that "the lion shall eat straw like the bullock."

VIRGO, Virgin Mother, Venus, Eve, Isis, &c.--([symbol for VIRGO]).--Is
the sixth sign of the zodiac, which the sun enters about the 21st of
August. The myths and fables regarding the virgin which abound among all
nations and all religions, are both various and voluminous, and we may
add somewhat improbable. They all agree, however, in this, that the
female, shown on the preceding diagram, holding in her right hand a
branch of ripened fruit,--the apples of Paradise,--was intended
to represent the reproductive powers of nature,--the abundance,
satisfaction and contentment which mortals enjoy during the happy period
of harvest.

LIBRA, the Balance.--The seventh sign of the zodiac, directly opposite
to Aries, from which it is distant 180 degrees. It is marked thus
[symbol for LIBRA], after the manner of a pair of scales; to denote,
probably, that when the sun arrives at this part of the ecliptic, the
days and nights are equal, as if weighed in a balance. Hence the
period when the sun enters Libra, (about September 21st,) is called the
Autumnal equinox. On the 25th of September was born John the Baptist,
the forerunner of his cousin Jesus, who came to his exaltation of glory
on the 25th of March, the Vernal equinox. "The equinoxes and solstices,"
says Higgins, "equally marked the births and deaths of John and Jesus."
The one preceded and prepared the way for the other, who receded.
One advanced, the other declined. Jesus ascended, John descended.
Astrologically speaking, "He must increase, but I must decrease." (John
iii, 30.)

SCORPIO, the Scorpion.--The eighth sign of the zodiac, which the sun
enters on the 23d of October, is marked thus [symbol for SCORPIO].
Scorpio is fabled to have killed the great hunter Orion, and for that
exploit to have been placed among the constellations. For this reason it
is also said that when Scorpio rises Orion sets.

SAGITTARIUS, the Archer: (marked thus, [symbol for SAGITTARIUS]) is the
ninth zodiacal sign, and corresponds with the month of November. This
sign is represented like a centaur and was fabled to be Crotus, the son
of Eupheme, the nurse of the Muses.

CAPRICORNUS, the Goat.([symbol for CAPRICORNUS])--The tenth sign of the
zodiac, which the sun enters the 21st of December, (the longest night in
the year,) called the winter solstice. This sign is drawn to represent
the horns of a goat, and is fabled to have been Pan, who in the war of
the giants was taken to heaven in the shape of a goat. Others claim
that it was the goat of Amalthaea, which fed Jupiter with her milk.
Macrobius, who calls Cancer and Capricorn the gates of the sun, makes
the latter sign to represent his motion, after the manner of a goat
climbing the mountains.

AQUARIUS, the Water Bearer.--A constellation in the heavens so called,
because during its rising there is usually an abundance of rain. It
is the eleventh sign in the zodiac, reckoned from Aries, and is marked
thus, [symbol for AQUARIUS]. It rises in January and sets in February,
and is supposed by the poets to be Ganymede.

PISCES, the Fishes, [symbol for PISCES].--The twelfth sign of the
zodiac, rises in February and is represented by two fishes tied together
by the tails. These fishes are fabled by the Greeks to be those into
which Venus and Cupid were changed to escape from the giant Typhon. This
fable may not be true, but that wonderful miracles were once performed
with two small fishes is stated in the ninth chapter of the Gospel of
St. Luke, where it is said that 5000 hungry mortals were cheaply, if
not sumptuously regaled with two small fishes and five loaves of bread;
while a large surplus of this piscatory diet, larger indeed than the
original stock, still remained intact.

In the vestibule or approaches to catholic churches is usually found a
vase filled with water, (called Piscina,) and this water is considered
holy. The Fish-days are observed as holy days, or fast days, in which
Fish may be eaten and meat is forbidden; and learned writers have
asserted that in the worship of Pisces may be found the true secret of
the origin of the rite of baptism. The Fish-god Oannes, is said to have
come out of the Erythraean Sea and taught the Babylonians all kinds of
useful knowledge. Ionnes or Jonas went headlong into the sea and into
a fish, and has kindly recorded for our instruction his remarkable
adventures. The miraculous draughts of fishes in the apostolic age still
excite the emulation of modern fishermen, who cannot even hope to rival
the wonders that have been recorded. St. Peter is said to have secured
ready money from the mouth of a fish that he caught with a hook and
line in the sea of Galilee. (Matthew xvii, 27.) His success was justly
rewarded, and to him was delegated the power of ruling the infant
church. Pisces thus displaced Aries. The fisherman succeeded the
shepherd. The precession of the equinoxes produced a new avatar; a new
sign arose in the heavens; and a new saviour was born to save mankind.


THE CONSTELLATIONS.


SIRIUS, the Dog Star.--A bright star of the first magnitude in the
mouth of the constellation Canis Major. This is the brightest star that
appears in our firmament, and is supposed by some to be the nearest.

LEPUS.--One of the southern constellations, placed near Orion, according
to Grecian fable, because it was one of the animals which he hunted.

ERIDANUS.--A winding southern constellation, near the Cetus, containing
the bright star Achemar.

CETUS, the Whale.--A southern constellation, and one of the forty-eight
old asterisms. It is fabled to have been the sea monster sent by Neptune
to devour Andromeda, which was killed by Perseus.

CRATER, the Cup.--A southern constellation, near Hydra. This is supposed
by Hyainus to be the cup which Apollo gave to the Corvus, or Raven.

CORVUS.--One of the old constellations in the southern hemisphere, near
Sagittarius. This bird is fabled to have been translated to heaven by
Apollo for discovering to him the infidelity of the nymph Coronis.

ARGO NAVIS, the Ship.--A constellation near to the Canis Major, and the
name of the ship which carried Jason and his fifty-four companions
to Colchis in quest of the golden fleece, and was said to have been
translated into the heavens.

CANOPUS.--The name formerly given to a star in the second bend of
Eridanus. A bright star of the first magnitude in the rudder of the ship
Argo, which, according to Pliny, was visible at Alexandria in Egypt.

CENTAURUS.--One of the forty-eight old constellations in the southern
hemisphere, represented in the form of half man and half horse, who was
fabled by the Greeks to have been Chiron, the tutor of Achilles.

AVA, or ALTAR.--One of the old constellations, and fabled to have been
that at which the giants entered into their conspiracy against the gods;
wherefore Jupiter, in commemoration of the event, transplanted the altar
into the heavens.

PEGASUS.--One of the forty-eight old constellations of the northern
hemisphere, figured in the form of a flying horse.

DELPHINUS, or DOLPHIN.--A northern constellation, near Pegasus. The
Dolphin is fabled to have been translated to heaven by Neptune.

AQUILA, the Eagle.--In the Arabic Altair, but in the Persian tables the
Flying Vulture. This is one of the old constellations, situated near
Delphinus in the northern hemisphere. According to Grecian fable, Aquila
represented Ganymede or Hebe, who was transported to heaven and made
cup-bearer to Jupiter.

SAGITTA--the Dart or Arrow, called by the Arabians Schahan. One of
the old constellations in the northern hemisphere, near Aquila and
Delphinus. It is fabled to have been the arrow with which Hercules slew
the vulture that was devouring the liver of Prometheus who was, like
Jesus, crucified for loving mankind.

CYGNUS, the Swan.--An old constellation in the milky-way, between
Equus and the Dragon. This is fabled to be the swan into which Jupiter
transformed himself in order to deceive the virtuous Leda, wife of
Tyndareus, king of Sparta. The Grecian matron, like the Jewish virgin,
thus became the mother of a God.

LYRA.--A northern constellation between Hercules and Cygnus, containing
a white star of the first magnitude.

MILKY-WAY.--Galaxy, or Via Lactia.--A broad luminous path or circle
encompassing the heavens, which is easily discernible by its white
appearance, from which it derives its name. It is supposed to be the
blended light of innumerable fixed stars, which are not distinguishable
with ordinary telescopes.

HYDRA, the Serpent.--A southern constellation of great length, which is
drawn to represent a serpent. The Hydra is fabled to have been placed in
the heavens by Apollo, to frighten the Raven from drinking.

ORION, the hunter.--A constellation of the southern hemisphere with
respect to the ecliptic, but half southern and half northern with
respect to the equinoctial. It is placed near the feet of the bull, and
is composed of seventeen stars in the form of a sword, which has given
occasion to the poets to speak of Orion's sword. He was described by
the Greeks as a "mighty hunter," who for his exploits was placed in the
heavens by Jupiter, between the Canis and the Lepus. He is believed by
many to have been the "mighty hunter" spoken of in the bible, under the
name of Nimrod. (See Gen. x: 8, 9; 1 Chron. i: 10; Micha v: 6, Job ix,
9; Amos v, 8.)

PERSEUS.--This constellation is named from Perseus, the son of Jupiter
by Danae, who was translated into the heavens by the assistance of
Minerva, for having released Andromeda from her confinement on the
rock to which she was chained. He is represented in the preceding
illustration holding a drawn sword in his right hand and in his left the
head of Medusa, the Gorgon, whose terrifying appearance changed all who
beheld her into stone, and whom he had destroyed with the assistance of
the wings he had borrowed from Mercury, the helmet from Pluto, the sword
from Vulcan, and the shield from Minerva.

JOSEPH'S STABLE; AURIGA, the Wagoner:--A northern constellation between
Perseus and Gemini, represented by the figure of an old man supporting
a goat. He is said to have been taken to heaven by Jupiter after the
invention of wagons.

URSA MAJOR, the Bear.--One of the prominent northern constellations,
situated near the north pole. It contains the stars called the Dipper.
Ursa Minor contains the pole-star, which is shown in the extremity of
the tail of the bear.

ANDROMEDA.--A northern constellation, represented by a woman chained;
as, according to Grecian fable, Andromeda, the daughter of Cassiopia,
was bound to a rock by the Nereides, and afterwards released by Perseus.
Minerva changed her into a constellation after her death, and placed her
in the heavens.

DRACO OR DRAGON.--A northern constellation, supposed to represent the
Dragon that guarded the Hesperian fruit, and was killed by Hercules.
It is said that Juno took it up to heaven and placed it among the
constellations.

BOOTIS, the Ox driver: so called because this constellation seems
to follow the Great Bear as the driver follows his oxen. Bootis is
represented as grasping in his right hand a sickle and in his left a
club, and is fabled to have been Icarius, who was transported to heaven
because he was a great cultivator of the vine; for when Bootes rises the
works of ploughing and cultivation go forward.

CORONA BOREALIS. Northern Crown.--One of the old northern
constellations, between Hercules and Bootes.

CORONA AUSTRALIS--Southern Crown.--One of the old constellations in the
southern hemisphere, between Sagittarius and Scorpio. The Corona
were fabled to be Menippe and Metioche, two daughters of Orion, who
sacrificed themselves at the suggestion of an oracle, to protect
Boeotia, their native country, from the ravages of a pestilence: it
being the belief of idolatrous nations that an angry god could be
propitiated by human sacrifices, and that the death of the innocent
might atone for the sins of the guilty. The deities of Hades were
astonished, it is said, at the patriotism and devotion of these Grecian
maidens, who had so generously and uselessly sacrificed their lives.
After their death two stars were seen to issue from the altars that
still smoked with their blood, and these stars were placed in the
heavens in the form of a crown or coronet.

CEPHEUS AND CASSIOPIA.--One of the old asterism in the northern
hemisphere, near the pole. According to Grecian fables, Cassiopia
and her husband Cepheus, king of Etheopia, were placed among the
constellations to witness the punishment inflicted on their daughter,
Andromeda.

TRIANGULARIUM.--A name for both one of the old and new constellations in
the northern hemisphere, between Andromeda and Aries.

SERPENTARIUS, called Ophiucus, is a constellation in the northern
hemisphere, between Scorpio and Hercules.

HERCULES, one of the old northern constellations. In Grecian mythology
it was taught and believed that Hercules, the Theban, was born of a
human mother and an immortal father, like other so-called saviours of
mankind. His mother, the fair Alcmena, wife of Amphitryon, having found
favor in the eyes of the god Jupiter, soon fell an unwilling victim
to his celestial wiles. The life of the infant Hercules, born of this
unnatural union, was threatened by the jealous Juno, the same as the
life of the infant Jesus was threatened by the tyrant Herod. Like Jesus,
Hercules devoted his life to the benefit of the human race, and like
Jesus he was also worshipped after his death as a God in heaven. He is
shown in the astrological chart, enveloped in the skin of the lion he
has slain, with his club upraised, and his foot placed threateningly
above the head of the Dragon, as if about to fulfill the scriptural
prophecy, that "the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head."





End of Project Gutenberg's The Ruins, by C. F. [Constantin Francois de] Volney

