CHAPTER III.

PRINCIPLES OF THE LAW OF NATURE RELATING TO MAN.


Q. Explain the principles of the law of nature with relation to man.

A. They are simple; all of them are comprised in one fundamental and
single precept.

Q. What is that precept?

A. It is self-preservation.

Q. Is not happiness also a precept of the law of nature?

A. Yes: but as happiness is an accidental state, resulting only from
the development of man's faculties and his social system, it is not
the immediate and direct object of nature; it is in some measure,
a superfluity annexed to the necessary and fundamental object of
preservation.

Q. How does nature order man to preserve himself?

A. By two powerful and involuntary sensations, which it has attached,
as two guides, two guardian Geniuses to all his actions: the one a
sensation of pain, by which it admonishes him of, and deters him
from, everything that tends to destroy him; the other, a sensation of
pleasure, by which it attracts and carries him towards everything that
tends to his preservation and the development of his existence.

Q. Pleasure, then, is not an evil, a sin, as casuists pretend?

A. No, only inasmuch as it tends to destroy life and health which, by
the avowal of those same casuists, we derive from God himself.

Q. Is pleasure the principal object of our existence, as some
philosophers have asserted?

A. No; not more than pain; pleasure is an incitement to live as pain is
a repulsion from death.

Q. How do you prove this assertion?

A. By two palpable facts: One, that pleasure, when taken immoderately,
leads to destruction; for instance, a man who abuses the pleasure of
eating or drinking, attacks his health, and injures his life. The other,
that pain sometimes leads to self-preservation; for instance, a man who
permits a mortified member to be cut off, suffers pain in order not to
perish totally.

Q. But does not even this prove that our sensations can deceive us
respecting the end of our preservation?

A. Yes; they can momentarily.

Q. How do our sensations deceive us?

A. In two ways: by ignorance, and by passion.

Q. When do they deceive us by ignorance?

A. When we act without knowing the action and effect of objects on our
senses: for example, when a man touches nettles without knowing
their stinging quality, or when he swallows opium without knowing its
soporiferous effects.

Q. When do they deceive us by passion?

A. When, conscious of the pernicious action of objects, we abandon
ourselves, nevertheless, to the impetuosity of our desires and
appetites: for example, when a man who knows that wine intoxicates, does
nevertheless drink it to excess.

Q. What is the result?

A. That the ignorance in which we are born, and the unbridled appetites
to which we abandon ourselves, are contrary to our preservation; that,
therefore, the instruction of our minds and the moderation of our
passions are two obligations, two laws, which spring directly from the
first law of preservation.

Q. But being born ignorant, is not ignorance a law of nature?

A. No more than to remain in the naked and feeble state of infancy. Far
from being a law of nature, ignorance is an obstacle to the practice of
all its laws. It is the real original sin.

Q. Why, then, have there been moralists who have looked upon it as a
virtue and perfection?

A. Because, from a strange or perverted disposition, they confounded the
abuse of knowledge with knowledge itself; as if, because men abuse the
power of speech, their tongues should be cut out; as if perfection and
virtue consisted in the nullity, and not in the proper development of
our faculties.

Q. Instruction, then, is indispensable to man's existence?

A. Yes, so indispensable, that without it he is every instant assailed
and wounded by all that surrounds him; for if he does not know the
effects of fire, he burns himself; those of water he drowns himself;
those of opium, he poisons himself; if, in the savage state, he does
not know the wiles of animals, and the art of seizing game, he perishes
through hunger; if in the social state, he does not know the course
of the seasons, he can neither cultivate the ground, nor procure
nourishment; and so on, of all his actions, respecting all his wants.

Q. But can man individually acquire this knowledge necessary to his
existence, and to the development of his faculties?

A. No; not without the assistance of his fellow men, and by living in
society.

Q. But is not society to man a state against nature?

A. No: it is on the contrary a necessity, a law that nature imposed
on him by the very act of his organization; for, first, nature has so
constituted man, that he cannot see his species of another sex without
feeling emotions and an attraction which induce him to live in a family,
which is already a state of society; secondly, by endowing him with
sensibility, she organized him so that the sensations of others reflect
within him, and excite reciprocal sentiments of pleasure and of grief,
which are attractions, and indissoluble ties of society; thirdly, and
finally, the state of society, founded on the wants of man, is only a
further means of fulfilling the law of preservation: and to pretend that
this state is out of nature, because it is more perfect, is the same
as to say, that a bitter and wild fruit of the forest, is no longer the
production of nature, when rendered sweet and delicious by cultivation
in our gardens.

Q. Why, then, have philosophers called the savage state the state of
perfection?

A. Because, as I have told you, the vulgar have often given the name of
philosophers to whimsical geniuses, who, from moroseness, from wounded
vanity, or from a disgust to the vices of society, have conceived
chimerical ideas of the savage state, in contradiction with their own
system of a perfect man.

Q. What is the true meaning of the word philosopher?

A. The word philosopher signifies a lover of wisdom; and as wisdom
consists in the practice of the laws of nature, the true philosopher is
he who knows those laws, and conforms the whole tenor of his conduct to
them.

Q. What is man in the savage state?

A. A brutal, ignorant animal, a wicked and ferocious beast.

Q. Is he happy in that state?

A. No; for he only feels momentary sensations, which are habitually of
violent wants which he cannot satisfy, since he is ignorant by nature,
and weak by being isolated from his race.

Q. Is he free?

A. No; he is the most abject slave that exists; for his life depends
on everything that surrounds him: he is not free to eat when hungry,
to rest when tired, to warm himself when cold; he is every instant in
danger of perishing; wherefore nature offers but fortuitous examples of
such beings; and we see that all the efforts of the human species,
since its origin, sorely tends to emerge from that violent state by the
pressing necessity of self-preservation.

Q. But does not this necessity of preservation engender in individuals
egotism, that is to say self-love? and is not egotism contrary to the
social state?

A. No; for if by egotism you mean a propensity to hurt our neighbor, it
is no longer self-love, but the hatred of others. Self-love, taken in
its true sense, not only is not contrary to society, but is its firmest
support, by the necessity we lie under of not injuring others, lest in
return they should injure us.

Thus mans preservation, and the unfolding of his faculties, directed
towards this end, teach the true law of nature in the production of the
human being; and it is from this essential principle that are derived,
are referred, and in its scale are weighed, all ideas of good and evil,
of vice and virtue, of just and unjust, of truth or error, of lawful or
forbidden, on which is founded the morality of individual, or of social
man.



