CHAPTER IX.

ON CLEANLINESS.


Q. Why is cleanliness included among the virtues?

A. Because it is, in reality, one of the most important among them, on
account of its powerful influence over the health and preservation of
the body. Cleanliness, as well in dress as in residence, obviates
the pernicious effects of the humidity, baneful odors, and contagious
exhalations, proceeding from all things abandoned to putrefaction.
Cleanliness, maintains free transpiration; it renews the air, refreshes
the blood, and disposes even the mind to cheerfulness.

From this it appears that persons attentive to the cleanliness of their
bodies and habitations are, in general, more healthy, and less subject
to disease, than those who live in filth and nastiness; and it is
further remarked, that cleanliness carries with it, throughout all the
branches of domestic administration, habits of order and arrangement,
which are the chief means and first elements of happiness.

Q. Uncleanliness or filthiness is, then, a real vice?

A. Yes, as real a one as drunkenness, or as idleness, from which in a
great measure it is derived. Uncleanliness is the second, and often the
first, cause of many inconveniences, and even of grievous disorders; it
is a fact in medicine, that it brings on the itch, the scurf, tetters,
leprosies, as much as the use of tainted or sour aliments; that it
favors the contagious influence of the plague and malignant fevers,
that it even produces them in hospitals and prisons; that it occasions
rheumatisms, by incrusting the skin with dirt, and thereby preventing
transpiration; without reckoning the shameful inconvenience of being
devoured by vermin--the foul appendage of misery and depravity.

Most ancient legislators, therefore, considered cleanliness, which they
called purity, as one of the essential dogmas of their religions. It
was for this reason that they expelled from society, and even punished
corporeally those who were infected with distempers produced by
uncleanliness; that they instituted and consecrated ceremonies of
ablutions baths, baptisms, and of purifications, even by fire and the
aromatic fumes of incense, myrrh, benjamin, etc., so that the entire
system of pollutions, all those rites of clean and unclean things,
degenerated since into abuses and prejudices, were only founded
originally on the judicious observation, which wise and learned men
had made, of the extreme influence that cleanliness in dress and abode
exercises over the health of the body, and by an immediate consequence
over that of the mind and moral faculties.

Thus all the individual virtues have for their object, more or less
direct, more or less near, the preservation of the man who practises
them and by the preservation of each man, they lead to that of families
and society, which are composed of the united sum of individuals.



CHAPTER X.

ON DOMESTIC VIRTUES.


Q. What do you mean be domestic virtues?

A. I mean the practice of actions useful to a family, supposed to live
in the same house.*

     * Domestic is derived from the Latin word domus, a house.

Q. What are those virtues?

A. They are economy, paternal love, filial love, conjugal love,
fraternal love, and the accomplishment of the duties of master and
servant.

Q. What is economy?

A. It is, according to the most extensive meaning of the word, the
proper administration of every thing that concerns the existence of
the family or house; and as subsistence holds the first rank, the word
economy in confined to the employment of money for the wants of life.

Q. Why is economy a virtue?

A. Because a man who makes no useless expenses acquires a
superabundancy, which is true wealth, and by means of which he procures
for himself and his family everything that is really convenient and
useful; without mentioning his securing thereby resources against
accidental and unforeseen losses, so that he and his family enjoy
an agreeable and undisturbed competency, which is the basis of human
felicity.

Q. Dissipation and prodigality, therefore, are vices?

A. Yes, for by them man, in the end, is deprived of the necessaries
of life; he falls into poverty and wretchedness; and his very friends,
fearing to be obliged to restore to him what he has spent with or for
them, avoid him as a debtor does his creditor, and he remains abandoned
by the whole world.

Q. What is paternal love?

A. It is the assiduous care taken by parents to make their children
contract the habit of every action useful to themselves and to society.

Q. Why is paternal tenderness a virtue in parents?

A. Because parents, who rear their children in those habits, procure for
themselves, during the course of their lives, enjoyments and helps that
give a sensible satisfaction at every instant, and which assure to them,
when advanced in years, supports and consolations against the wants and
calamities of all kinds with which old age is beset.

Q. Is paternal love a common virtue?

A. No; notwithstanding the ostentation made of it by parents, it is
a rare virtue. They do not love their children, they caress and spoil
them. In them they love only the agents of their will, the instruments
of their power, the trophies of their vanity, the pastime of their
idleness. It is not so much the welfare of their children that they
propose to themselves, as their submission and obedience; and if among
children so many are seen ungrateful for benefits received, it
is because there are among parents as many despotic and ignorant
benefactors.

Q. Why do you say that conjugal love is a virtue?

A. Because the concord and union resulting from the love of the married,
establish in the heart of the family a multitude of habits useful to its
prosperity and preservation. The united pair are attached to, and seldom
quit their home; they superintend each particular direction of it; they
attend to the education of their children; they maintain the respect and
fidelity of domestics; they prevent all disorder and dissipation;
and from the whole of their good conduct, they live in ease and
consideration; while married persons who do not love one another, fill
their house with quarrels and troubles, create dissension between their
children and the servants, leaving both indiscriminately to all kinds of
vicious habits; every one in turn spoils, robs, and plunders the house;
the revenues are absorbed without profit; debts accumulate; the married
pair avoid each other, or contend in lawsuits; and the whole family
falls into disorder, ruin, disgrace and want.

Q. Is adultery an offence in the law of nature?

A. Yes; for it is attended with a number of habits injurious to the
married and to their families. The wife or husband, whose affections
are estranged, neglect their house, avoid it, and deprive it, as much as
they can, of its revenues or income, to expend them with the object of
their affections; hence arise quarrels, scandal, lawsuits, the neglect
of their children and servants, and at last the plundering and ruin of
the whole family; without reckoning that the adulterous woman commits
a most grievous theft, in giving to her husband heirs of foreign blood,
who deprive his real children of their legitimate portion.

Q. What is filial love?

A. It is, on the side of children, the practice of those actions useful
to themselves and to their parents.

Q. How does the law of nature prescribe filial love?

A. By three principal motives:

1. By sentiment; for the affectionate care of parents inspires, from the
most tender age, mild habits of attachment.

2. By justice; for children owe to their parents a return and indemnity
for the cares, and even for the expenses, they have caused them.

3. By personal interest; for, if they use them ill, they give to their
own children examples of revolt and ingratitude, which authorize them,
at a future day, to behave to themselves in a similar manner.

Q. Are we to understand by filial love a passive and blind submission?

A. No; but a reasonable submission, founded on the knowledge of the
mutual rights and duties of parents and children; rights and duties,
without the observance of which their mutual conduct is nothing but
disorder.

Q. Why is fraternal love a virtue?

A. Because the concord and union, which result from the love of
brothers, establish the strength, security, and conservation of the
family: brothers united defend themselves against all oppression,
they aid one another in their wants, they help one another in their
misfortunes, and thus secure their common existence; while brothers
disunited, abandoned each to his own personal strength, fall into
all the inconveniences attendant on an insulated state and individual
weakness. This is what a certain Scythian king ingeniously expressed
when, on his death-bed, calling his children to him, he ordered them to
break a bundle of arrows. The young men, though strong, being unable to
effect it, he took them in his turn, and untieing them, broke each of
the arrows separately with his fingers. "Behold," said he, "the effects
of union; united together, you will be invincible; taken separately, you
will be broken like reeds."

Q. What are the reciprocal duties of masters and of servants?

A. They consist in the practice of the actions which are respectively
and justly useful to them; and here begin the relations of society; for
the rule and measure of those respective actions is the equilibrium or
equality between the service and the recompense, between what the one
returns and the other gives; which is the fundamental basis of all
society.

Thus all the domestic and individual virtues refer, more or less
mediately, but always with certitude, to the physical object of the
amelioration and preservation of man, and are thereby precepts resulting
from the fundamental law of nature in his formation.



