LETTER 6th
LAURA to MARIANNE


The noble Youth informed us that his name was Lindsay—for particular
reasons however I shall conceal it under that of Talbot. He told us
that he was the son of an English Baronet, that his Mother had been for
many years no more and that he had a Sister of the middle size. “My
Father (he continued) is a mean and mercenary wretch—it is only to such
particular freinds as this Dear Party that I would thus betray his
failings. Your Virtues my amiable Polydore (addressing himself to my
father) yours Dear Claudia and yours my Charming Laura call on me to
repose in you, my confidence.” We bowed. “My Father seduced by the
false glare of Fortune and the Deluding Pomp of Title, insisted on my
giving my hand to Lady Dorothea. No never exclaimed I. Lady Dorothea is
lovely and Engaging; I prefer no woman to her; but know Sir, that I
scorn to marry her in compliance with your Wishes. No! Never shall it
be said that I obliged my Father.”

We all admired the noble Manliness of his reply. He continued.

“Sir Edward was surprised; he had perhaps little expected to meet with
so spirited an opposition to his will. “Where, Edward in the name of
wonder (said he) did you pick up this unmeaning gibberish? You have
been studying Novels I suspect.” I scorned to answer: it would have
been beneath my dignity. I mounted my Horse and followed by my faithful
William set forth for my Aunts.”

“My Father’s house is situated in Bedfordshire, my Aunt’s in Middlesex,
and tho’ I flatter myself with being a tolerable proficient in
Geography, I know not how it happened, but I found myself entering this
beautifull Vale which I find is in South Wales, when I had expected to
have reached my Aunts.”

“After having wandered some time on the Banks of the Uske without
knowing which way to go, I began to lament my cruel Destiny in the
bitterest and most pathetic Manner. It was now perfectly dark, not a
single star was there to direct my steps, and I know not what might
have befallen me had I not at length discerned thro’ the solemn Gloom
that surrounded me a distant light, which as I approached it, I
discovered to be the chearfull Blaze of your fire. Impelled by the
combination of Misfortunes under which I laboured, namely Fear, Cold
and Hunger I hesitated not to ask admittance which at length I have
gained; and now my Adorable Laura (continued he taking my Hand) when
may I hope to receive that reward of all the painfull sufferings I have
undergone during the course of my attachment to you, to which I have
ever aspired. Oh! when will you reward me with Yourself?”

“This instant, Dear and Amiable Edward.” (replied I.). We were
immediately united by my Father, who tho’ he had never taken orders had
been bred to the Church.

Adeiu.
Laura.




LETTER 7th
LAURA to MARIANNE


We remained but a few days after our Marriage, in the Vale of Uske.
After taking an affecting Farewell of my Father, my Mother and my
Isabel, I accompanied Edward to his Aunt’s in Middlesex. Philippa
received us both with every expression of affectionate Love. My arrival
was indeed a most agreable surprise to her as she had not only been
totally ignorant of my Marriage with her Nephew, but had never even had
the slightest idea of there being such a person in the World.

Augusta, the sister of Edward was on a visit to her when we arrived. I
found her exactly what her Brother had described her to be—of the
middle size. She received me with equal surprise though not with equal
Cordiality, as Philippa. There was a disagreable coldness and
Forbidding Reserve in her reception of me which was equally distressing
and Unexpected. None of that interesting Sensibility or amiable
simpathy in her manners and Address to me when we first met which
should have distinguished our introduction to each other. Her Language
was neither warm, nor affectionate, her expressions of regard were
neither animated nor cordial; her arms were not opened to receive me to
her Heart, tho’ my own were extended to press her to mine.

A short Conversation between Augusta and her Brother, which I
accidentally overheard encreased my dislike to her, and convinced me
that her Heart was no more formed for the soft ties of Love than for
the endearing intercourse of Freindship.

“But do you think that my Father will ever be reconciled to this
imprudent connection?” (said Augusta.)

“Augusta (replied the noble Youth) I thought you had a better opinion
of me, than to imagine I would so abjectly degrade myself as to
consider my Father’s Concurrence in any of my affairs, either of
Consequence or concern to me. Tell me Augusta with sincerity; did you
ever know me consult his inclinations or follow his Advice in the least
trifling Particular since the age of fifteen?”

“Edward (replied she) you are surely too diffident in your own praise.
Since you were fifteen only! My Dear Brother since you were five years
old, I entirely acquit you of ever having willingly contributed to the
satisfaction of your Father. But still I am not without apprehensions
of your being shortly obliged to degrade yourself in your own eyes by
seeking a support for your wife in the Generosity of Sir Edward.”

“Never, never Augusta will I so demean myself. (said Edward). Support!
What support will Laura want which she can receive from him?”

“Only those very insignificant ones of Victuals and Drink.” (answered
she.)

“Victuals and Drink! (replied my Husband in a most nobly contemptuous
Manner) and dost thou then imagine that there is no other support for
an exalted mind (such as is my Laura’s) than the mean and indelicate
employment of Eating and Drinking?”

“None that I know of, so efficacious.” (returned Augusta).

“And did you then never feel the pleasing Pangs of Love, Augusta?
(replied my Edward). Does it appear impossible to your vile and
corrupted Palate, to exist on Love? Can you not conceive the Luxury of
living in every distress that Poverty can inflict, with the object of
your tenderest affection?”

“You are too ridiculous (said Augusta) to argue with; perhaps however
you may in time be convinced that...”

Here I was prevented from hearing the remainder of her speech, by the
appearance of a very Handsome young Woman, who was ushured into the
Room at the Door of which I had been listening. On hearing her
announced by the Name of “Lady Dorothea,” I instantly quitted my Post
and followed her into the Parlour, for I well remembered that she was
the Lady, proposed as a Wife for my Edward by the Cruel and Unrelenting
Baronet.

Altho’ Lady Dorothea’s visit was nominally to Philippa and Augusta, yet
I have some reason to imagine that (acquainted with the Marriage and
arrival of Edward) to see me was a principal motive to it.

I soon perceived that tho’ Lovely and Elegant in her Person and tho’
Easy and Polite in her Address, she was of that inferior order of
Beings with regard to Delicate Feeling, tender Sentiments, and refined
Sensibility, of which Augusta was one.

She staid but half an hour and neither in the Course of her Visit,
confided to me any of her secret thoughts, nor requested me to confide
in her, any of Mine. You will easily imagine therefore my Dear Marianne
that I could not feel any ardent affection or very sincere Attachment
for Lady Dorothea.

Adeiu.
Laura.




