Letter in my Life. Do write me another just like it, and tell me you
are in love with me in every other line. I quite die to see you. How
shall we manage to see one another? for we are so much in love that we
cannot live asunder. Oh! my dear Musgrove you cannot think how
impatiently I wait for the death of my Uncle and Aunt—If they will not
Die soon, I beleive I shall run mad, for I get more in love with you
every day of my Life.

How happy your Sister is to enjoy the pleasure of your Company in her
house, and how happy every body in London must be because you are
there. I hope you will be so kind as to write to me again soon, for I
never read such sweet Letters as yours. I am my dearest Musgrove most
truly and faithfully yours for ever and ever

Henrietta Halton.


I hope he will like my answer; it is as good a one as I can write
though nothing to his; Indeed I had always heard what a dab he was at a
Love-letter. I saw him you know for the first time at Lady
Scudamores—And when I saw her Ladyship afterwards she asked me how I
liked her Cousin Musgrove?

“Why upon my word said I, I think he is a very handsome young Man.”

“I am glad you think so replied she, for he is distractedly in love
with you.”

“Law! Lady Scudamore said I, how can you talk so ridiculously?”

“Nay, t’is very true answered she, I assure you, for he was in love
with you from the first moment he beheld you.”

“I wish it may be true said I, for that is the only kind of love I
would give a farthing for—There is some sense in being in love at first
sight.”

“Well, I give you Joy of your conquest, replied Lady Scudamore, and I
beleive it to have been a very complete one; I am sure it is not a
contemptible one, for my Cousin is a charming young fellow, has seen a
great deal of the World, and writes the best Love-letters I ever read.”

This made me very happy, and I was excessively pleased with my
conquest. However, I thought it was proper to give myself a few Airs—so
I said to her—

“This is all very pretty Lady Scudamore, but you know that we young
Ladies who are Heiresses must not throw ourselves away upon Men who
have no fortune at all.”

“My dear Miss Halton said she, I am as much convinced of that as you
can be, and I do assure you that I should be the last person to
encourage your marrying anyone who had not some pretensions to expect a
fortune with you. Mr Musgrove is so far from being poor that he has an
estate of several hundreds an year which is capable of great
Improvement, and an excellent House, though at Present it is not quite
in repair.”

“If that is the case replied I, I have nothing more to say against him,
and if as you say he is an informed young Man and can write a good
Love-letter, I am sure I have no reason to find fault with him for
admiring me, tho’ perhaps I may not marry him for all that Lady
Scudamore.”

“You are certainly under no obligation to marry him answered her
Ladyship, except that which love himself will dictate to you, for if I
am not greatly mistaken you are at this very moment unknown to
yourself, cherishing a most tender affection for him.”

“Law, Lady Scudamore replied I blushing how can you think of such a
thing?”

“Because every look, every word betrays it, answered she; Come my dear
Henrietta, consider me as a freind, and be sincere with me—Do not you
prefer Mr Musgrove to any man of your acquaintance?”

“Pray do not ask me such questions Lady Scudamore, said I turning away
my head, for it is not fit for me to answer them.”

“Nay my Love replied she, now you confirm my suspicions. But why
Henrietta should you be ashamed to own a well-placed Love, or why
refuse to confide in me?”

“I am not ashamed to own it; said I taking Courage. I do not refuse to
confide in you or blush to say that I do love your cousin Mr Musgrove,
that I am sincerely attached to him, for it is no disgrace to love a
handsome Man. If he were plain indeed I might have had reason to be
ashamed of a passion which must have been mean since the object would
have been unworthy. But with such a figure and face, and such beautiful
hair as your Cousin has, why should I blush to own that such superior
merit has made an impression on me.”

“My sweet Girl (said Lady Scudamore embracing me with great affection)
what a delicate way of thinking you have in these matters, and what a
quick discernment for one of your years! Oh! how I honour you for such
Noble Sentiments!”

“Do you Ma’am said I; You are vastly obliging. But pray Lady Scudamore
did your Cousin himself tell you of his affection for me I shall like
him the better if he did, for what is a Lover without a Confidante?”

“Oh! my Love replied she, you were born for each other. Every word you
say more deeply convinces me that your Minds are actuated by the
invisible power of simpathy, for your opinions and sentiments so
exactly coincide. Nay, the colour of your Hair is not very different.
Yes my dear Girl, the poor despairing Musgrove did reveal to me the
story of his Love—. Nor was I surprised at it—I know not how it was,
but I had a kind of presentiment that he _would_ be in love with you.”

“Well, but how did he break it to you?”

“It was not till after supper. We were sitting round the fire together
talking on indifferent subjects, though to say the truth the
Conversation was cheifly on my side for he was thoughtful and silent,
when on a sudden he interrupted me in the midst of something I was
saying, by exclaiming in a most Theatrical tone—

Yes I’m in love I feel it now And Henrietta Halton has undone me

“Oh! What a sweet way replied I, of declaring his Passion! To make such
a couple of charming lines about me! What a pity it is that they are
not in rhime!”

“I am very glad you like it answered she; To be sure there was a great
deal of Taste in it. And are you in love with her, Cousin? said I. I am
very sorry for it, for unexceptionable as you are in every respect,
with a pretty Estate capable of Great improvements, and an excellent
House tho’ somewhat out of repair, yet who can hope to aspire with
success to the adorable Henrietta who has had an offer from a Colonel
and been toasted by a Baronet”—“_That_ I have—” cried I. Lady Scudamore
continued. “Ah dear Cousin replied he, I am so well convinced of the
little Chance I can have of winning her who is adored by thousands,
that I need no assurances of yours to make me more thoroughly so. Yet
surely neither you or the fair Henrietta herself will deny me the
exquisite Gratification of dieing for her, of falling a victim to her
Charms. And when I am dead”—continued her—

“Oh Lady Scudamore, said I wiping my eyes, that such a sweet Creature
should talk of dieing!”

“It is an affecting Circumstance indeed, replied Lady Scudamore.” “When
I am dead said he, let me be carried and lain at her feet, and perhaps
she may not disdain to drop a pitying tear on my poor remains.”

“Dear Lady Scudamore interrupted I, say no more on this affecting
subject. I cannot bear it.”

“Oh! how I admire the sweet sensibility of your Soul, and as I would
not for Worlds wound it too deeply, I will be silent.”

“Pray go on.” said I. She did so.

“And then added he, Ah! Cousin imagine what my transports will be when
I feel the dear precious drops trickle on my face! Who would not die to
haste such extacy! And when I am interred, may the divine Henrietta
bless some happier Youth with her affection, May he be as tenderly
attached to her as the hapless Musgrove and while _he_ crumbles to
dust, May they live an example of Felicity in the Conjugal state!”

Did you ever hear any thing so pathetic? What a charming wish, to be
lain at my feet when he was dead! Oh! what an exalted mind he must have
to be capable of such a wish! Lady Scudamore went on.

“Ah! my dear Cousin replied I to him, such noble behaviour as this,
must melt the heart of any woman however obdurate it may naturally be;
and could the divine Henrietta but hear your generous wishes for her
happiness, all gentle as is her mind, I have not a doubt but that she
would pity your affection and endeavour to return it.” “Oh! Cousin
answered he, do not endeavour to raise my hopes by such flattering
assurances. No, I cannot hope to please this angel of a Woman, and the
only thing which remains for me to do, is to die.” “True Love is ever
desponding replied I, but _I_ my dear Tom will give you even greater
hopes of conquering this fair one’s heart, than I have yet given you,
by assuring you that I watched her with the strictest attention during
the whole day, and could plainly discover that she cherishes in her
bosom though unknown to herself, a most tender affection for you.”

“Dear Lady Scudamore cried I, This is more than I ever knew!”

“Did not I say that it was unknown to yourself? I did not, continued I
to him, encourage you by saying this at first, that surprise might
render the pleasure still Greater.” “No Cousin replied he in a languid
voice, nothing will convince me that _I_ can have touched the heart of
Henrietta Halton, and if you are deceived yourself, do not attempt
deceiving me.” “In short my Love it was the work of some hours for me
to Persuade the poor despairing Youth that you had really a preference
for him; but when at last he could no longer deny the force of my
arguments, or discredit what I told him, his transports, his Raptures,
his Extacies are beyond my power to describe.”

“Oh! the dear Creature, cried I, how passionately he loves me! But dear
Lady Scudamore did you tell him that I was totally dependant on my
Uncle and Aunt?”

“Yes, I told him every thing.”

“And what did he say.”

“He exclaimed with virulence against Uncles and Aunts; Accused the laws
of England for allowing them to Possess their Estates when wanted by
their Nephews or Neices, and wished _he_ were in the House of Commons,
that he might reform the Legislature, and rectify all its abuses.”

“Oh! the sweet Man! What a spirit he has!” said I.

“He could not flatter himself he added, that the adorable Henrietta
would condescend for his sake to resign those Luxuries and that
splendor to which she had been used, and accept only in exchange the
Comforts and Elegancies which his limited Income could afford her, even
supposing that his house were in Readiness to receive her. I told him
that it could not be expected that she would; it would be doing her an
injustice to suppose her capable of giving up the power she now
possesses and so nobly uses of doing such extensive Good to the poorer
part of her fellow Creatures, merely for the gratification of you and
herself.”

“To be sure said I, I _am_ very Charitable every now and then. And what
did Mr Musgrove say to this?”

“He replied that he was under a melancholy necessity of owning the
truth of what I said, and that therefore if he should be the happy
Creature destined to be the Husband of the Beautiful Henrietta he must
bring himself to wait, however impatiently, for the fortunate day, when
she might be freed from the power of worthless Relations and able to
bestow herself on him.”

What a noble Creature he is! Oh! Matilda what a fortunate one I am, who
am to be his Wife! My Aunt is calling me to come and make the pies, so
adeiu my dear freind, and beleive me yours etc—

H. Halton.


Finis.




SCRAPS




To Miss FANNY CATHERINE AUSTEN


MY DEAR NEICE

As I am prevented by the great distance between Rowling and Steventon
from superintending your Education myself, the care of which will
probably on that account devolve on your Father and Mother, I think it
is my particular Duty to Prevent your feeling as much as possible the
want of my personal instructions, by addressing to you on paper my
Opinions and Admonitions on the conduct of Young Women, which you will
find expressed in the following pages.—

I am my dear Neice
Your affectionate Aunt
The Author.




THE FEMALE PHILOSOPHER

A LETTER

MY DEAR LOUISA

Your friend Mr Millar called upon us yesterday in his way to Bath,
whither he is going for his health; two of his daughters were with him,
but the eldest and the three Boys are with their Mother in Sussex.
Though you have often told me that Miss Millar was remarkably handsome,
you never mentioned anything of her Sisters’ beauty; yet they are
certainly extremely pretty. I’ll give you their description.—Julia is
eighteen; with a countenance in which Modesty, Sense and Dignity are
happily blended, she has a form which at once presents you with Grace,
Elegance and Symmetry. Charlotte who is just sixteen is shorter than
her Sister, and though her figure cannot boast the easy dignity of
Julia’s, yet it has a pleasing plumpness which is in a different way as
estimable. She is fair and her face is expressive sometimes of softness
the most bewitching, and at others of Vivacity the most striking. She
appears to have infinite Wit and a good humour unalterable; her
conversation during the half hour they set with us, was replete with
humourous sallies, Bonmots and repartees; while the sensible, the
amiable Julia uttered sentiments of Morality worthy of a heart like her
own. Mr Millar appeared to answer the character I had always received
of him. My Father met him with that look of Love, that social Shake,
and cordial kiss which marked his gladness at beholding an old and
valued freind from whom thro’ various circumstances he had been
separated nearly twenty years. Mr Millar observed (and very justly too)
that many events had befallen each during that interval of time, which
gave occasion to the lovely Julia for making most sensible reflections
on the many changes in their situation which so long a period had
occasioned, on the advantages of some, and the disadvantages of others.
From this subject she made a short digression to the instability of
human pleasures and the uncertainty of their duration, which led her to
observe that all earthly Joys must be imperfect. She was proceeding to
illustrate this doctrine by examples from the Lives of great Men when
the Carriage came to the Door and the amiable Moralist with her Father
and Sister was obliged to depart; but not without a promise of spending
five or six months with us on their return. We of course mentioned you,
and I assure you that ample Justice was done to your Merits by all.
“Louisa Clarke (said I) is in general a very pleasant Girl, yet
sometimes her good humour is clouded by Peevishness, Envy and Spite.
She neither wants Understanding or is without some pretensions to
Beauty, but these are so very trifling, that the value she sets on her
personal charms, and the adoration she expects them to be offered are
at once a striking example of her vanity, her pride, and her folly.” So
said I, and to my opinion everyone added weight by the concurrence of
their own.

Your affectionate
Arabella Smythe.




THE FIRST ACT OF A COMEDY


_Characters_

Popgun                 Maria
Charles                Pistolletta
Postilion              Hostess
Chorus of ploughboys   Cook
and                    and
Strephon               Chloe


SCENE—AN INN


_Enter_ Hostess, Charles, Maria, and Cook.


Hostess to Maria
If the gentry in the Lion should want beds, shew them number 9.

Maria
Yes Mistress.—_exit_ Maria

Hostess to Cook
If their Honours in the Moon ask for the bill of fare, give it them.

Cook
I will, I will. _exit_ Cook.

Hostess to Charles
If their Ladyships in the Sun ring their Bell—answer it.

Charles
Yes Madam. _exeunt_ Severally.

SCENE CHANGES TO THE MOON, and discovers Popgun and Pistoletta.


Pistoletta
Pray papa how far is it to London?

Popgun
My Girl, my Darling, my favourite of all my Children, who art the
picture of thy poor Mother who died two months ago, with whom I am
going to Town to marry to Strephon, and to whom I mean to bequeath my
whole Estate, it wants seven Miles.


SCENE CHANGES TO THE SUN—


_Enter_ Chloe and a chorus of ploughboys.


Chloe
Where am I? At Hounslow.—Where go I? To London—. What to do? To be
married—. Unto whom? Unto Strephon. Who is he? A Youth. Then I will
sing a song.

SONG


I go to Town
And when I come down,
I shall be married to Streephon.*
And that to me will be fun.


[* Note the two e’s]


Chorus


Be fun, be fun, be fun,
And that to me will be fun.


_Enter_ Cook—


Cook
Here is the bill of fare.

Chloe reads
2 Ducks, a leg of beef, a stinking partridge, and a tart.—I will have
the leg of beef and the partridge.

_Exit_ Cook.

And now I will sing another song.

SONG


I am going to have my dinner,
After which I shan’t be thinner,
I wish I had here Strephon
For he would carve the partridge if it should be a tough one.


Chorus


Tough one, tough one, tough one
For he would carve the partridge if it
Should be a tough one.


_Exit_ Chloe and Chorus.—

SCENE CHANGES TO THE INSIDE OF THE LION.


_Enter_ Strephon and Postilion.


Streph:)
You drove me from Staines to this place, from whence I mean to go to
Town to marry Chloe. How much is your due?

Post:
Eighteen pence.

Streph:
Alas, my freind, I have but a bad guinea with which I mean to support
myself in Town. But I will pawn to you an undirected Letter that I
received from Chloe.

Post:
Sir, I accept your offer.

END OF THE FIRST ACT.




A LETTER from a YOUNG LADY, whose feelings being too strong for her
Judgement led her into the commission of Errors which her Heart
disapproved.

Many have been the cares and vicissitudes of my past life, my beloved
Ellinor, and the only consolation I feel for their bitterness is that
on a close examination of my conduct, I am convinced that I have
strictly deserved them. I murdered my father at a very early period of
my Life, I have since murdered my Mother, and I am now going to murder
my Sister. I have changed my religion so often that at present I have
not an idea of any left. I have been a perjured witness in every public
tryal for these last twelve years; and I have forged my own Will. In
short there is scarcely a crime that I have not committed—But I am now
going to reform. Colonel Martin of the Horse guards has paid his
Addresses to me, and we are to be married in a few days. As there is
something singular in our Courtship, I will give you an account of it.
Colonel Martin is the second son of the late Sir John Martin who died
immensely rich, but bequeathing only one hundred thousand pound apeice
to his three younger Children, left the bulk of his fortune, about
eight Million to the present Sir Thomas. Upon his small pittance the
Colonel lived tolerably contented for nearly four months when he took
it into his head to determine on getting the whole of his eldest
Brother’s Estate. A new will was forged and the Colonel produced it in
Court—but nobody would swear to it’s being the right will except
himself, and he had sworn so much that Nobody beleived him. At that
moment I happened to be passing by the door of the Court, and was
beckoned in by the Judge who told the Colonel that I was a Lady ready
to witness anything for the cause of Justice, and advised him to apply
to me. In short the Affair was soon adjusted. The Colonel and I swore
to its’ being the right will, and Sir Thomas has been obliged to resign
all his illgotten wealth. The Colonel in gratitude waited on me the
next day with an offer of his hand—. I am now going to murder my
Sister.

Yours Ever,
Anna Parker.




A TOUR THROUGH WALES—
in a LETTER from a YOUNG LADY—


MY DEAR CLARA

I have been so long on the ramble that I have not till now had it in my
power to thank you for your Letter—. We left our dear home on last
Monday month; and proceeded on our tour through Wales, which is a
principality contiguous to England and gives the title to the Prince of
Wales. We travelled on horseback by preference. My Mother rode upon our
little poney and Fanny and I walked by her side or rather ran, for my
Mother is so fond of riding fast that she galloped all the way. You may
be sure that we were in a fine perspiration when we came to our place
of resting. Fanny has taken a great many Drawings of the Country, which
are very beautiful, tho’ perhaps not such exact resemblances as might
be wished, from their being taken as she ran along. It would astonish
you to see all the Shoes we wore out in our Tour. We determined to take
a good Stock with us and therefore each took a pair of our own besides
those we set off in. However we were obliged to have them both capped
and heelpeiced at Carmarthen, and at last when they were quite gone,
Mama was so kind as to lend us a pair of blue Sattin Slippers, of which
we each took one and hopped home from Hereford delightfully—

I am your ever affectionate
Elizabeth Johnson.




A TALE.


A Gentleman whose family name I shall conceal, bought a small Cottage
in Pembrokeshire about two years ago. This daring Action was suggested
to him by his elder Brother who promised to furnish two rooms and a
Closet for him, provided he would take a small house near the borders
of an extensive Forest, and about three Miles from the Sea. Wilhelminus
gladly accepted the offer and continued for some time searching after
such a retreat when he was one morning agreably releived from his
suspence by reading this advertisement in a Newspaper.

TO BE LETT


A Neat Cottage on the borders of an extensive forest and about three
Miles from the Sea. It is ready furnished except two rooms and a
Closet.

The delighted Wilhelminus posted away immediately to his brother, and
shewed him the advertisement. Robertus congratulated him and sent him
in his Carriage to take possession of the Cottage. After travelling for
three days and six nights without stopping, they arrived at the Forest
and following a track which led by it’s side down a steep Hill over
which ten Rivulets meandered, they reached the Cottage in half an hour.
Wilhelminus alighted, and after knocking for some time without
receiving any answer or hearing any one stir within, he opened the door
which was fastened only by a wooden latch and entered a small room,
which he immediately perceived to be one of the two that were
unfurnished—From thence he proceeded into a Closet equally bare. A pair
of stairs that went out of it led him into a room above, no less
destitute, and these apartments he found composed the whole of the
House. He was by no means displeased with this discovery, as he had the
comfort of reflecting that he should not be obliged to lay out anything
on furniture himself—. He returned immediately to his Brother, who took
him the next day to every Shop in Town, and bought what ever was
requisite to furnish the two rooms and the Closet, In a few days
everything was completed, and Wilhelminus returned to take possession
of his Cottage. Robertus accompanied him, with his Lady the amiable
Cecilia and her two lovely Sisters Arabella and Marina to whom
Wilhelminus was tenderly attached, and a large number of Attendants.—An
ordinary Genius might probably have been embarrassed, in endeavouring
to accomodate so large a party, but Wilhelminus with admirable presence
of mind gave orders for the immediate erection of two noble Tents in an
open spot in the Forest adjoining to the house. Their Construction was
both simple and elegant—A couple of old blankets, each supported by
four sticks, gave a striking proof of that taste for architecture and
that happy ease in overcoming difficulties which were some of
Wilhelminus’s most striking Virtues.
