CHAPTER XII.

CONCEPTION.

THE SENSE OF SAMENESS.


In Chapter VIII, p. 221, the distinction was drawn between two kinds of
knowledge of things, bare acquaintance with them and knowledge about
them. The possibility of two such knowledges depends on a fundamental
psychical peculiarity which may be entitled "_the principle of
constancy in the mind's meanings_" and which may be thus expressed:
"_The same matters can be thought of in successive portions of the
mental stream, and some of these portions can know that they mean
the same matters which the other portions meant._" One might put it
otherwise by saying that "_the mind can always intend, and know when it
intends, to think of the Same._"

This _sense of sameness_ is the very keel and backbone of our thinking.
We saw in Chapter X how the consciousness of personal identity reposed
on it, the present thought finding in its memories a warmth and
intimacy which it recognizes as the same warmth and intimacy it now
feels. This sense of identity of the knowing subject is held by some
philosophers to be the only vehicle by which the world hangs together.
It seems hardly necessary to say that a sense of identity of the known
object would perform exactly the same unifying function, even if the
sense of subjective identity were lost. And without the intention to
think of the same outer things over and over again, and the sense that
we were doing so, our sense of our own personal sameness would carry us
but a little way towards making a universe of our experience.

Note, however, that we are in the first instance speaking of the sense
of sameness from the point of view of the mind's structure alone, and
not from the point of view of the universe. We are psychologizing, not
philosophizing, That is, we do not care whether there be any _real_
sameness in _things_ or not, or whether the mind be true or false in
its assumptions of it. Our principle only lays it down that the mind
makes continual use of the _notion_ of sameness, and if deprived of
it, would have a different structure from what it has. In a word, the
principle that the mind can mean the Same is true of its _meanings_,
but not necessarily of aught besides.[386] The mind must conceive as
possible that the Same should be before it, for our experience to be
the sort of thing it is. Without the psychological sense of identity,
sameness might rain down upon us from the outer world for ever and we
be none the wiser. With the psychological sense, on the other hand,
the outer world might be an unbroken flux, and yet we should perceive
a repeated experience. Even now, the world may be a place in which
the same thing never did and never will come twice. The thing we mean
to point at may change from top to bottom and we be ignorant of the
fact. But in our meaning itself we are not deceived; our intention is
to think of the same. The name which I have given to the principle,
in calling it the law of constancy in our meanings, accentuates its
subjective character, and justifies us in laying it down as the most
important of all the features of our mental structure.

Not all psychic life need be assumed to have the sense of sameness
developed in this way. In the consciousness of worms and polyps,
though the same realities may frequently impress it, the feeling of
sameness may seldom emerge. We, however, running back and forth, like
spiders on the web they weave, feel ourselves to be working over
identical materials and thinking them in different ways. And the man
who identifies the materials most is held to have the most philosophic
human mind.


CONCEPTION DEFINED.


_The function by which we thus identify a numerically distinct and
permanent subject of discourse is called_ CONCEPTION; and the thoughts
which are its vehicles are called _concepts_. But the word 'concept'
is often used as if it stood for the object of discourse itself; and
this looseness feeds such evasiveness in discussion that I shall avoid
the use of the expression concept altogether, and speak of 'conceiving
state of mind,' or something similar, instead. The word 'conception'
is unambiguous. It properly denotes neither the mental state nor what
the mental state signifies, but the relation between the two, namely,
the _function_ of the mental state in signifying just that particular
thing. It is plain that one and the same mental state can be the
vehicle of many conceptions, can mean a particular thing, and a great
deal more besides. If it has such a multiple conceptual function, it
may be called an act of compound conception.

We may conceive realities supposed to be extra-mental, as steam-engine;
fictions, as mermaid; or mere _entia rationis_, like difference or
nonentity. But whatever we do conceive, our conception is of that and
nothing else--nothing else, that is, _instead_ of that, though it may
be of much else _in addition_ to that. Each act of conception results
from our attention singling out some one part of the mass of matter
for thought which the world presents, and holding fast to it, without
confusion.[387] Confusion occurs when we do not know whether a certain
object proposed to us is the same with one of our meanings or not;
so that the conceptual function requires, to be complete, that the
thought should not only say 'I mean this,' but also say 'I don't mean
that.'[388]

Each conception thus eternally remains what it is, and never can
become another. The mind may change its states, and its meanings, at
different times; may drop one conception and take up another, but the
dropped conception can in no intelligible sense be said to _change
into_ its successor. The paper, a moment ago white, I may now see to
have been scorched black. But my conception 'white' does not change
into my conception 'black.' On the contrary, it stays alongside of the
objective blackness, as a different meaning in my mind, and by so doing
lets me judge the blackness as the paper's change. Unless it stayed, I
should simply say 'blackness' and know no more. Thus, amid the flux of
opinions and of physical things, the world of conceptions, or things
intended to be thought about, stands stiff and immutable, like Plato's
Realm of Ideas.[389]

Some conceptions are of things, some of events, some of qualities. Any
fact, be it thing, event, or quality, may be conceived sufficiently
for purposes of identification, if only it be singled out and marked
so as to separate it from other things. Simply calling it 'this' or
'that' will suffice. To speak in technical language, a subject may
be conceived by its _denotation_, with no _connotation_, or a very
minimum of connotation, attached. The essential point is that it should
be re-identified by us as that which the talk is about; and no full
representation of it is necessary for this, even when it is a fully
representable thing.

In this sense, creatures extremely low in the intellectual scale may
have conception. All that is required is that they should recognize
the same experience again. A polyp would be a conceptual thinker if a
feeling of 'Hollo! thingumbob again!' ever flitted through its mind.

Most of the objects of our thought, however, are to some degree
represented as well as merely pointed out. Either they are things
and events perceived or imagined, or they are qualities apprehended
in a positive way. Even where we have no intuitive acquaintance with
the nature of a thing, if we know any of the relations of it at all,
anything _about_ it, that is enough to individualize and distinguish
it from all the other things which we might mean. Many of our topics
of discourse are thus _problematical_, or defined by their relations
only. We think of a thing _about_ which certain facts must obtain,
but we do not yet know how the thing will look when it is realized.
Thus we conceive of a perpetual-motion machine. It is a _quæsitum_
of a perfectly definite kind,--we can always tell whether the actual
machines offered us do or do not agree with what we mean by it. The
natural possibility or impossibility of the thing does not touch the
question of its conceivability in this problematic way. 'Round square,'
'black-white-thing,' are absolutely definite conceptions; it is a mere
accident, as far as conception goes, that they happen to stand for
things which nature never lets us sensibly perceive.[390]


CONCEPTIONS ARE UNCHANGEABLE.


The fact that the same real topic of discourse is at one time
conceived as a mere 'that' or 'that which, etc.,' and is at another
time conceived with additional specifications, has been treated by
many authors as a proof that conceptions themselves are fertile
and self-developing. A conception, according to the Hegelizers in
philosophy, 'develops its own significance,' 'makes explicit what it
implicitly contained,' passes, on occasion, 'over into its opposite,'
and in short loses altogether the blankly self-identical character we
supposed it to maintain. The figure we viewed as a polygon appears to
us now as a sum of juxtaposed triangles; the number hitherto conceived
as thirteen is at last noticed to be six plus seven, or prime; the man
thought honest is believed a rogue. Such changes of our opinion are
viewed by these thinkers as evolutions of our conception, from within.

The facts are unquestionable; our knowledge does grow and change by
rational and inward processes, as well as by empirical discoveries.
Where the discoveries are empirical, no one pretends that the
propulsive agency, the force that makes the knowledge develop, is
mere conception. All admit it to be our continued exposure to the
_thing_, with its power to impress our senses. Thus strychnin, which
tastes bitter, we find will also kill, etc. Now I say that where the
new knowledge merely comes from _thinking_, the facts are essentially
the same, and that _to talk of self-development on the part of
our conceptions is a very bad way of stating the case_. Not new
sensations, as in the empirical instance, but new conceptions, are the
indispensable conditions of advance.

For if the alleged cases of self-development be examined it will
be found, I believe, that the new truth affirms in every case a
_relation_ between the original subject of conception and some new
subject conceived later on. These new subjects of conception arise in
various ways. Every one of our conceptions is of something which our
attention originally tore out of the continuum of felt experience,
and provisionally isolated so as to make of it an individual topic
of discourse. Every one of them has a way, if the mind is left alone
with it, of suggesting other parts of the continuum from which it was
torn, for conception to work upon in a similar way. This 'suggestion'
is often no more than what we shall later know as the association
of ideas. Often, however, it is a sort of invitation to the mind to
play, add lines, break number-groups, etc. Whatever it is, it brings
new conceptions into consciousness, which latter thereupon may or may
not expressly attend to the relation in which the new stands to the
old. Thus I have a conception of equidistant lines. Suddenly, I know
not whence, there pops into my head the conception of their meeting.
Suddenly again I think of the meeting and the equidistance both
together, and perceive them incompatible. "_Those_ lines will never
meet," I say. Suddenly again the word 'parallel' pops into my head.
'They are parallels,' I continue; and so on. Original conceptions to
start with; adventitious conceptions pushed forward by multifarious
psychologic causes; comparisons and combinations of the two; resultant
conceptions to end with; which latter may be of either rational or
empirical relations.

As regards these relations, they are conceptions of the second degree,
as one might say, and their birthplace is the mind itself. In Chapter
XXVIII I shall at considerable length defend the mind's claim to
originality and fertility in bringing them forth. But no single one
of the mind's conceptions is fertile _of itself_ as the opinion which
I criticise pretends. When the several notes of a chord are sounded
together, we get a new feeling from their combination. This feeling is
due to the mind reacting upon that group of sounds in that determinate
way, and no one would think of saying of any single note of the chord
that it 'developed' of itself into the other notes or into the feeling
of harmony. So of Conceptions. No one of them develops into any other.
But if two of them are thought at once, their _relation_ may come to
consciousness, and form matter for a third conception.

Take 'thirteen' for example, which is said to develop into 'prime.'
What really happens is that we compare the utterly changeless
conception of thirteen with various other conceptions, those of the
different multiples of two, three, four, five, and six, and ascertain
that it _differs_ from them all. Such difference is a freshly
ascertained relation. It is only for mere brevity's sake that we call
it a property of the original thirteen, the property of being prime.
We shall see in the next chapter that (if we count out æsthetic and
moral relations between things) the only important relations of which
the mere inspection of conceptions makes us aware are relations of
comparison, that is, of difference and no-difference, between them. The
judgment 6 + 7 = 13 expresses the relation of _equality_ between two
ideal objects, 13 on the one hand and 6 + 7 on the other, successively
conceived and compared. The judgments 6 + 7 > 12, or 6 + 7 < 14,
express in like manner relations of inequality between ideal objects.
But if it be unfair to say that the conception of 6 + 7 generates that
of 12 or of 14, surely it is as unfair to say that it generates that of
13.

The conceptions of 12, 13, and 14 are each and all generated by
individual acts of the mind, playing with its materials. When,
comparing two ideal objects, we find them equal, the conception of one
of them may be that of a whole and of the other that of all its parts.
This particular case is, it seems to me, the only case which makes
the notion of one conception evolving into another sound plausible.
But even in this case the conception, as such, of the whole does not
evolve into the conception, as such, of the parts. Let the conception
of some object as a whole be given first. To begin with, it points
to and identifies for future thought a certain _that_. The 'whole'
in question might be one of those mechanical puzzles of which the
difficulty is to unlock the parts. In this case, nobody would pretend
that the richer and more elaborate conception which we gain of the
puzzle after solving it came directly out of our first crude conception
of it, for it is notoriously the outcome of experimenting with our
hands. It is true that, as they both mean _that same puzzle_, our
earlier thought and our later thought have one conceptual function, are
vehicles of one conception. But in addition to being the vehicle of
this bald unchanging conception, 'that same puzzle,' the later thought
is the vehicle of all those other conceptions which it took the manual
experimentation to acquire. Now, it is just the same where the whole
is mathematical instead of being mechanical. Let it be a polygonal
space, which we cut into triangles, and of which we then affirm that
it _is_ those triangles. Here the experimentation (although usually
done by a pencil in the hands) may be done by the unaided imagination.
We hold the space, first conceived as polygonal simply, in our mind's
eye until our attention wandering to and fro within it has carved it
into the triangles. The triangles are a new conception, the result of
this new operation. Having once conceived them, however, and compared
them with the old polygon which we originally conceived and which we
have never ceased conceiving, we judge them to fit exactly into its
area. The earlier and later conceptions, we say, are of one and the
same space. But this relation between triangles and polygon which the
mind cannot help finding if it compares them at all, is very badly
expressed by saying that the old conception has developed into the new.
New conceptions come from new sensations, new movements, new emotions,
new associations, new acts of attention, and new comparisons of old
conceptions, and not in other ways. Endogenous prolification is not a
mode of growth to which conceptions can lay claim.

I hope, therefore, that I shall not be accused of huddling mysteries
out of sight, when I insist that the psychology of conception is
not the place in which to treat of those of continuity and change.
Conceptions form the one class of entities that cannot under any
circumstances change. They can cease to be, altogether; or they can
stay, as what they severally are; but there is for them no middle
way. They form an essentially discontinuous system, and translate the
process of our perceptual experience, which is naturally a flux, into a
set of stagnant and petrified terms. The very conception of flux itself
is an absolutely changeless meaning in the mind: it signifies just that
one thing, flux, immovably.--And, with this, the doctrine of the flux
of the concept may be dismissed, and need not occupy our attention
again.[391]


'ABSTRACT' IDEAS.


We have now to pass to a less excusable mistake. There are philosophers
who deny that associated things can be broken asunder at all, even
provisionally, by the conceiving mind. The opinion known as Nominalism
says that we really never frame any conception of the partial elements
of an experience, but are compelled, whenever we think it, to think it
in its totality, just as it came.

I will be silent of mediæval Nominalism, and begin with Berkeley,
who is supposed to have rediscovered the doctrine for himself. His
asseverations against 'abstract ideas' are among the oftenest quoted
passages in philosophic literature.

 "It is agreed," he says, "on all hands that the qualities or modes
 of things do never really exist each of them apart by itself, and
 separated from all others, but are mixed, as it were, and blended
 together, several in the same object. But, we are told, the mind being
 able to consider each quality singly, or abstracted from those other
 qualities with which it is united, does by that means frame to itself
 abstract ideas.... After this manner, it is said, we come by the
 abstract idea of man, or, if you please, humanity, or human nature;
 wherein it is true there is included color, because there is no man
 but has some color, but then it can be neither white, nor black, nor
 any particular color, because there is no one particular color wherein
 all men partake. So likewise there is included stature, but then it
 is neither tall stature nor low stature, nor yet middle stature, but
 something abstracted from all these. And so of the rest.... Whether
 others have this wonderful faculty of abstracting their ideas, they
 best can tell: for myself, I find indeed I have a faculty of imagining
 or representing to myself the ideas of those particular things I have
 perceived and of variously compounding and dividing them.... I can
 consider the hand, the eye, the nose, each by itself abstracted or
 separated from the rest of the body. But then, whatever hand or eye
 I imagine, it must have some particular shape and color. Likewise
 the idea of man that I frame to myself must be either of a white, or
 a black, or a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or a low, or
 a middle-sized man. I cannot by any effort of thought conceive the
 abstract idea above described. And it is equally impossible for me to
 form the abstract idea of motion distinct from the body moving, and
 which is neither swift nor slow, curvilinear nor rectilinear; and the
 like may be said of all other abstract general ideas whatsoever....
 And there is ground to think most men will acknowledge themselves to
 be in my case. The generality of men which are simple and illiterate
 never pretend to abstract notions. It is said they are difficult, and
 not to be attained without pains and study.

 "Now I would fain know at what time it is men are employed in
 surmounting that difficulty, and furnishing themselves with those
 necessary helps for discourse. It cannot be when they are grown up,
 for then it seems they are not conscious of any such painstaking; it
 remains therefore to be the business of their childhood. And surely
 the great and multiplied labor of framing abstract notions will be
 found a hard task for that tender age. Is it not a hard thing to
 imagine that a couple of children cannot prate together of their
 sugar-plums and rattles and the rest of their little trinkets, till
 they have first tacked together numberless inconsistencies, and so
 framed in their minds abstract general ideas, and annexed them to
 every common name they make use of?"[392]

The note, so bravely struck by Berkeley, could not, however, be well
sustained in face of the fact patent to every human being that we
_can_ mean color without meaning any particular color, and stature
without meaning any particular height. James Mill, to be sure, chimes
in heroically in the chapter on Classification of his 'Analysis'; but
in his son John the nominalistic voice has grown so weak that, although
'abstract ideas' are repudiated as a matter of traditional form, the
opinions uttered are really nothing but a conceptualism ashamed to call
itself by its own legitimate name.[393] Conceptualism says the mind can
conceive any quality or relation it pleases, and mean nothing but it,
in isolation from everything else in the world. This is, of course, the
doctrine which we have professed. John Mill says:

 "The formation of a Concept does not consist in separating the
 attributes which are said to compose it from all other attributes
 of the same object, and enabling us to conceive those attributes,
 disjoined from any others. We neither conceive them, nor think
 them, nor cognize them in any way, as a thing apart, but solely as
 forming, in combination with numerous other attributes, the idea of an
 individual object. But, though meaning them only as part of a larger
 agglomeration, we have the power of fixing our attention on them, to
 the neglect of the other attributes with which we think them combined.
 _While the concentration of attention lasts, if it is sufficiently
 intense, we may be temporarily unconscious of any of the other
 attributes, and may really, for a brief interval, have nothing-present
 to our mind but the attributes constituent of the concept_.... General
 concepts, therefore, we have, properly speaking, none; we have only
 complex ideas of objects in the concrete: but we are able to _attend
 exclusively to certain parts_ of the concrete idea: and by that
 _exclusive attention_ we enable those parts to _determine exclusively
 the course of our thoughts_ as subsequently called up by association;
 and are in a condition to carry on a train of meditation or reasoning
 relating to those parts only, _exactly as if_ we were able to
 _conceive_ them separately from the rest."[394]

This is a lovely example of Mill's way of holding piously to his
general statements, but conceding in detail all that their adversaries
ask. If there be a better description extant, of a mind in possession
of an 'abstract idea,' than is contained in the words I have
italicized, I am unacquainted with it. The Berkeleyan nominalism thus
breaks down.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is easy to lay bare the false assumption which underlies the whole
discussion of the question as hitherto carried on. That assumption is
that ideas, in order to know, must be cast in the exact likeness of
whatever things they know, and that the only things that can be known
are those which ideas can resemble. The error has not been confined
to nominalists. _Omnis cognitio fit per assimilationem cognoscentis
et cogniti_ has been the maxim, more or less explicitly assumed, of
writers of every school. Practically it amounts to saying that an idea
must _be_ a duplicate edition of what it knows[395]--in other words,
that it can only know itself--or, more shortly still, that knowledge
in any strict sense of the word, as a self-transcendent function, is
impossible.

Now our own blunt statements about the ultimateness of the cognitive
relation, and the difference between the 'object' of the thought and
its mere 'topic' or 'subject of discourse' (cf. pp. 275 ff.), are all
at variance with any such theory; and we shall find more and more
occasion, as we advance in this book, to deny its general truth. All
that a state of mind need do, in order to take cognizance of a reality,
intend it, or be 'about' it, is to lead to a remoter state of mind
which either acts upon the reality or resembles it. The only class of
thoughts which can with any show of plausibility be said to resemble
their objects are sensations. The stuff of which all our other thoughts
are composed is symbolic, and a thought attests its pertinency to a
topic by simply _terminating_, sooner or later, in a sensation which
resembles the latter.

But Mill and the rest believe that a thought must _be_ what it means,
and mean what it _is_, and that if it be a picture of an entire
individual, it cannot mean any part of him to the exclusion of the
rest. I say nothing here of the preposterously false descriptive
psychology involved in the statement that the only things we can
mentally picture are individuals completely determinate in all
regards. Chapter XVIII will have something to say on that point, and
we can ignore it here. For even if it were true that our images were
always of concrete individuals, it would not in the least follow that
our meanings were of the same.

_The sense of our meaning is an entirely peculiar element of the
thought._ It is one of those evanescent and 'transitive' facts of mind
which introspection cannot turn round upon, and isolate and hold up
for examination, as an entomologist passes round an insect on a pin.
In the (somewhat clumsy) terminology I have used, it pertains to the
'fringe' of the subjective state, and is a 'feeling of tendency,' whose
neural counterpart is undoubtedly a lot of dawning and dying processes
too faint and complex to be traced. The geometer, with his one definite
figure before him, knows perfectly that his thoughts apply to countless
other figures as well, and that although he _sees_ lines of a certain
special bigness, direction, color, etc., he _means_ not one of these
details. When I use the word _man_ in two different sentences, I may
have both times exactly the same sound upon my lips and the same
picture in my mental eye, but I may mean, and at the very moment of
uttering the word and imagining the picture, know that I mean, two
entirely different things. Thus when I say: "What a wonderful man
Jones is!" I am perfectly aware that I mean by man to exclude Napoleon
Bonaparte or Smith. But when I say: "What a wonderful thing Man is!"
I am equally well aware that I mean to _in_clude not only Jones, but
Napoleon and Smith as well. This added consciousness is an absolutely
positive sort of feeling, transforming what would otherwise be mere
noise or vision into something _understood_; and determining the sequel
of my thinking, the later words and images, in a perfectly definite
way. We saw in Chapter IX that the image _per se_, the nucleus, is
_functionally_ the least important part of the thought. _Our doctrine,
therefore, of the 'fringe' leads to a perfectly satisfactory decision
of the nominalistic and conceptualistic controversy,_ so far as it
touches psychology. _We must decide in favor of the conceptualists,_
and affirm that the power to think things, qualities, relations, or
whatever other elements there may be, isolated and abstracted from
the total experience in which they appear, is the most indisputable
function of our thought.


UNIVERSALS.


After abstractions, universals! The 'fringe,' which lets us believe in
the one, lets us believe in the other too. An individual conception
is of something restricted, in its application, to a single case. A
universal or general conception is of an entire class, or of something
belonging to an entire class, of things. The conception of an abstract
quality is, taken by itself, neither universal nor particular.[396] If
I abstract _white_ from the rest of the wintry landscape this morning,
it is a perfectly definite conception, a self-identical quality which I
may mean again; but, as I have not yet individualized it by expressly
meaning to restrict it to this particular snow, nor thought at all of
the possibility of other things to which it may be applicable, it is
so far nothing but a 'that,' a 'floating adjective,' as Mr. Bradley
calls it, or a topic broken out from the rest of the world. Properly
it is, in this state, a singular--I have 'singled it out;' and when,
later, I universalize or individualize its application, and my thought
turns to mean either _this_ white or _all possible_ whites, I am in
reality meaning two new things and forming two new conceptions.[397]
Such an alteration of my meaning has nothing to do with any change
in the image I may have in my mental eye, but solely with the vague
consciousness that surrounds the image, of the sphere to which it is
intended to apply. We can give no more definite account of this vague
consciousness than has been given on pp. 249-266. But that is no
reason for denying its presence.[398]

But the nominalists and traditional conceptualists find matter for an
inveterate quarrel in these simple facts. Full of their notion that
an idea, feeling, or state of consciousness can at bottom only be
aware of its own quality; and agreeing, as they both do, that such an
idea or state of consciousness is a perfectly determinate, singular,
and transitory thing; they find it impossible to conceive how it
should become the vehicle of a knowledge of anything permanent or
universal. "To know a universal, it must be universal; for like can
only be known by like," etc. Unable to reconcile these incompatibles,
the knower and the known, each side immolates one of them to save the
other. The nominalists 'settle the hash' of the thing known by denying
it to be ever a genuine universal; the conceptualists despatch the
knower by denying it to be a state of mind, in the sense of being
a perishing segment of thoughts' stream, consubstantial with other
facts of sensibility. They invent, instead of it, as the vehicle of
the knowledge of universals, an _actus purus intellectus_, or an Ego,
whose function is treated as quasi-miraculous and nothing if not
awe-inspiring, and which it is a sort of blasphemy to approach with the
intent to explain and make common, or reduce to lower terms. Invoked
in the first instance as a vehicle for the knowledge of universals,
the higher principle presently is made the indispensable vehicle of
all thinking whatever, for, it is contended, "a universal element is
present in every thought." The nominalists meanwhile, who dislike
_actus purus_ and awe-inspiring principles and despise the reverential
mood, content themselves with saying that we are mistaken in supposing
we ever get sight of the face of an universal; and that what deludes us
is nothing but the swarm of 'individual ideas' which may at any time be
awakened by the hearing of a name.

If we open the pages of either school, we find it impossible to tell,
in all the whirl about universal and particular, when the author
is talking about universals in the mind, and when about objective
universals, so strangely are the two mixed together. James Ferrier, for
example, is the most brilliant of anti-nominalist writers. But who is
nimble-witted enough to count, in the following sentences from him, the
number of times he steps from the known to the knower, and attributes
to both whatever properties he finds in either one?

 "To think is to pass from the singular or particular to the idea
 [concept] or universal.... Ideas are necessary because no thinking
 can take place without them. They are universal, inasmuch as they
 are completely divested of the particularity which characterizes
 all the phenomena of mere sensation. To grasp the nature of this
 universality is not easy. Perhaps the best means by which this end
 may be compassed is by contrasting it with the particular. It is not
 difficult to understand that a sensation, a phenomenon of sense, is
 never more than the particular which it is. As such, that is, in its
 strict particularity, it is absolutely unthinkable. In the very act
 of being thought, something more than it emerges, and this something
 more cannot be again the particular.... Ten particulars _per se_
 cannot be thought of any more than one particular can be thought
 of;... there always emerges in thought an additional something, which
 is the possibility of other particulars to an indefinite extent....
 The indefinite additional something which they are instances of is a
 universal.... The idea or universal cannot possibly be pictured in the
 imagination, for this would at once reduce it to the particular....
 This inability to form any sort of picture or representation of
 an idea does not proceed from any imperfection or limitation of
 our faculties, but is a quality inherent in the very nature of
 intelligence. A contradiction is involved in the supposition that an
 idea or a universal can become the object either of sense or of the
 imagination. An idea is thus diametrically opposed to an image."[399]

The nominalists, on their side, admit a _quasi_-universal, something
which we think _as if it were_ universal, though it is not; and in
all that they say about this something, which they explain to be 'an
indefinite number of particular ideas,' the same vacillation between
the subjective and the objective points of view appears. The reader
never can tell whether an 'idea' spoken of is supposed to be a knower
or a known. The authors themselves do not distinguish. They want to get
something in the mind which shall _resemble_ what is out of the mind,
however vaguely, and they think that when that fact is accomplished, no
farther questions will be asked. James Mill writes:[400]

 "The word, man, we shall say, is first applied to an individual; it
 is first associated with the idea of that individual, and acquires
 the power of calling up the idea of him; it is next applied to
 another individual and acquires the power of calling up the idea of
 him; so of another and another, till it has become associated with
 an indefinite number, and has acquired the power of calling up an
 indefinite number of those ideas indifferently. What happens? It
 does call up an indefinite number of the ideas of individuals as
 often as it occurs; and calling them in close connection, it forms
 a species of complex idea of them.... It is also a fact, that when
 an idea becomes to a certain extent complex, from the multiplicity
 of the ideas it _comprehends_, it is of necessity indistinct;... and
 this indistinctness has, doubtless, been a main cause of the mystery
 which has appeared to belong to it.... It thus appears that the word
 _man_ is not a word having a very simple idea, as was the opinion of
 the realists; nor a word having no idea at all, as was that of the
 [earlier] nominalists; but a word calling up an indefinite number of
 ideas, by the irresistible laws of association, and forming them into
 one very complex and indistinct, but not therefore unintelligible,
 idea."

Berkeley had already said:[401]

 "A word becomes general by being made the sign, not of an abstract
 general idea, but of many several particular ideas, any one of which
 it indifferently suggests to the mind. An idea which, considered in
 itself, is particular, becomes general by being made to represent or
 stand for all other particular ideas of the same sort."

'Stand for,' not _know_; 'becomes general,' not becomes _aware
of something_ general; 'particular ideas,' not particular
_things_--everywhere the same timidity about begging the fact of
knowing, and the pitifully impotent attempt to foist it in the shape
of a mode of _being_ of 'ideas.' If the fact to be conceived be the
indefinitely numerous actual and possible members of a class, then it
is assumed that if we can only get enough ideas to huddle together
for a moment in the mind, the _being_ of each several one of them
there will be an equivalent for the _knowing_, or _meaning_, of _one_
member of the class in question; and their number will be so large as
to confuse our tally and leave it doubtful whether all the possible
members of the class have thus been satisfactorily told off or not.

Of course this is nonsense. An idea neither is what it knows, nor knows
what it is; nor will swarms of copies of the same 'idea,' recurring in
stereotyped form, or 'by the irresistible laws of association formed
into one idea,' ever be the same thing as a thought of '_all the
possible members_' of a class. We must mean _that_ by an altogether
special bit of consciousness _ad hoc_. But it is easy to translate
Berkeley's, Hume's, and Mill's notion of a swarm of ideas into cerebral
terms, and so to make them stand for something real; and, in this
sense, I think the doctrine of these authors less hollow than the
opposite one which makes the vehicle of universal conceptions to be
an _actus purus_ of the soul. If each 'idea' stand for some special
nascent nerve-process, then the aggregate of these nascent processes
might have for its conscious correlate a psychic 'fringe,' which should
be just that universal meaning, or intention that the name or mental
picture employed should mean all the possible individuals of the class.
Every peculiar complication of brain-processes must have some peculiar
correlate in the soul. To one set of processes will correspond the
thought of an indefinite taking of the extent of a word like _man_;
to another set that of a particular taking; and to a third set that
of a universal taking, of the extent of the same word. The thought
corresponding to either set of processes, is always itself a unique and
singular event, whose dependence on its peculiar nerve-process I of
course am far from professing to explain.[402]

Truly in comparison with the fact that every conception, whatever
it be of, is one of the mind's immutable possessions, the question
whether a single thing, or a whole class of things, or only an
unassigned quality, be meant by it, is an insignificant matter of
detail. Our meanings are of singulars, particulars, indefinites, and
universals, mixed together in every way. A singular individual is as
much _conceived_ when he is isolated and identified away from the
rest of the world in my mind, as is the most rarefied and universally
applicable quality he may possess--_being_, for example, when treated
in the same way.[403] From every point of view, the overwhelming and
portentous character ascribed to universal conceptions is surprising.
Why, from Plato and Aristotle downwards, philosophers should have vied
with each other in scorn of the knowledge of the particular, and in
adoration of that of the general, is hard to understand, seeing that
the more adorable knowledge ought to be that of the more adorable
things, and that the _things_ of worth are all concretes and singulars.
The only value of universal characters is that they help us, by
reasoning, to know new truths about individual things. The restriction
of one's meaning, moreover, to an individual thing, probably requires
even more complicated brain-processes than its extension to all the
instances of a kind; and the mere mystery, as such, of the knowledge,
is equally great, whether generals or singulars be the things known. In
sum, therefore, the traditional universal-worship can only be called a
bit of perverse sentimentalism, a philosophic 'idol of the cave.'

       *       *       *       *       *

It may seem hardly necessary to add (what follows as a matter of
course from pp. 229-237, and what has been implied in our assertions
all along) that _nothing can be conceived twice over without being
conceived in entirely different states of mind_. Thus, my arm-chair is
one of the things of which I have a conception; I knew it yesterday
and recognized it when I looked at it. But if I think of it to-day as
the same arm-chair which I looked at yesterday, it is obvious that
the very conception of it as the same is an additional complication
to the thought, whose inward constitution must alter in consequence.
In short, it is logically impossible that the same thing should be
_known as the same_ by two successive copies of the same thought. As
a matter of fact, the thoughts by which we know that we mean the same
thing are apt to be very different indeed from each other. We think
the thing now in one context, now in another; now in a definite image,
now in a symbol. Sometimes our sense of its identity pertains to the
mere fringe, sometimes it involves the nucleus, of our thought. We
never can break the thought asunder and tell just which one of its
bits is the part that lets us know which subject is referred to; but
nevertheless we always _do_ know which of all possible subjects we have
in mind. Introspective psychology must here throw up the sponge; the
fluctuations of subjective life are too exquisite to be arrested by its
coarse means. It must confine itself to bearing witness to the fact
that all sorts of different subjective states do form the vehicle by
which the same is known; and it must contradict the opposite view.

The ordinary Psychology of 'ideas' constantly talks as if the vehicle
of the same thing-known must be the same recurrent state of mind,
and as if the having over again of the same 'idea' were not only a
necessary but a sufficient condition for meaning the same thing twice.
But this recurrence of the same idea would utterly defeat the existence
of a repeated knowledge of anything. It would be a simple reversion
into a pre-existent state, with nothing gained in the interval, and
with complete unconsciousness of the state having existed before. Such
is not the way in which we think. As a rule we are fully aware that
we have thought before of the thing we think of now. The continuity
and permanency of the topic is of the essence of our intellection.
We recognize the old problem, and the old solutions; and we go on to
alter and improve and substitute one predicate for another without ever
letting the subject change.

This is what is meant when it is said that thinking consists in making
_judgments_. A succession of judgments may all be about the same thing.
The general practical postulate which encourages us to keep thinking
at all is that by going on to do so we shall judge better _of the same
things_ than if we do not.[404] In the successive judgments, all sorts
of new operations are performed on the things, and all sorts of new
results brought out, without the sense of the main topic ever getting
lost. At the outset, we merely _have_ the topic; then we _operate_ on
it; and finally we have it again in a richer and truer way. A compound
conception has been substituted for the simple one, but with full
consciousness that both are of the Same.

The distinction between having and operating is as natural in the
mental as in the material world. As our hands may hold a bit of wood
and a knife, and yet do naught with either; so our mind may simply
be aware of a thing's existence, and yet neither attend to it nor
discriminate it, neither locate nor count nor compare nor like nor
dislike nor deduce it, nor recognize it articulately as having been
met with before. At the same time we know that, instead of staring at
it in this entranced and senseless way, we may rally our activity in
a moment, and locate, class, compare, count, and judge it. There is
nothing involved in all this which we did not postulate at the very
outset of our introspective work: realities, namely, _extra mentem_,
thoughts, and possible relations of cognition between the two. The
result of the thoughts' operating on the data given to sense is to
transform the order in which experience _comes_ into an entirely
different order, that of the _conceived_ world. There is no spot of
light, for example, which I pick out and proceed to define as a pebble,
which is not thereby torn from its mere time- and space-neighbors,
and thought in conjunction with things physically parted from it by
the width of nature. Compare the form in which facts appear in a
text-book of physics, as logically subordinated laws, with that in
which we naturally make their acquaintance. The conceptual scheme is
a sort of sieve in which we try to gather up the world's contents.
Most facts and relations fall through its meshes, being either too
subtle or insignificant to be fixed in any conception. But whenever a
physical reality is caught and identified as the same with something
already conceived, it remains on the sieve, and all the predicates
and relations of the conception with which it is identified become
its predicates and relations too; it is subjected to the sieve's
network, in other words. Thus comes to pass what Mr. Hodgson calls
the translation of the perceptual into the conceptual order of the
world.[405] In Chapter XXII we shall see how this translation always
takes place for the sake of some subjective _interest_, and how the
conception with which we handle a bit of sensible experience is
really nothing but a teleological instrument. _This whole function
of conceiving, of fixing, and holding fast to meanings, has no
significance apart from the fact that the conceiver is a creature with
partial purposes and private ends._ There remains, therefore, much more
to be said about conception, but for the present this will suffice.


FOOTNOTES:

[386] There are two other 'principles of identity' in philosophy.
The _ontological_ one asserts that every real thing is what it is,
that _a_ is _a_, and _b, b_. The _logical_ one says that what is once
true of the subject of a judgment is always true of that subject.
The ontological law is a tautological truism; the logical principle
is already more, for it implies subjects unalterable by time. The
_psychological_ law also implies facts which might not be realized:
there might be no succession of thoughts; or if there were, the later
ones might not think of the earlier; or if they did, they might not
recall the content thereof; or, recalling the content, they might not
take it as 'the same' with anything else.

[387] In later chapters we shall see that determinate relations exist
between the various data thus fixed upon by the mind. These are called
_a priori_ or axiomatic relations. Simple inspection of the data
enables us to perceive them; and one inspection is as effective as
a million for engendering in us the conviction that between _those_
data that relation must always hold. To change the relation we should
have to make the data different. 'The guarantee for the uniformity
and adequacy' of the data can only be the mind's own power to fix
upon any objective content, and to mean that content as often as it
likes. This right of the mind to 'construct' permanent ideal objects
for itself out of the data of experience seems, singularly enough,
to be a stumbling-block to many. Professor Robertson in his clear
and instructive article 'Axioms' in the Encyclopædia Britannica (9th
edition) suggests that it may only be where _movements_ enter into the
constitution of the ideal object (as they do in geometrical figures)
that we can "_make_ the ultimate relations to be what for us they
must be in all circumstances." He makes, it is true, a concession
in favor of conceptions of number abstracted from "subjective
occurrences succeeding each other in time" because these also are
acts "of construction, dependent on the power we have of voluntarily
determining the flow of subjective consciousness." "The content of
passive sensation," on the other hand, "may indefinitely vary beyond
any control of ours." What if it do vary, so long as we can continue
to think of and mean the qualities it varied from? We can 'make' ideal
objects for ourselves out of irrecoverable bits of passive experience
quite as perfectly as out of easily repeatable active experiences. And
when we have got our objects together and compared them, we do not
_make_, but _find_, their relations.

[388] Cf. Hodgson, Time and Space, § 46. Lotze, Logic, § 11.

[389] "For though a man in a fever should from sugar have a bitter
taste which at another time would produce a sweet one, yet the idea of
bitter in that man's mind would be as distinct as if he had tasted only
gall." (Locke's Essay bk. ii, chap. xi, § 3. Read the whole section!)

[390] Black round things, square white things, _per contra_, Nature
gives us freely enough. But the combinations which she refuses to
realize may exist as distinctly, in the shape of postulates, as
those which she gives may exist in the shape of positive images, in
our mind. As a matter of fact, she _may_ realize a warm cold thing
whenever two points of the skin, so near together as not to be locally
distinguished, are touched, the one with a warm, the other with a cold,
piece of metal. The warmth and the cold are then often felt as if in
the same objective place. Under similar conditions two objects, one
sharp and the other blunt, may feel like one sharp blunt thing. The
same space may appear of two colors if, by optical artifice, one of the
colors is made to appear as if seen _through_ the other.--Whether any
two attributes whatever shall be compatible or not, in the sense of
appearing or not to occupy the same place and moment, depends simply
on _de facto_ peculiarities of natural bodies and of our sense-organs.
_Logically_, anyone combination of qualities is to the full as
_conceivable_ as any other, and has as distinct a meaning for thought.
What necessitates this remark is the confusion deliberately kept up
by certain authors (e.g. Spencer, Psychology, §§ 420-7) between the
inconceivable and the not-distinctly-imaginable. How do we know _which_
things we cannot imagine unless by first conceiving them, meaning
_them_ and not other things?

[391] Arguments seldom make converts in matters philosophical; and
some readers, I know, who find that they conceive a certain matter
differently from what they did, will still prefer saying they have two
different editions of the same conception, one evolved from the other,
to saying they have two different conceptions of the same thing. It
depends, after all, on how we define conception. We ourselves defined
it as the function by which a state of mind means to think the same
whereof it thought on a former occasion. Two states of mind will
accordingly be two editions of the same conception just so far as
either does mean to think what the other thought; but no farther. If
either mean to think what the other did not think, it is a different
conception from the other. And if either mean to think all that the
other thought, _and more_, it is a different conception, so far as the
_more_ goes. In this last case one state of mind has two conceptual
functions. Each thought decides, by its own authority, which, out of
all the conceptive functions open to it, it shall now renew; with
which other thought it shall identify itself as a conceiver, and just
how far. "The same A which I once meant," it says, "I shall now mean
again, and mean it with C as its predicate (or what not) instead of B,
as before." In all this, therefore, there is absolutely no changing,
but only uncoupling and recoupling of conceptions. Compound conceptions
come, as functions of new states of mind. Some of these functions are
the same with previous ones, some not. Any changed opinion, then,
_partly_ contains new editions (absolutely identical with the old,
however) of former conceptions, _partly_ absolutely new conceptions.
The division is a perfectly easy one to make in each particular case.

[392] Principles of Human Knowledge, Introduction, §§ 10, 14.

[393] 'Conceptualisme honteux,' Rabier, Psychologie, 310.

[394] Exam. of Hamilton, p. 393. Cf. also Logic, bk. ii, chap. v, § 1,
and bk iv, chap ii, § 1.

[395] E.g.: "The knowledge of things must mean that the mind finds
itself in them, or that, in some way, the difference between them and
the mind is dissolved." (E. Caird, Philosophy of Kant, first edition,
p. 553.)

[396] The traditional conceptualist doctrine is that an abstract must
_eo ipso_ be a universal. Even modern and independent authors like
Prof. Dewey (Psychology, 207) obey the tradition: "The mind seizes
upon some one aspect,... abstracts or prescinds it. This very seizure
of some one element generalizes the one abstracted.... Attention, in
drawing it forth, makes it a distinct content of consciousness, and
thus universalizes it; it is considered no longer in its particular
connection with the object, but on its own account; that is, as an
idea, or what it signifies to the mind; and significance is always
universal."

[397] C. F. Reid's Intellectual Powers, Essay v, chap.
iii.--_Whiteness_ is one thing, _the whiteness of this sheet of paper_
another thing.

[398] Mr. F. H. Bradley says the conception or the 'meaning' "consists
of a part of the content, cut off, fixed by the mind, and considered
apart from the existence of the sign. It would not be correct to add,
and referred away to another real subject; for where we think without
judging, and where we deny, that description would not be applicable."
This seems to be the same doctrine as ours; the application to one or
to all subjects of the abstract fact conceived (i.e. its individuality
or its universality), constituting a new conception. I am, however,
not quite sure that Mr. Bradley steadily maintains this ground. Cf.
the first chapter of his Principles of Logic. The doctrine I defend
is stoutly upheld in Rosmini's Philosophical System, Introduction by
Thomas Davidson, p. 43 (London, 1882).

[399] Lectures on Greek Philosophy, pp. 33-39.

[400] Analysis, chap. viii.

[401] Principles of Human Knowledge, Introduction, §§ 11, 12.

[402] It may add to the effect of the text to quote a passage from the
essay in 'Mind,' referred to on p. 224.

"Why may we not side with the conceptualists in saying that the
universal sense of a word does correspond to a mental fact of _some_
kind, but at the same time, agreeing with the nominalists that all
mental facts are modifications of subjective sensibility, why may we
not call that fact a 'feeling'? _Man_ meant for _mankind_ is in short
a different feeling from _man_ as a mere noise, or from _man_ meant
for _that_ man, to wit, John Smith alone. Not that the difference
consists simply in the fact that, when taken universally, the word
has one of Mr. Galton's 'blended' images of man associated with it.
Many persons have seemed to think that these blended or, as Prof.
Huxley calls them, 'generic' images are equivalent to concepts. But,
in itself, a blurred thing is just as particular as a sharp thing; and
the generic character of either sharp image or blurred image depends on
its being felt _with its representative function_. This function is the
mysterious _plus_, the understood meaning. But it is nothing applied to
the image from above, no pure act of reason inhabiting a supersensible
and semi-supernatural plane. It can be diagrammatized as continuous
with all the other segments of the subjective stream. It is just that
staining, fringe, or halo of obscurely felt relation to masses of other
imagery about to come, but not yet distinctly in focus, which we have
so abundantly set forth [in Chapter IX].

"If the image come unfringed, it reveals but a simple quality, thing,
or event; if it come fringed, it may reveal something expressly taken
universally or in a scheme of relations. The difference between thought
and feeling thus reduces itself, in the last subjective analysis, to
the presence or absence of 'fringe.' And this in turn reduces itself,
with much probability, in the last physiological analysis, to the
absence or presence of sub-excitements in other convolutions of the
brain than those whose discharges underlie the more definite nucleus,
the substantive ingredient, of the thought,--in this instance, the word
or image it may happen to arouse.

"The contrast is not, then, as the Platonists would have it, between
certain subjective facts called images and sensations, and others
called acts of relating intelligence; the former being blind perishing
things, knowing not even their own existence as such, whilst the latter
combine the poles in the mysterious synthesis of their cognitive sweep.
The contrast is really between two _aspects_, in which all mental
facts without exception may be taken; their structural aspect, as
being subjective, and their functional aspect, as being cognitions.
In the former aspect, the highest as well as the lowest is a feeling,
a peculiarly tinged segment of the stream. This tingeing is its
sensitive body, the _wie ihm zu Muthe ist_, the way it feels whilst
passing. In the latter aspect, the lowest mental fact as well as the
highest may grasp some bit of truth as its content, even though that
truth were as relationless a matter as a bare unlocalized and undated
quality of pain. From the cognitive point of view, all mental facts
are intellections. From the subjective point of view all are feelings.
Once admit that the passing and evanescent are as real parts of the
stream as the distinct and comparatively abiding; once allow that
fringes and halos, inarticulate perceptions, whereof the objects are as
yet unnamed, mere nascencies of cognition, premonitions, awarenesses
of direction, are thoughts _sui generis_, as much as articulate
imaginings and propositions are; once restore, I say, the _vague_ to
its psychological rights, and the matter presents no further difficulty.

"And then we see that the current opposition of Feeling to Knowledge
is quite a false issue. If every feeling is at the same time a bit
of knowledge, we ought no longer to talk of mental states differing
by having more or less of the cognitive quality; they only differ in
knowing more or less, in having much fact or little fact for their
object. The feeling of a broad scheme of relations is a feeling that
knows much; the feeling of a simple quality is a feeling that knows
little. But the knowing itself, whether of much or of little, has the
same essence, and is as good knowing in the one case as in the other.
Concept and image, thus discriminated through their objects, are
consubstantial in their inward nature, as modes of feeling. The one,
as particular, will no longer be held to be a relatively base sort
of entity, to be taken as a matter of course, whilst the other, as
universal, is celebrated as a sort of standing miracle, to be adored
but not explained. Both concept and image, _quâ_ subjective, are
singular and particular. Both are moments of the stream, which come
and in an instant are no more. The word universality has no meaning as
applied to their psychic body or structure, which is always finite. It
only has a meaning when applied to their use, import, or reference to
the kind of object they may reveal. The representation, as such, of
the universal object is as particular as that of an object about which
we know so little that the interjection 'Ha!' is all it can evoke from
us in the way of speech. Both should be weighed in the same scales,
and have the same measure meted out to them whether of worship or of
contempt." (Mind, ix, pp. 18-19.)

[403] Hodgson, Time and Space, p. 404.

[404] Compare the admirable passage in Hodgson's Time and Space, p. 310.

[405] Philosophy of Reflection, i, 273-308.




