CHAPTER XIII.

DISCRIMINATION AND COMPARISON.


It is matter of popular observation that some men have sharper senses
than others, and that some have acuter minds and are able to 'split
hairs' and see two shades of meaning where the majority see but one.
Locke long ago set apart the faculty of discrimination as one in which
men differ individually. What he wrote is good enough to quote as an
introduction to this chapter:

 "Another faculty we may take notice of in our minds is that of
 discerning and distinguishing between the several ideas it has. It
 is not enough to have a confused perception of something in general:
 unless the mind had a distinct perception of different objects and
 their qualities, it would be capable of very little knowledge; though
 the bodies that affect us were as busy about us as they are now,
 and the mind were continually employed in thinking. On this faculty
 of distinguishing one thing from another depends the evidence and
 certainty of several even very general propositions, which have passed
 for innate truths; because men, overlooking the true cause why those
 propositions find universal assent, impute it wholly to native uniform
 impressions; whereas it in truth depends upon this clear discerning
 faculty of the mind, whereby it perceives two ideas to be the same or
 different. But of this more hereafter?

 "How much the imperfection of accurately discriminating ideas one from
 another lies either in the dulness or faults of the organs of sense,
 or want of acuteness, exercise, or attention in the understanding, or
 hastiness and precipitancy natural to some tempers, I will not here
 examine: it suffices to take notice that this is one of the operations
 that the mind may reflect on and observe in itself. It is of that
 consequence to its other knowledge, that so far as this faculty is in
 itself dull, or not rightly made use of for the distinguishing one
 thing from another, so far our notions are confused, and our reason
 and judgment disturbed or misled. If in having our ideas in the
 memory ready at hand consists quickness of parts; in this of having
 them unconfused, and being able nicely to distinguish one thing from
 another where there is but the least difference, consists in a great
 measure the exactness of judgment and clearness of reason which is to
 be observed in one man above another. And hence, perhaps, may be given
 some reason of that common observation,--that men who have a great
 deal of wit and prompt memories have not always the clearest judgment
 or deepest reason. For, wit lying most in the assemblage of ideas, and
 putting those together with quickness and variety wherein can be found
 any resemblance or congruity, thereby to make up pleasant pictures and
 agreeable visions in the fancy; judgment, on the contrary, lies quite
 on the other side, in separating carefully one from another ideas
 wherein can be found the least difference, thereby to avoid being
 misled by similitude and by affinity to take one thing for another.
 This is a way of proceeding quite contrary to metaphor and allusion,
 wherein for the most part lies that entertainment and pleasantry of
 wit which strikes so lively on the fancy, and therefore, so acceptable
 to all people because its beauty appears at first sight, and there is
 required no labor of thought to examine what truth or reason there is
 in it."[406]

But Locke's descendants have been slow to enter into the path whose
fruitfulness was thus pointed out by their master, and have so
neglected the study of discrimination that one might almost say that
the classic English psychologists have, as a school, hardly recognized
it to exist. 'Association' has proved itself in their hands the one
all-absorbing power of the mind. Dr. Martineau, in his review of Bain,
makes some very weighty remarks on this onesidedness of the Lockian
school. Our mental history, says he, is, in its view,

 "a perpetual formation of new compounds: and the words 'association,'
 'cohesion,' 'fusion,' 'indissoluble connection,' all express the
 change from plurality of data to some unity of result. An explanation
 of the process therefore requires two things: a true enumeration of
 the primary constituents, and a correct statement of their laws of
 combination: just as, in chemistry, we are furnished with a list of
 the simple elements, and the with then principles of their synthesis.
 Now the latter of these two conditions we find satisfied by the
 association-psychologists: but not the former. They are not agreed
 upon their catalogue of elements, or the marks by which they may know
 the simple from the compound. The psychologic unit is not fixed; that
 which is called one impression by Hartley is treated as half-a-dozen
 or more by Mill: and the tendency of the modern teachers on this point
 is to recede more and more from the better-chosen track of their
 master. Hartley, for example, regarded the whole present effect upon
 us of any single object--say, an orange--as a single sensation; and
 the whole vestige it left behind, as a single 'idea of sensation.'
 His modern disciples, on the other hand, consider this same effect
 as an aggregate from a plurality of sensations, and the ideal trace
 it leaves as highly compound. 'The idea of an object,' instead of
 being an elementary starting-point with them, is one of the elaborate
 results of repetition and experience; and is continually adduced as
 remarkably illustrating the fusing power of habitual association. Thus
 James Mill observes:

 "'It is to this great law of association that we trace the formation
 of our ideas of what we call external objects; that is, the ideas of
 a certain number of sensations, received together so frequently that
 they coalesce as it were, and are spoken of under the idea of unity.
 Hence, what we call the idea of a tree, the idea of a stone, the
 idea of a horse, the idea of a man. In using the names, tree, horse,
 man, the names of what I call objects, I am referring, and can be
 referring, only to my own sensations; in fact, therefore, only naming
 a certain number of sensations regarded as in a particular state of
 combination, that is, concomitance. Particular sensations of sight,
 of touch, of the muscles, are the sensations to the ideas of which,
 color, extension, roughness, hardness, smoothness, taste, smell, so
 coalescing as to appear one idea, I give the name of the idea of a
 tree.'[407]

 "To precisely the same effect Mr. Bain remarks:

 "'External objects usually affect us through a plurality of senses.
 The pebble on the sea-shore is pictured on the eye as form and color.
 We take it up in the hand and repeat the impression of form, with
 the additional feeling of touch. Knock two together, and there is a
 characteristic sound. To preserve the impression of an object of this
 kind, there must be an association of all these different effects.
 Such association, when matured and firm, is our idea, our intellectual
 grasp of the pebble. Passing to the organic world, and plucking a
 rose, we have the same effects of form to the eye and hand, color and
 touch, with new effects of odor and taste. A certain time is requisite
 for the coherence of all these qualities in one aggregate, so as to
 give us for all purposes the enduring image of the rose. When fully
 acquired, any one of the characteristic impressions will revive the
 others; the odor, the sight, the feeling of the thorny stalk--each of
 these by itself will hoist the entire impression into the view.'[408]

 "Now, this order of derivation, making our objective knowledge begin
 with plurality of impression and arrive at unity, we take to be a
 complete inversion of our psychological history. Hartley, we think,
 was perfectly right in taking no notice of the number of inlets
 through which an object delivers its effect upon us, and, in spite of
 this circumstance, treating the effect as one.... Even now, after life
 has read us so many analytic lessons, in proportion as we can fix the
 attitude of our scene and ourselves, the sense of plurality in our
 impressions retreats, and we lapse into an undivided consciousness;
 losing, for instance, the separate notice of any uniform hum in the
 ear, or light in the eye, or weight of clothes on the body, though
 not one of them is inoperative on the complexion of our feeling. This
 law, once granted, must be carried far beyond Hartley's point. Not
 only must each object present itself to us integrally before it shells
 off into its qualities, but the whole scene around us must disengage
 for us object after object from its still background by emergence and
 change; and even our self-detachment from the world over against us
 must wait for the start of collision between the force we issue and
 that which we receive. To confine ourselves to the simplest case:
 when a red ivory ball, seen for the first time, has been withdrawn,
 it will leave a mental representation of itself, in which all that it
 simultaneously gave us will indistinguishably coexist. Let a white
 ball succeed to it; now, and not before, will an attribute detach
 itself, and the color, by force of contrast, be shaken out into the
 foreground. Let the white ball be replaced by an egg: and this new
 difference will bring the form into notice from its previous slumber.
 And thus, that which began by being simply an object, cut out from the
 surrounding scene, becomes for us first a _red_ object, and then a
 _red round_ object; and so on. Instead, therefore, of the qualities,
 as separately given, subscribing together and adding themselves up
 to present us with the object as their aggregate, the object is
 beforehand with them, and from its integrity delivers them out to our
 knowledge, one by one. In this disintegration, the primary nucleus
 never loses its substantive character or name; whilst the difference
 which it throws off appears as a mere attribute, expressed by an
 adjective. Hence it is that we are compelled to think of the object as
 _having_, not as _being_, its qualities; and can never heartily admit
 the belief of any loose lot of attributes really fusing themselves
 into a _thing_. The unity of the original whole is not felt to go
 to pieces and be resolved into the properties which it successively
 gives off; it retains a residuary existence, which constitutes it
 a _substance_, as against the emerging quality, which is only its
 _phenomenal predicate_. Were it not for this perpetual process of
 differentiation of self from the world, of object from its scene,
 of attribute from object, no step of Abstraction could be taken; no
 qualities could fall under our notice; and had we ten thousand senses,
 they would all converge and meet in but one consciousness. But if this
 be so, it is an utter falsification of the order of nature to speak
 of sensations grouping themselves into aggregates, and so composing
 for us the objects of which we think; and the whole language of
 the theory, in regard to the field of synchronous existences, is a
 direct inversion of the truth. Experience proceeds and intellect is
 trained, not by Association, but by _Dissociation_, not by reduction
 of pluralities of impression to one, but by the opening out of one
 into many; and a true psychological history must expound itself in
 analytic rather than synthetic terms. Precisely those ideas--of
 Substance, of Mind, of Cause, of Space--which this system treats as
 infinitely complex, the last result of myriads of confluent elements,
 are in truth the residuary simplicities of consciousness, whose
 stability the eddies and currents of phenomenal experience have left
 undisturbed."[409]

The truth is that Experience is trained by _both_ association and
dissociation, and that psychology must be writ _both_ in synthetic and
in analytic terms. Our original sensible totals are, on the one hand,
subdivided by discriminative attention, and, on the other, united
with other totals,--either through the agency of our own movements,
carrying our senses from one part of space to another, or because new
objects come successively and replace those by which we were at first
impressed. The 'simple impression' of Hume, the 'simple idea' of Locke
are both abstractions, never realized in experience. Experience, from
the very first, presents us with concreted objects, vaguely continuous
with the rest of the world which envelops them in space and time, and
potentially divisible into inward elements and parts. These objects
we break asunder and reunite. We must treat them in both ways for our
knowledge of them to grow; and it is hard to say, on the whole, which
way preponderates. But since the elements with which the traditional
associationism performs its constructions--'simple sensations,'
namely--are all products of discrimination carried to a high pitch, it
seems as if we ought to discuss the subject of analytic attention and
discrimination first.

The noticing of any _part_ whatever of our object is an act of
discrimination. Already on p. 404 I have described the manner in which
we often spontaneously lapse into the undiscriminating state, even with
regard to objects which we have already learned to distinguish. Such
anæsthetics as chloroform, nitrous oxide, etc., sometimes bring about
transient lapses even more total, in which numerical discrimination
especially seems gone; for one sees light and hears sound, but whether
one or many lights and sounds is quite impossible to tell. Where the
parts of an object have already been discerned, and each made the
object of a special discriminative act, we can with difficulty feel
the object again in its pristine unity; and so prominent may our
consciousness of its composition be, that we may hardly believe that it
ever could have appeared undivided. But this is an erroneous view, the
undeniable fact being that _any number of impressions, from any number
of sensory sources, falling simultaneously on a mind_ WHICH HAS NOT YET
EXPERIENCED THEM SEPARATELY, _will fuse into a single undivided object
for that mind._ The law is that all things fuse that _can_ fuse, and
nothing separates except what must. What makes impressions separate
we have to study in this chapter. Although they separate easier if
they come in through distinct nerves, yet distinct nerves are not an
unconditional ground of their discrimination, as we shall presently
see. The baby, assailed by eyes, ears, nose, skin, and entrails at
once, feels it all as one great blooming, buzzing confusion; and to the
very end of life, our location of all things in one space is due to the
fact that the original extents or bignesses of all the sensations which
came to our notice at once, coalesced together into one and the same
space. There is no other reason than this why "the hand I touch and see
coincides spatially with the hand I immediately feel."[410]

It is true that we may sometimes be tempted to exclaim, when once a
lot of hitherto unnoticed details of the object lie before us, "How
could we ever have been ignorant of these things and yet have felt
the object, or drawn the conclusion, as if it were a _continuum_, a
_plenum_? There would have been _gaps_--but we felt no gaps; wherefore
we must have seen and heard these details, leaned upon these steps;
they must have been operative upon our minds, just as they are now,
only _unconsciously_, or at least _inattentively_. Our first unanalyzed
sensation was really composed of these elementary sensations, our first
rapid conclusion was really based on these intermediate inferences, all
the while, only we failed to note the fact." But this is nothing but
the fatal 'psychologist's fallacy' (p. 196) of treating an inferior
state of mind as if it must somehow know implicitly all that is
explicitly known _about the same topic_ by superior states of mind.
The thing thought of is unquestionably the same, but it is thought
twice over in two absolutely different psychoses,--once as an unbroken
unit, and again as a sum of discriminated parts. It is not one thought
in two editions, but two entirely distinct thoughts of one thing.
And each thought is within itself a _continuum_, a _plenum_, needing
no contributions from the other to fill up its gaps. As I sit here,
I think objects, and I make inferences, which the future is sure to
analyze and articulate and riddle with discriminations, showing me
many things wherever I now notice one. Nevertheless, my thought feels
quite sufficient unto itself for the time being; and ranges from pole
to pole, as free, and as unconscious of having overlooked anything, as
if it possessed the greatest discriminative enlightenment. We all cease
analyzing the world at some point, and notice no more differences. The
last units with which we stop are our objective elements of being.
Those of a dog are different from those of a Humboldt; those of a
practical man from those of a metaphysician. But the dog's and the
practical man's thoughts _feel_ continuous, though to the Humboldt or
the metaphysician they would appear full of gaps and defects. And they
_are_ continuous, _as thoughts_. It is only _as mirrors of things_ that
the superior minds find them full of omissions. And when the omitted
things are discovered and the unnoticed differences laid bare, it is
not that the old _thoughts_ split up, but that _new thoughts supersede_
them, which make new judgments about the same objective world.


THE PRINCIPLE OF MEDIATE COMPARISON.


When we discriminate an element, we may contrast it with the case of
its own absence, of its simply not being there, without reference
to what _is_ there; or we may also take the latter into account.
Let the first sort of discrimination be called _existential_, the
latter _differential_ discrimination. A peculiarity of differential
discriminations is that they result in a perception of differences
which are felt as _greater or less_ one than the other. Entire groups
of differences may be ranged in series: the musical scale, the color
scale, are examples. Every department of our experience may have
its data written down in an evenly gradated order, from a lowest to
a highest member. And any one datum may be a term in several such
orders. A given note may have a high place in the pitch-series, a low
place in the loudness-series, and a medium place in the series of
agreeablenesses. A given tint must, in order to be fully determined,
have its place assigned in the series of qualities, in the series
of purities (freedom from white), and in the series of intensities
or brightnesses. It may be low in one of these respects, but high
in another. In passing from term to term in any such series we are
conscious not only of each step of difference being equal to (or
greater or less than) the last, but we are conscious of proceeding
in a _uniform direction_, different from other possible directions.
This _consciousness of serial increase of differences_ is one of the
fundamental facts of our intellectual life. More, _more_, MORE, of the
same kind of difference, we say, as we advance from term to term, and
realize that the farther on we get the larger grows the breach between
the term we are at and the one from which we started. Between any two
terms of such a series the difference is greater than that between
any intermediate terms, or than that between an intermediate term and
either of the extremes. The louder than the loud is louder than the
less loud; the farther than the far is farther than the less far; the
earlier than the early is earlier than the late; the higher than the
high is higher than the low; the bigger than the big is bigger than
the small; or, to put it briefly and universally, _the more than the
more is more than the less_; such is _the great synthetic principle of
mediate comparison which is involved in the possession by the human
mind of the sense of serial increase_. In Chapter XXVIII we shall see
the altogether overwhelming importance of this principle in the conduct
of all our higher rational operations.


ARE ALL DIFFERENCES DIFFERENCES OF COMPOSITION?


Each of the differences in one of these uniform series feels like a
definite sensible quantity, and each term seems like the last term with
this quantity added. In many concrete objects which differ from one
another we can plainly see that the difference does consist singly
in the fact that one object is the same as the other _plus_ something
else, or that they both have an identical part, to which each adds
a distinct remainder. Thus two pictures may be struck from the same
block, but one of them may differ in having color added; or two carpets
may show an identical pattern which in each is woven in distinct hues.
Similarly, two classes of sensation may have the same emotional tone
but negate each other in remaining respects--a dark color and a deep
sound, for example; or two faces may have the same shape of nose but
everything else unlike. The similarity of the same note sounded by
instruments of different timbre is explained by the coexistence of
a fundamental tone common to both, with over-tones in one which the
other lacks. Dipping my hand into water and anon into a colder water,
I may then observe certain additional feelings, broader and deeper
irradiations of the cold, so to speak, which were not in the earlier
experience, though for aught I can tell, the feelings may be otherwise
the same. 'Hefting' first one weight, and then another, new feelings
may start out in my elbow-joint, wrist, and elsewhere, and make me call
the second weight the heavier of the twain. In all these cases each
of the differing things may be represented by two parts, one that is
common to it and the others, and another that is peculiar to itself. If
they form a series, _A, B, C, D,_ etc., and the common part be called
_X_, whilst the lowest difference be called _d_, then the composition
of the series would be as follows:

    _A_ = _X_ + _d_;
    _B_ = (_X_ + _d_) + _d_, or _X_ + 2_d_;
    _C_ = _X_ + 3_d_;
    _D_ = _X_ + 4_d_;
    ........

If _X_ itself were ultimately composed of _d_'s we should have
the entire series explained as due to the varying combination and
re-combination with itself of an unvarying element; and all the
apparent differences of quality would be translated into differences
of quantity alone. This is the sort of reduction which the atomic
theory in physics and the mind-stuff theory in psychology regard as
their ideal. So that, following the analogy of our instances, one might
easily be tempted to generalize and to say that all difference is
but addition and subtraction, and that what we called 'differential'
discrimination is only 'existential' discrimination in disguise; that
is to say, that where _A_ and _B_ differ, we merely discern something
in the one which the other is without. _Absolute identity in things
up to a certain point, then absolute non-identity,_ would on this
theory take the place of those ultimate qualitative unlikenesses
between them, in which we naturally believe; and the mental function
of discrimination, ceasing to be regarded as an ultimate one, would
resolve itself into mere logical affirmation and negation, or
perception that a feature found in one thing, in another does not exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

Theoretically, however, this theory is full of difficulty. If all the
differences which we feel were _in one direction_, so that all objects
could be arranged in one series (however long), it might still work.
But when we consider the notorious fact that objects differ from each
other in _divergent directions_, it grows well nigh impossible to make
it do so. For then, supposing that an object differed from things
in one direction by the increment _d_, it would have to differ from
things in another direction by a different sort of increment, call it
_d'_; so that, after getting rid of qualitative unlikeness between
objects, we should have it back on our hands again between their
increments. We may of course re-apply our method, and say that the
difference between _d_ and _d'_ is not a qualitative unlikeness, but a
fact of composition, one of them being the same as the other _plus_ an
increment of still higher order, _δ_ for example, added. But when we
recollect that everything in the world can be compared with everything
else, and that the number of directions of difference is indefinitely
great, then we see that the complication of self-compoundings of the
ultimate differential increment by which, on this theory, all the
innumerable unlikenesses of the world are explained, in order to avoid
writing any of them down as ultimate differences of kind, would beggar
all conception. It is the mind-dust theory; with all its difficulties
in a particularly uncompromising form; and all for the sake of the
fantastic pleasure of being able arbitrarily to say that there is
between the things in the world and between the 'ideas' in the mind
nothing but absolute sameness and absolute not-sameness of elements,
the not-sameness admitting no degrees.

To me it seems much wiser to turn away from such transcendental
extravagances of speculation, and to abide by the natural appearances.
These would leave unlikeness as an indecomposable relation amongst
things, and a relation moreover of which there were all degrees.
Absolute not-sameness would be the maximal degree, absolute sameness
the minimal degree of this unlikeness, the discernment of which would
be one of our ultimate cognitive powers.[411] Certainly the natural
appearances are dead against the notion that no qualitative differences
exist. With the same clearness with which, in certain objects, we do
feel a difference to be a mere matter of _plus_ and _minus_, in other
objects we feel that this is not the case. Contrast our feeling of
the difference between the length of two lines with our feeling of
the difference between blue and yellow, or with that between right
and left. Is right equal to left with something added? Is blue yellow
_plus_ something? If so, _plus_ what?[412] So long as we stick to
_verifiable_ psychology, _we are forced to admit that differences of
simple_ KIND _form an irreducible sort of relation_ between some of
the elements of our experience, and forced to deny that differential
discrimination can everywhere be reduced to the mere ascertainment
that elements present in one fact, in another fail to exist. The
perception that an element exists in one thing and does not exist in
another and the perception of qualitative difference are, in short,
entirely disconnected mental functions.[413]

But at the same time that we insist on this, we must also admit that
differences of quality, however abundant, are not the only distinctions
with which our mind has to deal. Differences which seem of mere
composition, of number, of _plus_ and _minus_, also abound.[414] But it
will be best for the present to disregard all these quantitative cases
and, taking the others (which, by the least favorable calculation, will
still be numerous enough), to consider next _the manner in which we
come to cognize simple differences of kind_. We cannot _explain_ the
cognition; we can only ascertain the conditions by virtue of which it
occurs.


THE CONDITIONS OF DISCRIMINATION.


_What, then, are the conditions under which we discriminate things
differing in a simple way?_

First, _the things must_ BE _different_, either in time, or place, or
quality. If the difference in any of these regards is sufficiently
great, then we cannot overlook it, except by not noticing the things
at all. No one can help singling out a black stripe on a white ground,
or feeling the contrast between a bass note and a high one sounded
immediately after it. Discrimination is here _involuntary_. But where
the objective difference is less, discrimination need not so inevitably
occur, and may even require considerable effort of attention to be
performed at all.

Another condition which then favors it is that the sensations excited
by _the differing objects should not come to us simultaneously but fall
in immediate_ SUCCESSION upon the same organ. It is easier to compare
successive than simultaneous sounds, easier to compare two weights
or two temperatures by testing one after the other with the same
hand, than by using both hands and comparing both at once. Similarly
it is easier to discriminate shades of light or color by moving the
eye from one to the other, so that they successively stimulate the
same retinal tract. In testing the local discrimination of the skin,
by applying compass-points, it is found that they are felt to touch
different spots much more readily when set down one after the other
than when both are applied at once. In the latter case they may be two
or three inches apart on the back, thighs, etc., and still feel as
if they were set down in one spot. Finally, in the case of smell and
taste it is well-nigh impossible to compare simultaneous impressions
at all. The reason why successive impression so much favors the result
seems to be that there is a real _sensation of difference_, aroused
by the shock of transition from one perception to another which is
unlike the first. This sensation of difference has its own peculiar
quality, as difference, which remains sensible, no matter of what sort
the terms may be, between which it obtains. It is, in short, one of
those transitive feelings, or feelings of relation, of which I treated
in a former place (pp. 245 ff.); and, when once aroused, its object
lingers in the memory along with the substantive terms which precede
and follow, and enables our _judgments of comparison_ to be made.
We shall soon see reason to believe that no two terms can possibly
be _simultaneously_ perceived to differ, unless, in a preliminary
operation, we have successively attended to each, and, in so doing, had
the transitional sensation of difference between them aroused. A field
of consciousness, however complex, is never analyzed unless some of
its ingredients have changed. We _now_ discern, 'tis true, a multitude
of coexisting things about us at every moment: but this is because we
have had a long education, and each thing we now see distinct has been
already differentiated from its neighbors by repeated appearances in
successive order. To the infant, sounds, sights, touches, and pains,
form probably one unanalyzed bloom of confusion.[415]

Where the difference between the successive sensations is but slight,
the transition between them must be made as immediate as possible, and
both must be compared _in memory_, in order to get the best results.
One cannot judge accurately of the difference between two similar
wines, whilst the second is still in one's mouth. So of sounds,
warmths, etc.--we must get the dying phases of both sensations of the
pair we are comparing. Where, however, the difference is strong, this
condition is immaterial, and we can then compare a sensation actually
felt with another carried in memory only. The longer the interval of
time between the sensations, the more uncertain is their discrimination.

The difference, thus immediately felt between two terms, is independent
of our ability to identify either of the terms by itself. I can feel
two distinct spots to be touched on my skin, yet not know which is
above and which below. I can observe two neighboring musical tones to
differ, and still not know which of the two is the higher in pitch.
Similarly I may discriminate two neighboring tints, whilst remaining
uncertain which is the bluer or the yellower, or _how_ either differs
from its mate.[416]

       *       *       *       *       *

With such direct perceptions of difference as this, we must not
confound those entirely unlike cases in which we _infer_ that two
things must differ because we know enough _about_ each of them taken
by itself to warrant our classing them under distinct heads. It often
happens, when the interval is long between two experiences, that our
judgments are guided, not so much by a positive image or copy of the
earlier one, as by our recollection of certain facts about it. Thus I
know that the sunshine to-day is less bright than on a certain day last
week, because I then said it was quite dazzling, a remark I should not
now care to make. Or I know myself to feel better now than I was last
summer, because I can now psychologize, and then I could not. We are
constantly busy comparing feelings with whose quality our imagination
has no sort of _acquaintance_ at the time--pleasures, or pains, for
example. It is notoriously hard to conjure up in imagination a lively
image of either of these classes of feeling. The associationists may
prate of an idea of pleasure being a pleasant idea, of an idea of
pain being a painful one, but the unsophisticated sense of mankind is
against them, agreeing with Homer that the memory of griefs when past
may be a joy, and with Dante that there is no greater sorrow than, in
misery, to recollect one's happier time.

Feelings remembered in this imperfect way _must_ be compared with
present or recent feelings by the aid of what we know about them. We
identify the remote experience in such a case by _conceiving it_. The
most perfect way of conceiving it is by defining it in terms of some
standard scale. If I know the thermometer to stand at zero to-day and
to have stood at 32° last Sunday, I know to-day to be colder, and I
know just how much colder, than it was last Sunday. If I know that a
certain note was _c_, and that this note is _d_, I know that this note
must be the higher of the two.

The inference that two things differ because their concomitants,
effects, names, kinds, or--to put it generally--their _signs_, differ,
is of course susceptible of unlimited complication. The sciences
furnish examples, in the way in which men are led, by noticing
differences in effects, to assume new hypothetical causes, differing
from any known heretofore. But no matter how many may be the steps
by which such inferential discriminations are made, _they all end in
a direct intuition of difference somewhere_. The _last_ ground for
inferring that A and B differ must be that, whilst A is an _m_, B is
an _n_, and that _m_ and _n_ are _seen to differ_. Let us then neglect
the complex cases, the A's and the B's, and go back to the study of the
unanalyzable perception of difference between their signs, the _m_'s
and the _n_'s, when these are seemingly simple terms.

I said that in their immediate succession the shock of their difference
was _felt_. It is felt _repeatedly_ when we go back and forth from
_m_ to _n_; and we make a point of getting it thus repeatedly (by
alternating our attention at least) whenever the shock is so slight
as to be with difficulty perceived. But in addition to being felt
at the brief instant of transition, the difference also feels as
if incorporated and taken up into the second term, which feels
'different-from-the-first' even while it lasts. It is obvious that the
'second term' of the mind in this case is not bald _n_, but a very
complex object; and that the sequence is not simply first '_m_,' then
'_difference_,' then '_n_'; but first '_m_,' then '_difference_,' then
'_n-different-from-m_.' The several thoughts, however, to which these
three several objects are revealed, are three ordinary 'segments' of
the mental 'stream.'

As our brains and minds are actually made, it is impossible to get
certain _m_'s and _n_'s in immediate sequence and to keep them _pure_.
If kept pure, it would mean that they remained uncompared. With us,
inevitably, by a mechanism which we as yet fail to understand, the
shock of difference is felt between them, and the second object is not
_n_ pure, but _n-as-different-from-m_.[417] It is no more a paradox
that under these conditions this cognition of _m_ and _n_ in mutual
relation should occur, than that under other conditions the cognition
of _m_'s or _n_'s simple quality should occur. But as it has been
treated as a paradox, and as a spiritual agent, not itself a portion
of the stream, has been invoked to account for it, a word of further
remark seems desirable.

My account, it will be noted, is merely a description of the facts
as they occur: feelings (or thoughts) each knowing something, but
the later one knowing, if preceded by a certain earlier one, a more
complicated object than it would have known had the earlier one not
been there. I offer no _explanation_ of such a sequence of cognitions.
The explanation (I devoutly expect) will be found some day to depend
on cerebral conditions. Until it is forthcoming, we can only treat the
sequence as a special case of the general law that every experience
undergone by the brain leaves in it a modification which is one factor
in determining what manner of experiences the following ones shall be
(_cf._ pp. 232-236). To anyone who denies the possibility of such a law
I have nothing to say, until he brings his proofs.

The sensationalists and the spiritualists meanwhile (filled both of
them with their notion that the mind must in some fashion _contain_
what it knows) begin by giving a crooked account of the facts. Both
admit that for _m_ and _n_ to be known in any way whatever, little
rounded and finished off duplicates of each must be contained in the
mind as separate entities. These pure ideas, so called, of _m_ and _n_
respectively, succeed each other there. And since they _are distinct_,
say the sensationalists, they are _eo ipso_ distinguished. "To have
ideas different and ideas distinguished, are synonymous expressions;
different and distinguished meaning exactly the same thing," says James
Mill.[418] "Distinguished!" say the spiritualists, "distinguished _by
what_, forsooth? Truly the respective ideas of _m_ and of _n_ in the
mind are distinct. But for that very reason neither can distinguish
itself from the other, for to do that it would have to be aware of the
other, and thus for the time being become the other, and that would
be to get mixed up with the other and to lose its own distinctness.
Distinctness of ideas and idea of distinctness, are not one thing, but
two. This last is a _relation_. Only a _relating principle_, opposed
in nature to all facts of feeling, an Ego, Soul, or Subject, is
competent, by being present to both of the ideas alike, to hold them
together and at the same time to keep them distinct."

But if the plain facts be admitted that the _pure_ idea of '_n_' is
_never in the mind at all_, when '_m_' has once gone before; and that
the feeling '_n-different-from-m_' is itself an absolutely unique
pulse of thought, the bottom of this precious quarrel drops out and
neither party is left with anything to fight about. Surely such a
consummation ought to be welcomed, especially when brought about, us
here, by a formulation of the facts which offers itself so naturally
and unsophistically.[419]

We may, then, conclude our examination of the manner in which simple
involuntary discrimination comes about, by saying, 1) that its vehicle
is a thought possessed of a knowledge of both terms compared and of
their difference; 2) that the necessary and sufficient condition (as
the human mind goes) for arousing this thought is that a thought or
feeling of one of the terms discriminated should, as immediately as
possible, precede that in which the other term is known; and 3) and
that the thought which knows the second term will then also know the
difference (or in more difficult cases will be continuously succeeded
by one which does know the difference) and both of the terms between
which it holds.

This last thought need, however, not _be_ these terms with their
difference, nor _contain_ them. A man's thought can know and mean
all sorts of things without those things getting bodily into it--the
distant, for example, the future, and the past.[420] The vanishing
term in the case which occupies us vanishes; but because it is the
specific term it is and nothing else, it leaves a specific influence
behind it when it vanishes, the effect of which is to determine the
succeeding pulse of thought in a perfectly characteristic way. Whatever
consciousness comes next must know the vanished term and call it
different from the one now there.

Here we are at the end of our tether about involuntary discrimination
of successively felt simple things; and must drop the subject,
hopeless of seeing any deeper into it for the present, and turn to
discriminations of a less simple sort.


THE PROCESS OF ANALYSIS.


And first, of the discrimination of simultaneously felt impressions!
Our first way of looking at a reality is often to suppose it simple,
but later we may learn to perceive it as compound. This new way of
knowing the same reality may conveniently be called by the name of
_Analysis_. It is manifestly one of the most incessantly performed of
all our mental processes, so let us examine the conditions under which
it occurs.

I think we may safely lay down at the outset this fundamental
principle, that _any total impression made on the mind must be
unanalyzable, whose elements are never experienced apart_. The
components of an absolutely changeless group of not-elsewhere-occurring
attributes could never be discriminated. If all cold things were wet
and all wet things cold, if all hard things pricked our skin, and no
other things did so; is it likely that we should discriminate between
coldness and wetness, and hardness and pungency respectively? If all
liquids were transparent and no non-liquid were transparent, it would
be long before we had separate names for liquidity and transparency. If
heat were a function of position above the earth's surface, so that the
higher a thing was the hotter it became, one word would serve for hot
and high. We have, in fact, a number of sensations whose concomitants
are almost invariably the same, and we find it, accordingly, almost
impossible to analyze them out from the totals in which they are found.
The contraction of the diaphragm and the expansion of the lungs, the
shortening of certain muscles and the rotation of certain joints, are
examples. The converging of the eyeballs and the accommodation for near
objects are, for each distance of the object (in the common use of the
eyes) inseparably linked, and neither can (without a sort of artificial
training which shall presently be mentioned) be felt by itself. We
learn that the _causes_ of such groups of feelings are multiple, and
therefore we frame theories about the composition of the feelings
themselves, by 'fusion,' 'integration,' 'synthesis,' or what not. But
by direct introspection no analysis of them is ever made. A conspicuous
case will come to view when we treat of the emotions. Every emotion
has its 'expression,' of quick breathing, palpitating heart, flushed
face, or the like. The expression gives rise to bodily feelings; and
the emotion is thus necessarily and invariably accompanied by these
bodily feelings. The consequence is that it is impossible to apprehend
it as a spiritual state by itself, or to analyze it away from the
lower feelings in question. It is in fact impossible to prove that it
exists as a distinct psychic fact. The present writer strongly doubts
that it does so exist. But those who are most firmly persuaded of its
existence must wait, to prove their point, until they can quote some as
yet unfound pathological case of an individual who shall have emotions
in a body in which either complete paralysis will have prevented their
expression, or complete anæsthesia will have made the latter unfelt.

In general, then, if an object affects us simultaneously in a number of
ways, _abcd_, we get a peculiar integral impression, which thereafter
characterizes to our mind the individuality of that object, and becomes
the sign of its presence; and which is only resolved into _a, b, c, d,_
respectively by the aid of farther experiences. These we now may turn
to consider.

_If any single quality or constituent, a, of such an object, have
previously been known by us isolatedly,_ or have in any other manner
already become an object of separate acquaintance on our part, so that
we have an image of it, distinct or vague, in our mind, disconnected
with _bcd, then that constituent a may be analyzed out from the total
impression_. Analysis of a thing means separate attention to each of
its parts. In Chapter XI we saw that one condition of attending to a
thing was the formation from within of a separate image of that thing,
which should, as it were, go out to meet the impression received.
Attention being the condition of analysis, and separate imagination
being the condition of attention, it follows also that separate
imagination is the condition of analysis. _Only such elements as we
are acquainted with, and can imagine, separately, can be discriminated
within a total sense-impression_. The image seems to welcome its own
mate from out of the compound, and to heighten the feeling thereof;
whereas it dampens and opposes the feeling of the other constituents;
and thus the compound becomes broken for our consciousness into parts.

All the facts cited in Chapter XI, to prove that attention involves
inward reproduction, go to prove this point as well. In looking for any
object in a room, for a book in a library, for example, we detect it
the more readily if, in addition to merely knowing its name, etc., we
carry in our mind a distinct image of its appearance. The assafœtida
in 'Worcestershire sauce' is not obvious to anyone who has not tasted
assafœtida _per se_. In a 'cold' color an artist would never be able to
analyze out the pervasive presence of _blue_, unless he had previously
made acquaintance with the color blue by itself. All the colors we
actually experience are mixtures. Even the purest primaries always come
to us with some white. Absolutely pure red or green or violet is never
experienced, and so can never be discerned in the so-called primaries
with which we have to deal: the latter consequently pass for pure.--The
reader will remember how an overtone can only be attended to in the
midst of its consorts in the voice of a musical instrument, by sounding
it previously alone. The imagination, being then full of it, hears
the like of it in the compound tone. Helmholtz, whose account of this
observation we formerly quoted, goes on to explain the difficulty of
the case in a way which beautifully corroborates the point I now seek
to prove. He says:

 "The ultimate simple elements of the sensation of tone, simple tones
 themselves, are rarely heard alone. Even those instruments by which
 they can be produced (as tuning-forks before resonance-chambers),
 when strongly excited, give rise to weak harmonic upper partials,
 partly within and partly without the ear.... Hence the opportunities
 are very scanty for impressing on our memory an exact and sure image
 of these simple elementary tones. But if the constituents are only
 indefinitely and vaguely known, the analysis of their sum into them
 must be correspondingly uncertain. If we do not know with certainty
 how much of the musical tone under consideration is to be attributed
 to its prime, we cannot but be uncertain as to what belongs to the
 partials. Consequently we must begin by making the individual elements
 which have to be distinguished individually audible, so as to obtain
 an entirely fresh recollection of the corresponding sensation, and the
 whole business requires undisturbed and concentrated attention. We are
 even without the ease that can be obtained by frequent repetitions of
 the experiment, such as we possess in the analysis of musical chords
 into their individual notes. In that case we hear the individual notes
 sufficiently often by themselves, whereas we rarely hear simple tones,
 and may almost be said never to hear the building up of a compound
 from its simple tones."[421]


THE PROCESS OF ABSTRACTION.


Very few elements of reality are experienced by us in absolute
isolation. The most that usually happens to a constituent _a_, of a
compound phenomenon _abcd_, is that its _strength_ relatively to _bcd_
varies from a maximum to a minimum; or that it appears linked with
_other_ qualities, in other compounds, as _aefg_, or _ahik_. Either
of these vicissitudes in the mode of our experiencing _a_ may, under
favorable circumstances, lead us to feel the difference between it and
its concomitants, and to single it out--not absolutely, it is true, but
approximately--and so to analyze the compound of which it is a part.
The act of singling out is then called _abstraction_, and the element
disengaged is an _abstract_.

Consider the case of fluctuations of relative strength or intensity
first. Let there be three grades of the compound, as _Abcd, abcd,_ and
_abcD_. In passing between these compounds, the mind will feel shocks
of difference. The differences, moreover, will serially increase, and
their direction will be felt as of a distinct sort. The increase from
_abcd_ to _Abcd_ is on the _a_ side; that to _abcD_ is on the _d_ side.
And these two differences of direction are differently felt. I do not
say that this discernment of the _a_-direction from the _d_-direction
will give us an actual intuition either of _a_ or of _d_ in the
abstract. But it leads us to _conceive_ or _postulate_ each of these
qualities, and to define it as the _extreme_ of a certain direction.
'Dry' wines and 'sweet' wines, for example, differ, and form a series.
It happens that we have an experience of sweetness pure and simple in
the taste of sugar, and this we can analyze out of the wine-taste.
But no one knows what 'dryness' tastes like, all by itself. It must,
however, be something extreme in the dry direction; and we should
probably not fail to recognize it as the original of our abstract
conception, in case we ever did come across it. In some such way we get
to form notions of the flavor of meats, apart from their feeling to the
tongue, or of that of fruits apart from their acidity, etc., and we
abstract the touch of bodies as distinct from their temperature. We may
even apprehend the quality of a muscle's contraction as distinguished
from its extent, or one muscle's contraction from another's, as when,
by practising with prismatic glasses, and varying our eyes' convergence
whilst our accommodation remains the same, we learn the direction
in which our feeling of the convergence differs from that of the
accommodation.

But the fluctuation in a quality's intensity is a less efficient aid
to our abstracting of it than the diversity of the other qualities in
whose company it may appear. _What is associated now with one thing and
now with another tends to become dissociated from either, and to grow
into an object of abstract contemplation by the mind._ One might call
this the _law of dissociation by varying concomitants_. The practical
result of it will be to allow the mind which has thus dissociated and
abstracted a character to analyze it out of a total, whenever it meets
with it again. The law has been frequently recognized by psychologists,
though I know of none who has given it the emphatic prominence in our
mental history which it deserves. Mr. Spencer says:

 "If the property A occurs here along with the properties B, C, D,
 there along with C, F, H, and again with E, G, B,... it must happen
 that by multiplication of experiences the impressions produced by
 these properties on the organism will be disconnected and rendered
 so far independent in the organism as the properties are in the
 environment, whence must eventually result a power to recognize
 attributes in themselves, apart from particular bodies."[422]

And still more to the point Dr. Martineau, in the passage I have
already quoted, writes:

 "When a red ivory ball, seen for the first time, has been withdrawn,
 it will leave a mental representation of itself, in which all that
 it simultaneously gave us will indistinguishably coexist. Let a white
 ball succeed to it; now, and not before, will an attribute detach
 itself, and the _color_, by force of contrast, be shaken out into
 the foreground. Let the white ball be replaced by an egg, and this
 new difference will bring the _form_ into notice from its previous
 slumber, and thus that which began by being simply an object cut out
 from the surrounding scene becomes for us first a _red_ object, then a
 _red round_ object, and so on."

_Why_ the repetition of the character in combination with different
wholes will cause it thus to break up its adhesion with any one of
them, and roll out, as it were, alone upon the table of consciousness,
is a little of a mystery. One might suppose the nerve-processes of the
various concomitants to neutralize or inhibit each other more or less
and to leave the process of the common term alone distinctly active.
Mr. Spencer appears to think that the mere fact that the common term
is repeated more often than any one of its associates will, of itself,
give it such a degree of intensity that its abstraction must needs
ensue.

This has a plausible sound, but breaks down when examined closely. For
it is not always the often-repeated character which is first noticed
when its concomitants have varied a certain number of times; it is
even more likely to be the most novel of all the concomitants, which
will arrest the attention. If a boy has seen nothing all his life but
sloops and schooners, he will probably never distinctly have singled
out in his notion of 'sail' the character of being hung lengthwise.
When for the first time he sees a square-rigged ship, the opportunity
of extracting the lengthwise mode of hanging as a special accident, and
of dissociating it from the general notion of sail, is offered. But
there are twenty chances to one that that will not be the form of the
boy's consciousness. What he _notices_ will be the new and exceptional
character of being hung crosswise. He will go home and speak of
that, and perhaps never consciously formulate what the more familiar
peculiarity consists in.

This mode of abstraction is realized on a very wide scale, because the
elements of the world in which we find ourselves appear, as a matter of
fact, here, there, and everywhere, and are changing their concomitants
all the while. But on the other hand the abstraction is, so to speak,
never complete, the analysis of a compound never perfect, because
no element is ever given to us absolutely alone, and we can never
therefore approach a compound with the image in our mind of any one of
its components in a perfectly pure form. Colors, sounds, smells, are
just as much entangled with other matter as are more formal elements of
experience, such as extension, intensity, effort, pleasure, difference,
likeness, harmony, badness, strength, and even consciousness itself.
All are embedded in one world. But by the fluctuations and permutations
of which we have spoken, we come to form a pretty good notion of
the _direction_ in which each element differs from the rest, and so
we frame the notion of it as a _terminus_, and continue to mean it
as an individual thing. In the case of many elements, the simple
sensibles, like heat, cold, the colors, smells, etc., the extremes
of the directions are almost touched, and in these instances we have
a comparatively exact perception of what it is we mean to abstract.
But even this is only an approximation; and in literal mathematical
strictness _all_ our abstracts must be confessed to be but imperfectly
imaginable things. At bottom the process is one of _conception_, and is
everywhere, even in the sphere of simple sensible qualities, the same
as that by which we are usually understood to attain to the notions of
abstract goodness, perfect felicity, absolute power, and the like: the
direct perception of a difference between compounds, and the imaginary
prolongation of the direction of the difference to an ideal terminus,
the notion of which we fix and keep as one of our permanent subjects of
discourse.

This is all that I can say usefully about abstraction, or about
analysis, to which it leads.


THE IMPROVEMENT OF DISCRIMINATION BY PRACTICE.


In all the cases considered hitherto I have supposed the differences
involved to be so large as to be flagrant, and the discrimination,
where successive, was treated as involuntary. But, so far from being
always involuntary, discriminations are often difficult in the extreme,
and by most men never performed. Professor de Morgan, thinking, it is
true, rather of conceptual than of perceptive discrimination, wrote,
wittily enough:

 "The great bulk of the illogical part of the educated
 community--whether majority or minority I know not; perhaps six of one
 and half a dozen of the other--have not power to make a distinction,
 and of course cannot be made to take a distinction, and of course
 never attempt to shake a distinction. With them all such things are
 evasions, subterfuges, come-offs, loop-holes, etc. They would hang a
 man for horse-stealing under a statute against sheep-stealing; and
 would laugh at you if you quibbled about the distinction between a
 horse and a sheep."[423]

Any personal or practical interest, however, in the results to be
obtained by distinguishing, makes one's wits amazingly sharp to
detect differences. The culprit himself is not likely to overlook the
difference between a horse and a sheep. And long training and practice
in distinguishing has the same effect as personal interest. Both of
these agencies give to small amounts of objective difference the same
effectiveness upon the mind that, under other circumstances, only large
ones would have. Let us seek to penetrate the _modus operandi_ of their
influence--beginning with that of practice and habit.

That 'practice makes perfect' is notorious in the field of motor
accomplishments. But motor accomplishments depend in part on sensory
discrimination. Billiard-playing, rifle-shooting, tight-rope-dancing,
demand the most delicate appreciation of minute disparities of
sensation, as well as the power to make accurately graduated muscular
response thereto. In the purely sensorial field we have the well-known
virtuosity displayed by the professional buyers and testers of various
kinds of goods. One man will distinguish by taste between the upper
and the lower half of a bottle of old Madeira. Another will recognize,
by feeling the flour in a barrel, whether the wheat was grown in Iowa
or Tennessee. The blind deaf-mute, Laura Bridgman, had so improved her
touch as to recognize, after a year's interval, the hand of a person
who once had shaken hers; and her sister in misfortune, Julia Brace, is
said to have been employed in the Hartford Asylum to sort the linen
of its multitudinous inmates, after it came from the wash, by her
wonderfully educated sense of smell.

The fact is so familiar that few, if any, psychologists have even
recognized it as needing explanation. They have seemed to think that
practice must, in the nature of things, improve the delicacy of
discernment, and have let the matter rest. At most they have said:
"Attention accounts for it; we attend more to habitual things, and what
we attend to we perceive more minutely." This answer is true, but too
general; it seems to me that we can be a little more precise.

       *       *       *       *       *

_There are at least two distinct causes_ which we can see at work
whenever experience improves discrimination:

First, the _terms_ whose difference comes to be felt contract disparate
associates and these help to drag them apart.

Second, the _difference_ reminds us of larger differences of the same
sort, and these help us to notice it.

Let us study the first cause first, and begin by supposing two
compounds, of ten elements apiece. Suppose no one element of either
compound to differ from the corresponding element of the other compound
enough to be distinguished from it if the two are compared alone, and
let the amount of this imperceptible difference be called equal to 1.
The compounds will differ from each other, however, in ten different
ways; and, although each difference by itself might pass unperceived,
the total difference, equal to 10, may very well be sufficient to
strike the sense. In a word, _increasing the number of 'points'
involved in a difference may excite our discrimination as effectually
as increasing the amount of difference at any one point_. Two men whose
mouth, nose, eyes, cheeks, chin, and hair, all differ slightly, will
be as little confounded by us, as two appearances of the same man one
with, and the other without, a false nose. The only contrast in the
cases is that we can easily name the _point_ of difference in the one,
whilst in the other we cannot.

Two things, then, B and C, indistinguishable when compared together
alone, may each contract adhesions with different associates, and the
compounds thus formed may, as wholes, be judged very distinct. _The
effect of practice in increasing discrimination must then, in part
be due to the reinforcing effect, upon an original slight difference
between the terms, of additional differences between the diverse
associates which they severally affect._ Let B and C be the terms: If
A contract adhesions with B, and C with D, AB may appear very distinct
from CD, though B and C _per se_ might have been almost identical.

To illustrate, how does one learn to distinguish claret from burgundy?
Probably they have been drunk on different occasions. When we first
drank claret we heard it called by that name, we were eating such and
such a dinner, etc. Next time we drink it, a dim reminder of all those
things chimes through us as we get the taste of the wine. When we try
burgundy our first impression is that it is a kind of claret; but
something falls short of full identification, and presently we hear it
called burgundy. During the next few experiences, the discrimination
may still be uncertain--"which," we ask ourselves, "of the two wines is
this present specimen?" But at last the claret-flavor recalls pretty
distinctly its own name, 'claret,' "that wine I drank at So-and-so's
table," etc.; and the burgundy-flavor recalls the name burgundy and
some one else's table. _And only when this different_ SETTING _has
come to each is our discrimination between the two flavors solid and
stable._ After a while the tables and other parts of the setting,
besides the name, grow so multifarious as not to come up distinctly
into consciousness; but _pari passu_ with this, the adhesion of each
wine with its own _name_ becomes more and more inveterate, and at last
each flavor suggests instantly and certainly its own name and nothing
else. The names differ far more than the flavors, and help to stretch
these latter farther apart. Some such process as this must go on in all
our experience. Beef and mutton, strawberries and raspberries, odor of
rose and odor of violet, contract different adhesions which reinforce
the differences already felt in the terms.

The reader may say that this has nothing to do with making us feel the
_difference_ between the two terms. It is merely fixing, identifying,
and so to speak substantializing, the _terms_. But what we feel as
their _difference_, we should feel, even though we were unable to name
or otherwise identify the terms.

To which I reply that I believe that the difference is always concreted
and made to seem _more substantial_ by recognizing the terms. I went
out for instance the other day and found that the snow just fallen
had a very odd look, different from the common appearance of snow. I
presently called it a 'micaceous' look; and it seemed to me as if, the
moment I did so, the difference grew more distinct and fixed than it
was before. The other connotations of the word 'micaceous' dragged the
snow farther away from ordinary snow and seemed even to aggravate the
peculiar look in question. I think some such effect as this on our way
of feeling a difference will be very generally admitted to follow from
naming the terms between which it obtains; although I admit myself that
it is difficult to show coercively that naming or otherwise identifying
any given pair of hardly distinguishable terms is essential to their
being felt as different at _first_.[424]

I offer the explanation only as a partial one: it certainly is
not complete. Take the way in which _practice refines our local
discrimination on the skin_, for example. Two compass-points touching
the palm of the hand must be kept, say, half an inch asunder in order
not to be mistaken for one point. But at the end of an hour or so of
practice with them we can distinguish them as two, even when less than
a quarter of an inch apart. If the same two regions of the skin were
constantly touched, in this experience, the explanation we have been
considering would perfectly apply. Suppose a line _a b c d e f_ of
points upon the skin. Suppose the local difference of feeling between
_a_ and _f_ to be so strong as to be instantly recognized when the
points are simultaneously touched, but suppose that between _c_ and
_d_ to be at first too small for this purpose. If we began by putting
the compasses on _a_ and _f_ and gradually contracted their opening,
the strong doubleness recognized at first would still be _suggested_,
as the compass-points approached the positions _c_ and _d_; for the
point _e_ would be so near _f_, and so like it, as not to be aroused
without _f_ also coming to mind. Similarly _d_ would recall _e_ and,
more remotely, _f_. In such wise _c--d_ would no longer be bare _c--d_,
but something more like _abc--def_,--palpably differing impressions.
But in actual experience the education can take place in a much less
methodical way, and we learn at last to discriminate _c_ and _d_
without any constant adhesion being contracted between one of these
spots and _ab_, and the other and _ef_. Volkmann's experiments show
this. He and Fechner, prompted by Czermak's observation that the skin
of the blind was twice as discriminative as that of seeing folks,
sought by experiment to show the effects of practice upon themselves.
They discovered that even within the limits of a single sitting the
distances at which points were felt double might fall at the end to
considerably less than half of their magnitude at the beginning; and
that some, though not all, of this improved sensibility was retained
next day. But they also found that exercising one part of the skin in
this way improved the discrimination not only of the corresponding part
of the opposite side of the body, but of the neighboring parts as well.
Thus, at the beginning of an experimental sitting, the compass-points
had to be a Paris line asunder, in order to be distinguished by the
little-finger-tip. But after exercising the _other fingers_, it was
found that the little-finger-tip could discriminate points only half a
line apart.[425] The same relation existed betwixt divers points of the
arm and hand.[426]

Here it is clear that the cause which I first suggested fails to apply,
and that we must invoke another.

What are the exact experimental phenomena? The spots, as such, are
not distinctly located, and the difference, as such, between their
feelings, is not distinctly felt, until the interval is greater than
the minimum required for the mere perception of their _doubleness_.
What we first feel is a bluntness, then a suspicion of doubleness,
which presently becomes a distinct doubleness, and at last two
different-feeling and differently placed spots with a definite tract
of space between them. Some of the places we try give us this latest
stage of the perception immediately; some only give us the earliest;
and between them are intermediary places. But as soon as the _image of
the doubleness_ as it is felt in the more discriminative places gets
lodged in our memory, it helps us to find its like in places where
otherwise we might have missed it, much as the recent hearing of an
'overtone' helps us to detect the latter in a compound sound (_supra_,
pp. 439-40). A dim doubleness grows clearer by being assimilated to
the image of a distincter doubleness felt a moment before. It is
interpreted by means of the latter. And so is any difference, like any
other sort of impression, more easily perceived when we carry in our
mind to meet it a distinct image of what sort of a thing we are to look
for, of what its nature is likely to be.[427]

_These two processes_, the reinforcement of the terms by disparate
associates, and the filling of the memory with past differences, of
similar direction with the present one, but of more conspicuous amount,
_are the only explanations I can offer of the effects of education
in this line_. What is accomplished by both processes is essentially
the same thing: they make small differences affect us as if they were
large ones--that large differences should affect us as they do remains
an inexplicable fact. In principle these two processes ought to be
sufficient to account for all possible cases. Whether in fact they are
sufficient, whether there be no residual factor which we have failed to
detect and analyze out, I will not presume to decide.


PRACTICAL INTERESTS LIMIT DISCRIMINATION.


It will be remembered that on page 509 personal interest was named
as a sharpener of discrimination alongside of practice. But personal
interest probably acts through attention and not in any immediate or
specific way. A distinction in which we have a practical stake is one
which we concentrate our minds upon and which we are on the look-out
for. We draw it frequently, and we get all the benefits of so doing,
benefits which have just been explained. Where, on the other hand,
a distinction has no practical interest, where we gain nothing by
analyzing a feature from out of the compound total of which it forms
a part, we contract a habit of leaving it unnoticed, and at last grow
callous to its presence. Helmholtz was the first psychologist who dwelt
on these facts as emphatically as they deserve, and I can do no better
than quote his very words.

 "We are accustomed," he says, "in a large number of cases where
 sensations of different kinds, or in different parts of the body,
 exist simultaneously, to recognize that they are distinct as soon as
 they are perceived, and to direct our attention at will to any one of
 them separately. Thus at any moment we can be separately conscious of
 what we see, of what we hear, of what we feel; and distinguish what we
 feel in a finger or in the great toe, whether pressure, gentle touch,
 or warmth. So also in the field of vision. Indeed, as I shall endeavor
 to show in what follows, we readily distinguish our sensations
 from one another _when we have a precise knowledge_ that they are
 composite, as, for example, when we have become certain, by frequently
 repeated and invariable experience, that our present sensation arises
 from the simultaneous action of many independent stimuli, each of
 which usually excites an equally well-known individual sensation."

This, it will be observed, is only another statement of our law, that
the only individual components which we can pick out of compounds are
those of which we have independent knowledge in a separate form.

 "This induces us to think that nothing can be easier, when a number of
 different sensations are simultaneously excited, than to distinguish
 them individually from each other, and that this is an innate faculty
 of our minds.

 "Thus we find, among other things, that it is quite a matter of course
 to hear separately the different musical tones which come to our
 senses collectively; and we expect that in every case when two of them
 occur together, we shall be able to do the like.

 "The matter becomes very different when we set to work to investigate
 the more unusual cases of perception, and seek more completely to
 understand the conditions under which the above-mentioned distinction
 can or cannot be made, as is the case in the physiology of the senses.
 We then become aware that _two different kinds or grades must be
 distinguished in our becoming conscious of a sensation_. The lower
 grade of this consciousness is that in which the influence of the
 sensation in question makes itself felt only in the conceptions we
 form of external things and processes, and assists in determining
 them. This can take place without our needing, or indeed being
 able, to ascertain to what particular part of our sensations we owe
 this or that circumstance in our perceptions. In this case we will
 say that the impression of the sensation in question is _perceived
 synthetically_. The second higher grade is when we immediately
 distinguish the sensation in question as an existing part of the
 sum of the sensations excited in us. We will say, then, that the
 sensation is _perceived analytically_. The two cases must be carefully
 distinguished from each other."[428]

By the sensation being perceived synthetically, Helmholtz means that
it is not discriminated at all, but only felt in a mass with other
simultaneous sensations. That it _is_ felt there he thinks is proved
by the fact that our _judgment_ of the total will change if anything
occurs to alter the _outer cause_ of the sensation.[429] The following
pages from an earlier edition show what the concrete cases of synthetic
perception and what those of analytic perception are wont to be:

 "In the use of our senses, practice and experience play a much larger
 part than we ordinarily suppose. Our sensations are in the first
 instance important only in so far as they enable us to judge rightly
 of the world about us; and our practice in discriminating between them
 usually goes only just far enough to meet this end. We are, however,
 too much disposed to think that we must be immediately conscious of
 every ingredient of our sensations. This natural prejudice is due
 to the fact that we are indeed conscious, immediately and without
 effort, of everything in our sensations which has a bearing upon those
 practical purposes, for the sake of which we wish to know the outer
 world. Daily and hourly, during our whole life, we keep our senses in
 training for this end exclusively, and for its sake our experiences
 are accumulated. But even within the sphere of these sensations, which
 do correspond to outer things, training and practice make themselves
 felt. It is well known how much finer and quicker the painter is in
 discriminating colors and illuminations than one whose eye is not
 trained in these matters; how the musician and the musical-instrument
 maker perceive with ease and certainty differences of pitch and tone
 which for the ear of the layman do not exist; and how even in the
 inferior realms of cookery and wine-judging it takes a long habit of
 comparing to make a master. But more strikingly still is seen the
 effect of practice when we pass to sensations which depend only on
 inner conditions of our organs, and which, not corresponding at all to
 outer things or to their effects upon us, are therefore of no value
 in giving us information about the outer world. The physiology of the
 sense-organs has, in recent times, made us acquainted with a number
 of such phenomena, discovered partly in consequence of theoretic
 speculations and questionings, partly by individuals, like Goethe and
 Purkinje, specially endowed by nature with talent for this sort of
 observation. These so-called subjective phenomena are extraordinarily
 hard to find; and when they are once found, special aids for the
 attention are almost always required to observe them. It is usually
 hard to notice the phenomenon again even when one knows already the
 description of the first observer. The reason is that we are not only
 unpractised in singling out these subjective sensations, but that
 we are, on the contrary, most thoroughly trained in abstracting our
 attention from them, because they would only hinder us in observing
 the outer world. Only when their intensity is so strong as actually to
 hinder us in observing the outer world do we begin to notice them; or
 they may sometimes, in dreaming and delirium, form the starting point
 of hallucinations.

 "Let me give a few well-known cases, taken from physiological optics,
 as examples. Every eye probably contains _muscæ volitantes_, so
 called; these are fibres, granules, etc., floating in the vitreous
 humor, throwing their shadows on the retina, and appearing in the
 field of vision as little dark moving spots. They are most easily
 detected by looking attentively at a broad, bright, blank surface
 like the sky. Most persons who have not had their attention expressly
 called to the existence of these figures are apt to notice them for
 the first time when some ailment befalls their eyes and attracts
 their attention to the subjective state of these organs. The usual
 complaint then is that the _muscæ volitantes_ came in with the malady;
 and this often makes the patients very anxious about these harmless
 things, and attentive to all their peculiarities. It is then hard work
 to make them believe that these figures have existed throughout all
 their previous life, and that all healthy eyes contain them. I knew
 an old gentleman who once had occasion to cover one of his eyes which
 had accidentally become diseased, and who was then in no small degree
 shocked at finding that his other eye was totally blind; with a sort
 of blindness, moreover, which must have lasted years, and yet he never
 was aware of it.

 "Who, besides, would believe without performing the appropriate
 experiments, that when one of his eyes is closed there is a great gap,
 the so-called 'blind spot,' not far from the middle of the field of
 the open eye, in which he sees nothing at all, but which he fills out
 with his imagination? Mariotte, who was led by theoretic speculations
 to discover this phenomenon, awakened no small surprise when he
 showed it at the court of Charles II. of England. The experiment was
 at that time repeated with many variations, and became a fashionable
 amusement. The gap is, in fact, so large that seven full moons
 alongside of each other would not cover its diameter, and that a
 man's face 6 or 7 feet off disappears within it. In our ordinary use
 of vision this great hole in the field fails utterly to be noticed;
 because our eyes are constantly wandering, and the moment an object
 interests us we turn them full upon it. So it follows that the object
 which at any actual moment excites our attention never happens to
 fall upon this gap, and thus it is that we never grow conscious of
 the blind spot in the field. In order to notice it, we must first
 purposely rivet our gaze upon one object and then move about a second
 object in the neighborhood of the blind spot, striving meanwhile to
 _attend_ to this latter without moving the direction of our gaze
 from the first object. This runs counter to all our habits, and is
 therefore a difficult thing to accomplish. With some people it is
 even an impossibility. But only when it is accomplished do we see the
 second object vanish and convince ourselves of the existence of this
 gap.

 "Finally, let me refer to the double images of ordinary binocular
 vision. Whenever we look at a point with both eyes, all objects on
 this side of it or beyond it appear double. It takes but a moderate
 effort of observation to ascertain this fact; and from this we may
 conclude that we have been seeing the far greater part of the external
 world double all our lives, although numbers of persons are unaware
 of it, and are in the highest degree astonished when it is brought
 to their attention. As a matter of fact, we never _have_ seen in
 this double fashion any particular object upon which our attention
 was directed at the time; for upon such objects we always converge
 both eyes. In the habitual use of our eyes, our attention is always
 withdrawn from such objects as give us double images at the time; this
 is the reason why we so seldom learn that these images exist. In order
 to find them we must set our attention a new and unusual task; we must
 make it explore the lateral parts of the field of vision, not, as
 usual, to find what objects are there, but to analyze our sensations.
 Then only do we notice this phenomenon.[430]

 "The same difficulty which is found in the observation of subjective
 sensations to which no external object corresponds is found also in
 the analysis of compound sensations which correspond to a single
 object. Of this sort are many of our sensations of sound. When the
 sound of a violin, no matter how often we hear it, excites over and
 over again in our ear the same sum of partial tones, the result is
 that our feeling of this sum of tones ends by becoming for our mind a
 mere sign for the voice of the violin. Another combination of partial
 tones becomes the sensible sign of the voice of a clarionet, etc. And
 the oftener any such combination is heard, the more accustomed we grow
 to perceiving it as an integral total, and the harder it becomes to
 analyze it by immediate observation. I believe that this is one of the
 principal reasons why the analysis of the notes of the human voice in
 singing is relatively so difficult. Such fusions of many sensations
 into what, to conscious perception, seems a simple whole, abound in
 all our senses.

 "Physiological optics affords other interesting examples. The
 perception of the bodily form of a near object comes about through the
 combination of two diverse pictures which the eyes severally receive
 from it, and whose diversity is due to the different position of each
 eye, altering the perspective view of what is before it. Before the
 invention of the stereoscope this explanation could only be assumed
 hypothetically; but it can now be proved at any moment by the use of
 the instrument. Into the stereoscope we insert two flat drawings,
 representing the two perspective views of the two eyes, in such a
 manner that each eye sees its own view in the proper place; and we
 obtain, in consequence, the perception of a single extended solid, as
 complete and vivid as if we had the real object before us.

 "Now we can, it is true, by shutting one eye after the other and
 attending to the point, recognize the difference in the pictures--at
 least when it is not too small. But, for the stereoscopic perception
 of solidity, pictures suffice whose difference is so extraordinarily
 slight as hardly to be recognized by the most careful comparison;
 and it is certain that, in our ordinary careless observing of bodily
 objects, we never dream that the perception is due to two perspective
 views fused into one, because it is an entirely different kind of
 perception from that of either flat perspective view by itself. It
 is certain, therefore, that two different sensations of our two eyes
 fuse into a third perception entirely different from either. Just
 as partial tones fuse into the perception of a certain instrument's
 voice; and just as we learn to separate the partial tones of a
 vibrating string by pinching a nodal point and letting them sound
 in isolation; so we learn to separate the images on the two eyes by
 opening and closing them alternately.

 "There are other much more complex instances of the way in which
 many sensations may combine to serve as the basis of a quite simple
 perception. When, for example we perceive an object in a certain
 _direction_, we must somehow be impressed by the fact that certain
 of our optic nerve-fibres, and no others, are impressed by its
 light. Furthermore, we must rightly judge the position of our eyes
 in our head, and of our head upon our body, by means of feelings in
 our eye-muscles and our neck-muscles respectively. If any of these
 processes is disturbed we get a false perception of the object's
 position. The nerve-fibres can be changed by a prism before the eye;
 or the eyeball's position changed by pressing the organ towards one
 side; and such experiments show that, for the simple seeing of the
 position of an object, sensations of these two sorts must concur. But
 it would be quite impossible to gather this directly from the sensible
 impression which the object makes. Even when we have made experiments
 and convinced ourselves in every possible manner that such must be
 the fact, it still remains hidden from our immediate introspective
 observation.

 "These examples" [of 'synthetic perception,' perception in which each
 contributory sensation is felt _in_ the whole, and is a co-determinant
 of what the whole shall be, but does not attract the attention to its
 separate self] "may suffice to show the vital part which the direction
 of attention and practice in observing play in sense-perception. To
 apply this now to the ear. The ordinary task which our ear has to
 solve when many sounds assail it at once is to discern the voices of
 the several sounding bodies or instruments engaged; beyond this it has
 no objective interest in analyzing. We wish to know, when many men
 are speaking together, what each one says, when many instruments and
 voices combine, which melody is executed by each. Any deeper analysis,
 such as that of each separate note into its partial tones (although
 it might be performed by the same means and faculty of hearing as the
 first analysis) would tell us nothing new about the sources of sound
 actually present, but might lead us astray as to their number. For
 this reason we confine our attention in analyzing a mass of sound to
 the several instruments' voices, and expressly abstain, as it were,
 from discriminating the elementary components of the latter. In this
 last sort of discrimination we are as unpractised as we are, on the
 contrary, well trained in the former kind."[431]

After all we have said, no comment seems called for upon these
interesting and important facts and reflections of Helmholtz.


REACTION-TIME AFTER DISCRIMINATION.


The _time required for discrimination_ has been made a subject of
experimental measurement. Wundt calls it _Unterscheidungszeit_. His
subjects (whose simple reaction-time--see p. 85 ff.--had previously
been determined) were required to make a movement, always the same,
the instant they discerned _which_ of two or more signals they
received. The exact time of the signal and that of the movement were
automatically registered by a galvanic chronoscope. The particular
signal to be received was unknown in advance, and the excess of time
occupied by those reactions in which its character had first to be
discerned, over the simple reaction-time, measured, according to Wundt,
the time required for the act of discrimination. It was found longer
when four different signals were irregularly used than when only
two were used. In the former case it averaged, for three observers
respectively (the signals being the sudden appearance of a black or of
a white object),

    0.050 sec.;
    0.047 sec.
    0.079 sec.

In the latter case, a red and a green signal being added to the former
ones, it became, for the same observers,

    0.157;
    0.073;
    0.132.[432]

Later, in Wundt's Laboratory, Herr Tischer made many careful
experiments after the same method, where the facts to be discriminated
were the different degrees of loudness in the sound which served as
a signal. I subjoin Herr Tischer's table of results, explaining that
each vertical column after the first gives the average results obtained
from a distinct individual, and that the figure in the first column
stands for the number of possible loudnesses that might be expected in
the particular series of reactions made. The times are expressed in
thousandths of a second.

    2 |  6    |  8.5  |  10.75 |  10.7 |  33   |  53
    3 |  10   |  14.4 |  19.9  |  22.7 |  58.5 |  57.8
    4 |  16.7 |  20.8 |  29    |  29.1 |  75   |  84
    5 |  25.6 |  31   |  ...   |  40.1 |  95.5 |  138[433]



The interesting points here are the great individual variations, and
the rapid way in which the time for discrimination increases with the
number of possible terms to discriminate. The individual variations are
largely due to want of practice in the particular task set, but partly
also to discrepancies in the psychic process. One gentleman said,
for example, that in the experiments with three sounds, he kept the
image of the middle one ready in his mind, and compared what he heard
as either louder, lower, or the same. His discrimination among three
possibilities became thus very similar to a discrimination between
two.[434]

Mr. J. M. Cattell found he could get no results by this method,[435]
and reverted to one used by observers previous to Wundt and which
Wundt had rejected. This is the _einfache Wahlmethode_, as Wundt calls
it. The reacter awaits the signal and reacts if it is of one sort, but
omits to act if it is of another sort. The reaction thus occurs after
discrimination; the motor impulse cannot be sent to the hand until the
subject knows what the signal is. The nervous impulse, as Mr. Cattell
says, must probably travel to the cortex and excite changes there,
causing in consciousness the perception of the signal. These changes
occupy the time of discrimination (or perception-time, as it is called
by Mr. C.) But _then_ a nervous impulse must descend from the cortex
to the lower motor centre which stands primed and ready to discharge;
and this, as Mr. C. says, gives a will-time as well. The total
reaction-time thus includes both 'will-time' and 'discrimination-time.'
But as the centrifugal and centripetal processes occupying these two
times respectively are probably about the same, and the time used
in the cortex is about equally divided between the perception of
the signal and the preparation of the motor discharge, if we divide
it equally between perception (discrimination) and volition, the
error cannot be great.[436] We can moreover change the nature of the
perception without altering the will-time, and thus investigate with
considerable thoroughness the length of the perception-time.

Guided by these principles, Prof. Cattell found the time required for
distinguishing a white signal from no signal to be, in two observers:

    0.030 sec. and 0.050 sec;

that for distinguishing one color from another was similarly:

    0.100 and 0.110;

that for distinguishing a certain color from ten other colors:

    0.105 and 0.117;

that for distinguishing the letter A in ordinary print from the letter
Z:

    0.142 and 0.137;

that for distinguishing a given letter from all the rest of the alphabet
(not reacting until that letter appeared)

    0.119 and 0.116;

that for distinguishing a word from any of twenty-five other words, from

    0.118 sec. to 0.158 sec.

The difference depending on the length of the words and the familiarity
of the language to which they belonged.

Prof. Cattell calls attention to the fact that the time for
distinguishing a word is often but little more than that for
distinguishing a letter:

 "We do not, therefore, distinguish separately the letters of which a
 word is composed, but the word as a whole. The application of this in
 teaching children to read is evident."

He also finds a great difference in the time with which various letters
are distinguished, E being particularly bad.[437]

I have, in describing these experiments, followed the example of
previous writers and spoken as if the process by which the nature of
the signal determines the reaction were identical with the ordinary
conscious process of discriminative perception and volition. I am
convinced, however, that this is not the case; and that although the
results are the same, the form of consciousness is quite different.
The reader will remember my contention (_supra_, p. 90 ff.) that the
simple reaction-time (usually supposed to include a conscious process
of perceiving) really measures nothing but a reflex act. Anyone who
will perform reactions with discrimination will easily convince
himself that the process here also is far more like a reflex, than
like a deliberate, operation. I have made, with myself and students,
a large number of measurements where the signal expected was in one
series a touch _somewhere_ on the skin of the back and head, and in
another series a spark _somewhere_ in the field of view. The hand
had to move as quickly as possible towards the place of the touch
or the spark. It did so infallibly, and sensibly instantly; whilst
both place and movement seemed to be _perceived_ only a moment
later, in memory. These experiments were undertaken for the express
purpose of ascertaining whether the movement at the sight of the
spark was discharged _immediately_ by the visual perception, or
whether a 'motor-idea' had to intervene between the perception of the
spark and the reaction.[438] The first thing that was manifest to
introspection was that no perception or idea of _any_ sort preceded
the reaction. It jumped of itself, whenever the signal came; and
perception was retrospective. We must suppose, then, that the state of
eager expectancy of a certain definite range of possible discharges,
innervates a whole set of paths in advance, so that when a particular
sensation comes it is drafted into its appropriate motor outlet too
quickly for the perceptive process to be aroused. In the experiments
I describe, the conditions were most favorable for rapidity, for the
connection between the signals and their movements might almost be
called innate. It is instinctive to move the hand towards a thing seen
or a skin-spot touched. But where the movement is _conventionally_
attached to the signal, there would be more chance for delay, and
the amount of practice would then determine the speed. This is well
shown in Tischer's results, quoted on p. 524, where the most practised
observer, Tischer himself, reacted in one eighth of the time needed
by one of the others.[439] But what all investigators have aimed to
determine in these experiments is the _minimum_ time. I trust I have
said enough to convince the student that this minimum time by no means
measures what we consciously know as discrimination. It only measures
something which, under the experimental conditions, leads to a similar
result. But it is the bane of psychology to suppose that where results
are similar, processes must be the same. Psychologists are too apt to
reason as geometers would, if the latter were to say that the diameter
of a circle is the same thing as its semi-circumference, because,
forsooth, they terminate in the same two points.[440]


THE PERCEPTION OF LIKENESS.


The perception of likeness is practically very much bound up with
that of difference. That is to say, the only differences we note _as_
differences, and estimate quantitatively, and arrange along a scale,
are those comparatively limited differences which we find between
members of a common genus. The force of gravity and the color of this
ink are things it never occurred to me to compare until now that I
am casting about for examples of the incomparable. Similarly the
elastic quality of this india-rubber band, the comfort of last night's
sleep, the good that can be done with a legacy, these are things too
discrepant to have ever been compared ere now. Their relation to each
other is less that of difference than of mere logical negativity. To be
found _different_, things must as a rule have some commensurability,
some aspect in common, which suggests the possibility of their
being treated in the same way. This is of course not a theoretic
necessity--for any distinction may be called a 'difference,' if one
likes--but a practical and linguistic remark.

The _same things, then, which arouse the perception of difference
usually arouse that of resemblance also_. And the analysis of them,
so as to define wherein the difference and wherein the resemblance
respectively consists, is called _comparison_. If we start to deal with
the things as simply the same or alike, we are liable to be surprised
by the difference. If we start to treat them as merely different, we
are apt to discover how much they are alike. _Difference, commonly so
called, is thus between species of a genus._ And the faculty by which
we perceive the resemblance upon which the genus is based, is just
as ultimate and inexplicable a mental endowment as that by which we
perceive the differences upon which the species depend. There is a
shock of likeness when we pass from one thing to another which in the
first instance we merely discriminate numerically, but, at the moment
of bringing our attention to bear, perceive to be _similar_ to the
first; just as there is a shock of difference when we pass between two
dissimilars.[441] The objective extent of the likeness, just like that
of the difference, determines the magnitude of the shock. The likeness
may be so evanescent, or the basis of it so habitual and little liable
to be attended to, that it will escape observation altogether. Where,
however, we find it, there we make a genus of the things compared; and
their discrepancies and incommensurabilities in other respects can
then figure as the _differential_ of so many species. As 'thinkables'
or 'existents' even the smoke of a cigarette and the worth of a
dollar-bill are comparable--still more so as 'perishables,' or as
'enjoyables.'

Much, then, of what I have said of difference in the course of this
chapter will apply, with a simple change of language, to resemblance as
well. We go through the world, carrying on the two functions abreast,
discovering differences in the like, and likenesses in the different.
To abstract the _ground_ of either difference or likeness (where it
is not ultimate) demands an analysis of the given objects into their
parts. So that all that was said of the dependence of analysis upon a
preliminary separate acquaintance with the character to be abstracted,
and upon its having varied concomitants, finds a place in the
psychology of resemblance as well as in that of difference.

But when all is said and done about the conditions which favor our
perception of resemblance and our abstraction of its ground, the
crude fact remains, that _some people are far more sensitive to
resemblances, and far more ready to point out wherein they consist,
than others are_. They are the wits, the poets, the inventors, the
scientific men, the practical geniuses. _A native talent for perceiving
analogies_ is reckoned by Prof. Bain, and by others before and after
him, as _the leading fact in genius of every order_. But as this
chapter is already long, and as the question of genius had better wait
till Chapter XXII, where its practical consequences can be discussed at
the same time, I will say nothing more at present either about it or
about the faculty of noting resemblances. If the reader feels that this
faculty is having small justice done it at my hands, and that it ought
to be wondered at and made much more of than has been done in these
last few pages, he will perhaps find some compensation when that later
chapter is reached. I think I emphasize it enough when I call it one of
the ultimate foundation-pillars of the intellectual life, the others
being Discrimination, Retentiveness, and Association.


THE MAGNITUDE OF DIFFERENCES.


On page 489 I spoke of differences being greater or less, and of
certain groups of them being susceptible of a linear arrangement
exhibiting serial _increase_. A series whose terms grow more and more
different from the starting point is one whose terms grow less and
less like it. They grow more and more like it if you read them the
other way. So that likeness and unlikeness to the starting point are
functions inverse to each other, of the position of any term in such a
series.

Professor Stumpf introduces the word _distance_ to denote the position
of a term in any such series. The less like is the term, the more
distant it is from the starting point. The ideally regular series of
this sort would be one in which the distances--the steps of resemblance
or difference--between all pairs of adjacent terms were equal. This
would be an evenly gradated series. And it is an interesting fact in
psychology that we are able, in many departments of our sensibility,
to arrange the terms without difficulty in this evenly gradated way.
Differences, in other words, between diverse pairs of terms, _a_ and
_b_, for example, on the one hand, and _c_ and _d_ on the other,[442]
can be judged equal or diverse in amount. The distances from one term
to another in the series are equal. Linear magnitudes and musical notes
are perhaps the impressions which we easiest arrange in this way.
Next come shades of light or color, which we have little difficulty
in arranging by steps of difference of sensibly equal value. Messrs.
Plateau and Delbœuf have found it fairly easy to determine what shade
of gray will be judged by every one to hit the exact middle between a
darker and a lighter shade.[443]

How now do we so readily recognize the equality of two differences
between different pairs of terms? or, more briefly, how do we recognize
the _magnitude_ of a difference at all? Prof. Stumpf discusses this
question in an interesting way;[444] and comes to the conclusion that
our feeling for the size of a difference, and our perception that
the terms of two diverse pairs are equally or unequally distant from
each other, can be explained by no simpler mental process, but, like
the shock of difference itself, must be regarded as for the present
an unanalyzable endowment of the mind. This acute author rejects in
particular the notion which would make our judgment of the distance
between two sensations depend upon our _mentally traversing the
intermediary steps_. We may of course do so, and may often find it
useful to do so, as in musical intervals, or figured lines, But we need
not do so; and nothing more is really _required_ for a comparative
judgment of the amount of a 'distance' than three or four impressions
belonging to a common kind.

The vanishing of all perceptible difference between two numerically
distinct things makes them _qualitatively the same_ or _equal_.
Equality, or _qualitative_ (as distinguished from numerical)
_identity_, is thus nothing but the _extreme degree of likeness_.[445]

We saw above (p. 492) that some persons consider that the difference
between two objects is constituted of two things, viz., their absolute
identity in certain respects, _plus_ their absolute non-identity in
others. We saw that this theory would not apply to all cases (p. 493).
So here any theory which would base likeness on identity, and not
rather identity on likeness, must fail. It is supposed perhaps, by
most people, that two resembling things owe their resemblance to their
absolute identity in respect of some attribute or attributes, combined
with the absolute non-identity of the rest of their being. This, which
may be true of compound things, breaks down when we come to simple
impressions.

 "When we compare a deep, a middle, and a high note, e.g. _C, f_ sharp,
 _a'''_, we remark immediately that the first is less like the third
 than the second is. The same would be true of _c d e_ in the same
 region of the scale. Our very calling one of the notes a 'middle'
 note is the expression of a judgment of this sort. But where here is
 the identical and where the non-identical part? We cannot think of
 the overtones; for the first-named three notes have none in common,
 at least not on musical instruments. Moreover, we might take simple
 tones, and still our judgment would be unhesitatingly the same,
 provided the tones were not chosen too close together.... Neither can
 it be said that the identity consists in their all being sounds, and
 not a sound, a smell, and a color, respectively. For this identical
 attribute comes to each of them in equal measure, whereas the first,
 being less like the third than the second is, ought, on the terms
 of the theory we are criticising, to have less of the identical
 quality.... It thus appears impracticable to define all possible cases
 of likeness as partial identity _plus_ partial disparity; and it is
 vain to seek in all cases for identical elements."[446]

And as all compound resemblances are based on simple ones like these,
it follows that likeness _überhaupt_ must not be conceived as a special
complication of identity, but rather that identity must be conceived as
a special degree of likeness, according to the proposition expressed at
the outset of the paragraph that precedes. Likeness and difference are
ultimate relations perceived. As a matter of fact, no two sensations,
no two objects of all those we know, are in scientific rigor identical.
We call those of them identical whose difference is unperceived.
Over and above this we have a _conception_ of absolute sameness, it
is true, but this, like so many of our conceptions (cf. p. 508), is
an ideal construction got by following a certain direction of serial
increase to its maximum supposable extreme. It plays an important
part, among other permanent meanings possessed by us, in our ideal
intellectual constructions. But it plays no part whatever in explaining
psychologically how we perceive likenesses between simple things.


THE MEASURE OF DISCRIMINATIVE SENSIBILITY.


In 1860, Professor G. T. Fechner of Leipzig, a man of great learning
and subtlety of mind, published two volumes entitled 'Psychophysik,'
devoted to establishing and explaining a law called by him the
psychophysic law, which he considered to express the deepest and most
elementary relation between the mental and the physical worlds. It is
a formula for the connection between the amount of our sensations and
the amount of their outward causes. Its simplest expression is, that
when we pass from one sensation to a stronger one of the same kind, the
sensations increase proportionally to the logarithms of their exciting
causes. Fechner's book was the starting point of a new department of
literature, which it would be perhaps impossible to match for the
qualities of thoroughness and subtlety, but of which, in the humble
opinion of the present writer, the proper psychological outcome is just
_nothing_. The psychophysic law controversy has prompted a good many
series of observations on sense-discrimination, and has made discussion
of them very rigorous. It has also cleared up our ideas about the best
methods for getting average results, when particular observations vary;
and beyond this it has done nothing; but as it is a chapter in the
history of our science, some account of it is here due to the reader.

Fechner's train of thought has been popularly expounded a great many
times. As I have nothing new to add, it is but just that I should quote
an existing account. I choose the one given by Wundt in his Vorlesungen
über Menschen und Thierseele, 1863, omitting a good deal:

 "How much stronger or weaker one sensation is than another, we are
 never able to say. Whether the sun be a hundred or a thousand times
 brighter than the moon, a cannon a hundred or a thousand times louder
 than a pistol, is beyond our power to estimate. The natural measure of
 sensation which we possess enables us to judge of the equality, of the
 'more' and of the 'less,' but not of 'how many times more or less.'
 This natural measure is, therefore, as good as no measure at all,
 whenever it becomes a question of accurately ascertaining intensities
 in the sensational sphere. Even though it may teach us in a general
 way that with the strength of the outward physical stimulus the
 strength of the concomitant sensation waxes or wanes, still it leaves
 us without the slightest knowledge of whether the sensation varies in
 exactly the same proportion as the stimulus itself, or at a slower
 or a more rapid rate. In a word, we know by our natural sensibility
 nothing of the _law_ that connects the sensation and its outward cause
 together. To find this law we must first find an exact measure for the
 sensation itself; we must be able to say: A stimulus of strength _one_
 begets a sensation of strength _one_; a stimulus of strength _two_
 begets a sensation of strength _two_, or _three_, or _four_, etc. But
 to do this we must first know what a sensation two, three, or four
 times greater than another signifies....

 "Space magnitudes we soon learn to determine exactly because we only
 measure one space against another. The measure of mental magnitudes
 is far more difficult.... But the problem of measuring the magnitude
 of _sensations_ is the first step in the bold enterprise of making
 mental magnitudes altogether subject to exact measurement.... Were
 our whole knowledge limited to the fact that the sensation rises when
 the stimulus rises, and falls when the latter falls, much would not
 be gained. But even immediate unaided observation teaches us certain
 facts which, at least in a general way, suggest the law according to
 which the sensations vary with their outward cause.

 "Every one knows that in the stilly night we hear things unnoticed in
 the noise of day. The gentle ticking of the clock, the air circulating
 through the chimney, the cracking of the chairs in the room, and a
 thousand other slight noises, impress themselves upon our ear. It is
 equally well known that in the confused hubbub of the streets, or the
 clamor of a railway, we may lose not only what our neighbor says to
 us, but even not hear the sound of our own voice. The stars which are
 brightest at night are invisible by day; and although we see the moon
 then, she is far paler than at night. Everyone who has had to deal
 with weights knows that if to a pound in the hand a second pound be
 added, the difference is immediately felt; whilst if it be added to a
 hundredweight, we are not aware of the difference at all....

 "The sound of the clock, the light of the stars, the pressure of
 the pound, these are all _stimuli_ to our senses, and stimuli whose
 outward amount remains the same. What then do these experiences teach?
 Evidently nothing but this, that one and the same stimulus, according
 to the circumstances under which it operates, will be felt either
 more or less intensely, or not felt at all. Of what sort now is the
 alteration in the circumstances, upon which this alteration in the
 feeling may depend? On considering the matter closely we see that it
 is everywhere of one and the same kind. The tick of the clock is a
 feeble stimulus for our auditory nerve, which we hear plainly when
 it is alone, but not when it is added to the strong stimulus of the
 carriage-wheels and other noises of the day. The light of the stars is
 a stimulus to the eye. But if the stimulation which this light exerts
 be added to the strong stimulus of daylight, we feel nothing of it,
 although we feel it distinctly when it unites itself with the feebler
 stimulation of the twilight. The pound-weight is a stimulus to our
 skin, which we feel when it joins itself to a preceding stimulus of
 equal strength, but which vanishes when it is combined with a stimulus
 a thousand times greater in amount.

 "We may therefore lay it down as a general rule that a stimulus,
 in order to be felt, may be so much the smaller if the already
 pre-existing stimulation of the organ is small, but must be so much
 the larger, the greater the pre-existing stimulation is. From
 this in a general way we can perceive the connection between the
 stimulus and the feeling it excites. At least thus much appears,
 that the law of dependence is not as simple a one as might have been
 expected beforehand. The simplest relation would obviously be that
 the sensation should increase in identically the same ratio as the
 stimulus, thus that if a stimulus of strength _one_ occasioned a
 sensation _one_, a stimulus of _two_ should occasion sensation _two_,
 stimulus _three_, sensation _three_, etc. But if this simplest of
 all relations prevailed, a stimulus added to a pre-existing strong
 stimulus ought to provoke as great an increase of feeling as if it
 were added to a pre-existing weak stimulus; the light of the stars
 e.g., ought to make as great an addition to the daylight as it does
 to the darkness of the nocturnal sky. This we know not to be the
 case: the stars are invisible by day, the addition they make to our
 sensation then is unnoticeable, whereas the same addition to our
 feeling of the twilight is very considerable indeed. So it is clear
 that the strength of the sensations does not increase in proportion
 to the amount of the stimuli, but more slowly. And now comes the
 question, in what proportion does the increase of the sensation
 grow less as the increase of the stimulus grows greater. To answer
 this question, every-day experiences do not suffice. We need exact
 measurements both of the amounts of the various stimuli, and of the
 intensity of the sensations themselves.

 "How to execute these measurements, however, is something which daily
 experience suggests. To measure the strength of sensations is, as we
 saw, impossible; we can only measure the difference of sensations.
 Experience showed us what very unequal differences of sensation
 might come from equal differences of outward stimulus. But all these
 experiences expressed themselves in one kind of fact, that the same
 difference of stimulus could in one case be felt, and in another
 case not felt at all--a pound felt if added to another pound, but
 not if added to a hundred-weight.... We can quickest reach a result
 with our observations if we start with an arbitrary strength of
 stimulus, notice what sensation it gives us, and then _see how much
 we can increase the stimulus without making the sensation seem to
 change_. If we carry out such observations with stimuli of varying
 absolute amounts, we shall be forced to choose in an equally varying
 way the amounts of addition to the stimulus which are capable of
 giving us a just barely perceptible feeling of _more_. A light, to be
 just perceptible in the twilight need not be near as bright as the
 starlight; it must be far brighter to be just perceived during the
 day. If now we institute such observations for all possible strengths
 of the various stimuli, and note for each strength the amount of
 addition of the latter required to produce a barely perceptible
 alteration of sensation, we shall have a series of figures in which is
 immediately expressed the law according to which the sensation alters
 when the stimulation is increased...."

Observations according to this method are particularly easy to make
in the spheres of light-, sound-, and pressure-sensation.... Beginning
with the latter case,

 "We find a surprisingly simple result. The barely sensible addition to
 the original weight _must stand exactly in the same proportion to it_,
 be the _same fraction_ of it, no matter what the absolute value may be
 of the weights on which the experiment is made.... As the average of
 a number of experiments, this fraction is found to be about 1/3; that
 is, no matter what pressure there may already be made upon the skin,
 an increase or a diminution of the pressure will be _felt_, as soon
 as the added or subtracted weight amounts to one third of the weight
 originally there."

Wundt then describes how differences may be observed in the muscular
feelings, in the feelings of heat, in those of light, and in those of
sound; and he concludes his seventh lecture (from which our extracts
have been made) thus:

 "So we have found that all the senses whose stimuli we are enabled to
 measure accurately, obey a uniform law. However various may be their
 several delicacies of discrimination, _this_ holds true of all, that
 _the increase of the stimulus necessary to produce an increase of the
 sensation bears a constant ratio to the total stimulus_. The figures
 which express this ratio in the several senses may be shown thus in
 tabular form:

    Sensation of light,   1/100
    Muscular sensation,   1/17
    Feeling of pressure,  1/3
    Feeling of warmth,    1/3
    Feeling of sound,     1/3

 "These figures are far from giving as accurate a measure as might be
 desired. But at least they are fit to convey a general notion of the
 relative discriminative susceptibility of the different senses....
 The important law which gives in so simple a form the relation of the
 sensation to the stimulus that calls it forth was first discovered
 by the physiologist Ernst Heinrich Weber to obtain in special cases.
 Gustav Theodor Fechner first proved it to be a law for all departments
 of sensation. Psychology owes to him the first comprehensive
 investigation of sensations from a physical point of view, the first
 basis of an exact Theory of Sensibility."

So much for a general account of what Fechner calls Weber's law. The
'exactness' of the theory of sensibility to which it leads consists in
the supposed fact that it gives the means of representing sensations
by numbers. The _unit_ of any kind of sensation will be that increment
which, when the stimulus is increased, we can just barely perceive
to be added. The total number of units which any given sensation
contains will consist of the total number of such increments which may
be perceived in passing from no sensation of the kind to a sensation
of the present amount. We cannot get at this number directly, but we
can, now that we know Weber's law, get at it by means of the physical
stimulus of which it is a function. For if we know how much of the
stimulus it will take to give a barely perceptible sensation, and then
what percentage of addition to the stimulus will constantly give a
barely perceptible increment to the sensation, it is at bottom only a
question of compound interest to compute, out of the total amount of
stimulus which we may be employing at any moment, the number of such
increments, or, in other words, of sensational units to which it may
give rise. This number bears the same relation to the total stimulus
which the time elapsed bears to the capital plus the compound interest
accrued.

To take an example: If stimulus A just falls short of producing a
sensation, and if _r_ be the percentage of itself which must be added
to it to get a sensation which is barely perceptible--call this
sensation 1--then we should have the series of sensation-numbers
corresponding to their several stimuli as follows:

    Sensation 0 = stimulus A;
    Sensation 1 = stimulus A (1 + r);
    Sensation 2 = stimulus A (1 + r)^2;
    Sensation 3 = stimulus A (1 + r)^3;
    .....
    Sensation _n_ = stimulus A (1 + r)^_n_.

The sensations here form an arithmetical series, and the stimuli a
geometrical series, and the two series correspond term for term. Now,
of two series corresponding in this way, the terms of the arithmetical
one are called the logarithms of the terms corresponding in rank to
them in the geometrical series. A conventional arithmetical series
beginning with zero has been formed in the ordinary logarithmic tables,
so that we may truly say (assuming our facts to be correct so far)
that the _sensations vary in the same proportion as the logarithms of
their respective stimuli_. And we can thereupon proceed to compute
the number of units in any given sensation (considering the unit of
sensation to be equal to the just perceptible increment above zero,
and the unit of stimulus to be equal to the increment of stimulus
_r_, which brings this about) by multiplying the logarithm of the
stimulus by a constant factor which must vary with the particular kind
of sensation in question. If we call the stimulus R, and the constant
factor C, we get the formula

    S = C log R,

which is what Fechner calls the _psychophysischer Maasformel_. This, in
brief, is Fechner's reasoning, as I understand it.

The _Maasformel_ admits of mathematical development in various
directions, and has given rise to arduous discussions into which I
am glad to be exempted from entering here, since their interest is
mathematical and metaphysical and not primarily psychological at
all.[447] I must say a word about them metaphysically a few pages later
on. Meanwhile it should be understood that no human being, in any
investigation into which sensations entered, has ever used the numbers
computed in this or any other way in order to test a theory or to reach
a new result. The whole notion of measuring sensations numerically,
remains in short a mere mathematical speculation about possibilities,
which has never been applied to practice. Incidentally to the
discussion of it, however, a great many particular facts have been
discovered about discrimination which merit a place in this chapter.

In the first place it is found, when the difference of two sensations
approaches the limit of discernibility, that at one moment we discern
it and at the next we do not. There are accidental fluctuations in
our inner sensibility which make it impossible to tell just what the
least discernible increment of the sensation is without taking the
average of a large number of appreciations. These _accidental errors_
are as likely to increase as to diminish our sensibility, and are
eliminated in such an average, for those above and those below the line
then neutralize each other in the sum, and the normal sensibility,
if there be one (that is, the sensibility due to constant causes as
distinguished from these accidental ones), stands revealed. The best
way of getting at the average sensibility has been very minutely worked
over. Fechner discussed three methods, as follows:

(1) _The Method of just-discernible Differences._ Take a standard
sensation _S_, and add to it until you distinctly feel the addition
_d_; then subtract from _S_ + _d_ until you distinctly feel the effect
of the subtraction;[448] call the difference here _d'_. The least
discernible difference sought is _d_ + _d'_/2; and the ratio of this
quantity to the original _S_ (or rather to _S_ + _d_ - _d'_) is what
Fechner calls the difference-threshold. _This difference-threshold
should be a constant fraction_ (no matter what is the size of _S_) _if
Weber's law holds universally true._ The difficulty in applying this
method is that we are _so often in doubt_ whether anything has been
added to _S_ or not. Furthermore, if we simply take the smallest _d_
about which we are _never_ in doubt or in error, we certainly get our
least discernible difference larger than it ought theoretically to
be.[449]

Of course the _sensibility_ is small when the least discernible
difference is large, and _vice versâ_; in other words, it and the
difference-threshold are inversely related to each other.

(2) _The Method of True and False Cases._ A sensation which is barely
greater than another will, on account of accidental errors in a long
series of experiments, sometimes be judged equal, and sometimes
smaller; i.e., we shall make a certain number of false and a certain
number of true judgments about the difference between the two
sensations which we are comparing.

 "But the larger this difference is, the more the number of the
 true judgments will increase at the expense of the false ones; or,
 otherwise expressed, the nearer to unity will be the fraction whose
 denominator represents the whole number of judgments, and whose
 numerator represents those which are true. If _m_ is a ratio of this
 nature, obtained by comparison of two stimuli, _A_ and _B_, we may
 seek another couple of stimuli, _a_ and _b_, which when compared will
 give the same ratio of true to false cases."[450]

If this were done, and the ratio of _a_ to _b_ then proved to be equal
to that of _A_ to _B_, that would prove that pairs of small stimuli
and pairs of large stimuli may affect our discriminative sensibility
similarly so long as the ratio of the components to each other within
each pair is the same. In other words, it would in so far forth prove
the Weberian law. Fechner made use of this method to ascertain his
own power of discriminating differences of weight, recording no less
than 24,576 separate judgments, and computing as a result that his
discrimination for the same relative increase of weight was less good
in the neighborhood of 500 than of 300 grams, but that after 500 grams
it improved up to 3000, which was the highest weight he experimented
with.

(3) _The Method of Average Errors_ consists in taking a standard
stimulus and then trying to make another one of the same sort exactly
equal to it. There will in general be an error whose amount is large
when the discriminative sensibility called in play is small, and _vice
versâ_. The sum of the errors, no matter whether they be positive or
negative, divided by their number, gives the average error. This,
when certain corrections are made, is assumed by Fechner to be the
'reciprocal' of the discriminative sensibility in question. It should
bear a constant proportion to the stimulus, no matter what the absolute
size of the latter may be, if Weber's law hold true.

       *       *       *       *       *

These methods deal with just perceptible differences. Delbœuf and Wundt
have experimented with larger differences by means of what Wundt calls
the _Méthode der mittleren Abstufungen_, and what we may call

(4) _The Method of Equal-appearing Intervals._ This consists in so
arranging three stimuli in a series that the intervals between the
first and the second shall appear equal to that between the second
and the third. At first sight there seems to be no direct logical
connection between this method and the preceding ones. By them we
compare equally _perceptible_ increments of stimulus in different
regions of the latter's scale; but by the fourth method we compare
increments which strike us as equally _big_. But what we can but just
notice as an increment need not appear always of the same bigness after
it is noticed. On the contrary, it will appear much bigger when we are
dealing with stimuli that are already large.

(5) The method of doubling the _stimulus_ has been employed by Wundt's
collaborator, Merkel, who tried to make one stimulus seem just double
the other, and then measured the objective relation of the two. The
remarks just made apply also to this case.

       *       *       *       *       *

So much for the methods. The results differ in the hands of different
observers. I will add a few of them, and will take first the
_discriminative sensibility to light_.

By the first method, Volkmann, Aubert, Masson, Helmholtz, and Kräpelin
find figures varying from 1/3 or 1/4 to 1/195 of the original
stimulus. The smaller fractional increments are discriminated when the
light is already fairly strong, the larger ones when it is weak or
intense. That is, the discriminative sensibility is low when weak or
overstrong lights are compared, and at its best with a certain medium
illumination. It is thus a function of the light's intensity; but
throughout a certain range of the latter it keeps constant, and _in so
far forth_ Weber's law is verified for light. Absolute figures cannot
be given, but Merkel, by method 1, found that Weber's law held good for
stimuli (measured by his arbitrary unit) between 96 and 4096, beyond
which intensity no experiments were made.[451] König and Brodhun
have given measurements by method 1 which cover the most extensive
series, and moreover apply to six different colors of light. These
experiments (performed in Helmholtz's laboratory, apparently,) ran from
an intensity called 1 to one which was 100,000 times as great. From
intensity 2000 to 20,000 Weber's law held good; below and above this
range discriminative sensibility declined. The increment discriminated
here was the same for all colors of light, and lay (according to the
tables) between 1 and 2 per cent of the stimulus.[452] Delbœuf had
verified Weber's law for a certain range of luminous intensities by
method 4; that is, he had found that the objective intensity of a light
which appeared midway between two others was really the geometrical
mean of the latter's intensities. But A. Lehmann and afterwards
Neiglick, in Wundt's laboratory, found that effects of contrast played
so large a part in experiments performed in this way that Delbœuf's
results could not be held conclusive. Merkel, repeating the experiments
still later, found that the objective intensity of the light which we
judge to stand midway between two others neither stands midway nor is
a geometric mean. The discrepancy from both figures is enormous, but
is least large from the midway figure or arithmetical mean of the two
extreme intensities.[453] Finally, the stars have from time immemorial
been arranged in 'magnitudes' supposed to differ by equal-seeming
intervals. Lately their intensities have been gauged photometrically,
and the comparison of the subjective with the objective series has been
made. Prof. J. Jastrow is the latest worker in this field. He finds,
taking Pickering's Harvard photometric tables as a basis, that the
ratio of the average intensity of each 'magnitude' to that below it
decreases as we pass from lower to higher magnitudes, showing a uniform
departure from Weber's law, if the method of equal-appearing intervals
be held to have any direct relevance to the latter.[454]

_Sounds_ are less delicately discriminated in intensity than lights.
A certain difficulty has come from disputes as to the measurement of
the objective intensity of the stimulus. Earlier inquiries made the
perceptible increase of the stimulus to be about 1/3 of the latter.
Merkel's latest results of the method of just perceptible differences
make it about 3/10 for that part of the scale of intensities during
which Weber's law holds good, which is from 20 to 5000 of M.'s
arbitrary unit.[455] Below this the fractional increment must be
larger. Above it no measurements were made.

For _pressure and muscular sense_ we have rather divergent results.
Weber found by the method of just-perceptible differences that persons
could distinguish an increase of weight of 1/40 when the two weights
were successively lifted by the same hand. It took a much larger
fraction to be discerned when the weights were laid on a hand which
rested on the table. He seems to have verified his results for only
two pairs of differing weights,[456] and on this founded his 'law.'
Experiments in Hering's laboratory on lifting 11 weights, running
from 250 to 2750 grams showed that the least perceptible increment
varied from 1/21 for 250 grams to 1/114 for 2500. For 2750 it rose to
1/98 again. Merkel's recent and very careful experiments, in which
the finger pressed down the beam of a balance counterweighted by from
25 to 8020 grams, showed that between 200 and 2000 grams a constant
fractional increase of about 1/13 was felt when there was no movement
of the finger, and of about 1/19 when there was movement. Above and
below these limits the discriminative power grew less. It was greater
when the pressure was upon one square millimeter of surface than when
it was upon seven.[457]

_Warmth and taste_ have been made the subject of similar investigations
with the result of verifying something like Weber's law. The
determination of the unit of stimulus is, however, so hard here
that I will give no figures. The results may be found in Wundt's
Physiologische Psychologie, 3d Ed. i, 370-2.

_The discrimination of lengths by the eye_ has been found also to obey
to a certain extent Weber's law. The figures will all be found in G. E.
Müller, _op. cit._ part ii, chap. x, to which the reader is referred.
Professor Jastrow has published some experiments, made by what may be
called a modification of the method of equal-appearing differences,
on our estimation of the length of sticks, by which it would seem
that the estimated intervals and the real ones are directly and not
logarithmically proportionate to each other. This resembles Merkel's
results by that method for weights, lights, and sounds, and differs
from Jastrow's own finding about star-magnitudes.[458]

       *       *       *       *       *

If we look back over these facts as a whole, we see that it is not any
fixed amount added to an impression that makes us notice an increase
in the latter, but that the amount depends on how large the impression
already is. The amount is expressible as a certain fraction of the
entire impression to which it is added; and it is found that the
fraction is a well-nigh constant figure throughout an entire region
of the scale of intensities of the impression in question. Above and
below this region the fraction increases in value. This is _Weber's
law_, which in so far forth expresses an empirical generalization of
practical importance, without involving any theory whatever or seeking
any absolute measure of the sensations themselves. It is in the


_Theoretic Interpretation of Weber's Law_


that Fechner's originality exclusively consists, in his assumptions,
namely, 1) that the just-perceptible increment is the _sensation-unit_,
and is in all parts of the scale the same (mathematically expressed,
Δ_s_= const.); 2) that all our sensations consist of sums of these
units; and finally, 3) that the reason why it takes a constant
fractional increase of the stimulus to awaken this unit lies in
an ultimate law of the connection of mind with matter, whereby
the quantities of our feelings are related logarithmically to
the quantities of their objects. Fechner seems to find something
inscrutably sublime in the existence of an ultimate 'psychophysic' law
of this form.

These assumptions are all peculiarly fragile. To begin with, the
_mental fact_ which in the experiments corresponds to the increase
of the stimulus is not an _enlarged sensation_, but a _judgment that
the sensation is enlarged_. What Fechner calls the 'sensation' is
what appears to the mind as the _objective phenomenon_ of light,
warmth, weight, sound, impressed part of body, etc. Fechner tacitly
if not openly assumes that such a _judgment of increase_ consists
in the simple fact that an _increased number_ of sensation-units
are present to the mind; and that the judgment is thus itself a
quantitatively bigger mental thing when it judges large differences,
or differences between large terms, than when it judges small ones.
But these ideas are really absurd. The hardest sort of judgment, the
judgment which strains the attention most (if _that_ be any criterion
of the judgment's 'size'), is that about the _smallest_ things and
differences. But really it has no meaning to talk about one judgment
being bigger than another. And even if we leave out judgments and
talk of sensations only, we have already found ourselves (in Chapter
VI) quite unable to read any clear meaning into the notion that they
are masses of units combined. To introspection, our feeling of pink
is surely not a portion of our feeling of scarlet; nor does the light
of an electric arc seem to contain that of a tallow-candle in itself.
Compound _things_ contain parts; and one such thing may have twice
or three times as many parts as another. But when we take a simple
sensible quality like light or sound, and say that there is now twice
or thrice as much of it present as there was a moment ago, although
we seem to mean the same thing as if we were talking of compound
objects, we really mean something different. We mean that if we were
to arrange the various possible degrees of the quality in a scale of
serial increase, the _distance, interval_, or _difference_ between the
stronger and the weaker specimen before us would seem about as great
as that between the weaker one and the beginning of the scale. _It is
these_ RELATIONS, _these_ DISTANCES, _which we are measuring and not
the composition of the qualities themselves_, as Fechner thinks. Whilst
if we turn to objects which _are_ divisible, surely a big object may be
known in a little thought. Introspection shows moreover that in most
sensations a new _kind_ of feeling invariably accompanies our judgment
of an increased impression; and this is a fact which Fechner's formula
disregards.[459]

But apart from these _a priori_ difficulties, and even supposing that
sensations did consist of added units, Fechner's assumption that all
_equally perceptible_ additions are _equally great_ additions is
entirely arbitrary. Why might not a small addition to a small sensation
be as _perceptible_ as a large addition to a large one? In this case
Weber's law would apply not to the additions themselves, but only to
their perceptibility. Our _noticing_ of a difference of units in two
sensations would depend on the latter being in a fixed ratio. But
the _difference itself_ would depend directly on that between their
respective stimuli. So many units added to the stimulus, so many
added to the sensation, and if the stimulus grew in a certain ratio,
in exactly the same ratio would the sensation also grow, though its
_perceptibility_ grew according to the logarithmic law.[460]

If _A_ stand for the smallest difference which _we perceive_, then we
should have, instead of the formula Δ_s_ = const., which is Fechner's,
the formula Δ_s_/_s_ = const., a formula which interprets all the
_facts_ of Weber's law, in an entirely different theoretic way from
that adopted by Fechner.[461]

The entire superstructure which Fechner rears upon the facts is thus
not only seen to be arbitrary and subjective, but in the highest degree
improbable as well. The departures from Weber's law in regions where
it does not obtain, he explains by the compounding with it of other
unknown laws which mask its effects. As if _any_ law could not be
found in _any_ set of phenomena, provided one have the wit to invent
enough other coexisting laws to overlap and neutralize it! The whole
outcome of the discussion, so far as Fechner's theories are concerned,
is indeed _nil. Weber's law alone remains true, as an empirical
generalization of fair extent:_ What we add to a large stimulus
we notice less than what we add to a small one, unless it happen
_relatively to the stimulus_ to be as great.


_Weber's law is probably purely physiological._


One can express this state of things otherwise by saying that the
whole of the stimulus does not seem to be effective in giving us the
perception of 'more,' and the simplest interpretation of such a state
of things would be _physical_. The loss of effect would take place in
the nervous system. If our feelings resulted from a condition of the
nerve-molecules which it grew ever more difficult for the stimulus
to increase, our feelings would naturally grow at a slower rate than
the stimulus itself. An ever larger part of the latter's work would
go to overcoming the resistances, and an ever smaller part to the
realization of the feeling-bringing state. Weber's law would thus be a
sort of _law of friction_ in the neural machine.[462] Just how these
inner resistances and frictions are to be conceived is a speculative
question. Delbœuf has formulated them as fatigue; Bernstein and Ward,
as irradiations. The latest, and probably the most 'real,' hypothesis
is that of Ebbinghaus, who supposes that the intensity of sensation
depends on the _number_ of neural molecules which are disintegrated in
the unit of time. There are only a certain number at any time which are
_capable_ of disintegrating; and whilst most of these are in an average
condition of instability, some are almost stable and some already near
to decomposition. The smallest stimuli affect these latter molecules
only; and as they are but few, the sensational effect from adding a
given quantity of stimulus _at first_ is relatively small. Medium
stimuli affect the majority of the molecules, but affect fewer and
fewer in proportion as they have already diminished their number. The
latest additions to the stimuli find all the medium molecules already
disintegrated, and only affect the small relatively indecomposable
remainder, thus giving rise to increments of feeling which are
correspondingly small. (Pflüger's Archiv, 45, 113.)

It is surely in some such way as this that Weber's law is to be
interpreted, if it ever is. The Fechnerian _Maasformel_ and the
conception of it as an ultimate 'psychophysic law' will remain an 'idol
of the den,' if ever there was one. Fechner himself indeed was a German
_Gelehrter_ of the ideal type, at once simple and shrewd, a mystic and
an experimentalist, homely and daring, and as loyal to facts as to his
theories. But it would be terrible if even such a dear old man as this
could saddle our Science forever with his patient whimsies, and, in
a world so full of more nutritious objects of attention, compel all
future students to plough through the difficulties, not only of his own
works, but of the still drier ones written in his refutation. Those who
desire this dreadful literature can find it; it has a 'disciplinary
value;' but I will not even enumerate it in a foot-note. The only
amusing part of it is that Fechner's critics should always feel bound,
after smiting his theories hip and thigh and leaving not a stick of
them standing, to wind up by saying that nevertheless to him belongs
the _imperishable glory_, of first formulating them and thereby turning
psychology into an _exact science_,

    "'And everybody praised the duke
    Who this great fight did win.'
    'But what good came of it at last?'
    Quoth little Peterkin.
    'Why, that I cannot tell,' said he,
    'But 'twas a famous victory!'"


FOOTNOTES:

[406] Human Understanding, ii, xi, 1, 2.

[407] Analysis, vol. i, p. 71.

[408] The Senses and the Intellect, page 411.

[409] Essays Philosophical and Theological: First Series, pp. 268-273.

[410] Montgomery in 'Mind,' x, 527. Cf. also Lipps: Grundtatsachen des
Seelenlebens, p. 579 ff.; and see below, Chapter XIX.

[411] Stumpf (Tonpsychologie, i, 116 ff.) tries to prove that the
theory that all differences are differences of composition leads
necessarily to an infinite regression when we try to determine the
unit. It seems to me that in his particular reasoning he forgets the
ultimate units of the mind-stuff theory. I cannot find the completed
infinite to be one of the obstacles to belief in this theory, although
I fully accept Stumpf's general reasoning, and am only too happy to
find myself on the same side with such an exceptionally clear thinker.
The strictures by Wahle in the Vierteljsch. f. wiss. Phil. seem to
me to have no force, since the writer does not discriminate between
resemblance of things obviously compound and that of things sensibly
simple.

[412] The _belief that the causes_ of effects felt by us to differ
qualitatively are facts which differ only in quantity (e.g. that blue
is caused by so many ether-waves, and yellow by a smaller number)
must not be confounded with the feeling that the effects differ
quantitatively themselves.

[413] Herr G. H. Schneider, in his youthful pamphlet (Die
Unterscheidung, 1877) has tried to show that there are no
positively existent elements of sensibility, no substantive
qualities between which differences obtain, but that the terms
we call such, the sensations, are but sums of differences, loci
or starting points whence many directions of difference proceed.
'_Unterschiedsempfindungs-Complexe_' are what he calls them. This
absurd carrying out of that 'principle of relativity' which we shall
have to mention in Chapter XVII may serve as a counterpoise to the
mind-stuff theory, which says that there are nothing but substantive
sensations, and denies the existence of relations of difference between
them at all.

[414] Cf. Stumpf, Tonpsychologie, i, 121, and James Ward, Mind, i, 464.

[415] The ordinary treatment of this is to call it the result of the
_fusion_ of a lot of sensations, in themselves separate. This is pure
mythology, as the sequel will abundantly show.

[416] "We often begin to be dimly aware of a difference in a sensation
or group of sensations, before we can assign any definite character
to that which differs. Thus we detect a strange or foreign ingredient
or flavor in a familiar dish, or of tone in a familiar tune, and
yet are wholly unable for a while to say what the intruder is like.
Hence perhaps discrimination may be regarded as the earliest and
most primordial mode of intellectual activity." (Sully: Outlines of
Psychology, p. 142. _Cf._ also G. H. Schneider: Die Unterscheidung, pp.
9-10.)

[417] In cases where the difference is slight, we may need, as
previously remarked, to get the dying phase of _n_ as well as of _m_
before _n-different-from-m_ is distinctly felt. In that case the
inevitably successive feelings (as far as we can sever what is so
continuous) would be four, _m, difference, n, n-different-from-m_. This
slight additional complication alters not a whit the essential features
of the case.

[418] Analysis. J. S. Mill's ed., ii, 17. Cf. also pp. 12, 14.

[419] There is only one obstacle, and that is our inveterate tendency
to believe that where two things or qualities are compared, it
_must_ be that exact duplicates of both have got into the mind and
have matched themselves against each other there. To which the first
reply is the empirical one of "Look into the mind and see." When I
recognize a weight which I now lift as _inferior_ to the one I just
lifted; when, with my tooth now aching, I perceive the pain to be
_less_ intense than it was a minute ago; the two things in the mind
which are compared would, by the authors I criticise, be admitted to
be an actual sensation and an image in the memory. An image in the
memory, by general consent of these same authors, is admitted to be a
weaker thing than a sensation. Nevertheless it is in these instances
judged stronger; that is, an object supposed to be known only in so
far forth as this image represents it, is judged stronger. Ought not
this to shake one's belief in the notion of separate representative
'ideas' weighing themselves, or being weighed by the Ego, against each
other in the mind? And let it not be said that what makes us judge the
felt pain to be weaker than the imagined one of a moment since is our
recollection of the _downward nature of the shock of difference_ which
we felt as we passed to the present moment from the one before it. That
shock does undoubtedly have a different character according as it comes
between terms of which the second diminishes or increases; and it may
be admitted that in cases Where the past term is doubtfully remembered,
the memory of the shock as _plus_ or _minus_, might sometimes enable us
to establish a relation which otherwise we should not perceive. But one
could hardly expect the memory of this shock to overpower our actual
comparison of terms, both of which are _present_ (as are the image
and the sensation in the case supposed), and make us judge the weaker
one to be the stronger.--And hereupon comes the second reply: Suppose
the mind does compare two realities by comparing two ideas of its own
which represent them--what is gained? The same mystery is still there.
The ideas must still be _known_; and, as the attention in comparing
oscillates from one to the other, past must be known with present just
as before. If you must end by simply saying that your 'Ego,' whilst
_being_ neither the idea of _m_ nor the idea of _n_, yet knows and
compares both, why not allow your pulse of thought, which _is_ neither
the thing _m_ nor the thing _n_, to know and compare both directly?
'Tis but a question of how to _name_ the facts least artificially.
The egoist _explains_ them, by naming them as an Ego 'combining' or
'synthetizing' two ideas, no more than we do by naming them a pulse of
thought knowing two facts.

[420] I fear that few will be converted by my words, so obstinately
do thinkers of all schools refuse to admit the unmediated function of
_knowing a thing_, and so incorrigibly do they substitute _being the
thing_ for it. E.g., in the latest utterance of the spiritualistic
philosophy (Bowne's Introduction to Psychological Theory, 1887,
published only three days before this writing) one of the first
sentences which catch my eye is this: "What remembers? The spiritualist
says, the soul remembers; it abides across the years and the flow of
the body, and _gathering up its past, carries it with it_" (p. 28).
Why, for heaven's sake, O Bowne, cannot you say '_knows it_'? If there
is anything our soul does _not_ do to its past, it is to carry it with
it.

[421] Sensations of Tone, 2d English Ed., p. 65.

[422] Psychology, i, 345.

[423] A Budget of Paradoxes, p. 380.

[424] The explanation I offer presupposes that a difference too faint
to have any direct effect in the way of making the mind notice it _per
se_ will nevertheless be strong enough to keep its 'terms' from calling
up identical associates. It seems probable from many observations that
this is the case. All the facts of 'unconscious' inference are proofs
of it. We say a painting 'looks' like the work of a certain artist,
though we cannot name the characteristic differentiæ. We see by a
man's face that he is sincere, though we can give no definite reason
for our faith. The facts of sense-perception quoted from Helmholtz
a few pages below will be additional examples. Here is another good
one, though it will perhaps be easier understood after reading the
chapter on Space-perception than now. Take two stereoscopic slides and
represent on each half-slide a pair of spots, _a_ and _b_, but make
their distances such that the _a_'s are equidistant on both slides,
whilst the _b_'s are nearer together on slide 1 than on slide 2. Make
moreover the distance _ab = ab'''_ and the distance _ab' = ab''_. Then
look successively at the two slides stereoscopically, so that the
_a_'s in both are directly fixated (that is fall on the two foveæ, or
centres of distinctest vision). The _a_'s will then appear single, and
so probably will the _b_'s. But the now single-seeming _b_ on slide 1
will look nearer, whilst that on slide 2 will look farther than the
_a_. But, if the diagrams are rightly drawn, _b_ and _b'''_ must affect
'identical' spots, spots equally far to the right of the fovea, _b_ in
the left eye and _b'''_ in the right eye. The same is true of _b'_ and
_b''_. Identical spots are spots whose sensations cannot possibly be
discriminated as such. Since in these two observations, however, they
give rise to such opposite perceptions of distance, and prompt such
opposite tendencies to movement (since in slide 1 we _converge_ in
looking from _a_ to _b_, whilst in slide 2 we _diverge_), it follows
that two processes which occasion feelings quite indistinguishable to
direct consciousness may nevertheless be each allied with disparate
associates both of a sensorial and of a motor kind. Cf. Donders, Archiv
f. Ophthalmologie, Bd. 13 (1867). The basis of his essay is that we
cannot _feel_ on which eye any particular element of a compound picture
falls, but its effects on our total perception differ in the two eyes.

                       _a    b_        _a  b'_

    _Slide_ 1.         .    .          .  .

                       _a b''_          _a   b'''_
    _Slide_ 2.         .  .             .    .


[425] A. W. Volkmann: Ueber den Einfluss der Uebung, etc., Leipzig
Berichte, Math.-phys. Classe. x, 1858, p. 67.

[426] _Ibid._ Tabelle 1, p. 43.

[427] Professor Lipps accounts for the tactile discrimination of the
blind in a way which (divested of its 'mythological' assumptions) seems
to me essentially to agree with this. Stronger ideas are supposed to
raise weaker ones over the threshold of consciousness by fusing with
them, the tendency to fuse being proportional to the similarity of the
ideas _Cf._ Grundtatsachen, etc., pp. 232-3; also pp. 118, 492, 526-7.

[428] Sensations of Tone, 2d. English Edition, p. 62.

[429] Compare as to this, however, what I said above, Chapter V, pp.
172-176.

[430] When a person squints, double images are formed in the centre
of the field. As a matter of fact, most squinters are found blind
of one eye, or almost so; and it has long been supposed amongst
ophthalmologists that the blindness is a secondary affection
superinduced by the voluntary suppression of one of the sets of double
images, in other words by the positive and persistent refusal to use
one of the eyes. This explanation of the blindness has, however, been
called in question of late years. See, for a brief account of the
matter, O. F. Wadsworth in Boston Med. and Surg. Journ., cxvi, 49 (Jan.
20, '87), and the replies by Derby and others a little later.--W. J.

[431] Tonempfindungen, Dritte Auflage, pp. 102-107.--The reader who
has assimilated the contents of our Chapter V, above, will doubtless
have remarked that the illustrious physiologist has fallen, in these
paragraphs, into that sort of interpretation of the facts which
we there tried to prove erroneous. Helmholtz, however, is no more
careless than most psychologists in confounding together the object
perceived, the organic conditions of the perception, and the sensations
which _would_ be excited by the several parts of the object, or by
the several organic conditions, _provided_ they came into action
separately or were separately attended to, and in assuming that
what is true of any one of these sorts of fact must be true of the
other sorts also. If each organic condition or part of the object
is there, its sensation, he thinks, must be there also, only in a
'synthetic'--which is indistinguishable from what the authors whom we
formerly reviewed called an 'unconscious'--state. I will not repeat
arguments sufficiently detailed in the earlier chapter (see especially
pp. 170-176), but simply say that what he calls the 'fusion of many
_sensations_ into one' is really the production of one sensation by the
co-operation of many _organic conditions_; and that what perception
fails to discriminate (when it is 'synthetic') is not _sensations_
already existent but not singled out, but new objective _facts_, judged
truer than the facts already synthetically perceived--two views of the
solid body, many harmonic tones, instead of one view and one tone,
states of the eyeball-muscles thitherto unknown, and the like. These
new facts, when first discovered, are known in states of consciousness
never till that moment exactly realized before, states of consciousness
which at the same time judge them to be determinations of the same
_matter of fact_ which was previously realized. All that Helmholtz
says of the conditions which hinder and further analysis applies just
as naturally to the analysis, through the advent of _new_ feelings, of
_objects_ into their elements, as to the analysis of aggregate feelings
into elementary feelings supposed to have been hidden in them all the
while.

The reader can himself apply this criticism to the following passages
from Lotze and Stumpf respectively, which I quote because they are the
ablest expressions of the view opposed to my own. Both authors, it
seems to me, commit the psychologist's fallacy, and allow their later
knowledge of the things felt to be foisted into their account of the
primitive way of feeling them.

Lotze says: "It is indubitable that the simultaneous assault of a
variety of different stimuli on different senses, or even on the same
sense, puts us into a state of confused general feeling in which we
are certainly not conscious of clearly distinguishing the different
impressions. Still it does not follow that in such a case we have a
positive perception of an actual unity of the contents of our ideas,
arising from their mixture; our state of mind seems rather to consist
in (1) the consciousness of our inability to separate what really has
remained diverse, and (2) in the general feeling of the disturbance
produced in the economy of our body by the simultaneous assault of
the stimuli.... Not that the sensations melt into one another, but
simply that the act of distinguishing them is absent; and this again
certainly not so far that the fact of the difference remains entirely
unperceived, but only so far as to prevent us from determining the
amount of the difference, and from apprehending other relations between
the different impressions. Anyone who is annoyed at one and the same
time by glowing heat, dazzling light, deafening noise, and an offensive
smell, will certainly not fuse these disparate sensations into a single
one with a single content which could be sensuously perceived; they
remain for him in separation, and he merely finds it impossible to be
conscious of one of them apart from the others. But, further, he will
have a feeling of discomfort--what I mentioned above as the _second_
constituent of his whole state. For every stimulus which produces in
consciousness a definite content of sensation is also a definite degree
of disturbance, and therefore makes a call upon the forces of the
nerves; and the sum of these little changes, which in their character
as disturbances are not so diverse as the contents of consciousness
they give rise to, produce the general feeling which, added to the
inability to distinguish, deludes us into the belief in an actual
absence of diversity in our sensations. It is only in some such way as
this, again, that I can imagine that state which is sometimes described
as the beginning of our whole education, a state which in itself is
supposed to be simple, and to be afterwards divided into different
sensations by an activity of separation. No activity of separation
in the world could establish differences where no real diversity
existed; for it would have nothing to guide it to the places where it
was to establish them, or to indicate the width it was to give them."
(Metaphysic, § 260, English translation.)

Stumpf writes as follows: "Of coexistent sensations there are always
a large number undiscriminated in consciousness, or (if one prefer
to call what is undiscriminated unconscious) in the soul. They
are, however, not fused into a simple quality. When, on entering a
room, we receive sensations of odor and warmth together, without
expressly attending to either, the two qualities of sensation are
not, as it were, an entirely new simple quality, which first at the
moment in which attention analytically steps in _changes into_ smell
and warmth.... In such cases we find ourselves in presence of an
indefinable, unnamable total of feeling. And when, after successfully
analyzing this total, we call it back to memory, as it was in its
unanalyzed state, and compare it with the elements we have found, the
latter (as it seems to me) may be recognized as real parts contained
in the former, and the former seen to be their sum. So, for example,
when we clearly perceive that the content of our sensation of oil
of peppermint is partly a sensation of taste and partly one of
temperature." (Tonpsychologie, i, 107.)

I should prefer to say that we perceive that objective fact, known to
us as the peppermint taste, to contain those other objective facts
known as aromatic or sapid quality, and coldness, respectively. No
ground to suppose that the vehicle of this last very complex perception
has any identity with the earlier psychosis--least of all is contained
in it.

[432] Physiol. Psych., ii, 248.

[433] Wundt's Philos. Studien, i, 527.

[434] _Ibid._ p. 530.

[435] Mind, xi, 377 ff. He says: "I apparently either distinguished
the impression and made the motion simultaneously, or if I tried to
avoid this by waiting until I had formed a distinct impression before
I began to make the motion, I added to the simple reaction, not only a
perception, but a volition."--Which remark may well confirm our doubts
as to the strict _psychologic_ worth of any of these measurements.

[436] Mind, xi, 379.

[437] For other determinations of discrimination-time by this method
cf. v. Kries and Auerbach, Archiv f. Physiologie, Bd. i, p. 297 ff.
(these authors get much smaller figures); Friedrich, Psychologische
Studien, i, 39. Chapter ix of Buccola's book, Le Legge del tempo, etc.,
gives a full account of the subject.

[438] If so, the reactions upon the spark would have to be slower than
those upon the touch. The investigation was abandoned because it was
found impossible to narrow down the difference between the conditions
of the sight-series and those of the touch-series, to nothing more than
the possible presence in the latter of the intervening motor-idea.
Other disparities could not be excluded.

[439] Tischer gives figures from quite unpractised individuals, which
I have not quoted. The discrimination-time of one of them is 22 times
longer than Tischer's own! (Psychol. Studien, i, 527.)

[440] Compare Lipps's excellent passage to the same critical effect
in his Grundtatsachen des Seelenlebens, pp. 390-393.--I leave my
text just as it was written before the publication of Lange's and
Münsterberg's results cited on pp. 92 and 432. Their 'shortened' or
'muscular' times, got when the expectant attention was addressed to the
possible reactions rather than to the stimulus, constitute the minimal
reaction-time of which I speak, and all that I say in the text falls
beautifully into line with their results.

[441] Cf. Sully: Mind, x, 494-5; Bradley: _ibid._ xi, 83; Bosanquet:
_ibid._ xi, 405.

[442] The judgment becomes easier if the two couples of terms have one
member in common, if _a--b_ and _b--c_, for example, are compared.
This, as Stumpf says (Tonpsychologie, i, 131), is probably because the
introduction of the fourth term brings involuntary cross-comparisons
with it, _a_ and _b_ with _d, b_ with _c_, etc., which confuses us
by withdrawing our attention from the relations we ought alone to be
estimating.

[443] J. Delbœuf: Éléments de Psychophysique (Paris, 1883), p. 64.
Plateau in Stumpf, Tonpsych., i, 125. I have noticed a curious
enlargement of certain 'distances' of difference under the influence
of chloroform. The jingling of the bells on the horses of a horse-car
passing the door, for example, and the rumbling of the vehicle itself,
which to our ordinary hearing merge together very readily into a
_quasi_-continuous body of sound, have seemed so far apart as to
require a sort of mental facing in opposite directions to get from one
to the other, as if they belonged in different worlds. I am inclined to
suspect, from certain data, that the ultimate philosophy of difference
and likeness will have to be built upon experiences of intoxication,
especially by nitrous oxide gas, which lets us into intuitions the
subtlety whereof is denied to the waking state. Cf. B. P. Blood: The
Anæsthetic Revelation, and the Gist of Philosophy (Amsterdam, N. Y.,
1874). Cf. also Mind, vii, 200.

[444] _Op. cit._ p. 126 ff.

[445] Stumpf, pp. 111-121.

[446] Stumpf, pp. 116-7. I have omitted, so as not to make my text
too intricate, an extremely acute and conclusive paragraph, which I
reproduce here: "We may generalize: Wherever a number of sensible
impressions are apprehended _as a series_, there in the last instance
must perceptions of simple likeness be found. _Proof:_ Assume that
all the terms of a series, e.g. the qualities of tone, _c d e f g_,
have something in common,--_no matter what it is_, call it _X_; then I
say that the differing parts of each of these terms must not only be
differently constituted in each, but must _themselves form a series_,
whose existence is the ground for our apprehending the original terms
in serial form. We thus get instead of the original series _a b c d
ef_ ... the equivalent series _Xɑ, Xβ, Xɣ_,... etc. What is gained?
The question immediately arises: How is _ɑ β ɣ_ known as a series?
According to the theory, these elements must themselves be made up of a
part common to all, and of parts differing in each, which latter parts
form a new series, and so on _ad infinitum_, which is absurd."

[447] The most important ameliorations of Fechner's formula are
Delbœuf's in his Recherches sur la Mesure des Sensations (1873), p. 35,
and Elsas's in his pamphlet Über die Psychophysik (1886) p. 16.

[448] Reversing the order is for the sake of letting the opposite
accidental errors due to 'contrast' neutralize each other.

[449] Theoretically it would seem that it ought to be equal to the sum
of all the additions which we judge to be increases divided by the
total number of judgments made.

[450] J. Delbœuf, Éléments de Psychophysique (1883), p. 9.

[451] Philos. Studien, iv, 588.

[452] Berlin Acad. Sitzungsberichte, 1888, p. 917. Other observers
(Dobrowolsky, Lamausky) found great differences in different colors.

[453] See Merkel's tables, _loc. cit._ p. 568.

[454] American Journal of Psychology, i, 125. The rate of decrease is
small but steady, and I cannot well understand what Professor J. means
by saying that his figures verify Weber's law.

[455] Philosophische Studien, v, 514-5.

[456] Cf. G. E. Müller: Zur Grundlegung der Psychophysik, §§ 68-70.

[457] Philosophische Studien, v, 287 ff.

[458] American J. of Psychology, iii, 44-7.

[459] Cf. Stumpf, Tonpsychologie, pp. 397-9. "One sensation cannot be
a multiple of another. If it could, we ought to be able to subtract
the one from the other, and to feel the remainder by itself. Every
sensation presents itself as an indivisible unit." Professor von Kries,
in the Viertejahrschrift für wiss. Philosophie, vi, 257 ff., shows very
clearly the absurdity of supposing that our stronger sensations contain
our weaker ones as parts. They differ as qualitative units. Compare
also J. Tannery in Delbœuf's Éléments de Psychophysique (1883), p. 134
ff.; J. Ward in Mind, i, 464: Lotze, Metaphysik, § 258.

[460] F Brentano, Psychologie, i, 9, 88 ff.--Merkel thinks that his
results with the method of equal-appearing intervals show that we
compare considerable intervals with each other by a different law from
that by which we notice barely perceptible intervals. The stimuli form
an arithmetical series (a pretty wild one according to his figures)
in the former case, a geometrical one in the latter--at least so I
understand this valiant experimenter but somewhat obscure if acute
writer.

[461] This is the formula which Merkel thinks he has verified (if I
understand him aright) by his experiments by method 4.

[462] Elsas: Ueber die Psychophysik (1856), p. 41. When the pans
of a balance are already loaded, but in equilibrium, it takes a
proportionally larger weight added to one of them to incline the beam.




