CHAPTER VI.

THE MIND-STUFF THEORY.


The reader who found himself swamped with too much metaphysics in the
last chapter will have a still worse time of it in this one, which is
exclusively metaphysical. Metaphysics means nothing but an unusually
obstinate effort to think clearly. The fundamental conceptions of
psychology are practically very clear to us, but theoretically they are
very confused, and one easily makes the obscurest assumptions in this
science without realizing, until challenged, what internal difficulties
they involve. When these assumptions have once established themselves
(as they have a way of doing in our very descriptions of the phenomenal
facts) it is almost impossible to get rid of them afterwards or to make
any one see that they are not essential features of the subject. The
only way to prevent this disaster is to scrutinize them beforehand and
make them give an articulate account of themselves before letting them
pass. One of the obscurest of the assumptions of which I speak is _the
assumption that our mental states are composite in structure, made up
of smaller states conjoined_. This hypothesis has outward advantages
which make it almost irresistibly attractive to the intellect, and
yet it is inwardly quite unintelligible. Of its unintelligibility,
however, half the writers on psychology seem unaware. As our own aim is
_to understand_ if possible, I make no apology for singling out this
particular notion for very explicit treatment before taking up the
descriptive part of our work. _The theory of 'mind-stuff' is the theory
that our mental states are compounds_, expressed in its most radical
form.


EVOLUTIONARY PSYCHOLOGY DEMANDS A MIND-DUST.


In a general theory of evolution the inorganic comes first, then the
lowest forms of animal and vegetable life, then forms of life that
possess mentality, and finally those like ourselves that possess it
in a high degree. As long as we keep to the consideration of purely
outward facts, even the most complicated facts of biology, our task
as evolutionists is comparatively easy. We are dealing all the time
with matter and its aggregations and separations; and although our
treatment must perforce be hypothetical, this does not prevent it from
being _continuous_. The point which as evolutionists we are bound
to hold fast to is that all the new forms of being that make their
appearance are really nothing more than results of the redistribution
of the original and unchanging materials. The self-same atoms which,
chaotically dispersed, made the nebula, now, jammed and temporarily
caught in peculiar positions, form our brains; and the 'evolution' of
the brains, if understood, would be simply the account of how the atoms
came to be so caught and jammed. In this story no new _natures_, no
factors not present at the beginning, are introduced at any later stage.

But with the dawn of consciousness an entirely new nature seems to slip
in, something whereof the potency was _not_ given in the mere outward
atoms of the original chaos.

The enemies of evolution have been quick to pounce upon this undeniable
discontinuity in the data of the world and many of them, from the
failure of evolutionary explanations at this point, have inferred their
general incapacity all along the line. Every one admits the entire
incommensurability of feeling as such with material motion as such.
"A motion became a feeling!"--no phrase that our lips can frame is
so devoid of apprehensible meaning. Accordingly, even the vaguest of
evolutionary enthusiasts, when deliberately comparing material with
mental facts, have been as forward as any one else to emphasize the
'chasm' between the inner and the outer worlds.

 "Can the oscillations of a molecule," says Mr. Spencer, "be
 represented side by side with a nervous shock [he means a mental
 shock], and the two be recognized as one? No effort enables us to
 assimilate them. That a unit of feeling has nothing in common with a
 unit of motion becomes more than ever manifest when we bring the two
 into juxtaposition."[160]

And again:

 "Suppose it to have become quite clear that a shock in consciousness
 and a molecular motion are the subjective and objective faces of the
 same thing; we continue utterly incapable of uniting the two, so as to
 conceive that reality of which they are the opposite faces."[161]

In other words, incapable of perceiving in them any common character.
So Tyndall, in that lucky paragraph which has been quoted so often that
every one knows it by heart:

 "The passage from the physics of the brain to the corresponding facts
 of consciousness is unthinkable. Granted that a definite thought and
 a definite molecular action in the brain occur simultaneously; we do
 not possess the intellectual organ, nor apparently any rudiment of the
 organ, which would enable us to pass, by a process of reasoning, from
 one to the other."[162]

Or in this other passage:

 "We can trace the development of a nervous system and correlate with
 it the parallel phenomena of sensation and thought. We see with
 undoubting certainty that they go hand in hand. But we try to soar
 in a vacuum the moment we seek to comprehend the connection between
 them.... There is no fusion possible between the two classes of
 facts--no motor energy in the intellect of man to carry it without
 logical rupture from the one to the other."[163]

None the less easily, however, when the evolutionary afflatus is upon
them, do the very same writers leap over the breach whose flagrancy
they are the foremost to announce, and talk as if mind grew out of body
in a continuous way. Mr. Spencer, looking back on his review of mental
evolution, tells us how "in tracing up the increase we found ourselves
passing _without break_ from the phenomena of bodily life to the
phenomena of mental life."[164] And Mr. Tyndall, in the same Belfast
Address from which we just quoted, delivers his other famous passage:

 "Abandoning all disguise, the confession that I feel bound to make
 before you is that I prolong the vision backward across the boundary
 of the experimental evidence, and discern in that matter which we,
 in our ignorance and notwithstanding our professed reverence for its
 Creator, have hitherto covered with opprobrium the promise and potency
 of every form and quality of life."[165]

--mental life included, as a matter of course.

So strong a postulate is continuity! Now this book will tend to show
that mental postulates are on the whole to be respected. The demand for
continuity has, over large tracts of science, proved itself to possess
true prophetic power. We ought therefore ourselves sincerely to try
every possible mode of conceiving the dawn of consciousness so that it
may _not_ appear equivalent to the irruption into the universe of a new
nature, non-existent until then.

Merely to call the consciousness 'nascent' will not serve our
turn.[166] It is true that the word signifies not yet _quite_ born,
and so seems to form a sort of bridge between existence and nonentity.
But that is a verbal quibble. The fact is that discontinuity comes
in if a new nature comes in at all. The _quantity_ of the latter is
quite immaterial. The girl in 'Midshipman Easy' could not excuse the
illegitimacy of her child by saying, 'it was a little small one.'
And Consciousness, however little, is an illegitimate birth in any
philosophy that starts without it, and yet professes to explain all
facts by continuous evolution.

_If evolution is to work smoothly, consciousness in some shape must
have been present at the very origin of things._ Accordingly we find
that the more clear-sighted evolutionary philosophers are beginning
to posit it there. Each atom of the nebula, they suppose, must have
had an aboriginal atom of consciousness linked with it; and, just
as the material atoms have formed bodies and brains by massing
themselves together, so the mental atoms, by an analogous process of
aggregation, have fused into those larger consciousnesses which we know
in ourselves and suppose to exist in our fellow-animals. Some such
doctrine of _atomistic hylozoism_ as this is an indispensable part of a
thorough-going philosophy of evolution. According to it there must be
an infinite number of degrees of consciousness, following the degrees
of complication and aggregation of the primordial mind-dust. To prove
the separate existence of these degrees of consciousness by indirect
evidence, since direct intuition of them is not to be had, becomes
therefore the first duty of psychological evolutionism.


SOME ALLEGED PROOFS THAT MIND-DUST EXISTS.


Some of this duty we find already performed by a number of philosophers
who, though not interested at all in evolution, have nevertheless on
independent grounds convinced themselves of the existence of a vast
amount of sub-conscious mental life. The criticism of this general
opinion and its grounds will have to be postponed for a while. At
present let us merely deal with the arguments assumed to prove
aggregation of bits of mind-stuff into distinctly sensible feelings.
They are clear and admit of a clear reply.

The German physiologist A. Fick, in 1862, was, so far as I know, the
first to use them. He made experiments on the discrimination of the
feelings of warmth and of touch, when only a very small portion of the
skin was excited through a hole in a card, the surrounding parts being
protected by the card. He found that under these circumstances mistakes
were frequently made by the patient,[167] and concluded that this must
be because the number of sensations from the elementary nerve-tips
affected was too small to sum itself distinctly into either of the
qualities of feeling in question. He tried to show how a different
manner of the summation might give rise in one case to the heat and in
another to the touch.

 "A feeling of temperature," he says, "arises when the intensities of
 the units of feeling are evenly gradated, so that between two elements
 _a_ and _b_ no other unit can spatially intervene whose intensity is
 not also _between_ that of _a_ and _b_. A feeling of contact perhaps
 arises when this condition is not fulfilled. Both kinds of feeling,
 however, are composed of the same units."

But it is obviously far clearer to interpret such a gradation of
intensities as a brain-fact than as a mind-fact. If in the brain a
tract were first excited in one of the ways suggested by Prof. Fick,
and then again in the other, it might very well happen, for aught
we can say to the contrary, that the psychic accompaniment in the
one case would be heat, and in the other pain. The pain and the heat
would, however, not be composed of psychic units, but would each be
the direct result of one total brain-process. So long as this latter
interpretation remains open, Fick cannot be held to have proved psychic
summation.

Later, both Spencer and Taine, independently of each other, took up
the same line of thought. Mr. Spencer's reasoning is worth quoting _in
extenso_. He writes:

 "Although the individual sensations and emotions, real or ideal,
 of which consciousness is built up, appear to be severally simple,
 homogeneous, unanalyzable, or of inscrutable natures, yet they are
 not so. There is at least one kind of feeling which, as ordinarily
 experienced, seems elementary, that is demonstrably not elementary.
 And after resolving it into its proximate components, we can scarcely
 help suspecting that other apparently-elementary feelings are also
 compound, and may have proximate components like those which we can in
 this one instance identify.

 "Musical sound is the name we give to this seemingly simple feeling
 which is clearly resolvable into simpler feelings. Well-known
 experiments prove that when equal blows or taps are made one after
 another at a rate not exceeding some sixteen per second, the effect
 of each is perceived as a separate noise; but when the rapidity with
 which the blows follow one another exceeds this, the noises are no
 longer identified in separate states of consciousness, and there
 arises in place of them a continuous state of consciousness, called
 a tone. In further increasing the rapidity of the blows, the tone
 undergoes the change of quality distinguished as rise in pitch; and
 it continues to rise in pitch as the blows continue to increase in
 rapidity, until it reaches an acuteness beyond which it is no longer
 appreciable as a tone. So that out of units of feeling of the same
 kind, many feelings distinguishable from one another in quality
 result, according as the units are more or less integrated.

 "This is not all. The inquiries of Professor Helmholtz have shown
 that when, along with one series of these rapidly-recurring noises,
 there is generated another series in which the noises are more rapid
 though not so loud, the effect is a change in that quality known as
 its _timbre_. As various musical instruments show us, tones which are
 alike in pitch and strength are distinguishable by their harshness or
 sweetness, their ringing or their liquid characters; and all their
 specific peculiarities are proved to arise from the combination
 of one, two, three, or more, supplementary series of recurrent
 noises with the chief series of recurrent noises. So that while the
 unlikenesses of feeling known as differences of pitch in tones are
 due to differences of integration among the recurrent noises of one
 series, the unlikenesses of feeling known as differences of _timbre_,
 are due to the simultaneous integration with this series of other
 series having other degrees of integration. And thus an enormous
 number of qualitatively-contrasted kinds of consciousness that seem
 severally elementary prove to be composed of one simple kind of
 consciousness, combined and recombined with itself in multitudinous
 ways.

 "Can we stop short here? If the different sensations known as sounds
 are built out of a common unit, is it not to be rationally inferred
 that so likewise are the different sensations known as tastes, and
 the different sensations known as odors, and the different sensations
 known as colors? Nay, shall we not regard it as probable that there is
 a unit common to all these strongly-contrasted classes of sensations?
 If the unlikenesses among the sensations of each class may be due to
 unlikenesses among the modes of aggregation of a unit of consciousness
 common to them all; so too may the much greater unlikenesses between
 the sensations of each class and those of other classes. There may be
 a single primordial element of consciousness, and the countless kinds
 of consciousness may be produced by the compounding of this element
 with itself and the recompounding of its compounds with one another
 in higher and higher degrees: so producing increased multiplicity,
 variety, and complexity.

 "Have we any clue to this primordial element? I think we have. That
 simple mental impression which proves to be the unit of composition
 of the sensation of musical tone, is allied to certain other simple
 mental impressions differently originated. The subjective effect
 produced by a crack or noise that has no appreciable duration is
 little else than a nervous shock. Though we distinguish such a nervous
 shock as belonging to what we call sounds, yet it does not differ very
 much from nervous shocks of other kinds. An electric discharge sent
 through the body causes a feeling akin to that which a sudden loud
 report causes. A strong unexpected impression made through the eyes,
 as by a flash of lightning, similarly gives rise to a start or shock;
 and though the feeling so named seems, like the electric shock, to
 have the body at large for its seat, and may therefore be regarded
 as the correlative rather of the efferent than of the afferent
 disturbance, yet on remembering the mental change that results from
 the instantaneous transit of an object across the field of vision, I
 think it may be perceived that the feeling accompanying the efferent
 disturbance is itself reduced very nearly to the same form. The state
 of consciousness so generated is, in fact, comparable in quality to
 the initial state of consciousness caused by a blow (distinguishing
 it from the pain or other feeling that commences the instant after);
 which state of consciousness caused by a blow may be taken as the
 primitive and typical form of the nervous shock. The fact that sudden
 brief disturbances thus set up by different stimuli through different
 sets of nerves cause feelings scarcely distinguishable in quality
 will not appear strange when we recollect that distinguishableness of
 feeling implies appreciable duration; and that when the duration is
 greatly abridged, nothing more is known than that some mental change
 has occurred and ceased. To have a sensation of redness, to know a
 tone as acute or grave, to be conscious of a taste as sweet, implies
 in each case a considerable continuity of state. If the state does
 not last long enough to admit of its being contemplated, it cannot be
 classed as of this or that kind; and becomes a momentary modification
 very similar to momentary modifications otherwise caused.

 "It is possible, then--may we not even say probable?--that something
 of the same order as that which we call a nervous shock is the
 ultimate unit of consciousness; and that all the unlikenesses
 among our feelings result from unlike modes of integration of this
 ultimate unit. I say of the same order, because there are discernible
 differences among nervous shocks that are differently caused; and
 the primitive nervous shock probably differs somewhat from each of
 them. And I say of the same order, for the further reason that while
 we may ascribe to them a general likeness in nature, we must suppose
 a great unlikeness in degree. The nervous shocks recognized as such
 are violent--must be violent before they can be perceived amid the
 procession of multitudinous vivid feelings suddenly interrupted by
 them. But the rapidly-recurring nervous shocks of which the different
 forms of feeling consist, we must assume to be of comparatively
 moderate, or even of very slight intensity. Were our various
 sensations and emotions composed of rapidly-recurring shocks as strong
 as those ordinarily called shocks, they would be unbearable; indeed
 life would cease at once. We must think of them rather as successive
 faint pulses of subjective change, each having the same quality as
 the strong pulse of subjective change distinguished as a nervous
 shock."[168]


INSUFFICIENCY OF THESE PROOFS.


[Illustration: FIG. 25.]

Convincing as this argument of Mr. Spencer's may appear on a first
reading, it is singular how weak it really is.[169] We do, it is true,
when we study the connection between a musical note and its outward
cause, find the note simple and continuous while the cause is multiple
and discrete. Somewhere, then, there _is_ a transformation, reduction,
or fusion. The question is, Where?--in the nerve-world or in the
mind-world? Really we have no experimental proof by which to decide;
and if decide we must, analogy and _a priori_ probability can alone
guide us. Mr. Spencer assumes that the fusion must come to pass in the
mental world, and that the physical processes get through air and ear,
auditory nerve and medulla, lower brain and hemispheres, without their
number being reduced. Figure 25 will make the point clear.

Let the line _a--b_ represent the threshold of consciousness: then
everything drawn below that line will symbolize a physical process,
everything above it will mean a fact of mind. Let the crosses stand
for the physical blows, the circles for the events in successively
higher orders of nerve-cells, and the horizontal marks for the facts of
feeling. Spencer's argument implies that each order of cells transmits
just as many impulses as it receives to the cells above it; so that if
the blows come at the rate of 20,000 in a second the cortical cells
discharge at the same rate, and one unit of feeling corresponds to each
one of the 20,000 discharges. Then, and only then, does 'integration'
occur, by the 20,000 units of feeling 'compounding with themselves'
into the 'continuous state of consciousness' represented by the short
line at the top of the figure.

Now such an interpretation as this flies in the face of physical
analogy, no less than of logical intelligibility. Consider physical
analogy first,

A pendulum may be deflected by a single blow, and swing back. Will
it swing back the more often the more we multiply the blows? No; for
if they rain upon the pendulum too fast, it will not swing at all
but remain deflected in a sensibly stationary state. In other words,
increasing the cause numerically need not equally increase numerically
the effect. Blow through a tube: you get a certain musical note; and
increasing the blowing increases for a certain time the loudness of
the note. Will this be true indefinitely? No; for when a certain force
is reached, the note, instead of growing louder, suddenly disappears
and is replaced by its higher octave. Turn on the gas slightly and
light it: you get a tiny flame. Turn on more gas, and the breadth
of the flame increases. Will this relation increase indefinitely?
No, again; for at a certain moment up shoots the flame into a ragged
streamer and begins to hiss. Send slowly through the nerve of a
frog's gastrocnemius muscle a succession of galvanic shocks: you get
a succession of twitches. Increasing the number of shocks does not
increase the twitching; on the contrary, it stops it, and we have
the muscle in the apparently stationary state of contraction called
tetanus. This last fact is the true analogue of what must happen
between the nerve-cell and the sensory fibre. It is certain that cells
are more inert than fibres, and that rapid vibrations in the latter can
only arouse relatively simple processes or states in the former. The
higher cells may have even a slower rate of explosion than the lower,
and so the twenty thousand supposed blows of the outer air may be
'integrated' in the cortex into a very small number of cell-discharges
in a second. This other diagram will serve to contrast this supposition
with Spencer's. In Fig. 26 all 'integration' occurs below the threshold
of consciousness. The frequency of cell-events becomes more and more
reduced as we approach the cells to which feeling is most directly
attached, until at last we come to a condition of things symbolized by
the larger ellipse, which may be taken to stand for some rather massive
and slow process of tension and discharge in the cortical centres, to
which, _as a whole_, the feeling of musical tone symbolized by the line
at the top of the diagram _simply and totally_ corresponds. It is as if
a long file of men were to start one after the other to reach a distant
point. The road at first is good and they keep their original distance
apart. Presently it is intersected by bogs each worse than the last,
so that the front men get so retarded that the hinder ones catch up
with them before the journey is done, and all arrive together at the
goal.[170]

[Illustration: FIG. 26.]

On this supposition there _are_ no unperceived units of mind-stuff
preceding and composing the full consciousness. The latter is itself
an immediate psychic fact and bears an immediate relation to the
neural state which is its unconditional accompaniment. Did each neural
shock give rise to its own psychic shock, and the psychic shocks then
combine, it would be impossible to understand why severing one part of
the central nervous system from another should break up the integrity
of the consciousness. The cut has nothing to do with the psychic world.
The atoms of mind-stuff ought to float off from the nerve-matter on
either side of it, and come together over it and fuse, just as well
as if it had not been made. We know, however, that they do not; that
severance of the paths of conduction between a man's left auditory
centre or optical centre and the rest of his cortex will sever all
communication between the words which he hears or sees written and the
rest of his ideas.

Moreover, if feelings can mix into a _tertium quid_, why do we not
take a feeling of greenness and a feeling of redness, and make a
feeling of yellowness out of them? Why has optics neglected the open
road to truth, and wasted centuries in disputing about theories of
color-composition which two minutes of introspection would have settled
forever[171] We cannot mix feelings as such, though we may mix the
objects we feel, and from _their_ mixture get new feelings. We cannot
even (as we shall later see) have two feelings in our mind at once. At
most we can compare together _objects previously presented_ to us in
distinct feelings; but then we find each object stubbornly maintaining
its separate identity before consciousness, whatever the verdict of the
comparison may be.[172]


SELF-COMPOUNDING OF MENTAL FACTS IS INADMISSIBLE.


But there is a still more fatal objection to the theory of mental
units 'compounding with themselves' or 'integrating.' It is logically
unintelligible; it leaves out the essential feature of all the
'combinations' we actually know.

_All the 'combinations' which we actually know are_ EFFECTS, _wrought
by the units said to be 'combined,'_ UPON SOME ENTITY OTHER THAN
THEMSELVES. Without this feature of a medium or vehicle, the notion of
combination has no sense.

 "A multitude of contractile units, by joint action, and by being
 all connected, for instance, with a single tendon, will pull at the
 same, and will bring about a dynamical effect which is undoubtedly
 the resultant of their combined individual energies.... On the whole,
 tendons are to muscular fibres, and bones are to tendons, combining
 recipients of mechanical energies. A medium of composition is
 indispensable to the summation of energies. To realize the complete
 dependence of mechanical resultants on a combining substratum, one may
 fancy for a moment all the individually contracting muscular elements
 severed from their attachments. They might then still be capable
 of contracting with the same energy as before, yet no co-operative
 result would be accomplished. The medium of dynamical combination
 would be wanting. The multiple energies, singly exerted on no common
 recipient, would lose themselves on entirely isolated and disconnected
 efforts."[173]

In other words, no possible number of entities (call them as you
like, whether forces, material particles, or mental elements) can
sum _themselves_ together. Each remains, in the sum, what it always
was; and the sum itself exists only _for a bystander_ who happens to
overlook the units and to apprehend the sum as such; or else it exists
in the shape of some other _effect_ on an entity external to the sum
itself. Let it not be objected that H_{2} and O combine of themselves
into 'water,' and thenceforward exhibit new properties. They do not.
The 'water' is just the old atoms in the new position, H-O-H; the 'new
properties' are just their combined _effects_, when in this position,
upon external media, such as our sense-organs and the various reagents
on which water may exert its properties and be known.

 "Aggregations are organized wholes only when they behave as such in
 the presence of other things. A statue is an aggregation of particles
 of marble, but as such it has no unity. For the spectator it is one;
 in itself it is an aggregate; just as, to the consciousness of an ant
 crawling over it, it may again appear a mere aggregate. No summing up
 of parts can make an unity of a mass of discrete constituents, unless
 this unity exist for some other subject, not for the mass itself."[174]

Just so, in the parallelogram of forces, the 'forces' themselves do
not combine into the diagonal resultant; a _body_ is needed on which
they may impinge, to exhibit their resultant effect. No more do musical
sounds combine _per se_ into concords or discords. Concord and discord
are names for their combined effects on that external medium, the
_ear_.

Where the elemental units are supposed to be feelings, the case is in
no wise altered. Take a hundred of them, shuffle them and pack them as
close together as you can (whatever that may mean); still each remains
the same feeling it always was, shut in its own skin, windowless,
ignorant of what the other feelings are and mean. There would be a
hundred-and-first feeling there, if, when a group or series of such
feelings were set up, a consciousness _belonging to the group as such_
should emerge. And this 101st feeling would be a totally new fact; the
100 original feelings might, by a curious physical law, be a signal
for its _creation_, when they came together; but they would have no
substantial identity with it, nor it with them, and one could never
deduce the one from the others, or (in any intelligible sense) say that
they _evolved_ it.

Take a sentence of a dozen words, and take twelve men and tell to each
one word. Then stand the men in a row or jam them in a bunch, and let
each think of his word as intently as he will; nowhere will there be
a consciousness of the whole sentence.[175] We talk of the 'spirit of
the age,' and the 'sentiment of the people,' and in various ways we
hypostatize 'public opinion.' But we know this to be symbolic speech,
and never dream that the spirit, opinion, sentiment, etc., constitute
a consciousness other than, and additional to, that of the several
individuals whom the words 'age,' 'people,' or 'public' denote. The
private minds do not agglomerate into a higher compound mind. This has
always been the invincible contention of the spiritualists against the
associationists in Psychology,--a contention which we shall take up
at greater length in Chapter X. The associationists say the mind is
constituted by a multiplicity of distinct 'ideas' _associated_ into
a unity. There is, they say, an idea of _a_, and also an idea of _b.
Therefore,_ they say, there is an idea of _a_ + _b_, or of _a_ and _b_
together. Which is like saying that the mathematical square of _a_ plus
that of _b_ is equal to the square of _a_ + _b_, a palpable untruth.
Idea of _a_ + idea of _b_ is _not_ identical with idea of (_a_ + _b_).
It is one, they are two; in it, what knows _a_ also knows _b_; in them,
what knows _a_ is expressly posited as not knowing _b_; etc. In short,
the two separate ideas can never by any logic be made to figure as one
and the same thing as the 'associated' idea.

This is what the spiritualists keep saying; and since we do, as a
matter of fact, have the 'compounded' idea, and do know _a_ and _b_
together, they adopt a farther hypothesis to explain that fact. The
separate ideas exist, they say, but _affect_ a third entity, the soul.
_This_ has the 'compounded' idea, if you please so to call it; and the
compounded idea is an altogether new psychic fact to which the separate
ideas stand in the relation, not of constituents, but of occasions of
production.

This argument of the spiritualists against the associationists has
never been answered by the latter. It holds good against any talk
about self-compounding amongst feelings, against any 'blending,'
or 'complication,' or 'mental chemistry,' or 'psychic synthesis,'
which supposes a resultant consciousness to float off from the
constituents _per se_, in the absence of a supernumerary principle of
consciousness which they may affect. The mind-stuff theory, in short,
is unintelligible. Atoms of feeling cannot compose higher feelings, any
more than atoms of matter can compose physical things! The 'things,'
for a clear-headed atomistic evolutionist, are not. Nothing is but
the everlasting atoms. When grouped in a certain way, _we_ name them
this 'thing' or that; but the thing we name has no existence out of
our mind. So of the states of mind which are supposed to be compound
because they know many different things together. Since indubitably
such states do exist, they must exist as single new facts, effects,
possibly, as the spiritualists say, on the Soul (we will not decide
that point here), but at any rate independent and integral, and not
compounded of psychic atoms.[176]


CAN STATES OF MIND BE UNCONSCIOUS?


The passion for unity and smoothness is in some minds so insatiate
that, in spite of the logical clearness of these reasonings and
conclusions, many will fail to be influenced by them. They establish
a sort of disjointedness in things which in certain quarters will
appear intolerable. They sweep away all chance of 'passing without
break' either from the material to the mental, or from the lower
to the higher mental; and they thrust us back into a pluralism of
consciousnesses--each arising discontinuously in the midst of two
disconnected worlds, material and mental--which is even worse than the
old notion of the separate creation of each particular soul. But the
malcontents will hardly try to refute our reasonings by direct attack.
It is more probable that, turning their back upon them altogether, they
will devote themselves to sapping and mining the region roundabout
until it is a bog of logical liquefaction, into the midst of which all
definite conclusions of any sort may be trusted ere long to sink and
disappear.

Our reasonings have assumed that the 'integration' of a thousand
psychic units must be either just the units over again, simply
rebaptized, or else something real, but then other than and additional
to those units; that if a certain existing fact is that of a thousand
feelings, it cannot at the same time be that of ONE feeling; for the
essence of feeling is to be felt, and as a psychic existent _feels_,
so it must _be_. If the one feeling feels like no one of the thousand,
in what sense can it be said to _be_ the thousand? These assumptions
are what the monists will seek to undermine. The Hegelizers amongst
them will take high ground at once, and say that the glory and
beauty of the psychic life is that in it all contradictions find
their reconciliation; and that it is just because the facts we are
considering _are_ facts of the self that they are both one and many at
the same time. With this intellectual temper I confess that I cannot
contend. As in striking at some unresisting gossamer with a club, one
but overreaches one's self, and the thing one aims at gets no harm. So
I leave this school to its devices.

The other monists are of less deliquescent frame, and try to break
down distinctness among mental states by _making a distinction_. This
sounds paradoxical, but it is only ingenious. The distinction is that
_between the unconscious and the conscious being of the mental state_.
It is the sovereign means for believing what one likes in psychology,
and of turning what might become a science into a tumbling-ground for
whimsies. It has numerous champions, and elaborate reasons to give for
itself. We must therefore accord it due consideration. In discussing
the question:


DO UNCONSCIOUS MENTAL STATES EXIST?


it will be best to give the list of so-called proofs as briefly as
possible, and to follow each by its objection, as in scholastic
books.[177]

_First Proof_. The _minimum visibile_, the _minimum audibile_, are
objects composed of parts. How can the whole affect the sense unless
each part does? And yet each part does so without being separately
sensible. Leibnitz calls the total consciousness an '_aperception_,'
the supposed insensible consciousness by the name of '_petites
perceptions_.'

 "To judge of the latter," he says, "I am accustomed to use the example
 of the roaring of the sea with which one is assailed when near the
 shore. To hear this noise as one does, one must hear the parts which
 compose its totality, that is, the noise of each wave,... although
 this noise would not be noticed if its wave were alone. One must be
 affected a little by the movement of one wave, one must have some
 perception of each several noise, however small it be. Otherwise one
 would not hear that of 100,000 waves, for of 100,000 zeros one can
 never make a quantity."[178]

_Reply_. This is an excellent example of the so-called 'fallacy of
division,' or predicating what is true only of a collection, of each
member of the collection distributively. It no more follows that if a
thousand things together cause sensation, one thing alone must cause
it, than it follows that if one pound weight moves a balance, then one
ounce weight must move it too, in less degree. One ounce weight does
not move it _at all_; its movement _begins_ with the pound. At most we
can say that each ounce affects it in _some_ way which helps the advent
of that movement. And so each infra-sensible stimulus to a nerve no
doubt affects the nerve and helps the birth of sensation when the other
stimuli come. But this affection is a nerve-affection, and there is not
the slightest ground for supposing it to be a 'perception' unconscious
of itself. "A certain _quantity_ of the cause may be a necessary
condition to the production of _any_ of the effect,"[179] when the
latter is a mental state.

_Second Proof._ In all acquired dexterities and habits, secondarily
automatic performances as they are called, we do what _originally_
required a chain of deliberately conscious perceptions and volitions.
As the actions still keep their intelligent character, intelligence
must still preside over their execution. But since our consciousness
seems all the while elsewhere engaged, such intelligence must consist
of unconscious perceptions, inferences, and volitions.

_Reply._ There is more than one alternative explanation in accordance
with larger bodies of fact. One is that the perceptions and volitions
in habitual actions may be performed consciously, only so quickly and
inattentively that no _memory_ of them remains. Another is that the
consciousness of these actions exists, but is _split-off_ from the rest
of the consciousness of the hemispheres. We shall find in Chapter X
numerous proofs of the reality of this split-off condition of portions
of consciousness. Since in man the hemispheres indubitably co-operate
in these secondarily automatic acts, it will not do to say either that
they occur without consciousness or that their consciousness is that
of the lower centres, which we know nothing about. But either lack of
memory or split-off cortical consciousness will certainly account for
all of the facts.[180]

_Third Proof._ Thinking of A, we presently find ourselves thinking of
C. Now B is the natural logical link between A and C, but we have no
consciousness of having thought of B. It must have been in our mind
'_un_consciously,' and in that state affected the sequence of our
ideas.

_Reply._ Here again we have a choice between more plausible
explanations. Either B was consciously there, but the next instant
forgotten, or its _brain-tract_ alone was adequate to do the whole work
of coupling A with C, without the idea B being aroused at all, whether
consciously or 'unconsciously.'

_Fourth Proof._ Problems unsolved when we go to bed are found solved
in the morning when we wake. Somnambulists do rational things. We
awaken punctually at an hour predetermined overnight, etc. Unconscious
thinking, volition, time-registration, etc., must have presided over
these acts.

_Reply._ Consciousness forgotten, as in the hypnotic trance.

_Fifth Proof._ Some patients will often, in an attack of epileptiform
unconsciousness, go through complicated processes, such as eating a
dinner in a restaurant and paying for it, or making a violent homicidal
attack. In trance, artificial or pathological, long and complex
performances, involving the use of the reasoning powers, are executed,
of which the patient is wholly unaware on coming to.

_Reply._ Rapid and complete oblivescence is certainly the explanation
here. The analogue again is hypnotism. Tell the subject of an hypnotic
trance, during his trance, that he _will_ remember, and he may remember
everything perfectly when he awakes, though without your telling him no
memory would have remained. The extremely rapid oblivescence of common
_dreams_ is a familiar fact.

_Sixth Proof._ In a musical concord the vibrations of the several notes
are in relatively simple ratios. The mind must unconsciously count the
vibrations, and be pleased by the simplicity which it finds.

_Reply._ The brain-process produced by the simple ratios may be as
directly agreeable as the conscious process of comparing them would be.
No counting, either conscious or 'unconscious,' is required.

_Seventh Proof._ Every hour we make theoretic judgments and emotional
reactions, and exhibit practical tendencies, for which we can give
no explicit logical justification, but which are good inferences from
certain premises. We know more than we can say. Our conclusions run
ahead of our power to analyze their grounds. A child, ignorant of
the axiom that two things equal to the same are equal to each other,
applies it nevertheless in his concrete judgments unerringly. A boor
will use the _dictum de omni et nullo_ who is unable to understand it
in abstract terms.

 "We seldom consciously think how our house is painted, what the shade
 of it is, what the pattern of our furniture is, or whether the door
 opens to the right or left, or out or in. But how quickly should we
 notice a change in any of these things! Think of the door you have
 most often opened, and tell, if you can, whether it opens to the
 right or left, out or in. Yet when you open the door you never put
 the hand on the wrong side to find the latch, nor try to push it when
 it opens with a pull.... What is the precise characteristic in your
 friend's step that enables you to recognize it when he is coming? Did
 you ever consciously think the idea, 'if I run into a solid piece of
 matter I shall get hurt, or be hindered in my progress'? and do you
 avoid running into obstacles because you ever distinctly conceived, or
 consciously acquired and thought, that idea?"[181]

Most of our knowledge is at all times potential. We act in accordance
with the whole drift of what we have learned, but few items rise into
consciousness at the time. Many of them, however, we may recall at
will. All this co-operation of unrealized principles and facts, of
potential knowledge, with our actual thought is quite inexplicable
unless we suppose the perpetual existence of an immense mass of _ideas
in an unconscious state_, all of them exerting a steady pressure
and influence upon our conscious thinking, and many of them in such
continuity with it as ever and anon to become conscious themselves.

_Reply._ No such mass of ideas is supposable. But there are all kinds
of short-cuts in the brain; and processes not aroused strongly enough
to give any 'idea' distinct enough to be a premise, may, nevertheless,
help to determine just that resultant process of whose psychic
accompaniment the said idea _would_ be a premise, if the idea existed
at all. A certain overtone may be a feature of my friend's voice,
and may conspire with the other tones thereof to arouse in my brain
the process which suggests to my consciousness his name. And yet I
may be ignorant of the overtone _per se_, and unable, even when he
speaks, to tell whether it be there or no. It leads me to the idea of
the name; but it produces in me no such cerebral process as that to
which the _idea of the overtone_ would correspond. And similarly of
our learning. Each subject we learn leaves behind it a modification
of the brain, which makes it impossible for the latter to react upon
things just as it did before; and the result of the difference may
be a tendency to act, though with no idea, much as we should _if_ we
were consciously thinking about the subject. The becoming conscious
of the latter at will is equally readily explained as a result of the
brain-modification. This, as Wundt phrases it, is a 'predisposition'
to bring forth the conscious idea of the original subject, a
predisposition which other stimuli and brain-processes may convert into
an actual result. But such a predisposition is no 'unconscious idea;'
it is only a particular collocation of the molecules in certain tracts
of the brain.

_Eighth Proof._ Instincts, as pursuits of ends by appropriate means,
are manifestations of intelligence; but as the ends are not foreseen,
the intelligence must be unconscious.

_Reply._ Chapter XXIV will show that all the phenomena of instinct are
explicable as actions of the nervous system, mechanically discharged by
stimuli to the senses.

_Ninth Proof._ In sense-perception we have results in abundance, which
can only be explained as conclusions drawn by a process of unconscious
inference from data given to sense. A small human image on the retina
is referred, not to a pygmy, but to a distant man of normal size. A
certain gray patch is inferred to be a white object seen in a dim
light. Often the inference leads us astray: e.g., pale gray against
pale green looks red, because we take a wrong premise to argue from.
We think a green film is spread over everything; and knowing that
under such a film a red thing would look gray, we wrongly infer
from the gray appearance that a red thing must be there. Our study
of space-perception in Chapter XVIII will give abundant additional
examples both of the truthful and illusory percepts which have been
explained to result from unconscious logic operations.

_Reply._ That chapter will also in many cases refute this explanation.
Color-and light-contrast are certainly purely sensational affairs, in
which inference plays no part. This has been satisfactorily proved by
Hering,[182] and shall be treated of again in Chapter XVII. Our rapid
judgments of size, shape, distance, and the like, are best explained
as processes of simple cerebral association. Certain sense-impressions
directly stimulate brain-tracts, of whose activity ready-made conscious
percepts are the immediate psychic counterparts. They do this by a
mechanism either connate or acquired by habit. It is to be remarked
that Wundt and Helmholtz, who in their earlier writings did more than
any one to give vogue to the notion that unconscious inference is a
vital factor in sense-perception, have seen fit on later occasions to
modify their views and to admit that results _like_ those of reasoning
may accrue without any actual reasoning process unconsciously taking
place.[183] Maybe the excessive and riotous applications made by
Hartmann of their principle have led them to this change. It would be
natural to feel towards him as the sailor in the story felt towards the
horse who got his foot into the stirrup,--"If you're going to get on, I
must get off."

Hartmann fairly boxes the compass of the universe with the principle of
unconscious thought. For him there is no namable thing that does not
exemplify it. But his logic is so lax and his failure to consider the
most obvious alternatives so complete that it would, on the whole, be
a waste of time to look at his arguments in detail. The same is true
of Schopenhauer, in whom the mythology reaches its climax. The visual
perception, for example, of an object in space results, according
to him, from the intellect performing the following operations, all
unconscious. First, it apprehends the inverted retinal image and
turns it right side up, constructing _flat space_ as a preliminary
operation; then it computes from the angle of convergence of the
eyeballs that the two retinal images must be the projection of but a
single _object_; thirdly, it constructs the third dimension and sees
this object _solid_; fourthly, it assigns its _distance_; and fifthly,
in each and all of these operations it gets the objective character of
what it 'constructs' by unconsciously inferring it as the only possible
_cause_ of some sensation which it unconsciously feels.[184] Comment on
this seems hardly called for. It is, as I said, pure mythology.

None of these facts, then, appealed to so confidently in proof of the
existence of ideas in an unconscious state, prove anything of the sort.
They prove either that conscious ideas were present which the next
instant were forgotten; or they prove that certain results, _similar_
to results of reasoning, may be wrought out by rapid brain-processes to
which no ideation seems attached. But there is one more argument to be
alleged, less obviously insufficient than those which we have reviewed,
and demanding a new sort of reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Tenth Proof._ There is a great class of experiences in our mental life
which may be described as discoveries that a subjective condition which
we have been having is really something different from what we had
supposed. We suddenly find ourselves bored by a thing which we thought
we were enjoying well enough; or in love with a person whom we imagined
we only liked. Or else we deliberately analyze our motives, and find
that at bottom they contain jealousies and cupidities which we little
suspected to be there. Our feelings towards people are perfect wells of
motivation, unconscious of itself, which introspection brings to light.
And our sensations likewise: we constantly discover new elements in
sensations which we have been in the habit of receiving all our days,
elements, too, which have been there from the first, since otherwise
we should have been unable to distinguish the sensations containing
them from others nearly allied. The elements must exist, for we use
them to discriminate by; but they must exist in an unconscious state,
since we so completely fail to single them out.[185] The books of the
analytic school of psychology abound in examples of the kind. Who knows
the countless associations that mingle with his each and every thought?
Who can pick apart all the nameless feelings that stream in at every
moment from his various internal organs, muscles, heart, glands, lungs,
etc., and compose in their totality his sense of bodily life? Who is
aware of the part played by feelings of innervation and suggestions of
possible muscular exertion in all his judgments of distance, shape, and
size? Consider, too, the difference between a sensation which we simply
_have_ and one which we _attend to_. Attention gives results that seem
like fresh creations; and yet the feelings and elements of feeling
which it reveals must have been already there--in an unconscious
state. We all know _practically_ the difference between the so-called
sonant and the so-called surd consonants, between D, B, Z, G, V, and
T, P, S, K, F, respectively. But comparatively few persons know the
difference _theoretically_, until their attention has been called to
what it is, when they perceive it readily enough. The sonants are
nothing but the surds plus a certain element, which is alike in all,
superadded. That element is the laryngeal sound with which they are
uttered, surds having no such accompaniment. When we hear the sonant
letter, both its component elements must really be in our mind; but
we remain unconscious of what they really are, and mistake the letter
for a simple quality of sound until an effort of attention teaches us
its two components. There exist a host of sensations which most men
pass through life and never attend to, and consequently have only in
an unconscious way. The feelings of opening and closing the glottis,
of making tense the tympanic membrane, of accommodating for near
vision, of intercepting the passage from the nostrils to the throat,
are instances of what I mean. Every one gets these feelings many times
an hour; but few readers, probably, are conscious of exactly what
sensations are meant by the names I have just used. All these facts,
and an enormous number more, seem to prove conclusively that, in
addition to the fully conscious way in which an idea may exist in the
mind, there is also an unconscious way; that it is unquestionably the
same identical idea which exists in these two ways; and that therefore
any arguments against the mind-stuff theory, based on the notion
that _esse_ in our mental life is _sentiri_, and that an idea must
consciously be felt as what it is, fall to the ground.

_Objection._ These reasonings are one tissue of confusion. Two states
of mind which refer to the same external reality, or two states of
mind the later one of which refers to the earlier, are described
as the same state of mind, or 'idea,' published as it were in two
editions; and then whatever qualities of the second edition are found
openly lacking in the first are explained as having really been there,
only in an 'unconscious' way. It would be difficult to believe that
intelligent men could be guilty of so patent a fallacy, were not the
history of psychology there to give the proof. The psychological
stock-in-trade of some authors is the belief that two thoughts about
one thing are virtually the same thought, and that this same thought
may in subsequent reflections become more and more _conscious_ of what
it really _was_ all along from the first. But once make the distinction
between simply _having an idea_ at the moment of its presence and
subsequently knowing all sorts of things _about it_; make moreover that
between a state of mind itself, taken as a subjective fact, on the one
hand, and the objective thing it knows, on the other, and one has no
difficulty in escaping from the labyrinth.

Take the latter distinction first: Immediately all the arguments based
on sensations and the new features in them which attention brings to
light fall to the ground. The sensations of the B and the V when we
attend to these sounds and analyze out the laryngeal contribution
which makes them differ from P and F respectively, are _different
sensations_ from those of the B and the V taken in a simple way.
They stand, it is true, for the _same letters_, and thus mean the
_same outer realities_; but they are different mental affections, and
certainly depend on widely different processes of cerebral activity.
It is unbelievable that two mental states so different as the passive
reception of a sound as a whole, and the analysis of that whole into
distinct ingredients by voluntary attention, should be due to processes
at all similar. And the subjective difference does not consist in that
the first-named state _is_ the second in an 'unconscious' form. It is
an absolute psychic difference, even greater than that between the
states to which two different surds will give rise. The same is true
of the other sensations chosen as examples. The man who learns for the
first time how the closure of his glottis feels, experiences in this
discovery an absolutely new psychic modification, the like of which he
never had before. He had another feeling before, a feeling incessantly
renewed, and of which the same glottis was the organic starting point;
but that was not the later feeling in an 'unconscious' state; it was
a feeling _sui generis_ altogether, although it took cognizance of
the same bodily part, the glottis. We shall see, hereafter, that the
same reality can be cognized by an endless number of psychic states,
which may differ _toto cœlo_ among themselves, without ceasing on
that account to refer to the reality in question. Each of them is a
conscious fact: none of them has any mode of being whatever except a
certain way of being felt at the moment of being present. It is simply
unintelligible and fantastical to say, because they point to the same
outer reality, that they must therefore be so many editions of the same
'idea,' now in a conscious and now in an 'unconscious' phase. There is
only one 'phase' in which an idea can be, and that is a fully conscious
condition. If it is not in that condition, then it is not at all.
Something else is, in its place. The something else may be a merely
physical brain-process, or it may be another conscious idea. Either of
these things may perform much the same _function_ as the first idea,
refer to the same object, and roughly stand in the same relations to
the upshot of our thought. But that is no reason why we should throw
away the logical principle of identity in psychology, and say that,
however it may fare in the outer world, the mind at any rate is a place
in which a thing can be all kinds of other things without ceasing to be
itself as well.

Now take the other cases alleged, and the other distinction, that
namely between _having_ a mental state and knowing all _about_ it.
The truth is here even simpler to unravel. When I decide that I have,
without knowing it, been for several weeks in love, I am simply giving
a name to a state which previously _I have not named_, but which was
fully conscious; which had no residual mode of being except the manner
in which it was conscious; and which, though it was a feeling towards
the same person for whom I now have a much more inflamed feeling, and
though it continuously led into the latter, and is similar enough to be
called by the same name, is yet in no sense identical with the latter,
and least of all in an 'unconscious' way. Again, the feelings from our
viscera and other dimly-felt organs, the feelings of innervation (if
such there be), and those of muscular exertion which, in our spatial
judgments, are supposed unconsciously to determine what we shall
perceive, are just exactly what we feel them, perfectly determinate
conscious states, not vague editions of other conscious states. They
may be faint and weak; they may be very vague cognizers of the same
realities which other conscious states cognize and name exactly; they
may be unconscious of much in the reality which the other states are
conscious of. But that does not make them _in themselves_ a whit dim
or vague or unconscious. They _are_ eternally as they feel when they
exist, and can, neither actually nor potentially, be identified with
anything else than their own faint selves. A faint feeling may be
looked back upon and classified and understood in its relations to what
went before or after it in the stream of thought. But it, on the one
hand, and the later state of mind which knows all these things about
it, on the other, are surely not two conditions, one conscious and the
other 'unconscious,' of the same identical psychic fact. It is the
destiny of thought that, on the whole, our early ideas are superseded
by later ones, giving fuller accounts of the same realities. But none
the less do the earlier and the later ideas preserve their own several
substantive identities as so many several successive states of mind.
To believe the contrary would make any definite science of psychology
impossible. The only identity to be found among our successive ideas is
their similarity of cognitive or representative function as dealing
with the same objects. Identity of _being_, there is none; and I
believe that throughout the rest of this volume the reader will reap
the advantages of the simpler way of formulating the facts which is
here begun.[186]

       *       *       *       *       *

So we seem not only to have ascertained the unintelligibility of the
notion that a mental fact can be two things at once, and that what
seems like one feeling, of blueness for example, or of hatred, may
really and 'unconsciously' be ten thousand elementary feelings which
do not resemble blueness or hatred at all, but we find that we can
express all the observed facts in other ways. The mind-stuff theory,
however, though scotched, is, we may be sure, not killed. If we ascribe
consciousness to unicellular animalcules, then single cells can have
it, and analogy should make us ascribe it to the several cells of the
brain, each individually taken. And what a convenience would it not
be for the psychologist if, by the adding together of various doses
of this separate-cell-consciousness, he could treat thought as a kind
of stuff or material, to be measured out in great or small amount,
increased and subtracted from, and baled about at will! He feels an
imperious craving to be allowed to _construct_ synthetically the
successive mental states which he describes. The mind-stuff theory so
easily admits of the construction being made, that it seems certain
that 'man's unconquerable mind' will devote much future pertinacity and
ingenuity to setting it on its legs again and getting it into some sort
of plausible working-order. I will therefore conclude the chapter with
some consideration of the remaining difficulties which beset the matter
as it at present stands.


DIFFICULTY OF STATING THE CONNECTION BETWEEN MIND AND BRAIN.


It will be remembered that in our criticism of the theory of the
integration of successive conscious units into a feeling of musical
pitch, we decided that whatever integration there was was that of the
air-pulses into a simpler and simpler sort of physical effect, as the
propagations of material change got higher and higher in the nervous
system. At last, we said (p. 23), there results some simple and massive
process in the auditory centres of the hemispherical cortex, to which,
_as a whole_, the feeling of musical pitch directly corresponds.
Already, in discussing the localization of functions in the brain,
I had said (pp. 158-9) that consciousness accompanies the stream of
innervation through that organ and varies in quality with the character
of the currents, being mainly of things seen if the occipital lobes
are much involved, of things heard if the action is focalized in the
temporal lobes, etc., etc.; and I had added that a vague formula like
this was as much as one could safely venture on in the actual state of
physiology. The facts of mental deafness and blindness, of auditory
and optical aphasia, show us that the whole brain must act together
if certain thoughts are to occur. The consciousness, which is itself
an integral thing not made of parts, 'corresponds' to the entire
activity of the brain, whatever that may be, at the moment. This is a
way of expressing the relation of mind and brain from which I shall
not depart during the remainder of the book, because it expresses the
bare phenomenal fact with no hypothesis, and is exposed to no such
logical objections as we have found to cling to the theory of ideas in
combination.

Nevertheless, this formula which is so unobjectionable if taken
vaguely, positivistically, or scientifically, as a mere empirical law
of concomitance between our thoughts and our brain, tumbles to pieces
entirely if we assume to represent anything more intimate or ultimate
by it. The ultimate of ultimate problems, of course, in the study
of the relations of thought and brain, is to understand why and how
such disparate things are connected at all. But before that problem
is solved (if it ever is solved) there is a less ultimate problem
which must first be settled. Before the connection of thought and
brain can be explained, it must at least be _stated_ in an elementary
form; and there are great difficulties about so stating it. To state
it in elementary form one must reduce it to its lowest terms and
know which mental fact and which cerebral fact are, so to speak, in
immediate juxtaposition. We must find the minimal mental fact whose
being reposes directly on a brain-fact; and we must similarly find
the minimal brain-event which will have a mental counterpart at all.
Between the mental and the physical minima thus found there will be an
immediate relation, the expression of which, if we had it, would be the
elementary psycho-physic law.

Our own formula escapes the unintelligibility of psychic atoms by
_taking the entire thought_ (even of a complex object) _as the minimum
with which it deals on the mental side_. But in taking the entire
brain-process as its minimal fact on the material side it confronts
other difficulties almost as bad.

In the first place, it ignores analogies on which certain critics
will insist, those, namely, between the composition of the total
brain-process and that of the _object_ of the thought. The total
brain-process is composed of parts, of simultaneous processes in the
seeing, the hearing, the feeling, and other centres. The object thought
of is also composed of parts, some of which are seen, others heard,
others perceived by touch and muscular manipulation. "How then,"
these critics will say, "should the thought not itself be composed of
parts, each the counterpart of a part of the object and of a part of
the brain-process?" So natural is this way of looking at the matter
that it has given rise to what is on the whole the most flourishing of
all psychological systems--that of the Lockian school of associated
ideas--of which school the mind-stuff theory is nothing but the last
and subtlest offshoot.

The second difficulty is deeper still. _The 'entire brain-process' is
not a physical fact at all._ It is the appearance to an onlooking mind
of a multitude of physical facts. 'Entire brain' is nothing but our
name for the way in which a million of molecules arranged in certain
positions may affect our sense. On the principles of the corpuscular or
mechanical philosophy, the only realities are the separate molecules,
or at most the cells. Their aggregation into a 'brain' is a fiction of
popular speech. Such a fiction cannot serve as the objectively real
counterpart to any psychic state whatever. Only a genuinely physical
fact can so serve. But the molecular fact is the only genuine physical
fact--whereupon we seem, if we are to have an elementary psycho-physic
law at all, thrust right back upon something like the mind-stuff
theory, for the molecular fact, being an element of the 'brain,'
would seem naturally to correspond, not to the total thoughts, but to
elements in the thought.

What shall we do? Many would find relief at this point in celebrating
the mystery of the Unknowable and the 'awe' which we should feel at
having such a principle to take final charge of our perplexities.
Others would rejoice that the finite and separatist view of things
with which we started had at last developed its contradictions, and
was about to lead us dialectically upwards to some 'higher synthesis'
in which inconsistencies cease from troubling and logic is at rest.
It may be a constitutional infirmity, but I can take no comfort in
such devices for making a luxury of intellectual defeat. They are but
spiritual chloroform. Better live on the ragged edge, better gnaw the
file forever!


THE MATERIAL-MONAD THEORY.


The most rational thing to do is to suspect that there may be a third
possibility, an alternative supposition which we have not considered.
Now there _is_ an alternative supposition--a supposition moreover
which has been frequently made in the history of philosophy, and which
is freer from logical objections than either of the views we have
ourselves discussed. It may be called the _theory of polyzoism or
multiple monadism_; and it conceives the matter thus:

Every brain-cell has its own individual consciousness, which no other
cell knows anything about, all individual consciousnesses being
'ejective' to each other. There is, however, among the cells one
central or pontifical one to which _our_ consciousness is attached. But
the events of all the other cells physically influence this arch-cell;
and through producing their joint effects on it, these other cells may
be said to 'combine.' The arch-cell is, in fact, one of those 'external
media' without which we saw that no fusion or integration of a number
of things can occur. The physical modifications of the arch-cell thus
form a sequence of results in the production whereof every other cell
has a share, so that, as one might say, every other cell is represented
therein. And similarly, the conscious correlates to these physical
modifications form a sequence of thoughts or feelings, each one of
which is, as to its substantive being, an integral and uncompounded
psychic thing, but each one of which may (in the exercise of its
_cognitive_ function) be _aware of THINGS_ many and complicated in
proportion to the number of other cells that have helped to modify the
central cell.

By a conception of this sort, one incurs neither of the internal
contradictions which we found to beset the other two theories. One has
no unintelligible self-combining of psychic units to account for on the
one hand; and on the other hand, one need not treat as the physical
counterpart of the stream of consciousness under observation, a 'total
brain-activity' which is non-existent as a genuinely physical fact.
But, to offset these advantages, one has physiological difficulties
and improbabilities. There is no cell or group of cells in the brain
of such anatomical or functional pre-eminence as to appear to be the
keystone or centre of gravity of the whole system. And even if there
were such a cell, the theory of multiple monadism would, in strictness
of thought, have no right to stop at it and treat it as a unit. The
cell is no more a unit, materially considered, than the total brain
is a unit. It is a compound of molecules, just as the brain is a
compound of cells and fibres. And the molecules, according to the
prevalent physical theories, are in turn compounds of atoms. The
theory in question, therefore, if radically carried out, must set up
for its elementary and irreducible psycho-physic couple, not the cell
and its consciousness, but the primordial and eternal atom and its
consciousness. We are back at Leibnitzian monadism, and therewith leave
physiology behind us and dive into regions inaccessible to experience
and verification; and our doctrine, although not self-contradictory,
becomes so remote and unreal as to be almost as bad as if it were.
Speculative minds alone will take an interest in it; and metaphysics,
not psychology, will be responsible for its career. That the career may
be a successful one must be admitted as a possibility--a theory which
Leibnitz, Herbart, and Lotze have taken under their protection must
have some sort of a destiny.


THE SOUL-THEORY.


But is this my last word? By no means. Many readers have certainly been
saying to themselves for the last few pages: "Why on earth doesn't
the poor man say _the Soul_ and have done with it?" Other readers, of
anti-spiritualistic training and prepossessions, advanced thinkers,
or popular evolutionists, will perhaps be a little surprised to
find this much-despised word now sprung upon them at the end of so
physiological a train of thought. But the plain fact is that all the
arguments for a 'pontifical cell' or an 'arch-monad' are also arguments
for that well-known spiritual agent in which scholastic psychology
and common-sense have always believed. And my only reason for beating
the bushes so, and not bringing it in earlier as a possible solution
of our difficulties, has been that by this procedure I might perhaps
force some of these materialistic minds to feel the more strongly the
logical respectability of the spiritualistic position. The fact is that
one cannot afford to despise any of these great traditional objects of
belief. Whether we realize it or not, there is always a great drift
of reasons, positive and negative, towing us in their direction. If
there be such entities as Souls in the universe, they may possibly be
affected by the manifold occurrences that go on in the nervous centres.
To the state of the entire brain at a given moment they may respond
by inward modifications of their own. These changes of state may be
pulses of consciousness, cognitive of objects few or many, simple or
complex. The soul would be thus a medium upon which (to use our earlier
phraseology) the manifold brain-processes _combine their effects_.
Not needing to consider it as the 'inner aspect' of any arch-molecule
or brain-cell, we escape that physiological improbability; and as its
pulses of consciousness are unitary and integral affairs from the
outset, we escape the absurdity of supposing feelings which exist
separately and then 'fuse together' by themselves. The separateness is
in the brain-world, on this theory, and the unity in the soul-world;
and the only trouble that remains to haunt us is the metaphysical one
of understanding how one sort of world or existent thing can affect or
influence another at all. This trouble, however, since it also exists
inside of both worlds, and involves neither physical improbability nor
logical contradiction, is relatively small.

I confess, therefore, that to posit a soul influenced in some
mysterious way by the brain-states and responding to them by conscious
affections of its own, seems to me the line of least logical
resistance, so far as we yet have attained.

If it does not strictly _explain_ anything, it is at any rate less
positively objectionable than either mind-stuff or a material-monad
creed. _The bare_ PHENOMENON, _however, the_ IMMEDIATELY KNOWN _thing
which on the mental side is in apposition with the entire brain-process
is the state of consciousness and not the soul itself._ Many of the
stanchest believers in the soul admit that we know it only as an
inference from experiencing its _states_. In Chapter X, accordingly,
we must return to its consideration again, and _ask ourselves whether,
after all, the ascertainment of a blank unmediated correspondence,
term for term, of the succession of states of consciousness with the
succession of total brain-processes, be not the simplest psycho-physic
formula, and the last word of a psychology which contents itself with
verifiable laws, and seeks only to be clear, and to avoid unsafe
hypotheses._ Such a mere admission of the empirical parallelism will
there appear the wisest course. By keeping to it, our psychology
will remain positivistic and non-metaphysical; and although this is
certainly only a provisional halting-place, and things must some day
be more thoroughly thought out, we shall abide there in this book, and
just as we have rejected mind-dust, we shall take no account of the
soul. The spiritualistic reader may nevertheless believe in the soul
if he will; whilst the positivistic one who wishes to give a tinge of
mystery to the expression of his positivism can continue to say that
nature in her unfathomable designs has mixed us of clay and flame,
of brain and mind, that the two things hang indubitably together and
determine each other's being, but how or why, no mortal may ever know.


FOOTNOTES:

[160] Psychol. § 62.

[161] _Ibid._ § 272.

[162] Fragments of Science, 5th ed., p. 420.

[163] Belfast Address, 'Nature,' August 20, 1874, p. 318. I cannot
help remarking that the disparity between motions and feelings on
which these authors lay so much stress, is somewhat less absolute
than at first sight it seems. There are categories common to the two
worlds. Not only temporal succession (as Helmholtz admits, Physiol.
Optik, p. 445), but such attributes as intensity, volume, simplicity
or complication, smooth or impeded change, rest or agitation, are
habitually predicated of both physical facts and mental facts. Where
such analogies obtain, the things do have something in common.

[164] Psychology, § 131

[165] 'Nature,' as above, 317-8.

[166] 'Nascent' is Mr. Spencer's great word. In showing how at a
certain point consciousness must appear upon the evolving scene this
author fairly outdoes himself in vagueness.

"In its higher forms, Instinct is probably accompanied by a rudimentary
consciousness. There cannot be co-ordination of many stimuli without
some ganglion through which they are all brought into relation. In
the process of bringing them into relation, this ganglion must be
subject to the influence of each--must undergo many changes. And
the quick succession of changes in a ganglion, implying as it does
perpetual experiences of differences and likenesses, constitutes the
_raw material_ of consciousness. The _implication_ is that as fast as
Instinct is developed, some kind of consciousness becomes nascent."
(Psychology, § 195.)

The words 'raw material' and 'implication' which I have italicized
are the words which do the _evolving_. They are supposed to have
all the rigor which the 'synthetic philosophy' requires. In the
following passage, when 'impressions' pass through a common 'centre
of communication' in succession (much as people might pass into a
theatre through a turnstile) consciousness, non-existent until then, is
supposed to result:

"Separate impressions are received by the senses--by different parts
of the body. If they go no further than the places at which they
are received, they are useless. Or if only some of them are brought
into relation with one another, they are useless. That an effectual
adjustment may be made, they must be all brought into relation with one
another. But this implies some centre of communication common to them
all, through which they severally pass; and as they cannot pass through
it simultaneously, they must pass through it in succession. So that as
the external phenomena responded to become greater in number and more
complicated in kind, the variety and rapidity of the changes to which
this common centre of communication is subject must increase--there
must result an unbroken series of these changes-_there must arise a
consciousness_.

"Hence the progress of the correspondence between the organism and its
environment necessitates a gradual reduction of the sensorial changes
to a succession; and by so doing _evolves a distinct consciousness_--a
consciousness that becomes higher as the succession becomes more rapid
and the correspondence more complete." (_Ibid._ § 179.)

It is true that in the Fortnightly Review (vol. xiv, p. 716) Mr.
Spencer denies that he means by this passage to tell us anything about
the origin of consciousness at all. It resembles, however, too many
other places in his Psychology (e.g. §§ 43, 110, 244) not to be taken
as a serious attempt to explain how consciousness must at a certain
point be 'evolved.' That, when a critic calls his attention to the
inanity of his words, Mr. Spencer should say he never meant anything
particular by them, is simply an example of the scandalous vagueness
with which this sort of 'chromo-philosophy' is carried on.

[167] His own words are: "Mistakes are made in the sense that he
admits having been touched, when in reality it was radiant heat that
affected his skin. In our own before-mentioned experiments there
was never any deception on the entire palmar side of the hand or
on the face. On the back of the hand in one case in a series of 60
stimulations 4 mistakes occurred, in another case 2 mistakes in 45
stimulations. On the extensor side of the upper arm 3 deceptions out of
48 stimulations were noticed, and in the case of another individual,
1 out of 31. In one case over the spine 3 deceptions in a series of
11 excitations were observed; in another, 4 out of 19. On the lumbar
spine 6 deceptions came among 29 stimulations, and again 4 out of
7. There is certainly not yet enough material on which to rest a
calculation of probabilities, but any one can easily convince himself
that on the back there is no question of even a moderately accurate
discrimination between warmth and a light pressure so far as but small
portions of skin come into play. It has been as yet impossible to make
corresponding experiments with regard to sensibility to cold." (Lehrb.
d. Anat. u. Physiol. d. Sinnesorgane (1862), p. 29.)

[168] Principles of Psychology, § 60.

[169] Oddly enough, Mr. Spencer seems quite unaware of the
_general_ function of the theory of elementary units of mind-stuff
in the evolutionary philosophy. We have seen it to be absolutely
indispensable, if that philosophy is to work, to postulate
consciousness in the nebula,---the simplest way being, of course, to
suppose every atom animated. Mr. Spencer, however, will have it (e.g.
First Principles, § 71) that consciousness is only the occasional
result of the 'transformation' of a certain amount of 'physical force'
to which it is 'equivalent.' Presumably a brain must already be there
before any such 'transformation' can take place; and so the argument
quoted in the text stands as a mere local detail, without general
bearings.

[170] The compounding of colors may be dealt with in an identical
way. Helmholtz has shown that if green light and red light fall
simultaneously on the retina, we see the color yellow. The mind-stuff
theory would interpret this as a ease where the feeling green and the
feeling red 'combine' into the _tertium quid_ of feeling, yellow. What
really occurs is no doubt that a third kind of nerve-process is set
up when the combined lights impinge on the retina,--not simply the
process of red plus the process of green, but something quite different
from both or either. Of course, then, there _are_ no feelings, either
of red or of green, present to the mind at all; but the feeling of
yellow which _is_ there, answers as directly to the nerve-process which
momentarily then exists, as the feelings of green and red would answer
to their respective nerve-processes did the latter happen to be taking
place.

[171] Cf. Mill's Logic, book vi, chap. iv, § 3.

[172] I find in my students an almost invincible tendency to think that
we can immediately perceive that feelings do combine. "What!" they say,
"is not the taste of lemonade composed of that of lemon _plus_ that of
sugar?" This is taking the combining of objects for that of feelings.
The physical lemonade contains both the lemon and the sugar, but its
taste does not contain their tastes, for if there are any two things
which are certainly _not_ present in the taste of lemonade, those are
the lemon-sour on the one hand and the sugar-sweet on the other. These
tastes are absent utterly. The entirely new taste which is present
_resembles_, it is true, both those tastes; but in Chapter XIII we
shall see that resemblance can not always be held to involve partial
identity.

[173] E. Montgomery, in 'Mind,' v, 18-19. See also pp. 24-5.

[174] J. Royce, 'Mind,' vi, p. 376. Lotze has set forth the truth
of this law more clearly and copiously than any other writer.
Unfortunately he is too lengthy to quote. See his Microcosmus, bk. ii,
ch. i, § 5; Metaphysik, §§ 242, 260; Outlines of Metaphysics, part ii,
chap. i, §§ 3, 4, 5. Compare also Reid's Intellectual Powers, essay v,
chap. iii, _ad fin._; Bowne's Metaphysics, pp. 361-76; St. J. Mivart:
Nature and Thought, pp. 98-101; E. Gurney: 'Monism,' in 'Mind,' vi,
153; and the article by Prof. Royce, just quoted, on 'Mind-stuff and
Reality.'

_In defence of the mind-stuff view,_ see W. K. Clifford: 'Mind,' iii,
57 (reprinted in his 'Lectures and Essays,' ii, 71); G. T. Fechner,
Psychophysik, Bd. ii, cap. xlv; H. Taine: on Intelligence, bk. iii; E.
Haeckel: 'Zellseelen u. Seelenzellen' in Gesammelte pop. Vorträge, Bd.
i, p. 143; W. S. Duncan: Conscious Matter, _passim_; H. Zöllner: Natur
d. Cometen, pp. 320 ff.; Alfred Barratt: 'Physical Ethic' and 'Physical
Metempiric,' _passim_; J. Soury: 'Hylozoismus,' in 'Kosmos,' V. Jahrg.,
Heft x, p. 241; A. Main: 'Mind,' i, 292, 431, 566; ii, 129, 402; _Id._
Revue Philos., ii, 86, 88, 419; iii, 51, 502; iv, 402; F. W. Frankland:
'Mind,' vi, 116; Whittaker: 'Mind,' vi, 498 (historical); Morton
Prince: The Nature of Mind and Human Automatism (1885); A. Riehl: Der
philosophische Kriticismus, Bd. ii, Theil 2, 2ter Abschnitt, 2tes Cap.
(1887). The clearest of all these Statements is, as far as it goes,
that of Prince.

[175] "Someone might say that although it is true that neither a blind
man nor a deaf man by himself can compare sounds with colors, yet since
one hears and the other sees they might do so both together.... But
whether they are apart or close together makes no difference; not even
if they permanently keep house together; no, not if they were Siamese
twins, or more than Siamese twins, and were inseparably grown together,
would it make the assumption any more possible. Only when sound and
color are represented in the same reality is it thinkable that they
should be compared." (Brentano: Psychologie, p. 209.)

[176] The reader must observe that we are reasoning altogether about
the _Logic_ of the mind-stuff theory, about whether it can _exist in
the constitution_ of higher mental states by viewing them as _identical
with lower ones_ summed together. We say the two sorts of fact are
not identical: a higher state _is_ not a lot of lower states; it is
itself. When, however, a lot of lower states have come together, or
when certain brain-conditions occur together which, _if they occurred
separately, would produce_ a lot of lower states, we have not for a
moment pretended that a higher state may not emerge. In fact it does
emerge under those conditions; and our Chapter IX will be mainly
devoted to the proof of this fact. But such emergence is that of a new
psychic entity, and is _toto cœlo_ different from such an 'integration'
of the lower states as the mind-stuff theory affirms.

It may seem strange to suppose that anyone should mistake criticism
of a certain theory about a fact for doubt of the fact itself. And
yet the confusion is made in high quarters enough to justify our
remarks. Mr. J. Ward, in his article Psychology in the Encyclopædia
Britannica, speaking of the hypothesis that "a series of feelings can
be aware of itself as a series," says (p. 39): "Paradox is too mild
a word for it, even contradiction will hardly suffice." Whereupon,
Professor Bain takes him thus to task: "As to 'a series of states being
aware of itself,' I confess I see no insurmountable difficulty. It
may be a fact, or not a fact; it may be a very clumsy expression for
what it is applied to; but it is neither paradox nor contradiction.
A series merely contradicts an individual, or it may be two or more
individuals as coexisting; but that is too general to exclude the
possibility of self-knowledge. It certainly does not bring the property
of self-knowledge into the foreground, which, however, is not the same
as denying it. An algebraic series might know itself, without any
contradiction: the only thing against it is the want of evidence of the
fact." ('Mind,' xi, 459). Prof. Bain thinks, then, that all the bother
is about the difficulty of seeing how a series of feelings can have the
knowledge of itself _added to it!!!_ As if anybody ever was troubled
about that. That, notoriously enough, is a fact: our consciousness
is a series of feelings to which every now and then is _added_ a
retrospective consciousness that they have come and gone. What Mr. Ward
and I are troubled about is merely the silliness of the mind-stuffists
and associationists continuing to say that the 'series of states' _is_
the 'awareness of itself;' that if the states be posited severally,
their collective consciousness is _eo ipso_ given; and that we need no
farther explanation, or 'evidence of the fact.'

[177] The writers about 'unconscious cerebration' seem sometimes to
mean that and sometimes unconscious thought. The arguments which follow
are culled from various quarters. The reader will find them most
systematically urged by E. von Hartmann: Philosophy of the Unconscious,
vol. i; and by E. Colsenet: La Vie Inconsciente de l'Esprit (1880).
Consult also T. Laycock: Mind and Brain, vol. i, chap. v (1860); W.
B. Carpenter: Mental Physiology, chap. xiii; F. P. Cobbe: Darwinism
in Morals and other Essays, essay xi, Unconscious Cerebration (1872);
F. Bowen: Modern Philosophy, pp. 428-480; R. H. Hutton: Contemporary
Review, vol. xxiv, p. 201; J. S. Mill: Exam. of Hamilton, chap. xv; G.
H. Lewes: Problems of Life and Mind, 3d series, Prob. ii, chap. x, and
also Prob. iii, chap. ii; D. G. Thompson: A System of Psychology, chap.
xxxiii; J. M. Baldwin, Handbook of Psychology, chap. iv.

[178] Nouveaux Essais, Avant-propos.

[179] J. S. Mill, Exam. of Hamilton, chap. xv.

[180] Cf. Dugald Stewart, Elements, chap. ii.

[181] J. E. Maude: 'The Unconscious in Education,' in 'Education,' vol.
i, p. 401 (1882).

[182] Zur Lehre vor Lichtsinne (1878).

[183] Cf. Wundt: Ueber den Einfluss der Philosophie, etc.--Antrittsrede
(1876), pp. 10-11;--Helmholtz: Die Thatsachen in der Wahrnehmung
(1879), p. 27.

[184] Cf. Satz vom Grunde, pp. 59-65. Compare also F. Zöllner's Natur
der Kometen, pp. 342 ff. and 425.

[185] Cf. the statements from Helmholtz to be found later in Chapter
XIII.

[186] The text was written before Professor Lipps's Grundtatsachen des
Seelenlebens (1883) came into my hands. In Chapter III of that book
the notion of unconscious thought is subjected to the clearest and
most searching criticism which it has yet received. Some passages are
so similar to what I have myself written that I must quote them in a
note. After proving that dimness and clearness, incompleteness and
completeness do not pertain to a state of mind _as such_--since every
state of mind must be _exactly_ what it is, and nothing else--but only
pertain to the way in which states of mind stand for objects, which
they more or less dimly, more or less clearly, _represent_; Lipps takes
the case of those sensations which attention is said to make more
clear. "I perceive an object," he says, "now in clear daylight, and
again at night. Call the content of the day-perception _a_, and that
of the evening-perception _a^1_. There will probably be a considerable
difference between _a_ and _a^1_. The colors of _a_ will be varied
and intense, and will be sharply bounded by each other; those of
_a^1_ will be less luminous, and less strongly contrasted, and will
approach a common gray or brown, and merge more into each other. Both
percepts, however, as such, are completely determinate and distinct
from all others. The colors of _a^1_ appear before my eye neither more
nor less decidedly dark and blurred than the colors of _a_ appear
bright and sharply bounded. But now I know, or believe I know, that
one and the same real Object A corresponds to both _a_ and _a^1_. I
am convinced, moreover, that _a_ represents A better than does _a^1_.
Instead, however, of giving to my conviction this, its only correct,
expression, and keeping the content of my consciousness and the real
object, the representation and what it means, distinct from each other,
I substitute the real object for the content of the consciousness, and
talk of the experience as if it consisted in one and the same object
(namely, the surreptitiously introduced real one), constituting twice
over the content of my consciousness, once in a clear and distinct,
the other time in an obscure and vague fashion. I talk now of a
distincter and of a less distinct _consciousness_ of A, whereas I
am only justified in talking of two consciousnesses, _a_ and _a^1_,
equally distinct _in se_, but to which the supposed external object A
corresponds with different degrees of distinctness." (P. 38-9.)




