Chapter XII we shall have to take up the judgment of sameness again.

To show that the question of reality being extra-mental or not is not
likely to arise in the absence of repeated experiences of the _same_,
take the example of an altogether unprecedented experience, such as
a new taste in the throat. Is it a subjective quality of feeling, or
an objective quality felt? You do not even ask the question at this
point. It is simply _that taste_. But if a doctor hears you describe
it, and says: "Ha! Now you know what _heartburn_ is," then it becomes
a quality already existent _extra mentem tuam_, which you in turn have
come upon and learned. The first spaces, times, things, qualities,
experienced by the child probably appear, like the first heartburn, in
this absolute way, as simple _beings_, neither in nor out of thought.
But later, by having other thoughts than this present one, and making
repeated judgments of sameness among their objects, he corroborates in
himself the notion of realities, past and distant as well as present,
which realities no one single thought either possesses or engenders,
but which all may contemplate and know. This, as was stated in the
last chapter, is the _psychological_ point of view, the relatively
uncritical non-idealistic point of view of all natural science, beyond
which this book cannot go. A mind which has become conscious of its own
cognitive function, plays what we have called 'the psychologist' upon
itself. It not only knows the things that appear before it; it knows
that it knows them. This stage of reflective condition is, more or
less explicitly, our habitual adult state of mind.

It cannot, however, be regarded as primitive. The consciousness
of objects must come first. We seem to lapse into this primordial
condition when consciousness is reduced to a minimum by the inhalation
of anæsthetics or during a faint. Many persons testify that at a
certain stage of the anæsthetic process objects are still cognized
whilst the thought of self is lost. Professor Herzen says:[243]

 "During the syncope there is absolute psychic annihilation, the
 absence of all consciousness; then at the beginning of coming to,
 one has at a certain moment a vague, limitless, infinite feeling--a
 sense of _existence in general_ without the least trace of distinction
 between the me and the not-me."

Dr. Shoemaker of Philadelphia describes during the deepest conscious
stage of ether-intoxication a vision of

 "two endless parallel lines in swift longitudinal motion ... on a
 uniform misty background ... together with a constant sound or whirr,
 not loud but distinct ... which seemed to be connected with the
 parallel lines.... These phenomena occupied the whole field. There
 were present no dreams or visions in any way connected with human
 affairs, no ideas or impressions akin to anything in past experience,
 no emotions, of course no idea of personality. There was no conception
 as to what being it was that was regarding the two lines, or that
 there existed any such thing as such a being; the lines and waves were
 all."[244]

Similarly a friend of Mr. Herbert Spencer, quoted by him in 'Mind' (vol
iii, p. 556), speaks of "an undisturbed empty quiet everywhere except
that a stupid presence lay like a heavy intrusion _somewhere_--a blotch
on the calm." This sense of objectivity and lapse of subjectivity, even
when the object is almost indefinable, is, it seems to me, a somewhat
familiar phase in chloroformization, though in my own case it is too
deep a phase for any articulate after-memory to remain. I only know
that as it vanishes I seem to wake to a sense of my own existence as
something additional to what had previously been there.[245]

Many philosophers, however, hold that the reflective consciousness
of the self is essential to the cognitive function of thought. They
hold that a thought, in order to know a thing at all, must expressly
distinguish between the thing and its own self.[246] This is a
perfectly wanton assumption, and not the faintest shadow of reason
exists for supposing it true. As well might I contend that I cannot
dream without dreaming that I dream, swear without swearing that I
swear, deny without denying that I deny, as maintain that I cannot
know without knowing that I know. I may have either acquaintance-with,
or knowledge-about, an object O without think about myself at all. It
suffices for this that I think O, and that it exist. If, in addition
to thinking O, I also think that I exist and that I know O, well and
good; I then know one more thing, a fact about O, of which I previously
was unmindful. That, however, does not prevent me from having already
known O a good deal. O _per se_, or O _plus_ P, are as good objects
of knowledge as O _plus me_ is. The philosophers in question simply
substitute one particular object for all others, and call it _the_
object _par excellence_. It is a case of the 'psychologist's fallacy'
(see p. 197). _They_ know the object to be one thing and the thought
another; and they forthwith foist their own knowledge into that of the
thought of which they pretend to give a true account. To conclude,
then, _thought may, but need not, in knowing, discriminate between its
object and itself._

We have been using the word Object. _Something must now be said about
the proper use of the term Object in Psychology._

In popular parlance the word object is commonly taken without reference
to the act of knowledge, and treated as synonymous with individual
subject of existence. Thus if anyone ask what is the mind's object when
you say 'Columbus discovered America in 1492,' most people will reply
'Columbus,' or 'America,' or, at most, 'the discovery of America.' They
will name a substantive kernel or nucleus of the consciousness, and say
the thought is 'about' that,--as indeed it is,--and they will call that
your thought's 'object.' Really that is usually only the grammatical
object, or more likely the grammatical subject, of your sentence. It
is at most your 'fractional object;' or you may call it the 'topic'
of your thought, or the 'subject of your discourse.' But the _Object_
of your thought is really its entire content or deliverance, neither
more nor less. It is a vicious use of speech to take out a substantive
kernel from its content and call that its object; and it is an equally
vicious use of speech to add a substantive kernel not articulately
included in its content, and to call that its object. Yet either
one of these two sins we commit, whenever we content ourselves with
saying that a given thought is simply 'about' a certain topic, or that
that topic is its 'object.' The object of my thought in the previous
sentence, for example, is strictly speaking neither Columbus, nor
America, nor its discovery. It is nothing short of the entire sentence,
'Columbus-discovered-America-in-1492.' And if we wish to speak of it
substantively, we must make a substantive of it by writing it out thus
with hyphens between all its words. Nothing but this can possibly name
its delicate idiosyncrasy. And if we wish to _feel_ that idiosyncrasy
we must reproduce the thought as it was uttered, with every word
fringed and the whole sentence bathed in that original halo of obscure
relations, which, like an horizon, then spread about its meaning.

Our psychological duty is to cling as closely as possible to the actual
constitution of the thought we are studying. We may err as much by
excess as by defect. If the kernel or 'topic,' Columbus, is in one way
less than the thought's object, so in another way it may be more. That
is, when named by the psychologist, it may mean much more than actually
is present to the thought of which he is reporter. Thus, for example,
suppose you should go on to think: 'He was a daring genius!' An
ordinary psychologist would not hesitate to say that the object of your
thought was still 'Columbus.' True, your thought is _about_ Columbus.
It 'terminates' in Columbus, leads from and to the direct idea of
Columbus. But for the moment it is not fully and immediately Columbus,
it is only 'he,' or rather 'he-was-a-daring-genius;' which, though it
may be an unimportant difference for conversational purposes, is, for
introspective psychology, as great a difference as there can be.

The object of every thought, then, is neither more nor less than all
that the thought thinks, exactly as the thought thinks it, however
complicated the matter, and however symbolic the manner of the thinking
may be. It is needless to say that memory can seldom accurately
reproduce such an object, when once it has passed from before the
mind. It either makes too little or too much of it. Its best plan is
to repeat the verbal sentence, if there was one, in which the object
was expressed. But for inarticulate thoughts there is not even this
resource, and introspection must confess that the task exceeds her
powers. The mass of our thinking vanishes for ever, beyond hope of
recovery, and psychology only gathers up a few of the crumbs that fall
from the feast.

       *       *       *       *       *

The next point to make clear is that, _however complex the object may
be, the thought of it is one undivided state of consciousness_. As
Thomas Brown says:[247]

 "I have already spoken too often to require again to caution you
 against the mistake into which, I confess, that the terms which the
 poverty of our language obliges us to use might of themselves very
 naturally lead you; the mistake of supposing that the most complex
 states of mind are not truly, in their very essence, as much one and
 indivisible as those which we term simple--the complexity and seeming
 coexistence which they involve being relative to our feeling[248]
 only, not to their own absolute nature. I trust I need not repeat to
 you that, in itself, every notion, however seemingly complex, is, and
 must be, truly simple--being one state or affection, of one simple
 substance, mind. Our conception of a whole army, for example, is as
 truly this one mind existing in this one state, as our conception
 of any of the individuals that compose an army. Our notion of the
 abstract numbers, eight, four, two, is as truly one feeling of the
 mind as our notion of simple unity."

The ordinary associationist-psychology supposes, in contrast with
this, that whenever an object of thought contains many elements,
the thought itself must be made up of just as many ideas, one idea
for each element, and all fused together in appearance, but really
separate.[249] The enemies of this psychology find (as we have already
seen) little trouble in showing that such a bundle of separate ideas
would never form one thought at all, and they contend that an Ego
must be added to the bundle to give it unity, and bring the various
ideas into relation with each other.[250] We will not discuss the
ego just yet, but it is obvious that if things are to be thought in
relation, they must be thought together, and in one _something_, be
that something ego, psychosis, state of consciousness, or whatever
you please. If not thought with each other, things are not thought in
relation at all. Now most believers in the ego make the same mistake as
the associationists and sensationists whom they oppose. Both agree that
the elements of the subjective stream are discrete and separate and
constitute what Kant calls a 'manifold.' But while the associationists
think that a 'manifold' can form a single knowledge, the egoists
deny this, and say that the knowledge comes only when the manifold
is subjected to the synthetizing activity of an ego. Both make an
identical initial hypothesis; but the egoist, finding it won't express
the facts, adds another hypothesis to correct it. Now I do not wish
just yet to 'commit myself' about the existence or non-existence of the
ego, but I do contend that we need not invoke it for this particular
reason--namely, because the manifold of ideas has to be reduced to
unity. _There is no manifold of coexisting ideas;_ the notion of such
a thing is a chimera. _Whatever things are thought in relation are
thought from the outset in a unity, in a single pulse of subjectivity,
a single psychosis, feeling, or state of mind._

The reason why this fact is so strangely garbled in the books seems to
be what on an earlier page (see p. 196 ff.) I called the psychologist's
fallacy. We have the inveterate habit, whenever we try introspectively
to describe one of our thoughts, of dropping the thought as it is in
itself and talking of something else. We describe the things that
appear to the thought, and we describe other thoughts _about_ those
things--as if these and the original thought were the same. If, for
example, the thought be 'the pack of cards is on the table,' we say,
"Well, isn't it a thought of the pack of cards? Isn't it of the cards
as included in the pack? Isn't it of the table? And of the legs of
the table as well? The table has legs--how can you think the table
without virtually thinking its legs? Hasn't our thought then, all these
parts--one part for the pack and another for the table? And within the
pack-part a part for each card, as within the table-part a part for
each leg? And isn't each of these parts an idea? And can our thought,
then, be anything but an assemblage or pack of ideas, each answering to
some element of what it knows?"

Now not one of these assumptions is true. The thought taken as an
example is, in the first place, not of 'a pack of cards.' It is of
'the-pack-of-cards-is-on-the-table,' an entirely different subjective
phenomenon, whose Object implies the pack, and every one of the cards
in it, but whose conscious constitution bears very little resemblance
to that of the thought of the pack _per se_. What a thought _is_,
and what it may be developed into, or explained to stand for, and be
equivalent to, are two things, not one.[251]

An analysis of what passes through the mind as we utter the phrase _the
pack of cards is on the table_ will, I hope, make this clear, and may
at the same time condense into a concrete example a good deal of what
has gone before.

[Illustration: FIG. 29.--The Stream of Consciousness.]

It takes time to utter the phrase. Let the horizontal line in Fig.
29 represent time. Every part of it will then stand for a fraction,
every point for an instant, of the time. Of course the thought has
_time-parts_. The part 2-3 of it, though continuous with 1-2, is yet a
different part from 1-2. Now I say of these time-parts that we cannot
take any one of them so short that it will not after some fashion or
other be a thought of the whole object 'the pack of cards is on the
table.' They melt into each other like dissolving views, and no two of
them feel the object just alike, but each feels the total object in
a unitary undivided way. This is what I mean by denying that in the
thought any parts can be found corresponding to the object's parts.
Time-parts are not such parts.

Now let the vertical dimensions of the figure stand for the objects
or contents of the thoughts. A line vertical to any point of the
horizontal, as _1-1'_, will then symbolize the object in the mind
at the instant 1; a space above the horizontal, as 1-1'-2'-2, will
symbolize all that passes through the mind during the time 1-2 whose
line it covers. The entire diagram from 0 to 0' represents a finite
length of thought's stream.

Can we now define the psychic constitution of each vertical section of
this segment? We can, though in a very rough way. Immediately after
0, even before we have opened our mouths to speak, the entire thought
is present to our mind in the form of an intention to utter that
sentence. This intention, though it has no simple name, and though it
is a transitive state immediately displaced by the first word, is yet
a perfectly determinate phase of thought, unlike anything else (see p.
253). Again, immediately before 0', after the last word of the sentence
is spoken, all will admit that we again think its entire content as
we inwardly realize its completed deliverance. All vertical sections
made through any other parts of the diagram will be respectively filled
with other ways of feeling the sentence's meaning. Through 2, for
example, the cards will be the part of the object most emphatically
present to the mind; through 4, the table. The stream is made higher
in the drawing at its end than at its beginning, because the final way
of feeling the content is fuller and richer than the initial way. As
Joubert says, "we only know just what we meant to say, after we have
said it." And as M. V. Egger remarks, "before speaking, one barely
knows what one intends to say, but afterwards one is filled with
admiration and surprise at having said and thought it so well."

This latter author seems to me to have kept at much closer quarters
with the facts than any other analyst of consciousness.[252] But even
he does not quite hit the mark, for, as I understand him, he thinks
that each word as it occupies the mind _displaces_ the rest of the
thought's content. He distinguishes the 'idea' (what I have called
the total _object_ or meaning) from the consciousness of the words,
calling the former a very feeble state, and contrasting it with the
liveliness of the words, even when these are only silently rehearsed.
"The feeling," he says, "of the words makes ten or twenty times more
noise in our consciousness than the sense of the phrase, which for
consciousness is a very slight matter."[253] And having distinguished
these two things, he goes on to separate them in time, saying that
the idea may either precede or follow the words, but that it is a
'pure illusion' to suppose them simultaneous.[254] Now I believe
that in all cases where the words are _understood_, the total idea
may be and usually is present not only before and after the phrase
has been spoken, but also whilst each separate word is uttered.[255]
It is the overtone, halo, or fringe of the word, _as spoken in that
sentence_. It is never absent; no word in an understood sentence comes
to consciousness as a mere noise. We feel its meaning as it passes;
and although our object differs from one moment to another as to its
verbal kernel or nucleus, yet it is _similar_ throughout the entire
segment of the stream. The same object is known everywhere, now from
the point of view, if we may so call it, of this word, now from the
point of view of that. And in our feeling of each word there chimes an
echo or foretaste of every other. The consciousness of the 'Idea' and
that of the words are thus consubstantial. They are made of the same
'mind-stuff,' and form an unbroken stream. Annihilate a mind at any
instant, cut its thought through whilst yet uncompleted, and examine
the object present to the cross-section thus suddenly made; you will
find, not the bald word in process of utterance, but that word suffused
with the whole idea. The word may be so loud, as M. Egger would say,
that we cannot _tell_ just how its suffusion, as such, feels, or how it
differs from the suffusion of the next word. But it does differ; and we
maybe sure that, could we see into the brain, we should find the same
processes active through the entire sentence in different degrees, each
one in turn becoming maximally excited and then yielding the momentary
verbal 'kernel,' to the thought's content, at other times being only
sub-excited, and then combining with the other sub-excited processes to
give the overtone or fringe.[256]

[Illustration: FIG. 30.]

[Illustration: FIG. 31.]

[Illustration: FIG. 32.]

We may illustrate this by a farther development of the diagram on p.
279. Let the objective content of any vertical section through the
stream be represented no longer by a line, but by a plane figure,
highest opposite whatever part of the object is most prominent in
consciousness at the moment when the section is made. This part, in
verbal thought, will usually be some word. A series of sections 1-1',
taken at the moments 1, 2, 3, would then look like this: horizontal
breadth stands for the entire object in each of the figures; the
height of the curve above each part of that object marks the relative
prominence of that part in the thought. At the moment symbolized by the
first figure _pack_ is the prominent part; in the third figure it is
_table_, etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 33.]

We can easily add all these plane sections together to make a solid,
one of whose solid dimensions will represent time, whilst a cut across
this at right angles will give the thought's content at the moment when
the cut is made. Let it be the thought, 'I am the same I that I was
yesterday.' If at the fourth moment of time we annihilate the thinker
and examine how the last pulsation of his consciousness was made, we
find that it was an awareness of the whole content with _same_ most
prominent, and the other parts of the thing known relatively less
distinct. With each prolongation of the scheme in the time-direction,
the summit of the curve of section would come further towards the end
of the sentence. If we make a solid wooden frame with the sentence
written on its front, and the time-scale on one of its sides, if
we spread flatly a sheet of India rubber over its top, on which
rectangular co-ordinates are painted, and slide a smooth ball under
the rubber in the direction from 0 to 'yesterday,' the bulging of the
membrane along this diagonal at successive moments will symbolize the
changing of the thought's content in a way plain enough, after what
has been said, to call for no more explanation. Or to express it in
cerebral terms, it will show the relative intensities, at successive
moments, of the several nerve-processes to which the various parts of
the thought-object correspond.

       *       *       *       *       *

The last peculiarity of consciousness to which attention is to be drawn
in this first rough description of its stream is that

5) _It is always interested more in one part of its object than in
another, and welcomes and rejects, or chooses, all the while it thinks._


The phenomena of selective attention and of deliberative will are
of course patent examples of this choosing activity. But few of us
are aware how incessantly it is at work in operations not ordinarily
called by these names. Accentuation and Emphasis are present in
every perception we have. We find it quite impossible to disperse
our attention impartially over a number of impressions. A monotonous
succession of sonorous strokes is broken up into rhythms, now of
one sort, now of another, by the different accent which we place on
different strokes. The simplest of these rhythms is the double one,
tick-tóck, tick-tóck, tick-tóck. Dots dispersed on a surface are
perceived in rows and groups. Lines separate into diverse figures. The
ubiquity of the distinctions, _this_ and _that, here_ and _there, now_
and _then_, in our minds is the result of our laying the same selective
emphasis on parts of place and time.

But we do far more than emphasize things, and unite some, and keep
others apart. We actually _ignore_ most of the things before us. Let me
briefly show how this goes on.

To begin at the bottom, what are our very senses themselves but
organs of selection? Out of the infinite chaos of movements, of which
physics teaches us that the outer world consists, each sense-organ
picks out those which fall within certain limits of velocity. To
these it responds, but ignores the rest as completely as if they did
not exist. It thus accentuates particular movements in a manner for
which objectively there seems no valid ground; for, as Lange says,
there is no reason whatever to think that the gap in Nature between
the highest sound-waves and the lowest heat-waves is an abrupt break
like that of our sensations; or that the difference between violet
and ultra-violet rays has anything like the objective importance
subjectively represented by that between light and darkness. Out of
what is in itself an undistinguishable, swarming _continuum_, devoid of
distinction or emphasis, our senses make for us, by attending to this
motion and ignoring that, a world full of contrasts, of sharp accents,
of abrupt changes, of picturesque light and shade.

If the sensations we receive from a given organ have their causes thus
picked out for us by the conformation of the organ's termination,
Attention, on the other hand, out of all the sensations yielded,
picks out certain ones as worthy of its notice and suppresses all the
rest. Helmholtz's work on Optics is little more than a study of those
visual sensations of which common men never become aware--blind spots,
_muscæ volitantes_, after-images, irradiation, chromatic fringes,
marginal changes of color, double images, astigmatism, movements of
accommodation and convergence, retinal rivalry, and more besides. We do
not even know without special training on which of our eyes an image
falls. So habitually ignorant are most men of this that one may be
blind for years of a single eye and never know the fact.

Helmholtz says that we notice only those sensations which are signs to
us of _things_. But what are things? Nothing, as we shall abundantly
see, but special groups of sensible qualities, which happen practically
or æsthetically to interest us, to which we therefore give substantive
names, and which we exalt to this exclusive status of independence
and dignity. But in itself, apart from my interest, a particular
dust-wreath on a windy day is just as much of an individual thing, and
just as much or as little deserves an individual name, as my own body
does.

And then, among the sensations we get from each separate thing,
what happens? The mind selects again. It chooses certain of the
sensations to represent the thing most _truly_, and considers the
rest as its appearances, modified by the conditions of the moment.
Thus my table-top is named _square_, after but one of an infinite
number of retinal sensations which it yields, the rest of them being
sensations of two acute and two obtuse angles; but I call the latter
_perspective_ views, and the four right angles the _true_ form of the
table, and erect the attribute squareness; into the table's essence,
for æsthetic reasons of my own. In like manner, the real form of the
circle is deemed to be the sensation it gives when the line of vision
is perpendicular to its centre--all its other sensations are signs of
this sensation. The real sound of the cannon is the sensation it makes
when the ear is close by. The real color of the brick is the sensation
it gives when the eye looks squarely at it from a near point, out of
the sunshine and yet not in the gloom; under other circumstances it
gives us other color-sensations which are but signs of this--we then
see it looks pinker or blacker than it really is. The reader knows
no object which he does not represent to himself by preference as in
some typical attitude, of some normal size, at some characteristic
distance, of some standard tint, etc., etc. But all these essential
characteristics, which together form for us the genuine objectivity
of the thing and are contrasted with what we call the subjective
sensations it may yield us at a given moment, are mere sensations
like the latter. The mind chooses to suit itself, and decides what
particular sensation shall be held more real and valid than all the
rest.

Thus perception involves a twofold choice. Out of all present
sensations, we notice mainly such as are significant of absent ones;
and out of all the absent associates which these suggest, we again pick
out a very few to stand for the objective reality _par excellence_. We
could have no more exquisite example of selective industry.

That industry goes on to deal with the things thus given in perception.
A man's empirical thought depends on the things he has experienced,
but what these shall be is to a large extent determined by his habits
of attention. A thing may be present to him a thousand times, but if
he persistently fails to notice it, it cannot be said to enter into
his experience. We are all seeing flies, moths, and beetles by the
thousand, but to whom, save an entomologist, do they say anything
distinct? On the other hand, a thing met only once in a lifetime may
leave an indelible experience in the memory. Let four men make a tour
in Europe. One will bring home only picturesque impressions--costumes
and colors, parks and views and works of architecture, pictures and
statues. To another all this will be non-existent; and distances
and prices, populations and drainage-arrangements, door- and
window-fastenings, and other useful statistics will take their place.
A third will give a rich account of the theatres, restaurants, and
public balls, and naught beside; whilst the fourth will perhaps have
been so wrapped in his own subjective broodings as to tell little more
than a few names of places through which he passed. Each has selected,
out of the same mass of presented objects, those which suited his
private interest and has made his experience thereby.

If, now, leaving the empirical combination of objects, we ask how the
mind proceeds _rationally_ to connect them, we find selection again
to be omnipotent. In a future chapter we shall see that all Reasoning
depends on the ability of the mind to break up the totality of the
phenomenon reasoned about, into parts, and to pick out from among these
the particular one which, in our given emergency, may lead to the
proper conclusion. Another predicament will need another conclusion,
and require another element to be picked out. The man of genius is he
who will always stick in his bill at the right point, and bring it
out with the right element--'reason' if the emergency be theoretical,
'means' if it be practical--transfixed upon it. I here confine myself
to this brief statement, but it may suffice to show that Reasoning is
but another form of the selective activity of the mind.

If now we pass to its æsthetic department, our law is still more
obvious. The artist notoriously selects his items, rejecting all
tones, colors, shapes, which do not harmonize with each other and with
the main purpose of his work. That unity, harmony, 'convergence of
characters,' as M. Taine calls it, which gives to works of art their
superiority over works of nature, is wholly due to _elimination_. Any
natural subject will do, if the artist has wit enough to pounce upon
some one feature of it as characteristic, and suppress all merely
accidental items which do not harmonize with this.

Ascending still higher, we reach the plane of Ethics, where choice
reigns notoriously supreme. An act has no ethical quality whatever
unless it be chosen out of several all equally possible. To sustain the
arguments for the good course and keep them ever before us, to stifle
our longing for more flowery ways, to keep the foot unflinchingly
on the arduous path, these are characteristic ethical energies. But
more than these; for these but deal with the means of compassing
interests already felt by the man to be supreme. The ethical energy
_par excellence_ has to go farther and choose which _interest_ out of
several, equally coercive, shall become supreme. The issue here is of
the utmost pregnancy, for it decides a man's entire career. When he
debates, Shall I commit this crime? choose that profession? accept that
office, or marry this fortune?--his choice really lies between one of
several equally possible future Characters. What he shall _become_ is
fixed by the conduct of this moment. Schopenhauer, who enforces his
determinism by the argument that with a given fixed character only one
reaction is possible under given circumstances, forgets that, in these
critical ethical moments, what consciously _seems_ to be in question
is the complexion of the character itself. The problem with the man is
less what act he shall now choose to do, than what being he shall now
resolve to become.

Looking back, then, over this review, we see that the mind is at every
stage a theatre of simultaneous possibilities. Consciousness consists
in the comparison of these with each other, the selection of some, and
the suppression of the rest by the reinforcing and inhibiting agency of
attention. The highest and most elaborated mental products are filtered
from the data chosen by the faculty next beneath, out of the mass
offered by the faculty below that, which mass in turn was sifted from
a still larger amount of yet simpler material, and so on. The mind, in
short, works on the data it receives very much as a sculptor works on
his block of stone. In a sense the statue stood there from eternity.
But there were a thousand different ones beside it, and the sculptor
alone is to thank for having extricated this one from the rest. Just so
the world of each of us, howsoever different our several views of it
may be, all lay embedded in the primordial chaos of sensations, which
gave the mere _matter_ to the thought of all of us indifferently. We
may, if we like, by our reasonings unwind things back to that black
and jointless continuity of space and moving clouds of swarming atoms
which science calls the only real world. But all the while the world
_we_ feel and live in will be that which our ancestors and we, by
slowly cumulative strokes of choice, have extricated out of this, like
sculptors, by simply rejecting certain portions of the given stuff.
Other sculptors, other statues from the same stone! Other minds, other
worlds from the same monotonous and inexpressive chaos! My world is but
one in a million alike embedded, alike real to those who may abstract
them. How different must be the worlds in the consciousness of ant,
cuttle-fish, or crab!

       *       *       *       *       *

But in my mind and your mind the rejected portions and the selected
portions of the original world-stuff are to a great extent the same.
The human race as a whole largely agrees as to what it shall notice and
name, and what not. And among the noticed parts we select in much the
same way for accentuation and preference or subordination and dislike.
There is, however, one entirely extraordinary case in which no two
men ever are known to choose alike. One great splitting of the whole
universe into two halves is made by each of us; and for each of us
almost all of the interest attaches to one of the halves; but we all
draw the line of division between them in a different place. When I
say that we all call the two halves by the same; names, and that those
names are '_me_' and '_not-me_' respectively, it will at once be seen
what I mean. The altogether unique kind of interest which each human
mind feels in those parts of creation which it can call _me_ or _mine_
may be a moral riddle, but it is a fundamental psychological fact.
No mind can take the same interest in his neighbor's _me_ as in his
own. The neighbor's me falls together with all the rest of things in
one foreign mass, against which his own _me_ stands out in startling
relief. Even the trodden worm, as Lotze somewhere says, contrasts his
own suffering self with the whole remaining universe, though he have no
clear conception either of himself or of what the universe may be. He
is for me a mere part of the world; for him it is I who am the mere
part. Each of us dichotomizes the Kosmos in a different place.

Descending now to finer work than this first general sketch, let
us in the next chapter try to trace the psychology of this fact of
self-consciousness to which we have thus once more been led.


FOOTNOTES:

[215] A good deal of this chapter is reprinted from an article 'On some
Omissions of Introspective Psychology' which appeared in 'Mind' for
January 1884.

[216] B. P. Bowne: Metaphysics, p. 362.

[217] L'Automatisme Psychologique, p. 318.

[218] Cf. A. Constans: Relation sur une Épidémie d'hystéro-démonopathie
en 1861. 2me ed. Paris, 1863.--Chiap e Franzolin: L'Epidemia
d'istero-demonopatie in Verzegnis. Reggio, 1879.--See also J. Kerner's
little work: Nachricht von dem Vorkommen des Besessenseins. 1836.

[219] For the Physiology of this compare the chapter on the Will.

[220] _Loc. cit._ p. 316.

[221] The Philosophy of Reflection, i, 248, 290.

[222] Populäre Wissenschaftliche Vorträge, Drittes Heft (1876). p. 72.

[223] Fick, in L. Hermann's Handb. d. Physiol., Bd. iii, Th. i, p. 225.

[224] It need of course not follow, because a total brain-state does
not recur, that no _point_ of the brain can ever be twice in the same
condition. That would be as improbable a consequence as that in the sea
a wave-crest should never come twice at the same point of space. What
can hardly come twice is an identical _combination_ of wave-forms all
with their crests and hollows reoccupying identical places. For such a
total combination as this is the analogue of the brain-state to which
our actual consciousness at any moment is due.

[225] The accurate registration of the 'how long' is still a little
mysterious.

[226] Cf. Brentano; Psychologie, vol. i, pp. 219-20. Altogether this
chapter of Brentano's on the Unity of Consciousness is as good as
anything with which I am acquainted.

[227] Honor to whom honor is due! The most explicit acknowledgment I
have anywhere found of all this is in a buried and forgotten paper by
the Rev. Jas. Wills, on 'Accidental Association,' in the Transactions
of the Royal Irish Academy, vol xxi, part i (1846). Mr. Wills writes:

"At every instant of conscious thought there is a certain sum of
perceptions, or reflections, or both together, present, and together
constituting one whole state of apprehension. Of this some definite
portion may be far more distinct than all the rest; and the rest be in
consequence proportionally vague, even to the limit of obliteration.
But still, within this limit, the most dim shade of perception enters
into, and in some infinitesimal degree modifies, the whole existing
state. This state will thus be in some way modified by any sensation
or emotion, or act of distinct attention, that may give prominence to
any part of it; so that the actual result is capable of the utmost
variation, according to the person or the occasion.... To any portion
of the entire scope here described there may be a special direction of
the attention, and this special direction is recognized as strictly
what is _recognized_ as the idea present to the mind. This idea is
evidently not commensurate with the entire state of apprehension,
and much perplexity has arisen from not observing this fact. However
deeply we may suppose the attention to be engaged by any thought,
any considerable alteration of the surrounding phenomena would still
be perceived; the most abstruse demonstration in this room would
not prevent a listener, however absorbed, from noticing the sudden
extinction of the lights. Our mental states have always an _essential
unity_, such that each state of apprehension, however variously
compounded, is a single whole, of which every component is, therefore,
strictly apprehended (so far as it is apprehended) as a part. Such
is the elementary basis from which all our intellectual operations
commence."

[228] Compare the charming passage in Taine on Intelligence (N. Y.
ed.), i, 83-4.

[229] E.g.: "The stream of thought is not a continuous current, but a
series of distinct ideas, more or less rapid in their succession; the
rapidity being measurable by the number that pass through the mind in a
given time." (Bain: E. and W., p. 29.)

[230] Few writers have admitted that we cognize relations through
feeling. The intellectualists have explicitly denied the possibility of
such a thing--e.g., Prof. T. H. Green ('Mind,' vol. vii, p. 28): "No
feeling, as such or as felt, is [of?] a relation.... Even a relation
between feelings is not itself a feeling or felt." On the other hand,
the sensationists have either smuggled in the cognition without giving
any account of it, or have denied the relations to be cognized, or
even to exist, at all. A few honorable exceptions, however, deserve
to be named among the sensationists. Destutt de Tracy, Laromiguière,
Cardaillac, Brown, and finally Spencer, have explicitly contended for
feelings of relation, consubstantial with our feelings or thoughts
of the terms 'between' which they obtain. Thus Destutt de Tracy says
(Éléments d'Idéologie, T. Ier, chap. iv): "The faculty of judgment
is itself a sort of sensibility, for it is the faculty of feeling
the relations among our ideas; and to feel relations is to feel."
Laromiguière writes (Leçons de Philosophie, IIme Partie, 3me Leçon):

"There is no one whose intelligence does not embrace simultaneously
many ideas, more or less distinct, more or less confused. Now, when
we have many ideas at once, a peculiar feeling arises in us: we feel,
among these ideas, resemblances, differences, relations. Let us call
this mode of feeling, common to us all, the feeling of relation,
or relation-feeling (_sentiment-rapport_). One sees immediately
that these relation-feelings, resulting from the propinquity of
ideas, must be infinitely more numerous than the sensation-feelings
(_sentiments-sensations_) or the feelings we have of the action of
our faculties. The slightest knowledge of the mathematical theory of
combinations will prove this.... _Ideas_ of relation originate in
feelings of relation. They are the effect of our comparing them and
reasoning about them."

Similarly, de Cardaillac (Études Élémentaires de Philosophie, Section
i, chap. vii):

"By a natural consequence, we are led to suppose that at the same time
that we have several sensations or several ideas in the mind, we feel
the relations which exist between these sensations, and the relations
which exist between these ideas.... If the feeling of relations exists
in us,... it is necessarily the most varied and the most fertile of
all human feelings: 1°, the most varied, because, relations being more
numerous than beings, the feelings of relation must be in the same
proportion more numerous than the sensations whose presence gives rise
to their formation; 2°, the most fertile, for the relative ideas of
which the feeling-of-relation is the source ... are more important
than absolute ideas, if such exist.... If we interrogate common
speech, we find the feeling of relation expressed there in a thousand
different ways. If it is easy to seize a relation, we say that it is
_sensible_, to distinguish it from one which, because its terms are
too remote, cannot be as quickly perceived. A sensible difference,
or resemblance.... What is taste in the arts, in intellectual
productions? What but the feeling of those relations among the parts
which constitutes their merit?... Did we not feel relations we should
never attain to true knowledge,... for almost all our knowledge is of
relations.... We never have an isolated sensation;... we are therefore
never without the feeling of relation.... An _object_ strikes our
senses; we see in it only a sensation.... The relative is so near the
absolute, the relation-feeling so near the sensation-feeling, the two
are so intimately fused in the composition of the object, that the
relation appears to us as part of the sensation itself. It is doubtless
to this sort of fusion between sensations and feelings of relation that
the silence of metaphysicians as to the latter is due; and it is for
the same reason that they have obstinately persisted in asking from
sensation alone those ideas of relation which it was powerless to give."

Dr. Thomas Brown writes (Lectures, xlv, _init._): "There is an
extensive order of our feelings which involve this notion of relation,
and which consist indeed in the mere perception of a relation of some
sort.... Whether the relation be of two or of many external objects, or
of two or many affections of the mind, the feeling of this relation ...
is what I term a relative suggestion; that phrase being the simplest
which it is possible to employ, for expressing, without any theory, the
mere fact of the rise of certain feelings of relation, after certain
other feelings which precede them; and therefore, as involving no
particular theory, and simply expressive of an undoubted fact.... That
the feelings of relation are states of the mind essentially different
from our simple perceptions, or conceptions of the objects,... that
they are not what Condillac terms _transformed sensations_, I proved
in a former lecture, when I combated the excessive simplification of
that ingenious but not very accurate philosopher. There is an original
tendency or susceptibility of the mind, by which, on perceiving
together different objects, we are instantly, without the intervention
of any other mental process, sensible of their relation in certain
respects, as truly as there is an original tendency or susceptibility
by which, when external objects are present and have produced a certain
affection of our sensorial organ, we are instantly affected with the
primary elementary feelings of perception; and, I may add, that as
our sensations or perceptions are of various species, so are there
various species of relations;--the number of relations, indeed, even of
external things, being almost infinite, while the number of perceptions
is, necessarily, limited by that of the objects which have the power of
producing some affection of our organs of sensation.... Without that
susceptibility of the mind by which it has the feeling of relation, our
consciousness would be as truly limited to a single point, as our body
would become, were it possible to fetter it to a single atom."

Mr. Spencer is even more explicit. His philosophy is crude in that he
seems to suppose that it is only in transitive states that outward
relations are known; whereas in truth space-relations, relations
of contrast, etc., are felt along with their terms, in substantive
states as well as in transitive states, as we shall abundantly see.
Nevertheless Mr. Spencer's passage is so clear that it also deserves to
be quoted in full (Principles of Psychology, § 65):

"The proximate components of Mind are of two broadly-contrasted
kinds--Feelings and the relations between feelings. Among the members
of each group there exist multitudinous unlikenesses, many of which are
extremely strong; but such unlikenesses are small compared with those
which distinguish members of the one group from members of the other.
Let us, in the first place, consider what are the characters which
all Feelings have in common, and what are the characters which all
Relations between feelings have in common.

"Each feeling, as we here define it, is any portion of consciousness
which occupies a place sufficiently large to give it a perceivable
individuality; which has its individuality marked off from adjacent
portions of consciousness by qualitative contrasts; and which, when
introspectively contemplated, appears to be homogeneous. These are the
essentials. Obviously if, under introspection, a state of consciousness
is decomposable into unlike parts that exist either simultaneously or
successively, it is not one feeling but two or more. Obviously if it is
indistinguishable from an adjacent portion of consciousness, it forms
one with that portion--is not an individual feeling, but part of one.
And obviously if it does not occupy in consciousness an appreciable
area, or an appreciable duration, it cannot be known as a feeling.

"A Relation between feelings is, on the contrary, characterized by
occupying no appreciable part of consciousness. Take away the terms
it unites, and it disappears along with them; having no independent
place, no individuality of its own. It is true that, under an ultimate
analysis, what we call a relation proves to be itself a kind of
feeling--the momentary feeling accompanying the transition from
one conspicuous feeling to an adjacent conspicuous feeling. And it
is true that, notwithstanding its extreme brevity, its qualitative
character is appreciable; for relations are (as we shall hereafter
see) distinguishable from one another only by the unlikenesses of the
feelings which accompany the momentary transitions. Each relational
feeling may, in fact, be regarded as one of those nervous shocks
which we suspect to be the units of composition of feelings; and,
though instantaneous, it is known as of greater or less strength,
and as taking place with greater or less facility. But the contrast
between these relational feelings and what we ordinarily call feelings
is so strong that we must class them apart. Their extreme brevity,
their small variety, and their dependence on the terms they unite,
differentiate them in an unmistakable way.

"Perhaps it will be well to recognize more fully the truth that this
distinction cannot be absolute. Besides admitting that, as an element
of consciousness, a relation is a momentary feeling, we must also
admit that just as a relation can have no existence apart from the
feelings which form its terms, so a feeling can exist only by relations
to other feelings which limit it in space or time or both. Strictly
speaking, neither a feeling nor a relation is an independent element
of consciousness: there is throughout a dependence such that the
appreciable areas of consciousness occupied by feelings can no more
possess individualities apart from the relations which link them, than
these relations can possess individualities apart from the feelings
they link. The essential distinction between the two, then, appears
to be that whereas a relational feeling is a portion of consciousness
inseparable into parts, a feeling, ordinarily so called, is a portion
of consciousness that admits imaginary division into like parts which
are related to one another in sequence or coexistence. A feeling proper
is either made up of like parts that occupy time, or it is made up of
like parts that occupy space, or both. In any case, a feeling proper
is an aggregate of related like parts, while a relational feeling is
undecomposable. And this is exactly the contrast between the two which
must result if, as we have inferred, feelings are composed of units of
feelings, or shocks."

[231] M. Paulhan (Revue Philosophique, xx, 455-6), after speaking
of the faint mental images of objects and emotions, says: "We find
other vaguer states still, upon which attention seldom rests, except
in persons who by nature or profession are addicted to internal
observation. It is even difficult to name them precisely, for they
are little known and not classed; but we may cite as an example of
them that peculiar impression which we feel when, strongly preoccupied
by a certain subject, we nevertheless are engaged with, and have our
attention almost completely absorbed by, matters quite disconnected
therewithal. We do not then exactly think of the object of our
preoccupation; we do not represent it in a clear manner; and yet our
mind is not as it would be without this preoccupation. Its object,
absent from consciousness, is nevertheless represented there by a
peculiar unmistakable impression, which often persists long and is a
strong feeling, although so obscure for our intelligence." "A mental
sign of the kind is the unfavorable disposition left in our mind
towards an individual by painful incidents erewhile experienced and
now perhaps forgotten. The sign remains, but is not understood; its
definite meaning is lost." (P. 458.)

[232] Mozart describes thus his manner of composing: First bits and
crumbs of the piece come and gradually join together in his mind;
then the soul getting warmed to the work, the thing grows more and
more, "and I spread it out broader and clearer, and at last it gets
almost finished in my head, even when it is a long piece, so that I
can see the whole of it at a single glance in my mind, as if it were
a beautiful painting or a handsome human being; in which way I do not
hear it in my imagination at all as a succession--the way it must
come later--but all at once, as it were. If is a rare feast! All the
inventing and making goes on in me as in a beautiful strong dream. But
the best of all is the _hearing of it all at once_."

[233] Mental Physiology, § 236. Dr. Carpenter's explanation differs
materially from that given in the text.

[234] Cf. also S. Stricker: Vorlesungen über allg. u. exp. Pathologie
(1879), pp. 462-3, 501, 547; Romanes: Origin of Human Faculty, p.
82. It is so hard to make one's self clear that I may advert to a
misunderstanding of my views by the late Prof. Thos. Maguire of Dublin
(Lectures on Philosophy, 1885). This author considers that by the
'fringe' I mean some sort of psychic material by which sensations in
themselves separate are made to cohere together, and wittily says that
I ought to "see that uniting sensations by their 'fringes' is more
vague than to construct the universe out of oysters by platting their
beards" (p. 211). But the fringe, as I use the word, means nothing like
this; it is part of the _object cognized_,--substantive _qualities_
and _things_ appearing to the mind in a _fringe of relations_.
Some parts--the transitive parts--of our stream of thought cognize
the relations rather than the things; but both the transitive and
the substantive parts form one continuous stream, with no discrete
'sensations' in it such as Prof. Maguire supposes, and supposes me to
suppose, to be there.

[235] George Campbell: Philosophy of Rhetoric, book ii, chap. vii.

[236] Substantialism or Philosophy of Knowledge, by 'Jean Story' (1879).

[237] M. G. Tarde, quoting (in Delbœuf, Le Sommeil et les Rêves (1885),
p. 226) some nonsense-verses from a dream, says they show "how prosodic
forms may subsist in a mind from which logical rules are effaced....
I was able, in dreaming, to preserve the faculty of finding two words
which rhymed, to appreciate the rhyme, to fill up the verse as it first
presented itself with other words which, added, gave the right number
of syllables, and yet I was ignorant of the sense of the words....
Thus we have the extraordinary fact that the words called each other
up, without calling up their sense.... Even when awake, it is more
difficult to ascend to the meaning of a word than to pass from one word
to another; or to put it otherwise, _it is harder to be a thinker than
to be a rhetorician_, and on the whole nothing is commoner than trains
of words not understood."

[238] We think it odd that young children should listen with such rapt
attention to the reading of stories expressed in words half of which
they do not understand, and of none of which they ask the meaning. But
their thinking is in form just what ours is when it is rapid. Both
of us make flying leaps over large portions of the sentences uttered
and we give attention only to substantive starting points, turning
points, and conclusions here and there. All the rest, 'substantive' and
separately intelligible as it may _potentially_ be, actually serves
only as so much transitive material. It is _internodal_ consciousness,
giving us the sense of continuity, but having no significance apart
from its mere gap-filling function. The children probably feel no gap
when through a lot of unintelligible words they are swiftly carried to
a familiar and intelligible terminus.

[239] Not literally _heard_, of course. Deaf mutes are quick to
perceive shocks and jars that can be felt, even when so slight as to be
unnoticed by those who can hear.

[240] Quoted by Samuel Porter: 'Is Thought possible without Language?'
in Princeton Review, 57th year, pp. 108-12 (Jan. 1881?). Cf. also
W. W. Ireland: The Blot upon the Brain (1886), Paper x, part ii;
G. J. Romanes: Mental Evolution in Man, pp. 81-83, and references
therein made. Prof. Max Müller gives a very complete history of this
controversy in pp. 30-64 of his 'Science of Thought' (1887). His own
view is that Thought and Speech are inseparable; but under speech he
includes any conceivable sort of symbolism or even mental imagery, and
he makes no allowance for the wordless summary glimpses which we have
of systems of relation and direction.

[241] Problems of Life and Mind, 3d Series, Problem iv, chapter 5.
Compare also Victor Egger: La Parole Intérieure (Paris, 1881), chap. vi.

[242] If but one person sees an apparition we consider it his private
hallucination. If more than one, we begin to think it may be a real
external presence.

[243] Revue Philosophique, vol. xxi, p. 671.

[244] Quoted from the Therapeutic Gazette, by the N. Y. Semi-weekly
Evening Post for Nov. 2, 1886.

[245] In half-stunned states self-consciousness may lapse. A friend
writes me: "We were driving back from ---- in a wagonette. The door
flew open and X., alias 'Baldy,' fell out on the road. We pulled up at
once, and then he said, 'Did anybody fall out?' or 'Who fell out?'--I
don't exactly remember the words. When told that Baldy fell out, he
said, 'Did Baldy fall out? Poor Baldy!'"

[246] Kant originated this view. I subjoin a few English statements of
it. J. Ferrier, Institutes of Metaphysic, Proposition i: "Along with
whatever any intelligence knows it must, as the ground or condition
of its knowledge, have some knowledge of itself." Sir Wm. Hamilton,
Discussions, p. 47: "We know, and we know that we know,--these
propositions, logically distinct, are really identical; each implies
the other.... So true is the scholastic brocard: _non sentimus nisi
sentiamus nos sentire_." H. L. Mansel, Metaphysics, p. 58: "Whatever
variety of materials may exist within reach of my mind, I can become
conscious of them only by recognizing them as mine.... Relation to
the conscious self is thus the permanent and universal feature which
every state of consciousness as such must exhibit." T. H. Green,
Introduction to Hume, p. 12: "A consciousness by the man ... of
himself, in negative relation to the thing that is his object, and this
consciousness must be taken to go along with the perceptive act itself.
Not less than this indeed can be involved in any act that is to be the
beginning of knowledge at all. It is the minimum of possible thought or
intelligence."

[247] Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, Lecture 45.

[248] Instead of saying _to our feeling only_, he should have said, to
the _object_ only.

[249] "There can be no difficulty in admitting that association does
form the ideas of an indefinite number of individuals into one complex
idea; because it is an acknowledged fact. Have we not the idea of an
army? And is not that precisely the ideas of an indefinite number of
men formed into one idea?" (Jas. Mill's Analysis of the Human Mind (J.
S. Mill's Edition), vol. i, p. 264.)

[250] For their arguments, see above.

[251] I know there are readers whom nothing can convince that the
thought of a complex object has not as many parts as are discriminated
in the object itself. Well, then, let the word parts pass. Only
observe that these parts are not the separate 'ideas' of traditional
psychology. No one of them can live out of that particular thought, any
more than my head can live off of my particular shoulders. In a sense a
soap-bubble has parts; it is a sum of juxtaposed spherical triangles.
But these triangles are not separate realities; neither are the 'parts'
of the thought separate realities. Touch the bubble and the triangles
are no more. Dismiss the thought and out go its parts. You can no more
make a new thought out of 'ideas' that have once served than you can
make a new bubble out of old triangles Each bubble, each thought, is a
fresh organic unity, _sui generis_.

[252] In his work, La Parole Intérieure (Paris, 1881), especially
chapters vi and vii.

[253] Page 301.

[254] Page 218. To prove this point, M. Egger appeals to the fact that
we often hear some one speak whilst our mind is preoccupied, but do
not understand him until some moments afterwards, when we suddenly
'realize' what he meant. Also to our digging out the meaning of a
sentence in an unfamiliar tongue, where the words are present to us
long before the idea is taken in. In these special cases the word
does indeed precede the idea. The idea, on the contrary, precedes
the word whenever we try to express ourselves with effort, as in a
foreign tongue, or in an unusual field of intellectual invention. Both
sets of cases, however, are exceptional, and M. Egger would probably
himself admit, on reflection, that in the former class there is some
sort of a verbal suffusion, however evanescent, of the idea, when it
is grasped--we hear the echo of the words as we catch their meaning.
And he would probably admit that in the second class of cases the idea
persists after the words that came with so much effort are found. In
normal cases the simultaneity, as he admits, is obviously there.

[255] A good way to get the words and the sense separately is to
inwardly articulate word for word the discourse of another. One then
finds that the meaning will often come to the mind in pulses, after
clauses or sentences are finished.

[256] The nearest approach (with which I am acquainted) to the doctrine
set forth here is in O. Liebmaun's Zur Analysis der Wirklichkeit, pp.
427-438.




