CHAPTER IX.[215]

THE STREAM OF THOUGHT.


We now begin our study of the mind from within. Most books start with
sensations, as the simplest mental facts, and proceed synthetically,
constructing each higher stage from those below it. But this is
abandoning the empirical method of investigation. No one ever had a
simple sensation by itself. Consciousness, from our natal day, is of a
teeming multiplicity of objects and relations, and what we call simple
sensations are results of discriminative attention, pushed often to a
very high degree. It is astonishing what havoc is wrought in psychology
by admitting at the outset apparently innocent suppositions, that
nevertheless contain a flaw. The bad consequences develop themselves
later on, and are irremediable, being woven through the whole texture
of the work. The notion that sensations, being the simplest things, are
the first things to take up in psychology is one of these suppositions.
The only thing which psychology has a right to postulate at the outset
is the fact of thinking itself, and that must first be taken up and
analyzed. If sensations then prove to be amongst the elements of the
thinking, we shall be no worse off as respects them than if we had
taken them for granted at the start.

_The first fact for us, then, as psychologists, is that thinking of
some sort goes on._ I use the word thinking, in accordance with what
was said on p. 186, for every form of consciousness indiscriminately.
If we could say in English 'it thinks,' as we say 'it rains 'or 'it
blows,' we should be stating the fact most simply and with the minimum
of assumption. As we cannot, we must simply say that _thought goes on_.


FIVE CHARACTERS IN THOUGHT.


How does it go on? We notice immediately five important characters in
the process, of which it shall be the duty of the present chapter to
treat in a general way:

1) Every thought tends to be part of a personal consciousness.

2) Within each personal consciousness thought is always changing.

3) Within each personal consciousness thought is sensibly continuous.

4) It always appears to deal with objects independent of itself.

5) It is interested in some parts of these objects to the exclusion
of others, and welcomes or rejects--_chooses_ from among them, in a
word--all the while.

In considering these five points successively, we shall have to plunge
_in medias res_ as regards our vocabulary, and use psychological terms
which can only be adequately defined in later chapters of the book.
But every one knows what the terms mean in a rough way; and it is only
in a rough way that we are now to take them. This chapter is like a
painter's first charcoal sketch upon his canvas, in which no niceties
appear.


1) _Thought tends to Personal Form._


When I say _every thought is part of a personal consciousness_,
'personal consciousness' is one of the terms in question. Its meaning
we know so long as no one asks us to define it, but to give an accurate
account of it is the most difficult of philosophic tasks. This task we
must confront in the next chapter; here a preliminary word will suffice.

In this room--this lecture-room, say--there are a multitude of
thoughts, yours and mine, some of which cohere mutually, and some not.
They are as little each-for-itself and reciprocally independent as
they are all-belonging-together. They are neither: no one of them is
separate, but each belongs with certain others and with none beside.
My thought belongs with my other thoughts, and your thought with your
other thoughts. Whether anywhere in the room there be a mere thought,
which is nobody's thought, we have no means of ascertaining, for we
have no experience of its like. The only states of consciousness that
we naturally deal with are found in personal consciousnesses, minds,
selves, concrete particular I's and you's.

Each of these minds keeps its own thoughts to itself. There is no
giving or bartering between them. No thought even comes into direct
_sight_ of a thought in another personal consciousness than its own.
Absolute insulation, irreducible pluralism, is the law. It seems as if
the elementary psychic fact were not _thought_ or _this thought_ or
_that thought_, but _my thought_, every thought being _owned_. Neither
contemporaneity, nor proximity in space, nor similarity of quality and
content are able to fuse thoughts together which are sundered by this
barrier of belonging to different personal minds. The breaches between
such thoughts are the most absolute breaches in nature. Everyone will
recognize this to be true, so long as the existence of _something_
corresponding to the term 'personal mind' is all that is insisted on,
without any particular view of its nature being implied. On these
terms the personal self rather than the thought might be treated as
the immediate datum in psychology. The universal conscious fact is
not 'feelings and thoughts exist,' but 'I think' and 'I feel.'[216]
No psychology, at any rate, can question the _existence_ of personal
selves. The worst a psychology can do is so to interpret the nature of
these selves as to rob them of their worth. A French writer, speaking
of our ideas, says somewhere in a fit of anti-spiritualistic excitement
that, misled by certain peculiarities which they display, we 'end by
personifying' the procession which they make,--such personification
being regarded by him as a great philosophic blunder on our part. It
could only be a blunder if the notion of personality meant something
essentially different from anything to be found in the mental
procession. But if that procession be itself the very 'original' of the
notion of personality, to personify it cannot possibly be wrong. It is
already personified. There are no marks of personality to be gathered
_aliunde_, and then found lacking in the train of thought. It has them
all already; so that to whatever farther analysis we may subject that
form of personal selfhood under which thoughts appear, it is, and must
remain, true that the thoughts which psychology studies do continually
tend to appear as parts of personal selves.

I say 'tend to appear' rather than 'appear,' on account of those facts
of sub-conscious personality, automatic writing, etc., of which we
studied a few in the last chapter. The buried feelings and thoughts
proved now to exist in hysterical anæsthetics, in recipients of
post-hypnotic suggestion, etc., themselves are parts of _secondary
personal selves_. These selves are for the most part very stupid and
contracted, and are cut off at ordinary times from communication with
the regular and normal self of the individual; but still they form
conscious unities, have continuous memories, speak, write, invent
distinct names for themselves, or adopt names that are suggested; and,
in short, are entirely worthy of that title of secondary personalities
which is now commonly given them. According to M. Janet these secondary
personalities are always abnormal, and result from the splitting of
what ought to be a single complete self into two parts, of which one
lurks in the background whilst the other appears on the surface as
the only self the man or woman has. For our present purpose it is
unimportant whether this account of the origin of secondary selves is
applicable to all possible cases of them or not, for it certainly is
true of a large number of them. Now although the _size_ of a secondary
self thus formed will depend on the number of thoughts that are
thus split-off from the main consciousness, the _form_ of it tends
to personality, and the later thoughts pertaining to it remember
the earlier ones and adopt them as their own. M. Janet caught the
actual moment of inspissation (so to speak) of one of these secondary
personalities in his anæsthetic somnambulist Lucie. He found that when
this young woman's attention was absorbed in conversation with a third
party, her anæsthetic hand would write simple answers to questions
whispered to her by himself. "Do you hear?" he asked. "_No,_" was the
unconsciously written reply. "But to answer you must hear." "_Yes,
quite so._" "Then how do you manage?" "_I don't know._" "There must be
some one who hears me." "_Yes._" "Who?" "_Someone other than Lucie._"
"Ah! another person. Shall we give her a name?" "_No._" "Yes, it will
be more convenient." "_Well, Adrienne, then._" "Once baptized, the
subconscious personage," M. Janet continues, "grows more definitely
outlined and displays better her psychological characters. In
particular she shows us that she is conscious of the feelings excluded
from the consciousness of the primary or normal personage. She it is
who tells us that I am pinching the arm or touching the little finger
in which Lucie for so long has had no tactile sensations."[217]

In other cases the adoption of the name by the secondary self is more
spontaneous. I have seen a number of incipient automatic writers
and mediums as yet imperfectly 'developed,' who immediately and of
their own accord write and speak in the name of departed spirits.
These may be public characters, as Mozart, Faraday, or real persons
formerly known to the subject, or altogether imaginary beings.
Without prejudicing the question of real 'spirit-control' in the more
developed sorts of trance-utterance, I incline to think that these
(often deplorably unintelligent) rudimentary utterances are the work
of an inferior fraction of the subject's own natural mind, set free
from control by the rest, and working after a set pattern fixed by the
prejudices of the social environment. In a spiritualistic community we
get optimistic messages, whilst in an ignorant Catholic village the
secondary personage calls itself by the name of a demon, and proffers
blasphemies and obscenities, instead of telling us how happy it is in
the summer-land.[218]

Beneath these tracts of thought, which, however rudimentary, are
still organized selves with a memory, habits, and sense of their own
identity, M. Janet thinks that the facts of catalepsy in hysteric
patients drive us to suppose that there are thoughts quite unorganized
and impersonal. A patient in cataleptic trance (which can be produced
artificially in certain hypnotized subjects) is without memory on
waking, and seems insensible and unconscious as long as the cataleptic
condition lasts. If, however, one raises the arm of such a subject it
stays in that position, and the whole body can thus be moulded like
wax under the hands of the operator, retaining for a considerable
time whatever attitude he communicates to it. In hysterics whose arm,
for example, is anæsthetic, the same thing may happen. The anæsthetic
arm may remain passively in positions which it is made to assume; or
if the hand be taken and made to hold a pencil and trace a certain
letter, it will continue tracing that letter indefinitely on the
paper. These acts, until recently, were supposed to be accompanied by
no consciousness at all: they were physiological reflexes. M. Janet
considers with much more plausibility that feeling escorts them.
The feeling is probably merely that of the position or movement of
the limb, and it produces no more than its natural effects when it
discharges into the motor centres which keep the position maintained,
or the movement incessantly renewed.[219] Such thoughts as these, says
M. Janet, "are known by _no one_, for disaggregated sensations reduced
to a state of mental dust are not synthetized in any personality."[220]
He admits, however, that these very same unutterably stupid thoughts
tend to develop memory,--the cataleptic ere long moves her arm at a
bare hint; so that they form no important exception to the law that all
thought tends to assume the form of personal consciousness.


2) _Thought is in Constant Change._


I do not mean necessarily that no one state of mind has any
duration--even if true, that would be hard to establish. The change
which I have more particularly in view is that which takes place in
sensible intervals of time; and the result on which I wish to lay
stress is this, that _no state once gone can recur and be identical
with what it was before_. Let us begin with Mr. Shadworth Hodgson's
description:

 "I go straight to the facts, without saying I go to perception, or
 sensation, or thought, or any special mode at all. What I find when I
 look at my consciousness at all is that what I cannot divest myself
 of, or not have in consciousness, if I have any consciousness at all,
 is a sequence of different feelings. I may shut my eyes and keep
 perfectly still, and try not to contribute anything of my own will;
 but whether I think or do not think, whether I perceive external
 things or not, I always have a succession of different feelings.
 Anything else that I may have also, of a more special character,
 comes in as parts of this succession, Not to have the succession of
 different feelings is not to be conscious at all.... The chain of
 consciousness is a sequence of _differents_."[221]

Such a description as this can awaken no possible protest from any
one. We all recognize as different great classes of our conscious
states. Now we are seeing, now hearing; now reasoning, now willing;
now recollecting, now expecting; now loving, now hating; and in a
hundred other ways we know our minds to be alternately engaged. But
all these are complex states. The aim of science is always to reduce
complexity to simplicity; and in psychological science we have the
celebrated 'theory of _ideas_' which, admitting the great difference
among each other of what may be called concrete conditions of mind,
seeks to show how this is all the resultant effect of variations in
the _combination_ of certain simple elements of consciousness that
always remain the same. These mental atoms or molecules are what
Locke called 'simple ideas.' Some of Locke's successors made out that
the only simple ideas were the sensations strictly so called. Which
ideas the simple ones may be does not, however, now concern us. It is
enough that certain philosophers have thought they could see under the
dissolving-view-appearance of the mind elementary facts of _any_ sort
that remained unchanged amid the flow.

And the view of these philosophers has been called little into
question, for our common experience seems at first sight to corroborate
it entirely. Are not the sensations we get from the same object, for
example, always the same? Does not the same piano-key, struck with
the same force, make us hear in the same way? Does not the same grass
give us the same feeling of green, the same sky the same feeling of
blue, and do we not get the same olfactory sensation no matter how many
times we put our nose to the same flask of cologne? It seems a piece
of metaphysical sophistry to suggest that we do not; and yet a close
attention to the matter shows that _there is no proof that the same
bodily sensation is ever got by us twice_.

_What is got twice is the same_ OBJECT. We hear the same _note_ over
and over again; we see the same _quality_ of green, or smell the same
objective perfume, or experience the same _species_ of pain. The
realities, concrete and abstract, physical and ideal, whose permanent
existence we believe in, seem to be constantly coming up again before
our thought, and lead us, in our carelessness, to suppose that our
'ideas' of them are the same ideas. When we come, some time later, to
the chapter on Perception, we shall see how inveterate is our habit
of not attending to sensations as subjective facts, but of simply
using them as stepping-stones to pass over to the recognition of the
realities whose presence they reveal. The grass out of the window
now looks to me of the same green in the sun as in the shade, and
yet a painter would have to paint one part of it dark brown, another
part bright yellow, to give its real, sensational effect. We take
no heed, as a rule, of the different way in which the same things
look and sound and smell at different distances and under different
circumstances. The sameness of the _things_ is what we are concerned
to ascertain; and any sensations that assure us of that will probably
be considered in a rough way to be the same with each other. This
is what makes off-hand testimony about the subjective identity of
different sensations well-nigh worthless as a proof of the fact. The
entire history of Sensation is a commentary on our inability to tell
whether two sensations received apart are exactly alike. What appeals
to our attention far more than the absolute quality or quantity of
a given sensation is its _ratio_ to whatever other sensations we may
have at the same time. When everything is dark a somewhat less dark
sensation makes us see an object white. Helmholtz calculates that the
white marble painted in a picture representing an architectural view by
moonlight is, when seen by daylight, from ten to twenty thousand times
brighter than the real moonlit marble would be.[222]

Such a difference as this could never have been _sensibly_ learned; it
had to be inferred from a series of indirect considerations. There are
facts which make us believe that our sensibility is altering all the
time, so that the same object cannot easily give us the same sensation
over again. The eye's sensibility to light is at its maximum when the
eye is first exposed, and blunts itself with surprising rapidity.
A long night's sleep will make it see things twice as brightly on
wakening, as simple rest by closure will make it see them later in
the day.[223] We feel things differently according as we are sleepy
or awake, hungry or full, fresh or tired; differently at night and
in the morning, differently in summer and in winter, and above all
things differently in childhood, manhood, and old age. Yet we never
doubt that our feelings reveal the same world, with the same sensible
qualities and the same sensible things occupying it. The difference
of the sensibility is shown best by the difference of our emotion
about the things from one age to another, or when we are in different
organic moods. What was bright and exciting becomes weary, flat, and
unprofitable. The bird's song is tedious, the breeze is mournful, the
sky is sad.

To these indirect presumptions that our sensations, following the
mutations of our capacity for feeling, are always undergoing an
essential change, must be added another presumption, based on what
must happen in the brain. Every sensation corresponds to some cerebral
action. For an identical sensation to recur it would have to occur the
second time _in an unmodified brain_. But as this, strictly speaking,
is a physiological impossibility, so is an unmodified feeling an
impossibility; for to every brain-modification, however small, must
correspond a change of equal amount in the feeling which the brain
subserves.

All this would be true if even sensations came to us pure and single
and not combined into 'things.' Even then we should have to confess
that, however we might in ordinary conversation speak of getting the
same sensation again, we never in strict theoretic accuracy could do
so; and that whatever was true of the river of life, of the river of
elementary feeling, it would certainly be true to say, like Heraclitus,
that we never descend twice into the same stream.

But if the assumption of 'simple ideas of sensation' recurring in
immutable shape is so easily shown to be baseless, how much more
baseless is the assumption of immutability in the larger masses of our
thought!

For there it is obvious and palpable that our state of mind is never
precisely the same. Every thought we have of a given fact is, strictly
speaking, unique, and only bears a resemblance of kind with our other
thoughts of the same fact. When the identical fact recurs, we _must_
think of it in a fresh manner, see it under a somewhat different
angle, apprehend it in different relations from those in which it
last appeared. And the thought by which we cognize it is the thought
of it-in-those-relations, a thought suffused with the consciousness
of all that dim context. Often we are ourselves struck at the strange
differences in our successive views of the same thing. We wonder how
we ever could have opined as we did last month about a certain matter.
We have outgrown the possibility of that state of mind, we know not
how. From one year to another we see things in new lights. What was
unreal has grown real, and what was exciting is insipid. The friends
we used to care the world for are shrunken to shadows; the women, once
so divine, the stars, the woods, and the waters, how now so dull and
common! the young girls that brought an aura of infinity, at present
hardly distinguishable existences; pictures so empty; and as for the
books, what _was_ there to find so mysteriously significant in Goethe,
or in John Mill so full of weight? Instead of all this, more zestful
than ever is the work, the work; and fuller and deeper the import of
common duties and of common goods.

But what here strikes us so forcibly on the flagrant scale exists on
every scale, down to the imperceptible transition from one hour's
outlook to that of the next. Experience is remoulding us every moment,
and our mental reaction on every given thing is really a resultant of
our experience of the whole world up to that date. The analogies of
brain-physiology must again be appealed to to corroborate our view.

Our earlier chapters have taught us to believe that, whilst we think,
our brain changes, and that, like the aurora borealis, its whole
internal equilibrium shifts with every pulse of change. The precise
nature of the shifting at a given moment is a product of many factors.
The accidental state of local nutrition or blood-supply may be among
them. But just as one of them certainly is the influence of outward
objects on the sense-organs during the moment, so is another certainly
the very special susceptibility in which the organ has been left at
that moment by all it has gone through in the past. Every brain-state
is partly determined by the nature of this entire past succession.
Alter the latter in any part, and the brain-state must be somewhat
different. Each present brain-state is a record in which the eye of
Omniscience might read all the foregone history of its owner. It is out
of the question, then, that any total brain-state should identically
recur. Something like it may recur; but to suppose _it_ to recur would
be equivalent to the absurd admission that all the states that had
intervened between its two appearances had been pure nonentities, and
that the organ after their passage was exactly as it was before. And
(to consider shorter periods) just as, in the senses, an impression
feels very differently according to what has preceded it; as one
color succeeding another is modified by the contrast, silence sounds
delicious after noise, and a note, when the scale is sung up, sounds
unlike itself when the scale is sung down; as the presence of certain
lines in a figure changes the apparent form of the other lines, and as
in music the whole æsthetic effect comes from the manner in which one
set of sounds alters our feeling of another; so, in thought, we must
admit that those portions of the brain that have just been maximally
excited retain a kind of soreness which is a condition of our present
consciousness, a codeterminant of how and what we now shall feel.[224]

Ever some tracts are waning in tension, some waxing, whilst others
actively discharge. The states of tension have as positive an influence
as any in determining the total condition, and in deciding what the
_psychosis_ shall be. All we know of submaximal nerve-irritations,
and of the summation of apparently ineffective stimuli, tends to show
that _no_ changes in the brain are physiologically ineffective, and
that presumably none are bare of psychological result. But as the
brain-tension shifts from one relative state of equilibrium to another,
like the gyrations of a kaleidoscope, now rapid and now slow, is it
likely that its faithful psychic concomitant is heavier-footed than
itself, and that it cannot match each one of the organ's irradiations
by a shifting inward iridescence of its own? But if it can do this, its
inward iridescences must be infinite, for the brain-redistributions are
in infinite variety. If so coarse a thing as a telephone-plate can be
made to thrill for years and never reduplicate its inward condition,
how much more must this be the case with the infinitely delicate brain?

I am sure that this concrete and total manner of regarding the mind's
changes is the only true manner, difficult as it may be to carry it out
in detail. If anything seems obscure about it, it will grow clearer as
we advance. Meanwhile, if it be true, it is certainly also true that
no two 'ideas' are ever exactly the same, which is the proposition we
started to prove. The proposition is more important theoretically than
it at first sight seems. For it makes it already impossible for us
to follow obediently in the footprints of either the Lockian or the
Herbartian school, schools which have had almost unlimited influence
in Germany and among ourselves. No doubt it is often _convenient_ to
formulate the mental facts in an atomistic sort of way, and to treat
the higher states of consciousness as if they were all built out of
unchanging simple ideas. It is convenient often to treat curves as
if they were composed of small straight lines, and electricity and
nerve-force as if they were fluids. But in the one case as in the
other we must never forget that we are talking symbolically, and that
there is nothing in nature to answer to our words. _A permanently
existing 'idea' or 'Vorstellung' which makes its appearance before the
footlights of consciousness at periodical intervals, is as mythological
an entity as the Jack of Spades._

What makes it convenient to use the mythological formulas is the whole
organization of speech, which, as was remarked a while ago, was not
made by psychologists, but by men who were as a rule only interested
in the facts their mental states revealed. They only spoke of their
states as _ideas of this or of that thing_. What wonder, then, that the
thought is most easily conceived under the law of the thing whose name
it bears! If the thing is composed of parts, then we suppose that the
thought of the thing must be composed of the thoughts of the parts.
If one part of the thing have appeared in the same thing or in other
things on former occasions, why then we must be having even now the
very same 'idea' of that part which was there on those occasions. If
the thing is simple, its thought is simple. If it is multitudinous,
it must require a multitude of thoughts to think it. If a succession,
only a succession of thoughts can know it. If permanent, its thought
is permanent. And so on _ad libitum_. What after all is so natural
as to assume that one object, called by one name, should be known
by one affection of the mind? But, if language must thus influence
us, the agglutinative languages, and even Greek and Latin with their
declensions, would be the better guides. Names did not appear in them
inalterable, but changed their shape to suit the context in which
they lay. It must have been easier then than now to conceive of the
same object as being thought of at different times in non-identical
conscious states.

This, too, will grow clearer as we proceed. Meanwhile a necessary
consequence of the belief in permanent self-identical psychic facts
that absent themselves and recur periodically is the Humian doctrine
that our thought is composed of separate independent parts and is not a
sensibly continuous stream. That this doctrine entirely misrepresents
the natural appearances is what I next shall try to show.


3) _Within each personal consciousness, thought is sensibly continuous._


I can only define 'continuous' as that which is without breach, crack,
or division. I have already said that the breach from one mind to
another is perhaps the greatest breach in nature. The only breaches
that can well be conceived to occur within the limits of a single
mind would either be _interruptions, time_-gaps during which the
consciousness went out altogether to come into existence again at a
later moment; or they would be breaks in the _quality_, or content, of
the thought, so abrupt that the segment that followed had no connection
whatever with the one that went before. The proposition that within
each personal consciousness thought feels continuous, means two things:

1. That even where there is a time-gap the consciousness after it feels
as if it belonged together with the consciousness before it, as another
part of the same self;

2. That the changes from one moment to another in the quality of the
consciousness are never absolutely abrupt.

The case of the time-gaps, as the simplest, shall be taken first. And
first of all a word about time-gaps of which the consciousness may not
be itself aware.

On page 200 we saw that such time-gaps existed, and that they might
be more numerous than is usually supposed. If the consciousness is
not aware of them, it cannot feel them as interruptions. In the
unconsciousness produced by nitrous oxide and other anæsthetics, in
that of epilepsy and fainting, the broken edges of the sentient life
may meet and merge over the gap, much as the feelings of space of the
opposite margins of the 'blind spot' meet and merge over that objective
interruption to the sensitiveness of the eye. Such consciousness as
this, whatever it be for the onlooking psychologist, is for itself
unbroken. It _feels_ unbroken; a waking day of it is sensibly a unit
as long as that day lasts, in the sense in which the hours themselves
are units, as having all their parts next each other, with no intrusive
alien substance between. To expect the consciousness to feel the
interruptions of its objective continuity as gaps, would be like
expecting the eye to feel a gap of silence because it does not hear, or
the ear to feel a gap of darkness because it does not see. So much for
the gaps that are unfelt.

With the felt gaps the case is different. On waking from sleep, we
usually know that we have been unconscious, and we often have an
accurate judgment of how long. The judgment here is certainly an
inference from sensible signs, and its ease is due to long practice
in the particular field.[225] The result of it, however, is that the
consciousness is, _for itself,_ not what it was in the former case, but
interrupted and discontinuous, in the mere sense of the words. But in
the other sense of continuity, the sense of the parts being inwardly
connected and belonging together because they are parts of a common
whole, the consciousness remains sensibly continuous and one. What now
is the common whole? The natural name for it is _myself, I,_ or _me_.

When Paul and Peter wake up in the same bed, and recognize that they
have been asleep, each one of them mentally reaches back and makes
connection with but _one_ of the two streams of thought which were
broken by the sleeping hours. As the current of an electrode buried
in the ground unerringly finds its way to its own similarly buried
mate, across no matter how much intervening earth; so Peter's present
instantly finds out Peter's past, and never by mistake knits itself
on to that of Paul. Paul's thought in turn is as little liable to
go astray. The past thought of Peter is appropriated by the present
Peter alone. He may have a _knowledge_, and a correct one too, of
what Paul's last drowsy states of mind were as he sank into sleep,
but it is an entirely different sort of knowledge from that which he
has of his own last states. He _remembers_ his own states, whilst
he only _conceives_ Paul's. Remembrance is like direct feeling; its
object is suffused with a warmth and intimacy to which no object of
mere conception ever attains. This quality of warmth and intimacy and
immediacy is what Peter's _present_ thought also possesses for itself.
So sure as this present is me, is mine, it says, so sure is anything
else that comes with the same warmth and intimacy and immediacy, me and
mine. What the qualities called warmth and intimacy may in themselves
be will have to be matter for future consideration. But whatever past
feelings appear with those qualities must be admitted to receive the
greeting of the present mental state, to be owned by it, and accepted
as belonging together with it in a common self. This community of
self is what the time-gap cannot break in twain, and is why a present
thought, although not ignorant of the time-gap, can still regard itself
as continuous with certain chosen portions of the past.

Consciousness, then, does not appear to itself chopped up in bits. Such
words as 'chain' or 'train' do not describe it fitly as it presents
itself in the first instance. It is nothing jointed; it flows. A
'river' or a 'stream' are the metaphors by which it is most naturally
described. _In talking of it hereafter, let us call it the stream of
thought, of consciousness, or of subjective life._

       *       *       *       *       *

But now there appears, even within the limits of the same self, and
between thoughts all of which alike have this same sense of belonging
together, a kind of jointing and separateness among the parts, of which
this statement seems to take no account. I refer to the breaks that
are produced by sudden _contrasts in the quality_ of the successive
segments of the stream of thought If the words 'chain' and 'train' had
no natural fitness in them, how came such words to be used at all? Does
not a loud explosion rend the consciousness upon which it abruptly
breaks, in twain? Does not every sudden shock, appearance of a new
object, or change in a sensation, create a real interruption, sensibly
felt as such, which cuts the conscious stream across at the moment at
which it appears? Do not such interruptions smite us every hour of our
lives, and have we the right, in their presence, still to call our
consciousness a continuous stream?

This objection is based partly on a confusion and partly on a
superficial introspective view.

The confusion is between the thoughts themselves, taken as subjective
facts, and the things of which they are aware. It is natural to make
this confusion, but easy to avoid it when once put on one's guard.
The things are discrete and discontinuous; they do pass before us in
a train or chain, making often explosive appearances and rending each
other in twain. But their comings and goings and contrasts no more
break the flow of the thought that thinks them than they break the
time and the space in which they lie. A silence may be broken by a
thunder-clap, and we may be so stunned and confused for a moment by the
shock as to give no instant account to ourselves of what has happened.
But that very confusion is a mental state, and a state that passes us
straight over from the silence to the sound. The transition between the
thought of one object and the thought of another is no more a break in
the _thought_ than a joint in a bamboo is a break in the wood. It is
a part of the _consciousness_ as much as the joint is a part of the
_bamboo_.

The superficial introspective view is the overlooking, even when
the things are contrasted with each other most violently, of the
large amount of affinity that may still remain between the thoughts
by whose means they are cognized. Into the awareness of the thunder
itself the awareness of the previous silence creeps and continues;
for what we hear when the thunder crashes is not thunder _pure_,
but thunder-breaking-upon-silence-and-contrasting-with-it.[226] Our
feeling of the same objective thunder, coming in this way, is quite
different from what it would be were the thunder a continuation of
previous thunder. The thunder itself we believe to abolish and exclude
the silence; but the _feeling_ of the thunder is also a feeling of
the silence as just gone; and it would be difficult to find in the
actual concrete consciousness of man a feeling so limited to the
present as not to have an inkling of anything that went before. Here,
again, language works against our perception of the truth. We name our
thoughts simply, each after its thing, as if each knew its own thing
and nothing else. What each really knows is clearly the thing it is
named for, with dimly perhaps a thousand other things. It ought to
be named after all of them, but it never is. Some of them are always
things known a moment ago more clearly; others are things to be known
more clearly a moment hence.[227] Our own bodily position, attitude,
condition, is one of the things of which _some_ awareness, however
inattentive, invariably accompanies the knowledge of whatever else
we know. We think; and as we think we feel our bodily selves as the
seat of the thinking. If the thinking be _our_ thinking, it must be
suffused through all its parts with that peculiar warmth and intimacy
that make it come as ours. Whether the warmth and intimacy be anything
more than the feeling of the same old body always there, is a matter
for the next chapter to decide. _Whatever_ the content of the ego may
be, it is habitually felt _with_ everything else by us humans, and must
form a _liaison_ between all the things of which we become successively
aware.[228]

On this gradualness in the changes of our mental content the principles
of nerve-action can throw some more light. When studying, in Chapter
III, the summation of nervous activities, we saw that no state of the
brain can be supposed instantly to die away. If a new state comes, the
inertia of the old state will still be there and modify the result
accordingly. Of course we cannot tell, in our ignorance, what in each
instance the modifications ought to be. The commonest modifications
in sense-perception are known as the phenomena of contrast. In
æsthetics they are the feelings of delight or displeasure which certain
particular orders in a series of impressions give. In thought, strictly
and narrowly so called, they are unquestionably that consciousness of
the _whence_ and the _whither_ that always accompanies its flows. If
recently the brain-tract _a_ was vividly excited, and then _b_, and now
vividly _c_, the total present consciousness is not produced simply
by _c_'s excitement, but also by the dying vibrations of _a_ and _b_
as well. If we want to represent the brain-process we must write it
thus: __{a}b^{c}_--three different processes coexisting, and correlated
with them a thought which is no one of the three thoughts which they
would have produced had each of them occurred alone. But whatever this
fourth thought may exactly be, it seems impossible that it should not
be something _like_ each of the three other thoughts whose tracts are
concerned in its production, though in a fast-waning phase.

It all goes back to what we said in another connection only a few
pages ago (p. 233). As the total neurosis changes, so does the total
psychosis change. But as the changes of neurosis are never absolutely
discontinuous, so must the successive psychoses shade gradually into
each other, although their _rate_ of change may be much faster at one
moment than at the next.

       *       *       *       *       *

This difference in the rate of change lies at the basis of a difference
of subjective states of which we ought immediately to speak. When
the rate is slow we are aware of the object of our thought in a
comparatively restful and stable way. When rapid, we are aware of
a passage, a relation, a transition _from_ it, or _between_ it and
something else. As we take, in fact, a general view of the wonderful
stream of our consciousness, what strikes us first is this different
pace of its parts. Like a bird's life, it seems to be made of an
alternation of flights and perchings. The rhythm of language expresses
this, where every thought is expressed in a sentence, and every
sentence closed by a period. The resting-places are usually occupied
by sensorial imaginations of some sort, whose peculiarity is that they
can be held before the mind for an indefinite time, and contemplated
without changing; the places of flight are filled with thoughts of
relations, static or dynamic, that for the most part obtain between the
matters contemplated in the periods of comparative rest.

_Let us call the resting-places the 'substantive parts,' and the
places of flight the 'transitive parts,' of the stream of thought._
It then appears that the main end of our thinking is at all times the
attainment of some other substantive part than the one from which we
have just been dislodged. And we may say that the main use of the
transitive parts is to lead us from one substantive conclusion to
another.

Now it is very difficult, introspectively, to see the transitive parts
for what they really are. If they are but flights to a conclusion,
stopping them to look at them before the conclusion is reached is
really annihilating them. Whilst if we wait till the conclusion _be_
reached, it so exceeds them in vigor and stability that it quite
eclipses and swallows them up in its glare. Let anyone try to cut a
thought across in the middle and get a look at its section, and he
will see how difficult the introspective observation of the transitive
tracts is. The rush of the thought is so headlong that it almost
always brings us up at the conclusion before we can arrest it. Or if
our purpose is nimble enough and we do arrest it, it ceases forthwith
to be itself. As a snow-flake crystal caught in the warm hand is no
longer a crystal but a drop, so, instead of catching the feeling of
relation moving to its term, we find we have caught some substantive
thing, usually the last word we were pronouncing, statically taken, and
with its function, tendency, and particular meaning in the sentence
quite evaporated. The attempt at introspective analysis in these cases
is in fact like seizing a spinning top to catch its motion, or trying
to turn up the gas quickly enough to see how the darkness looks. And
the challenge to _produce_ these psychoses, which is sure to be thrown
by doubting psychologists at anyone who contends for their existence,
is as unfair as Zeno's treatment of the advocates of motion, when,
asking them to point out in what place an arrow _is_ when it moves, he
argues the falsity of their thesis from their inability to make to so
preposterous a question an immediate reply.

The results of this introspective difficulty are baleful. If to hold
fast and observe the transitive parts of thought's stream be so
hard, then the great blunder to which all schools are liable must be
the failure to register them, and the undue emphasizing of the more
substantive parts of the stream. Were we not ourselves a moment since
in danger of ignoring any feeling transitive between the silence and
the thunder, and of treating their boundary as a sort of break in
the mind? Now such ignoring as this has historically worked in two
ways. One set of thinkers have been led by it to _Sensationalism_.
Unable to lay their hands on any coarse feelings corresponding to
the innumerable relations and forms of connection between the facts
of the world, finding no _named_ subjective modifications mirroring
such relations, they have for the most part denied that feelings of
relation exist, and many of them, like Hume, have gone so far as to
deny the reality of most relations _out_ of the mind as well as in it.
Substantive psychoses, sensations and their copies and derivatives,
juxtaposed like dominoes in a game, but really separate, everything
else verbal illusion,--such is the upshot of this view.[229] The
_Intellectualists_, on the other hand, unable to give up the reality
of relations _extra mentem_, but equally unable to point to any
distinct substantive feelings in which they were known, have made the
same admission that the feelings do not exist. But they have drawn
an opposite conclusion. The relations must be known, they say, in
something that is no feeling, no mental modification continuous and
consubstantial with the subjective tissue out of which sensations and
other substantive states are made. They are known, these relations,
by something that lies on an entirely different plane, by an _actus
purus_ of Thought, Intellect, or Reason, all written with capitals
and considered to mean something unutterably superior to any fact of
sensibility whatever.

But from our point of view both Intellectualists and Sensationalists
are wrong. If there be such things as feelings at all, _then so surely
as relations between objects exist in rerum naturâ, so surely, and more
surely, do feelings exist to which these relations are known_. There
is not a conjunction or a preposition, and hardly an adverbial phrase,
syntactic form, or inflection of voice, in human speech, that does
not express some shading or other of relation which we at some moment
actually feel to exist between the larger objects of our thought. If we
speak objectively, it is the real relations that appear revealed; if we
speak subjectively, it is the stream of consciousness that matches each
of them by an inward coloring of its own. In either case the relations
are numberless, and no existing language is capable of doing justice to
all their shades.

We ought to say a feeling of _and_, a feeling of _if_, a feeling of
_but_, and a feeling of _by_, quite as readily as we say a feeling of
_blue_ or a feeling of _cold_. Yet we do not: so inveterate has our
habit become of recognizing the existence of the substantive parts
alone, that language almost refuses to lend itself to any other use.
The Empiricists have always dwelt on its influence in making us suppose
that where we have a separate name, a separate thing must needs be
there to correspond with it; and they have rightly denied the existence
of the mob of abstract entities, principles, and forces, in whose favor
no other evidence than this could be brought up. But they have said
nothing of that obverse error, of which we said a word in Chapter VII,
(see p. 195), of supposing that where there is _no_ name no entity
can exist. All _dumb_ or anonymous psychic states have, owing to this
error, been coolly suppressed; or, if recognized at all, have been
named after the substantive perception they led to, as thoughts 'about'
this object or 'about' that, the stolid word _about_ engulfing all
their delicate idiosyncrasies in its monotonous sound. Thus the greater
and greater accentuation and isolation of the substantive parts have
continually gone on.

Once more take a look at the brain. We believe the brain to be an organ
whose internal equilibrium is always in a state of change,--the change
affecting every part. The pulses of change are doubtless more violent
in one place than in another, their rhythm more rapid at this time than
at that. As in a kaleidoscope revolving at a uniform rate, although
the figures are always rearranging themselves, there are instants
during which the transformation seems minute and interstitial and
almost absent, followed by others when it shoots with magical rapidity,
relatively stable forms thus alternating with forms we should not
distinguish if seen again; so in the brain the perpetual rearrangement
must result in some forms of tension lingering relatively long, whilst
others simply come and pass. But if consciousness corresponds to the
fact of rearrangement itself, why, if the rearrangement stop not,
should the consciousness ever cease? And if a lingering rearrangement
brings with it one kind of consciousness, why should not a swift
rearrangement bring another kind of consciousness as peculiar as the
rearrangement itself? The lingering consciousnesses, if of simple
objects, we call 'sensations' or 'images,' according as they are vivid
or faint; if of complex objects, we call them 'percepts' when vivid,
'concepts' or 'thoughts' when faint. For the swift consciousnesses
we have only those names of 'transitive states,' or 'feelings of
relation,' which we have used.[230] As the brain-changes are
continuous, so do all these consciousnesses melt into each other like
dissolving views. Properly they are but one protracted consciousness,
one unbroken stream.


_Feelings of Tendency._


So much for the transitive states. But there are other unnamed states
or qualities of states that are just as important and just as
cognitive as they, and just as much unrecognized by the traditional
sensationalist and intellectualist philosophies of mind. The first
fails to find them at all, the second finds their _cognitive function_,
but denies that anything in the way of _feeling_ has a share in
bringing it about. Examples will make clear what these inarticulate
psychoses, due to waxing and waning excitements of the brain, are
like.[231]

Suppose three successive persons say to us: 'Wait!' 'Hark!' 'Look!'
Our consciousness is thrown into three quite different attitudes of
expectancy, although no definite object is before it in any one of
the three cases. Leaving out different actual bodily attitudes, and
leaving out the reverberating images of the three words, which are of
course diverse, probably no one will deny the existence of a residual
conscious affection, a sense of the direction from which an impression
is about to come, although no positive impression is yet there.
Meanwhile we have no names for the psychoses in question but the names
hark, look, and wait.

Suppose we try to recall a forgotten name. The state of our
consciousness is peculiar. There is a gap therein; but no mere gap.
It is a gap that is intensely active. A sort of wraith of the name
is in it, beckoning us in a given direction, making us at moments
tingle with the sense of our closeness, and then letting us sink back
without the longed-for term. If wrong names are proposed to us, this
singularly definite gap acts immediately so as to negate them. They do
not fit into its mould. And the gap of one word does not feel like the
gap of another, all empty of content as both might seem necessarily
to be when described as gaps. When I vainly try to recall the name of
Spalding, my consciousness is far removed from what it is when I vainly
try to recall the name of Bowles. Here some ingenious persons will
say: "How _can_ the two consciousnesses be different when the terms
which might make them different are not there? All that is there, so
long as the effort to recall is vain, is the bare effort itself. How
should that differ in the two cases? You are making it seem to differ
by prematurely filling it out with the different names, although
these, by the hypothesis, have not yet come. Stick to the two efforts
as they are, without naming them after facts not yet existent, and
you'll be quite unable to designate any point in which they differ."
Designate, truly enough. We can only designate the difference by
borrowing the names of objects not yet in the mind. Which is to say
that our psychological vocabulary is wholly inadequate to name the
differences that exist, even such strong differences as these. But
namelessness is compatible with existence. There are innumerable
consciousnesses of emptiness, no one of which taken in itself has a
name, but all different from each other. The ordinary way is to assume
that they are all emptinesses of consciousness, and so the same state.
But the feeling of an absence is _toto cœlo_ other than the absence
of a feeling. It is an intense feeling. The rhythm of a lost word may
be there without a sound to clothe it; or the evanescent sense of
something which is the initial vowel or consonant may mock us fitfully,
without growing more distinct. Every one must know the tantalizing
effect of the blank rhythm of some forgotten verse, restlessly dancing
in one's mind, striving to be filled out with words.

Again, what is the strange difference between an experience tasted
for the first time and the same experience recognized as familiar,
as having been enjoyed before, though we cannot name it or say where
or when? A tune, an odor, a flavor sometimes carry this inarticulate
feeling of their familiarity so deep into our consciousness that
we are fairly shaken by its mysterious emotional power. But strong
and characteristic as this psychosis is--it probably is due to the
submaximal excitement of wide-spreading associational brain-tracts--the
only name we have for all its shadings is 'sense of familiarity.'

When we read such phrases as 'naught but,' 'either one or the other,'
'_a_ is _b_, but,' 'although it is, nevertheless,' 'it is an excluded
middle, there is no _tertium quid_,' and a host of other verbal
skeletons of logical relation, is it true that there is nothing more
in our minds than the words themselves as they pass? What then is
the meaning of the words which we think we understand as we read?
What makes that meaning different in one phrase from what it is in
the other? 'Who?' 'When?' 'Where?' Is the difference of felt meaning
in these interrogatives nothing more than their difference of sound?
And is it not (just like the difference of sound itself) known and
understood in an affection of consciousness correlative to it, though
so impalpable to direct examination? Is not the same true of such
negatives as 'no,' 'never,' 'not yet'?

The truth is that large tracts of human speech are nothing but _signs
of direction_ in thought, of which direction we nevertheless have an
acutely discriminative sense, though no definite sensorial image plays
any part in it whatsoever. Sensorial images are stable psychic facts;
we can hold them still and look at them as long as we like. These bare
images of logical movement, on the contrary, are psychic transitions,
always on the wing, so to speak, and not to be glimpsed except in
flight. Their function is to lead from one set of images to another.
As they pass, we feel both the waxing and the waning images in a way
altogether peculiar and a way quite different from the way of their
full presence. If we try to hold fast the feeling of direction, the
full presence comes and the feeling of direction is lost. The blank
verbal scheme of the logical movement gives us the fleeting sense of
the movement as we read it, quite as well as does a rational sentence
awakening definite imaginations by its words.

What is that first instantaneous glimpse of some one's meaning which we
have, when in vulgar phrase we say we 'twig' it? Surely an altogether
specific affection of our mind. And has the reader never asked himself
what kind of a mental fact is his _intention of saying a thing_ before
he has said it? It is an entirely definite intention, distinct from
all other intentions, an absolutely distinct state of consciousness,
therefore; and yet how much of it consists of definite sensorial
images, either of words or of things? Hardly anything! Linger, and
the words and things come into the mind; the anticipatory intention,
the divination is there no more. But as the words that replace it
arrive, it welcomes them successively and calls them right if they
agree with it, it rejects them and calls them wrong if they do not.
It has therefore a nature of its own of the most positive sort, and
yet what can we say about it without using words that belong to the
later mental facts that replace it? The intention _to-say-so-and-so_
is the only name it can receive. One may admit that a good third of
our psychic life consists in these rapid premonitory perspective views
of schemes of thought not yet articulate. How comes it about that a
man reading something aloud for the first time is able immediately to
emphasize all his words aright, unless from the very first he have a
sense of at least the form of the sentence yet to come, which sense
is fused with his consciousness of the present word, and modifies its
emphasis in his mind so as to make him give it the proper accent as
he utters it? Emphasis of this kind is almost altogether a matter of
grammatical construction. If we read 'no more' we expect presently to
come upon a 'than'; if we read 'however' at the outset of a sentence
it is a 'yet,' a 'still,' or a 'nevertheless,' that we expect. A noun
in a certain position demands a verb in a certain mood and number, in
another position it expects a relative pronoun. Adjectives call for
nouns, verbs for adverbs, etc., etc. And this foreboding of the coming
grammatical scheme combined with each successive uttered word is so
practically accurate that a reader incapable of understanding four
ideas of the book he is reading aloud, can nevertheless read it with
the most delicately modulated expression of intelligence.

Some will interpret these facts by calling them all cases in which
certain images, by laws of association, awaken others so very rapidly
that we think afterwards we felt the very _tendencies_ of the nascent
images to arise, before they were actually there. For this school the
only possible materials of consciousness are images of a perfectly
definite nature. Tendencies exist, but they are facts for the outside
psychologist rather than for the subject of the observation. The
tendency is thus a _psychical_ zero; only its _results_ are felt.

Now what I contend for, and accumulate examples to show, is that
'tendencies' are not only descriptions from without, but that they are
among the _objects_ of the stream, which is thus aware of them from
within, and must be described as in very large measure constituted of
_feelings_ of _tendency_, often so vague that we are unable to name
them at all. It is, in short, the re-instatement of the vague to its
proper place in our mental life which I am so anxious to press on the
attention. Mr. Galton and Prof. Huxley have, as we shall see in Chapter
XVIII, made one step in advance in exploding the ridiculous theory of
Hume and Berkeley that we can have no images but of perfectly definite
things. Another is made in the overthrow of the equally ridiculous
notion that, whilst simple objective qualities are revealed to our
knowledge in subjective feelings, relations are not. But these reforms
are not half sweeping and radical enough. What must be admitted is
that the definite images of traditional psychology form but the very
smallest part of our minds as they actually live. The traditional
psychology talks like one who should say a river consists of nothing
but pailsful, spoonsful, quartpotsful, barrelsful, and other moulded
forms of water. Even were the pails and the pots all actually standing
in the stream, still between them the free water would continue to
flow. It is just this free water of consciousness that psychologists
resolutely overlook. Every definite image in the mind is steeped and
dyed in the free water that flows round it. With it goes the sense of
its relations, near and remote, the dying echo of whence it came to
us, the dawning sense of whither it is to lead. The significance, the
value, of the image is all in this halo or penumbra that surrounds and
escorts it,--or rather that is fused into one with it and has become
bone of its bone and flesh of its flesh; leaving it, it is true, an
image of the same _thing_ it was before, but making it an image of that
thing newly taken and freshly understood.

What is that shadowy scheme of the 'form' of an opera, play, or book,
which remains in our mind and on which we pass judgment when the actual
thing is done? What is our notion of a scientific or philosophical
system? Great thinkers have vast premonitory glimpses of schemes of
relation between terms, which hardly even as verbal images enter
the mind, so rapid is the whole process.[232] We all of us have
this permanent consciousness of whither our thought is going. It is
a feeling like any other, a feeling of what thoughts are next to
arise, before they have arisen. This field of view of consciousness
varies very much in extent, depending largely on the degree of mental
freshness or fatigue. When very fresh, our minds carry an immense
horizon with them. The present image shoots its perspective far before
it, irradiating in advance the regions in which lie the thoughts as
yet unborn. Under ordinary conditions the halo of felt relations is
much more circumscribed. And in states of extreme brain-fag the horizon
is narrowed almost to the passing word,--the associative machinery,
however, providing for the next word turning up in orderly sequence,
until at last the tired thinker is led to some kind of a conclusion. At
certain moments he may find himself doubting whether his thoughts have
not come to a full stop; but the vague sense of a _plus ultra_ makes
him ever struggle on towards a more definite expression of what it may
be; whilst the slowness of his utterance shows how difficult, under
such conditions, the labor of thinking must be.

The awareness that our _definite_ thought has come to a stop is an
entirely different thing from the awareness that our thought is
definitively completed. The expression of the latter state of mind is
the falling inflection which betokens that the sentence is ended, and
silence. The expression of the former state is 'hemming and hawing,' or
else such phrases as '_et cetera_,' or 'and so forth.' But notice that
every part of the sentence to be left incomplete feels differently as
it passes, by reason of the premonition we have that we shall be unable
to end it. The 'and so forth' casts its shadow back, and is as integral
a part of the object of the thought as the distinctest of images would
be.

Again, when we use a common noun, such as _man_, in a universal sense,
as signifying all possible men, we are fully aware of this intention
on our part, and distinguish it carefully from our intention when we
mean a certain group of men, or a solitary individual before us. In the
chapter on Conception we shall see how important this difference of
intention is. It casts its influence over the whole of the sentence,
both before and after the spot in which the word _man_ is used.

Nothing is easier than to symbolize all these facts in terms of
brain-action. Just as the echo of the _whence_, the sense of the
starting point of our thought, is probably due to the dying excitement
of processes but a moment since vividly aroused; so the sense of the
whither, the foretaste of the terminus, must be due to the waxing
excitement of tracts or processes which, a moment hence, will be the
cerebral correlatives of some thing which a moment hence will be
vividly present to the thought. Represented by a curve, the neurosis
underlying consciousness must at any moment be like this:

[Illustration: FIG. 27.]

Each point of the horizontal line stands for some brain-tract or
process. The height of the curve above the line stands for the
intensity of the process. All the processes are _present_, in the
intensities shown by the curve. But those before the latter's apex
_were_ more intense a moment ago; those after it _will be_ more intense
a moment hence. If I recite _a, b, c, d, e, f, g,_ at the moment
of uttering _d_, neither _a, b, c,_ nor _e, f, g,_ are out of my
consciousness altogether, but both, after their respective fashions,
'mix their dim lights' with the stronger one of the _d_, because their
neuroses are both awake in some degree.

There is a common class of mistakes which shows how brain-processes
begin to be excited before the thoughts attached to them are
_due_--due, that is, in substantive and vivid form. I mean those
mistakes of speech or writing by which, in Dr. Carpenter's words, "we
mispronounce or misspell a word, by introducing into it a letter or
syllable of some other, whose turn is shortly to come; or, it may be,
the whole of the anticipated word is substituted for the one which
ought to have been expressed."[233] In these cases one of two things
must have happened: either some local accident of nutrition _blocks_
the process that is _due_, so that other processes discharge that ought
as yet to be but nascently aroused; or some opposite local accident
_furthers_ the _latter processes_ and makes them explode before their
time. In the chapter on Association of Ideas, numerous instances will
come before us of the actual effect on consciousness of neuroses not
yet maximally aroused.

It is just like the 'overtones' in music. Different instruments give
the 'same note,' but each in a different voice, because each gives more
than that note, namely, various upper harmonics of it which differ from
one instrument to another. They are not separately heard by the ear;
they blend with the fundamental note, and suffuse it, and alter it; and
even so do the waxing and waning brain-processes at every moment blend
with and suffuse and alter the psychic effect of the processes which
are at their culminating point.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let us use the words _psychic overtone, suffusion,_ or _fringe_, to
designate the influence of a faint brain-process upon our thought, as
it makes it aware of relations and objects but dimly perceived.[234]

If we then consider the _cognitive function_ of different states of
mind, we may feel assured that the difference between those that are
mere 'acquaintance,' and those that are 'knowledges-_about_' (see p.
221) is reducible almost entirely to the absence or presence of psychic
fringes or overtones. Knowledge _about_ a thing is knowledge of its
relations. Acquaintance with it is limitation to the bare impression
which it makes. Of most of its relations we are only aware in the
penumbral nascent way of a 'fringe' of unarticulated affinities about
it. And, before passing to the next topic in order, I must say a little
of this sense of affinity, as itself one of the most interesting
features of the subjective stream.

In all our voluntary thinking there is some topic or subject about
which all the members of the thought revolve. Half the time this
topic is a problem, a gap we cannot yet fill with a definite picture,
word, or phrase, but which, in the manner described some time back,
influences us in an intensely active and determinate psychic way.
Whatever may be the images and phrases that pass before us, we feel
their relation to this aching gap. To fill it up is our thoughts'
destiny. Some bring us nearer to that consummation. Some the gap
negates as quite irrelevant. Each swims in a felt fringe of relations
of which the aforesaid gap is the term. Or instead of a definite gap
we may merely carry a mood of interest about with us. Then, however
vague the mood, it will still act in the same way, throwing a mantle of
felt affinity over such representations, entering the mind, as suit it,
and tingeing with the feeling of tediousness or discord all those with
which it has no concern.

Relation, then, to our topic or interest is constantly felt in the
fringe, and particularly the relation of harmony and discord, of
furtherance or hindrance of the topic. When the sense of furtherance
is there, we are 'all right;' with the sense of hindrance we are
dissatisfied and perplexed, and cast about us for other thoughts. Now
_any_ thought the quality of whose fringe lets us feel ourselves 'all
right,' is an acceptable member of our thinking, whatever kind of
thought it may otherwise be. Provided we only feel it to have a place
in the scheme of relations in which the interesting topic also lies,
that is quite sufficient to make of it a relevant and appropriate
portion of our train of ideas.

_For the important thing about a train of thought is its conclusion._
That is the _meaning_, or, as we say, the topic of the thought. That is
what abides when all its other members have faded from memory. Usually
this conclusion is a word or phrase or particular image, or practical
attitude or resolve, whether rising to answer a problem or fill a
pre-existing gap that worried us, or whether accidentally stumbled on
in revery. In either case it stands out from the other segments of
the stream by reason of the peculiar interest attaching to it. This
interest _arrests_ it, makes a sort of crisis of it when it comes,
induces attention upon it and makes us treat it in a substantive way.

The parts of the stream that precede these substantive conclusions
are but the means of the latter's attainment. And, provided the same
conclusion be reached, the means may be as mutable as we like, for the
'meaning' of the stream of thought will be the same. What difference
does it make what the means are? "_Qu'importe le flacon, pourvu qu'on
ait l'ivresse?_" The relative unimportance of the means appears from
the fact that when the conclusion is there, we have always forgotten
most of the steps preceding its attainment. When we have uttered a
proposition, we are rarely able a moment afterwards to recall our exact
words, though we can express it in different words easily enough. The
practical upshot of a book we read remains with us, though we may not
recall one of its sentences.

The only paradox would seem to lie in supposing that the fringe of
felt affinity and discord can be the same in two heterogeneous sets of
images. Take a train of words passing through the mind and leading to
a certain conclusion on the one hand, and on the other hand an almost
wordless set of tactile, visual and other fancies leading to the same
conclusion. Can the halo, fringe, or scheme in which we feel the words
to lie be the same as that in which we feel the images to lie? Does not
the discrepancy of terms involve a discrepancy of felt relations among
them?

If the terms be taken _quâ_ mere sensations, it assuredly does. For
instance, the words may rhyme with each other,--the visual images can
have no such affinity as _that_. But _quâ_ thoughts, _quâ_ sensations
_understood_, the words have contracted by long association fringes of
mutual repugnance or affinity with each other and with the conclusion,
which run exactly parallel with like fringes in the visual, tactile
and other ideas. The most important element of these fringes is, I
repeat, the mere feeling of harmony or discord, of a right or wrong
direction in the thought. Dr. Campbell has, so far as I know, made the
best analysis of this fact, and his words, often quoted, deserve to be
quoted again. The chapter is entitled "What is the cause that nonsense
so often escapes being detected, both by the writer and by the reader?"
The author, in answering this question, makes (_inter alia_) the
following remarks:[235]

 "That connection [he says] or relation which comes gradually to
 subsist among the different words of a language, in the minds of those
 who speak it,... is merely consequent on this, that those words are
 employed as signs of connected or related things. It is an axiom in
 geometry that things equal to the same thing are equal to one another.
 It may, in like manner, be admitted as an axiom in psychology that
 ideas associated by the same idea will associate one another. Hence it
 will happen that if, from experiencing the connection of two things,
 there results, as infallibly there will result, an association between
 the ideas or notions annexed to them, as each idea will moreover be
 associated by its sign, there will likewise be an association between
 the ideas of the signs. Hence the sounds considered as signs will be
 conceived to have a connection analogous to that which subsisteth
 among the things signified; I say, the sounds considered as signs;
 for this way of considering them constantly attends us in speaking,
 writing, hearing, and reading. When we purposely abstract from it,
 and regard them merely as sounds, we are instantly sensible that they
 are quite unconnected, and have no other relation than what ariseth
 from similitude of tone or accent. But to consider them in this manner
 commonly results from previous design, and requires a kind of effort
 which is not exerted in the ordinary use of speech. In ordinary use
 they are regarded solely as signs, or, rather, they are confounded
 with the things they signify; the consequence of which is that, in the
 manner just now explained, we come insensibly to conceive a connection
 among them of a very different sort from that of which sounds are
 naturally susceptible.

 "Now this conception, habit, or tendency of the mind, call it which
 you please, is considerably strengthened by the frequent use of
 language and by the structure of it. Language is the sole channel
 through which we communicate our knowledge and discoveries to
 others, and through which the knowledge and discoveries of others
 are communicated to us. By reiterated recourse to this medium, it
 necessarily happens that when things are related to each other, the
 words signifying those things are more commonly brought together in
 discourse. Hence the words and names by themselves, by customary
 vicinity, contract in the fancy a relation additional to that which
 they derive purely from being the symbols of related things. Farther,
 this tendency is strengthened by the structure of language. All
 languages whatever, even the most barbarous, as far as hath yet
 appeared, are of a regular and analogical make. The consequence is
 that similar relations in things will be expressed similarly; that
 is, by similar inflections, derivations, compositions, arrangement
 of words, or juxtaposition of particles, according to the genius or
 grammatical form of the particular tongue. Now as, by the habitual use
 of a language (even though it were quite irregular), the signs would
 insensibly become connected in the imagination wherever the things
 signified are connected in nature, so, by the regular structure of a
 language, this connection among the signs is conceived as analogous to
 that which subsisteth among their archetypes."

If we know English and French and begin a sentence in French, all the
later words that come are French; we hardly ever drop into English.
And this affinity of the French words for each other is not something
merely operating mechanically as a brain-law, it is something we feel
at the time. Our understanding of a French sentence heard never falls
to so low an ebb that we are not aware that the words linguistically
belong together. Our attention can hardly so wander that if an English
word be suddenly introduced we shall not start at the change. Such
a vague sense as this of the words belonging together is the very
minimum of fringe that can accompany them, if 'thought' at all. Usually
the vague perception that all the words we hear belong to the same
language and to the same special vocabulary in that language, and that
the grammatical sequence is familiar, is practically equivalent to an
admission that what we hear is sense. But if an unusual foreign word
be introduced, if the grammar trip, or if a term from an incongruous
vocabulary suddenly appear, such as 'rat-trap' or 'plumber's bill' in a
philosophical discourse, the sentence detonates, as it were, we receive
a shock from the incongruity, and the drowsy assent is gone. The
feeling of rationality in these cases seems rather a negative than a
positive thing, being the mere absence of shock, or sense of discord,
between the terms of thought.

So delicate and incessant is this recognition by the mind of the
mere fitness of words to be mentioned together that the slightest
misreading, such as 'casualty' for 'causality,' or 'perpetual' for
'perceptual,' will be corrected by a listener whose attention is so
relaxed that he gets no idea of the _meaning_ of the sentence at all.

Conversely, if words do belong to the same vocabulary, and if the
grammatical structure is correct, sentences with absolutely no meaning
may be uttered in good faith and pass unchallenged. Discourses at
prayer-meetings, reshuffling the same collection of cant phrases,
and the whole genus of penny-a-line-isms and newspaper-reporter's
flourishes give illustrations of this. "The birds filled the tree-tops
with their morning song, making the air moist, cool, and pleasant,"
is a sentence I remember reading once in a report of some athletic
exercises in Jerome Park. It was probably written unconsciously by the
hurried reporter, and read uncritically by many readers. An entire
volume of 784 pages lately published in Boston[236] is composed of
stuff like this passage picked out at random:

 "The flow of the efferent fluids of all these vessels from their
 outlets at the terminal loop of each culminate link on the surface of
 the nuclear organism is continuous as their respective atmospheric
 fruitage up to the altitudinal limit of their expansibility, whence,
 when atmosphered by like but coalescing essences from higher
 altitudes,--those sensibly expressed as the essential qualities of
 external forms,--they descend, and become assimilated by the afferents
 of the nuclear organism."[237]

There are every year works published whose contents show them to be by
real lunatics. To the reader, the book quoted from seems pure nonsense
from beginning to end. It is impossible to divine, in such a case,
just what sort of feeling of rational relation between the words may
have appeared to the author's mind. The border line between objective
sense and nonsense is hard to draw; that between subjective sense and
nonsense, impossible. Subjectively, any collocation of words may make
sense--even the wildest words in a dream--if one only does not doubt
their belonging together. Take the obscurer passages in Hegel: it is a
fair question whether the rationality included in them be anything more
than the fact that the words all belong to a common vocabulary, and are
strung together on a scheme of predication and relation,--immediacy,
self-relation, and what not,--which has habitually recurred. Yet there
seems no reason to doubt that the subjective feeling of the rationality
of these sentences was strong in the writer as he penned them, or even
that some readers by straining may have reproduced it in themselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

To sum up, certain kinds of verbal associate, certain grammatical
expectations fulfilled, stand for a good part of our impression
that a sentence has a meaning and is dominated by the Unity of one
Thought. Nonsense in grammatical form sounds half rational; sense
with grammatical sequence upset sounds nonsensical; e.g., "Elba the
Napoleon English faith had banished broken to be Saint because Helena
at." Finally, there is about each word the psychic 'overtone' of
feeling that it brings us nearer to a forefelt conclusion. Suffuse all
the words of a sentence, as they pass, with these three fringes or
haloes of relation, let the conclusion seem worth arriving at, and all
will admit the sentence to be an expression of thoroughly continuous,
unified, and rational thought.[238]

Each word, in such a sentence, is felt, not only as a word, but as
having a _meaning_. The 'meaning' of a word taken thus dynamically in a
sentence may be quite different from its meaning when taken statically
or without context. The dynamic meaning is usually reduced to the bare
fringe we have described, of felt suitability or unfitness to the
context and conclusion. The static meaning, when the word is concrete,
as 'table,' 'Boston,' consists of sensory images awakened; when it is
abstract, as 'criminal legislation,' 'fallacy,' the meaning consists of
other words aroused, forming the so-called 'definition.'

Hegel's celebrated dictum that pure being is identical with pure
nothing results from his taking the words statically, or without the
fringe they wear in a context. Taken in isolation, they agree in the
single point of awakening no sensorial images. But taken dynamically,
or as significant,--as _thought_,--their fringes of relation, their
affinities and repugnances, their function and meaning, are felt and
understood to be absolutely opposed.

Such considerations as these remove all appearance of paradox from
those cases of extremely deficient visual imagery of whose existence
Mr. Galton has made us aware (see below). An exceptionally intelligent
friend informs me that he can frame no image whatever of the appearance
of his breakfast-table. When asked how he then remembers it at all, he
says he simple '_knows_' that it seated four people, and was covered
with a white cloth on which were a butter-dish, a coffee-pot, radishes,
and so forth. The mind-stuff of which this 'knowing' is made seems
to be verbal images exclusively. But if the words 'coffee,' 'bacon,'
'muffins,' and 'eggs' lead a man to speak to his cook, to pay his
bills, and to take measures for the morrow's meal exactly as visual
and gustatory memories would, why are they not, for all practical
intents and purposes, as good a kind of material in which to think?
In fact, we may suspect them to be for most purposes better than
terms with a richer imaginative coloring. The scheme of relationship
and the conclusion being the essential things in thinking, that kind
of mind-stuff which is handiest will be the best for the purpose.
Now words, uttered or unexpressed, are the handiest mental elements
we have. Not only are they very _rapidly_ revivable, but they are
revivable as actual sensations more easily than any other items of our
experience. Did they not possess some such advantage as this, it would
hardly be the case that the older men are and the more effective as
thinkers, the more, as a rule, they have lost their visualizing power
and depend on words. This was ascertained by Mr. Galton to be the case
with members of the Royal Society. The present writer observes it in
his own person most distinctly.

On the other hand, a deaf and dumb man can weave his tactile and visual
images into a system of thought quite as effective and rational as
that of a word-user. _The question whether thought is possible without
language_ has been a favorite topic of discussion among philosophers.
Some interesting reminiscences of his childhood by Mr. Ballard, a
deaf-mute instructor in the National College at Washington, show it to
be perfectly possible. A few paragraphs may be quoted here.

 "In consequence of the loss of my hearing in infancy, I was debarred
 from enjoying the advantages which children in the full possession of
 their senses derive from the exercises of the common primary school,
 from the every-day talk of their school-fellows and playmates, and
 from the conversation of their parents and other grown-up persons.

 "I could convey my thoughts and feelings to my parents and brothers by
 natural signs or pantomime, and I could understand what they said to
 me by the same medium; our intercourse being, however, confined to the
 daily routine of home affairs and hardly going beyond the circle of my
 own observation....

 "My father adopted a course which he thought would, in some measure,
 compensate me for the loss of my hearing. It was that of taking me
 with him when business required him to ride abroad; and he took me
 more frequently than he did my brothers; giving, as the reason for his
 apparent partiality, that they could acquire information through the
 ear, while I depended solely upon my eye for acquaintance with affairs
 of the outside world....

 "I have a vivid recollection of the delight I felt in watching the
 different scenes we passed through, observing the various phases of
 nature, both animate and inanimate; though we did not, owing to my
 infirmity, engage in conversation. It was during those delightful
 rides, some two or three years before my initiation into the rudiments
 of written language, that I began to ask myself the question: _How
 came the world into being?_ When this question occurred to my mind, I
 set myself to thinking it over a long time. My curiosity was awakened
 as to what was the origin of human life in its first appearance upon
 the earth, and of vegetable life as well, and also the cause of the
 existence of the earth, sun, moon, and stars.

 "I remember at one time when my eye fell upon a very large old stump
 which we happened to pass in one of our rides, I asked myself, 'Is
 it possible that the first man that ever came into the world rose
 out of that stump? But that stump is only a remnant of a once noble
 magnificent tree, and how came that tree? Why, it came only by
 beginning to grow out of the ground just like those little trees now
 coming up.' And I dismissed from my mind, as an absurd idea, the
 connection between the origin of man and a decaying old stump....

 "I have no recollection of what it was that first suggested to me the
 question as to the origin of things. I had before this time gained
 ideas of the descent from parent to child, of the propagation of
 animals, and of the production of plants from seeds. The question that
 occurred to my mind was: whence came the first man, the first animal,
 and the first plant, at the remotest distance of time, before which
 there was no man, no animal, no plant; since I knew they all had a
 beginning and an end.

 "It is impossible to state the exact order in which these different
 questions arose, i.e., about men, animals, plants, the earth, sun,
 moon, etc. The lower animals did not receive so much thought as was
 bestowed upon man and the earth; perhaps because I put man and beast
 in the same class, since I believed that man would be annihilated
 and there was no resurrection beyond the grave,--though I am told by
 my mother that, in answer to my question, in the case of a deceased
 uncle who looked to me like a person in sleep, she had tried to make
 me understand that he would awake in the far future. It was my belief
 that man and beast derived their being from the same source, and were
 to be laid down in the dust in a state of annihilation. Considering
 the brute animal as of secondary importance, and allied to man on a
 lower level, man and the earth were the two things on which my mind
 dwelled most.

 "I think I was five years old, when I began to understand the
 descent from parent to child and the propagation of animals. I was
 nearly eleven years old, when I entered the Institution where I was
 educated; and I remember distinctly that it was at least two years
 before this time that I began to ask myself the question as to the
 origin of the universe. My age was then about eight, not over nine
 years.

 "Of the form of the earth, I had no idea in my childhood, except that,
 from a look at a map of the hemispheres, I inferred there were two
 immense disks of matter lying near each other. I also believed the
 sun and moon to be round, flat plates of illuminating matter; and for
 those luminaries I entertained a sort of reverence on account of their
 power of lighting and heating the earth. I thought from their coming
 up and going down, travelling across the sky in so regular a manner
 that there must be a certain something having power to govern their
 course. I believed the sun went into a hole at the west and came out
 of another at the east, travelling through a great tube in the earth,
 describing the same curve as it seemed to describe in the sky. The
 stars seemed to me to be tiny lights studded in the sky.

 "The source from which the universe came was the question about which
 my mind revolved in a vain struggle to grasp it, or rather to fight
 the way up to attain to a satisfactory answer. When I had occupied
 myself with this subject a considerable time, I perceived that it was
 a matter much greater than my mind could comprehend; and I remember
 well that I became so appalled at its mystery and so bewildered at my
 inability to grapple with it that I laid the subject aside and out
 of my mind, glad to escape being, as it were, drawn into a vortex of
 inextricable confusion. Though I felt relieved at this escape, yet I
 could not resist the desire to know the truth; and I returned to the
 subject; but as before, I left it, after thinking it over for some
 time. In this state of perplexity, I hoped all the time to get at the
 truth, still believing that the more I gave thought to the subject,
 the more my mind would penetrate the mystery. Thus I was tossed like
 a shuttlecock, returning to the subject and recoiling from it, till I
 came to school.

 "I remember that my mother once told me about a being up above,
 pointing her finger towards the sky and with a solemn look on her
 countenance. I do not recall the circumstance which led to this
 communication. When she mentioned the mysterious being up in the sky,
 I was eager to take hold of the subject, and plied her with questions
 concerning the form and appearance of this unknown being, asking if it
 was the sun, moon, or one of the stars. I knew she meant that there
 was a living one somewhere up in the sky; but when I realized that
 she could not answer my questions, I gave it up in despair, feeling
 sorrowful that I could not obtain a definite idea of the mysterious
 living one up in the sky.

 "One day, while we were haying in a field, there was a series of
 heavy thunder-claps. I asked one of my brothers where they came from.
 He pointed to the sky and made a zigzag motion with his finger,
 signifying lightning. I imagined there was a great man somewhere in
 the blue vault, who made a loud noise with his voice out of it; and
 each time I heard[239] a thunder-clap I was frightened, and looked up
 at the sky, fearing he was speaking a threatening word."[240]

[Illustration: FIG. 28.]

Here we may pause. The reader sees by this time that it makes little or
no difference in what sort of mind-stuff, in what quality of imagery,
his thinking goes on. The only images _intrinsically_ important are
the halting-places, the substantive conclusions, provisional or final,
of the thought. Throughout all the rest of the stream, the feelings of
relation are everything, and the terms related almost naught. These
feelings of relation, these psychic overtones, halos, suffusions, or
fringes about the terms, may be the same in very different systems of
imagery. A diagram may help to accentuate this indifference of the
mental means where the end is the same. Let _A_ be some experience from
which a number of thinkers start. Let _Z_ be the practical conclusion
rationally inferrible from it. One gets to the conclusion by one line,
another by another; one follows a course of English, another of German,
verbal imagery. With one, visual images predominate; with another,
tactile. Some trains are tinged with emotions, others not; some are
very abridged, synthetic and rapid, others, hesitating and broken into
many steps. But when the penultimate terms of all the trains, however
differing _inter se_, finally shoot into the same conclusion, we say
and rightly say, that all the thinkers have had substantially the same
thought. It would probably astound each of them beyond measure to be
let into his neighbor's mind and to find how different the scenery
there was from that in his own.

Thought is in fact a kind of Algebra, as Berkeley long ago said, "in
which, though a particular quantity be marked by each letter, yet to
proceed right, it is not requisite that in every step each letter
suggest to your thoughts that particular quantity it was appointed to
stand for." Mr. Lewes has developed this algebra-analogy so well that I
must quote his words:

 "The leading characteristic of algebra is that of operation on
 relations. This also is the leading characteristic of Thought.
 Algebra cannot exist without values, nor Thought without Feelings.
 The operations are so many blank forms till the values are assigned.
 Words are vacant sounds, ideas are blank forms, unless they symbolize
 images and sensations which are their values. Nevertheless it is
 rigorously true, and of the greatest importance, that analysts carry
 on very extensive operations with blank forms, never pausing to
 supply the symbols with values until the calculation is completed;
 and ordinary men, no less than philosophers, carry on long trains
 of thought without pausing to translate their ideas (words) into
 images.... Suppose some one from a distance shouts 'a lion!' At once
 the man starts in alarm.... To the man the word is not only an ...
 expression of all that he has seen and heard of lions, capable of
 recalling various experiences, but is also capable of taking its
 place in a connected series of thoughts without recalling any of
 those experiences, without reviving an image, however faint, of the
 lion--simply as a sign of a certain relation included in the complex
 so named. Like an algebraic symbol it may be operated on without
 conveying other significance than an abstract relation: it is a sign
 of Danger, related to fear with all its motor sequences. Its logical
 position suffices.... Ideas are _substitutions_ which require a
 secondary process when what is symbolized by them is translated into
 the images and experiences it replaces; and this secondary process is
 frequently not performed at all, generally only performed to a very
 small extent. Let anyone closely examine what has passed in his mind
 when he has constructed a chain of reasoning, and he will be surprised
 at the fewness and faintness of the images which have accompanied the
 ideas. Suppose you inform me that 'the blood rushed violently from
 the man's heart, quickening his pulse at the sight of his enemy.'
 Of the many latent images in this phrase, how many were salient in
 your mind and in mine? Probably two--the man and his enemy--and these
 images were faint. Images of blood, heart, violent rushing, pulse,
 quickening, and sight, were either not revived at all, or were passing
 shadows. Had any such images arisen, they would have hampered thought,
 retarding the logical process of judgment by irrelevant connections.
 The symbols had substituted _relations_ for these _values_.... There
 are no images of two things and three things, when I say 'two and
 three equal five;' there are simply familiar symbols having precise
 relations.... The verbal symbol 'horse,' which stands for all our
 experiences of horses, serves all the purposes of Thought, without
 recalling one of the images clustered in the perception of horses,
 just as the sight of a horse's form serves all the purposes of
 _recognition_ without recalling the sound of its neighing or its
 tramp, its qualities as an animal of draught, and so forth."[241]

It need only be added that as the Algebrist, though the sequence of his
terms is fixed by their relations rather than by their several values,
must give a real value to the _final_ one he reaches; so the thinker
in words must let his concluding word or phrase be translated into its
full sensible-image-value, under penalty of the thought being left
unrealized and pale.

This is all I have to say about the sensible continuity and unity of
our thought as contrasted with the apparent discreteness of the words,
images, and other means by which it seems to be carried on. Between all
their substantive elements there is 'transitive' consciousness, and the
words and images are 'fringed,' and not as discrete as to a careless
view they seem. Let us advance now to the next head in our description
of Thought's stream.


4. _Human thought appears to deal with objects independent of itself;
that is, it is cognitive, or possesses the function of knowing._


For Absolute Idealism, the infinite Thought and its objects are one.
The Objects are, through being thought; the eternal Mind is, through
thinking them. Were a human thought alone in the world there would be
no reason for any other assumption regarding it. Whatever it might
have before it would be its vision, would be there, in _its_ 'there,'
or then, in _its_ 'then'; and the question would never arise whether
an extra-mental duplicate of it existed or not. The reason why we all
believe that the objects of our thoughts have a duplicate existence
outside, is that there are _many_ human thoughts, each with the _same_
objects, as we cannot help supposing. The judgment that _my_ thought
has the same object as _his_ thought is what makes the psychologist
call my thought cognitive of an outer reality. The judgment that my own
past thought and my own present thought are of the same object is what
makes _me_ take the object out of either and project it by a sort of
triangulation into an independent position, from which it may _appear_
to both. _Sameness_ in a multiplicity of objective appearances is
thus the basis of our belief in realities outside of thought.[242] In
