CHAPTER VII.

THE METHODS AND SNARES OF PSYCHOLOGY


We have now finished the physiological preliminaries of our subject
and must in the remaining chapters study the mental states themselves
whose cerebral conditions and concomitants we have been considering
hitherto. Beyond the brain, however, there is an outer world to which
the brain-states themselves 'correspond.' And it will be well, ere we
advance farther, to say a word about the relation of the mind to this
larger sphere of physical fact.


PSYCHOLOGY IS A NATURAL SCIENCE.


That is, the mind which the psychologist studies is the mind of
distinct individuals inhabiting definite portions of a real space and
of a real time. With any other sort of mind, absolute Intelligence,
Mind unattached to a particular body, or Mind not subject to the course
of time, the psychologist as such has nothing to do. 'Mind,' in his
mouth, is only a class name for _minds_. Fortunate will it be if his
more modest inquiry result in any generalizations which the philosopher
devoted to absolute Intelligence as such can use.

To the psychologist, then, the minds he studies are _objects_, in a
world of other objects. Even when he introspectively analyzes his own
mind, and tells what he finds there, he talks about it in an objective
way. He says, for instance, that under certain circumstances the color
gray appears to him green, and calls the appearance an illusion.
This implies that he compares two objects, a real color seen under
certain conditions, and a mental perception which he believes to
represent it, and that he declares the relation between them to be of
a certain kind. In making this critical judgment, the psychologist
stands as much outside of the perception which he criticises as he
does of the color. Both are his objects. And if this is true of him
when he reflects on his own conscious states, how much truer is it
when he treats of those of others! In German philosophy since Kant
the word _Erkenntnisstheorie_, criticism of the faculty of knowledge,
plays a great part. Now the psychologist necessarily becomes such an
_Erkenntnisstheoretiker_. But the knowledge he theorizes about is not
the bare function of knowledge which Kant criticises--he does not
inquire into the possibility of knowledge _überhaupt_. He assumes it to
be possible, he does not doubt its presence in himself at the moment
he speaks. The knowledge he criticises is the knowledge of particular
men about the particular things that surround them. This he may, upon
occasion, in the light of his _own_ unquestioned knowledge, pronounce
true or false, and trace the reasons by which it has become one or the
other.

It is highly important that this natural-science point of view should
be understood at the outset. Otherwise more may be demanded of the
psychologist than he ought to be expected to perform.

A diagram will exhibit more emphatically what the assumptions of
Psychology must be:

------------------------------------------------------------------------
| 1            |  2           |   3             |   4                  |
| The          |  The Thought |   The Thought's |   The Psychologist's |
| Psychologist |  Studied     |   Object        |   Reality            |
------------------------------------------------------------------------

These four squares contain the irreducible data of psychology. No. 1,
the psychologist, believes Nos. 2, 3, and 4, which together form _his
_ total object, to be realities, and reports them and their mutual
relations as truly as he can without troubling himself with the puzzle
of how he can report them at all. About such _ultimate _ puzzles he in
the main need trouble himself no more than the geometer, the chemist,
or the botanist do, who make precisely the same assumptions as he.[187]

Of certain fallacies to which the psychologist is exposed by reason of
his peculiar point of view--that of being a reporter of subjective as
well as of objective facts, we must presently speak. But not until we
have considered the methods he uses for ascertaining what the facts in
question are.


THE METHODS OF INVESTIGATION.


_Introspective Observation is what we have to rely on first and
foremost and always._ The word introspection need hardly be defined--it
means, of course, the looking into our own minds and reporting what
we there discover. _Every one agrees that we there discover states of
consciousness._ So far as I know, the existence of such states has
never been doubted by any critic, however sceptical in other respects
he may have been. That we have _cogitations_ of some sort is the
_inconcussum_ in a world most of whose other facts have at some time
tottered in the breath of philosophic doubt. All people unhesitatingly
believe that they feel themselves thinking, and that they distinguish
the mental state as an inward activity or passion, from all the objects
with which it may cognitively deal. _I regard this belief as the most
fundamental of all the postulates of Psychology,_ and shall discard all
curious inquiries about its certainty as too metaphysical for the scope
of this book.

       *       *       *       *       *

_A Question of Nomenclature._ We ought to have some general term
by which to designate all states of consciousness merely as such,
and apart from their particular quality or cognitive function.
Unfortunately most of the terms in use have grave objections. 'Mental
state,' 'state of consciousness,' 'conscious modification,' are
cumbrous and have no kindred verbs. The same is true of 'subjective
condition.' 'Feeling' has the verb 'to feel,' both active and neuter,
and such derivatives as 'feelingly,' 'felt,' 'feltness,' etc., which
make it extremely convenient. But on the other hand it has specific
meanings as well as its generic one, sometimes standing for pleasure
and pain, and being sometimes a synonym of '_sensation_' as opposed
to _thought_; whereas we wish a term to cover sensation and thought
indifferently. Moreover, 'feeling' has acquired in the hearts of
platonizing thinkers a very opprobrious set of implications; and since
one of the great obstacles to mutual understanding in philosophy is the
use of words eulogistically and disparagingly, impartial terms ought
always, if possible, to be preferred. The word _psychosis_ has been
proposed by Mr. Huxley. It has the advantage of being correlative to
_neurosis_ (the name applied by the same author to the corresponding
nerve-process), and is moreover technical and devoid of partial
implications. But it has no verb or other grammatical form allied to
it. The expressions 'affection of the soul,' 'modification of the
ego,' are clumsy, like 'state of consciousness,' and they implicitly
assert theories which it is not well to embody in terminology before
they have been openly discussed and approved. 'Idea' is a good vague
neutral word, and was by Locke employed in the broadest generic way;
but notwithstanding his authority it has not domesticated itself in the
language so as to cover bodily sensations, and it moreover has no verb.
'Thought' would be by far the best word to use if it could be made to
cover sensations. It has no opprobrious connotation such as 'feeling'
has, and it immediately suggests the omnipresence of cognition (or
reference to an object other than the mental state itself), which
we shall soon see to be of the mental life's essence. But can the
expression 'thought of a toothache' ever suggest to the reader the
actual present pain itself? It is hardly possible; and we thus seem
about to be forced back on some _pair_ of terms like Hume's 'impression
and idea,' or Hamilton's 'presentation and representation,' or the
ordinary 'feeling and thought,' if we wish to cover the whole ground.

In this quandary we can make no definitive choice, but must, according
to the convenience of the context, use sometimes one, sometimes another
of the synonyms that have been mentioned. _My own partiality is for
either FEELING or THOUGHT._ I shall probably often use both words in a
wider sense than usual, and alternately startle two classes of readers
by their unusual sound; but if the connection makes it clear that
mental states at large, irrespective of their kind, are meant, this
will do no harm, and may even do some good.[188]

       *       *       *       *       *

_The inaccuracy of introspective observation_ has been made a subject
of debate. It is important to gain some fixed ideas on this point
before we proceed.

The commonest spiritualistic opinion is that the Soul or _Subject_
of the mental life is a metaphysical entity, inaccessible to direct
knowledge, and that the various mental states and operations of which
we reflectively become aware are objects of an inner sense which
does not lay hold of the real agent in itself, any more than sight
or hearing gives us direct knowledge of matter in itself. From, this
point of view introspection is, of course, incompetent to lay hold of
anything more than the Soul's _phenomena_. But even then the question
remains, How well can it know the phenomena themselves?

Some authors take high ground here and claim for it a sort of
infallibility. Thus Ueberweg:

 "When a mental image, as such, is the object of my apprehension,
 there is no meaning in seeking to distinguish its existence in my
 consciousness (in me) from its existence out of my consciousness (in
 itself); for the object apprehended is, in this case, one which does
 not even exist, as the objects of external perception do, in itself
 outside of my consciousness. It exists only within me."[189]

And Brentano:

 "The phenomena inwardly apprehended are true in themselves. As they
 appear--of this the evidence with which they are apprehended is a
 warrant--so they are in reality. Who, then, can deny that in this a
 great superiority of Psychology over the physical sciences comes to
 light?"

And again:

 "No one can doubt whether the psychic condition he apprehends in
 himself _be_, and be _so_, as he apprehends it. Whoever should doubt
 this would have reached that _finished_ doubt which destroys itself
 in destroying every fixed point from which to make an attack upon
 knowledge."[190]

Others have gone to the opposite extreme, and maintained that we
can have no introspective cognition of our own minds at all. A
deliverance of Auguste Comte to this effect has been so often quoted
as to be almost classical; and some reference to it seems therefore
indispensable here.

Philosophers, says Comte,[191] have

 "in these latter days imagined themselves able to distinguish, by a
 very singular subtlety, two sorts of observation of equal importance,
 one external, the other internal, the latter being solely destined for
 the study of intellectual phenomena.... I limit myself to pointing out
 the principal consideration which proves clearly that this pretended
 direct contemplation of the mind by itself is a pure illusion.... It
 is in fact evident that, by an invincible necessity, the human mind
 can observe directly all phenomena except its own proper states. For
 by whom shall the observation of these be made? It is conceivable
 that a man might observe himself with respect to the _passions_
 that animate him, for the anatomical organs of passion are distinct
 from those whose function is observation. Though we have all made
 such observations on ourselves, they can never have much scientific
 value, and the best mode of knowing the passions will always be that
 of observing them from without; for every strong state of passion
 ... is necessarily incompatible with the state of observation. But,
 as for observing in the same way _intellectual_ phenomena at the
 time of their actual presence, that is a manifest impossibility. The
 thinker cannot divide himself into two, of whom one reasons whilst
 the other observes him reason. The organ observed and the organ
 observing being, in this case, identical, how could observation take
 place? This pretended psychological method is then radically null
 and void. On the one hand, they advise you to isolate yourself, as
 far as possible, from every external sensation, especially every
 intellectual work,--for if you were to busy yourself even with the
 simplest calculation, what would become of _internal_ observation?--on
 the other hand, after having with the utmost care attained this state
 of intellectual slumber, you must begin to contemplate the operations
 going on in your mind, when nothing there takes place! Our descendants
 will doubtless see such pretensions some day ridiculed upon the stage.
 The results of so strange a procedure harmonize entirely with its
 principle. For all the two thousand years during which metaphysicians
 have thus cultivated psychology, they are not agreed about one
 intelligible and established proposition. '_Internal observation_'
 gives almost as many divergent results as there are individuals who
 think they practise it."

Comte hardly could have known anything of the English, and nothing
of the German, empirical psychology. The 'results' which he had in
mind when writing were probably scholastic ones, such as principles
of internal activity, the faculties, the ego, the _liberum arbitrium
indifferentiæ_, etc. John Mill, in replying to him,[192] says:

 "It might have occurred to M. Comte that a fact may be studied through
 the medium of memory, not at the very moment of our perceiving it,
 but the moment after: and this is really the mode in which our
 best knowledge of our intellectual acts is generally acquired. We
 reflect on what we have been doing when the act is past, but when
 its impression in the memory is still fresh. Unless in one of these
 ways, we could not have acquired the knowledge which nobody denies us
 to have, of what passes in our minds. M. Comte would scarcely have
 affirmed that we are not aware of our own intellectual operations. We
 know of our observings and our reasonings, either at the very time,
 or by memory the moment after; in either case, by direct knowledge,
 and not (like things done by us in a state of somnambulism) merely
 by their results. This simple fact destroys the whole of M. Comte's
 argument. Whatever we are directly aware of, we can directly observe."

Where now does the truth lie? Our quotation from Mill is obviously the
one which expresses the most of _practical_ truth about the matter.
Even the writers who insist upon the absolute veracity of our immediate
inner apprehension of a conscious state have to contrast with this the
fallibility of our _memory_ or _observation_ of it, a moment later. No
one has emphasized more sharply than Brentano himself the difference
between the immediate _feltness_ of a feeling, and its perception by
a subsequent reflective act. But which mode of consciousness of it is
that which the psychologist must depend on? If to _have_ feelings or
thoughts in their immediacy were enough, babies in the cradle would
be psychologists, and infallible ones. But the psychologist must not
only _have_ his mental states in their absolute veritableness, he must
report them and write about them, name them, classify and compare
them and trace their relations to other things. Whilst alive they are
their own property; it is only _post-mortem_ that they become his
prey.[193] And as in the naming, classing, and knowing of things
in general we are notoriously fallible, why not also here? Comte is
quite right in laying stress on the fact that a feeling, to be named,
judged, or perceived, must be already past. No subjective state,
whilst present, is its own object; its object is always something
else. There are, it is true, cases in which we appear to be naming
our present feeling, and so to be experiencing and observing the same
inner fact at a single stroke, as when we say 'I feel tired,' 'I am
angry,' etc. But these are illusory, and a little attention unmasks
the illusion. The present conscious state, when I say 'I feel tired,'
is not the direct state of tire; when I say 'I feel angry,' it is not
the direct state of anger. It is the state of _saying-I-feel-tired_,
of _saying-I-feel-angry_,--entirely different matters, so different
that the fatigue and anger apparently included in them are considerable
modifications of the fatigue and anger directly felt the previous
instant. The act of naming them has momentarily detracted from their
force.[194]

The only sound grounds on which the infallible veracity of the
introspective judgment might be maintained are empirical. If we had
reason to think it has never yet deceived us, we might continue to
trust it. This is the ground actually maintained by Herr Mohr.

 "The illusions of our senses," says this author, "have undermined
 our belief in the reality of the outer world; but in the sphere of
 inner observation our confidence is intact, for we have never found
 ourselves to be in error about the reality of an act of thought or
 feeling. We have never been misled into thinking we were _not_ in
 doubt or in anger when these conditions were really states of our
 consciousness."[195]

But sound as the reasoning here would be, were the premises correct,
I fear the latter cannot pass. However it may be with such strong
feelings as doubt or anger, about weaker feelings, and about the
_relations to each other_ of all feelings, we find ourselves in
continual error and uncertainty so soon as we are called on to name and
class, and not merely to feel. Who can be sure of the exact _order_
of his feelings when they are excessively rapid? Who can be sure, in
his sensible perception of a chair, how much comes from the eye and
how much is supplied out of the previous knowledge of the mind? Who
can compare with precision the _quantities_ of disparate feelings
even where the feelings are very much alike? For instance, where an
object is felt now against the back and now against the cheek, which
feeling is most extensive? Who can be sure that two given feelings are
or are not exactly the same? Who can tell which is briefer or longer
than the other when both occupy but an instant of time? Who knows, of
many actions, for what motive they were done, or if for any motive
at all? Who can enumerate all the distinct ingredients of such a
complicated feeling as _anger_? and who can tell off-hand whether or no
a perception of _distance_ be a compound or a simple state of mind? The
whole mind-stuff controversy would stop if we could decide conclusively
by introspection that what seem to us elementary feelings are really
elementary and not compound.

Mr. Sully, in his work on Illusions, has a chapter on those of
Introspection from which we might now quote. But, since the rest of
this volume will be little more than a collection of illustrations of
the difficulty of discovering by direct introspection exactly what our
feelings and their relations are, we need not anticipate our own future
details, I but just state our general conclusion that _introspection is
difficult and fallible; and that the difficulty is simply that of all
observation of whatever kind_. Something is before us; we do our best
to tell what it is, but in spite of our good will we may go astray, and
give a description more applicable to some other sort of thing. The
only safeguard is in the final _consensus_ of our farther knowledge
about the thing in question, later views correcting earlier ones, until
at last the harmony of a consistent system is reached. Such a system,
gradually worked out, is the best guarantee the psychologist can give
for the soundness of any particular psychologic observation which he
may report. Such a system we ourselves must strive, as far as may be,
to attain.

The English writers on psychology, and the school of Herbart in
Germany, have in the main contented themselves with such results as
the immediate introspection of single individuals gave, and shown what
a body of doctrine they may make. The works of Locke, Hume, Reid,
Hartley, Stewart, Brown, the Mills, will always be classics in this
line; and in Professor Bain's Treatises we have probably the last word
of what this method taken mainly by itself can do--the last monument of
the youth of our science, still untechnical and generally intelligible,
like the Chemistry of Lavoisier, or Anatomy before the microscope was
used.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The Experimental Method_. But psychology is passing into a less simple
phase. Within a few years what one may call a microscopic psychology
has arisen in Germany, carried on by experimental methods, asking of
course every moment for introspective data, but eliminating their
uncertainty by operating on a large scale and taking statistical means.
This method taxes patience to the utmost, and could hardly have arisen
in a country whose natives could be _bored_. Such Germans as Weber,
Fechner, Vierordt, and Wundt obviously cannot; and their success has
brought into the field an array of younger experimental psychologists,
bent on studying the _elements_ of the mental life, dissecting them
out from the gross results in which they are embedded, and as far as
possible reducing them to quantitative scales. The simple and open
method of attack having done what it can, the method of patience,
starving out, and harassing to death is tried; the Mind must submit
to a regular _siege_, in which minute advantages gained night and day
by the forces that hem her in must sum themselves up at last into
her overthrow. There is little of the grand style about these new
prism, pendulum, and chronograph-philosophers. They mean business, not
chivalry. What generous divination, and that superiority in virtue
which was thought by Cicero to give a man the best insight into nature,
have failed to do, their spying and scraping, their deadly tenacity and
almost diabolic cunning, will doubtless some day bring about.

No general description of the methods of experimental psychology
would be instructive to one unfamiliar with the instances of their
application, so we will waste no words upon the attempt. _The principal
fields of experimentation_ so far have been: 1) the connection of
conscious states with their physical conditions, including the whole
of brain-physiology, and the recent minutely cultivated physiology
of the sense-organs, together with what is technically known as
'psycho-physics,' or the laws of correlation between sensations and
the outward stimuli by which they are aroused; 2) the analysis of
space-perception into its sensational elements; 3) the measurement
of the _duration_ of the simplest mental processes; 4) that of the
_accuracy of reproduction_ in the memory of sensible experiences and
of intervals of space and time; 5) that of the manner in which simple
mental states _influence each other_, call each other up, or inhibit
each other's reproduction; 6) that of the _number of facts_ which
consciousness can simultaneously discern; finally, 7) that of the
elementary laws of oblivescence and retention. It must be said that in
some of these fields the results have as yet borne little theoretic
fruit commensurate with the great labor expended in their acquisition.
But facts are facts, and if we only get enough of them they are sure
to combine. New ground will from year to year be broken, and theoretic
results will grow. Meanwhile the experimental method has quite changed
the face of the science so far as the latter is a record of mere work
done.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _comparative method_, finally, supplements the introspective and
experimental methods. This method presupposes a normal psychology of
introspection to be established in its main features. But where the
origin of these features, or their dependence upon one another, is
in question, it is of the utmost importance to trace the phenomenon
considered through all its possible variations of type and combination.
So it has come to pass that instincts of animals are ransacked to throw
light on our own; and that the reasoning faculties of bees and ants,
the minds of savages, infants, madmen, idiots, the deaf and blind,
criminals, and eccentrics, are all invoked in support of this or that
special theory about some part of our own mental life. The history of
sciences, moral and political institutions, and languages, as types of
mental product, are pressed into the same service. Messrs. Darwin and
Galton have set the example of circulars of questions sent out by the
hundred to those supposed able to reply. The custom has spread, and it
will be well for us in the next generation if such circulars be not
ranked among the common pests of life. Meanwhile information grows, and
results emerge. There are great sources of error in the comparative
method. The interpretation of the 'psychoses' of animals, savages, and
infants is necessarily wild work, in which the personal equation of
the investigator has things very much its own way. A savage will be
reported to have no moral or religious feeling if his actions shock the
observer unduly. A child will be assumed without self-consciousness
because he talks of himself in the third person, etc., etc. No rules
can be laid down in advance. Comparative observations, to be definite,
must usually be made to test some pre-existing hypothesis; and the only
thing then is to use as much sagacity as you possess, and to be as
candid as you can.


THE SOURCES OF ERROR IN PSYCHOLOGY.


_The first of them arises from the Misleading Influence of Speech._
Language was originally made by men who were not psychologists, and
most men to-day employ almost exclusively the vocabulary of outward
things. The cardinal passions of our life, anger, love, fear, hate,
hope, and the most comprehensive divisions of our intellectual
activity, to remember, expect, think, know, dream, with the broadest
genera of æsthetic feeling, joy, sorrow, pleasure, pain, are the only
facts of a subjective order which this vocabulary deigns to note by
special words. The elementary qualities of sensation, bright, loud,
red, blue, hot, cold, are, it is true, susceptible of being used
in both an objective and a subjective sense. They stand for outer
qualities and for the feelings which these arouse. But the objective
sense is the original sense; and still to-day we have to describe a
large number of sensations by the name of the object from which they
have most frequently been got. An orange color, an odor of violets,
a cheesy taste, a thunderous sound, a fiery smart, etc., will recall
what I mean. This absence of a special vocabulary for subjective facts
hinders the study of all but the very coarsest of them. Empiricist
writers are very fond of emphasizing one great set of delusions which
language inflicts on the mind. Whenever we have made a word, they
say, to denote a certain group of phenomena, we are prone to suppose
a substantive entity existing beyond the phenomena, of which the word
shall be the name. But the _lack_ of a word quite as often leads to the
directly opposite error. We are then prone to suppose that no entity
can be there; and so we come to overlook phenomena whose existence
would be patent to us all, had we only grown up to hear it familiarly
recognized in speech.[196] It is hard to focus our attention on the
nameless, and so there results a certain vacuousness in the descriptive
parts of most psychologies.

But a worse defect than vacuousness comes from the dependence of
psychology on common speech. Naming our thought by its own objects,
we almost all of us assume that as the objects are, so the thought
must be. The thought of several distinct things can only consist of
several distinct bits of thought, or 'ideas;' that of an abstract or
universal object can only be an abstract or universal idea. As each
object may come and go, be forgotten and then thought of again, it
is held that the thought of it has a precisely similar independence,
self-identity, and mobility. The thought of the object's recurrent
identity is regarded as the identity of its recurrent thought; and
the perceptions of multiplicity, of coexistence, of succession, are
severally conceived to be brought about only through a multiplicity, a
coexistence, a succession, of perceptions. The continuous flow of the
mental stream is sacrificed, and in its place an atomism, a brickbat
plan of construction, is preached, for the existence of which no
good introspective grounds can be brought forward, and out of which
presently grow all sorts of paradoxes and contradictions, the heritage
of woe of students of the mind.

These words are meant to impeach the entire English psychology derived
from Locke and Hume, and the entire German psychology derived from
Herbart, so far as they both treat 'ideas' as separate subjective
entities that come and go. Examples will soon make the matter clearer.
Meanwhile our psychologic insight is vitiated by still other snares.

'_The Psychologist's Fallacy._' The _great_ snare of the psychologist
is the _confusion of his own standpoint with that of the mental fact_
about which he is making his report. I shall hereafter call this the
'psychologist's fallacy' _par excellence_. For some of the mischief,
here too, language is to blame. The psychologist, as we remarked above
(p. 183), stands outside of the mental state he speaks of. Both itself
and its object are objects for him. Now when it is a _cognitive_ state
(percept, thought, concept, etc.), he ordinarily has no other way of
naming it than as the thought, percept, etc., _of that object_. He
himself, meanwhile, knowing the self-same object in _his_ way, gets
easily led to suppose that the thought, which is _of_ it, knows it in
the same way in which he knows it, although this is often very far from
being the case.[197] The most fictitious puzzles have been introduced
into our science by this means. The so-called question of presentative
or representative perception, of whether an object is present to the
thought that thinks it by a counterfeit image of itself, or directly
and without any intervening image at all; the question of nominalism
and conceptualism, of the shape in which things are present when only
a general notion of them is before the mind; are comparatively easy
questions when once the psychologist's fallacy is eliminated from their
treatment,--as we shall ere long see (in Chapter XII).

_Another variety of the psychologist's fallacy is the assumption
that the mental state studied must be conscious of itself as the
psychologist is conscious of it._ The mental state is aware of itself
only from within; it grasps what we call its own content, and nothing
more. The psychologist, on the contrary, is aware of it from without,
and knows its relations with all sorts of other things. What the
thought sees is only its own object; what the psychologist sees is
the thought's object, plus the thought itself, plus possibly all the
rest of the world. We must be very careful therefore, in discussing a
state of mind from the psychologist's point of view, to avoid foisting
into its own ken matters that are only there for ours. We must avoid
substituting what we know the consciousness _is_, for what it is a
consciousness _of_, and counting its outward, and so to speak physical,
relations with other facts of the world, in among the objects of which
we set it down as aware. Crude as such a confusion of standpoints seems
to be when abstractly stated, it is nevertheless a snare into which
no psychologist has kept himself at all times from falling, and which
forms almost the entire stock-in-trade of certain schools. We cannot be
too watchful against its subtly corrupting influence.

_Summary_. To sum up the chapter, Psychology assumes that thoughts
successively occur, and that they know objects in a world which the
psychologist also knows. _These thoughts are the subjective data
of which he treats, and their relations to their objects, to the
brain, and to the rest of the world constitute the subject-matter of
psychologic science._ Its methods are introspection, experimentation,
and comparison. But introspection is no sure guide to truths _about_
our mental states; and in particular the poverty of the psychological
vocabulary leads us to drop out certain states from our consideration,
and to treat others as if they knew themselves and their objects as the
psychologist knows both, which is a disastrous fallacy in the science.


FOOTNOTES:

[187] On the relation between Psychology and General Philosophy, see G.
C. Robertson, 'Mind,' vol. viii, p. 1, and J. Ward, _ibid._ p. 153; J.
Dewey _ibid._ vol. ix, p. 1.

[188] Compare some remarks in Mill's Logic, bk. i, chap. iii, §§ 2, 3.

[189] Logic, § 40.

[190] Psychologie, bk. ii, chap. iii, §§ 1, 2.

[191] Cours de Philosophie Positive, i, 34-8.

[192] Auguste Comte and Positivism, 3d edition (1882), p. 64.

[193] Wundt says: "The first rule for utilizing inward observation
consists in taking, as far as possible, experiences that are
accidental, unexpected, and not intentionally brought about.... _First_
it is best as far as possible to rely on _Memory_ and not on immediate
Apprehension.... _Second_, internal observation is better fitted to
grasp clearly conscious states, especially voluntary mental acts: such
inner processes as are obscurely conscious and involuntary will almost
entirely elude it, because the effort to observe interferes with them,
and because they seldom abide in memory." (Logik, ii, 432.)

[194] In cases like this, where the state outlasts the act of naming
it, exists before it, and recurs when it is past, we probably run
little practical risk of error when we talk as if the state knew
itself. The state of feeling and the state of naming the feeling
are continuous, and the infallibility of such prompt introspective
judgments is probably great. But even here the certainty of our
knowledge ought not to be argued on the _a priori_ ground that
_percipi_ and _esse_ are in psychology the same. The states are really
two; the naming state and the named state are apart; '_percipi_ is
_esse_' is not the principle that applies.

[195] J. Mohr: Grundlage der Empirischen Psychologie (Leipzig, 1882),
p. 47.

[196] In English we have not even the generic distinction between
the-thing-thought-of and the-thought-thinking-it, which in German is
expressed by the opposition between _Gedachtes_ and _Gedanke_, in Latin
by that between _cogitatum_ and _cogitatio_.

[197] Compare B. P. Bowne's Metaphysics (1882), p. 408.




