CHAPTER VIII.

THE RELATIONS OF MINDS TO OTHER THINGS.


Since, for psychology, a mind is an object in a world of other objects,
its relation to those other objects must next be surveyed. First of
all, to its


TIME-RELATIONS.


Minds, as we know them, are temporary existences. Whether my mind
had a being prior to the birth of my body, whether it shall have
one after the latter's decease, are questions to be decided by my
general philosophy or theology rather than by what we call 'scientific
facts'--I leave out the facts of so-called spiritualism, as being still
in dispute. Psychology, as a natural science, confines itself to the
present life, in which every mind appears yoked to a body through which
its manifestations appear. In the present world, then, minds precede,
succeed, and coexist with each other in the common receptacle of time,
and of their _collective_ relations to the latter nothing more can
be said. The life of the _individual_ consciousness in time seems,
however, to be an interrupted one, so that the question:

    _Are we ever wholly unconscious?_

becomes one which must be discussed. Sleep, fainting, coma, epilepsy,
and other 'unconscious' conditions are apt to break in upon and occupy
large durations of what we nevertheless consider the mental history of
a single man. And, the fact of interruption being admitted, is it not
possible that it may exist where we do not suspect it, and even perhaps
in an incessant and fine-grained form?

This might happen, and yet the subject himself never know it. We often
take ether and have operations performed without a suspicion that our
consciousness has suffered a breach. The two ends join each other
smoothly over the gap; and only the sight of our wound assures us
that we must have been living through a time which for our immediate
consciousness was non-existent. Even in sleep this sometimes happens:
We think we have had no nap, and it takes the clock to assure us that
we are wrong.[198] We thus may live through a real outward time, a time
known by the psychologist who studies us, and yet not _feel_ the time,
or infer it from any inward sign. The question is, how often does this
happen? Is consciousness really discontinuous, incessantly interrupted
and recommencing (from the psychologist's point of view)? and does it
only seem continuous to itself by an illusion analogous to that of the
zoetrope? Or is it at most times as continuous outwardly as it inwardly
seems?

It must be confessed that we can give no rigorous answer to this
question. Cartesians, who hold that the _essence_ of the soul is to
think, can of course solve it _a priori_, and explain the appearance of
thoughtless intervals either by lapses in our ordinary memory, or by
the sinking of consciousness to a minimal state, in which perhaps all
that it feels is a bare existence which leaves no particulars behind to
be recalled. If, however, one have no doctrine about the soul or its
essence, one is free to take the appearances for what they seem to be,
and to admit that the mind, as well as the body, may go to sleep.

Locke was the first prominent champion of this latter view, and the
pages in which he attacks the Cartesian belief are as spirited as any
in his Essay. "Every drowsy nod shakes their doctrine who teach that
their soul is always thinking." He will not believe that men so easily
forget. M. Jouffroy and Sir W. Hamilton, attacking the question in the
same empirical way, are led to an opposite conclusion. Their reasons,
briefly stated, are these:

In somnambulism, natural or induced, there is often a great display of
intellectual activity, followed by complete oblivion of all that has
passed.[199]

On being suddenly awakened from a sleep, however profound, we always
catch ourselves in the middle of a dream. Common dreams are often
remembered for a few minutes after waking, and then irretrievably lost.

Frequently, when awake and absent-minded, we are visited by thoughts
and images which the next instant we cannot recall.

Our insensibility to habitual noises, etc., whilst awake, proves that
we can neglect to attend to that which we nevertheless feel. Similarly
in sleep, we grow inured, and sleep soundly in presence of sensations
of sound, cold, contact, etc., which at first prevented our complete
repose. We have learned to neglect them whilst asleep as we should
whilst awake. The mere _sense-impressions_ are the same when the sleep
is deep as when it is light; the difference must lie in a _judgment_
on the part of the apparently slumbering mind that they are not worth
noticing.

This discrimination is equally shown by nurses of the sick and mothers
of infants, who will sleep through much noise of an irrelevant sort,
but waken at the slightest stirring of the patient or the babe. This
last fact shows the _sense-organ_ to be pervious for sounds.

Many people have a remarkable faculty of registering when asleep the
flight of time. They will habitually wake up at the same minute day
after day, or will wake punctually at an unusual hour determined upon
overnight. How can this knowledge of the hour (more accurate often than
anything the waking consciousness shows) be possible without mental
activity during the interval?

Such are what we may call the classical reasons for admitting that the
mind is active even when the person afterwards ignores the fact.[200]
Of late years, or rather, one may say, of late months, they have been
reinforced by a lot of curious observations made on hysterical and
hypnotic subjects, which prove the existence of a highly developed
consciousness in places where it has hitherto not been suspected at
all. These observations throw such a novel light upon human nature that
I must give them in some detail. That at least four different and in
a certain sense rival observers should agree in the same conclusion
justifies us in accepting the conclusion as true.


_'Unconsciousness' in Hysterics._


One of the most constant symptoms in persons suffering from hysteric
disease in its extreme forms consists in alterations of the natural
sensibility of various parts and organs of the body. Usually the
alteration is in the direction of defect, or anæsthesia. One or both
eyes are blind, or color-blind, or there is hemianopsia (blindness
to one half the field of view), or the field is contracted. Hearing,
taste, smell may similarly disappear, in part or in totality. Still
more striking are the cutaneous anæsthesias. The old witch-finders
looking for the 'devil's seals' learned well the existence of those
insensible patches on the skin of their victims, to which the minute
physical examinations of recent medicine have but recently attracted
attention again. They may be scattered anywhere, but are very apt to
affect one side of the body. Not infrequently they affect an entire
lateral half, from head to foot; and the insensible skin of, say, the
left side will then be found separated from the naturally sensitive
skin of the right by a perfectly sharp line of demarcation down the
middle of the front and back. Sometimes, most remarkable of all, the
entire skin, hands, feet, face, everything, and the mucous membranes,
muscles and joints so far as they can be explored, become _completely_
insensible without the other vital functions becoming gravely disturbed.

These hysterical anæsthesias can be made to disappear more or less
completely by various odd processes. It has been recently found that
magnets, plates of metal, or the electrodes of a battery, placed
against the skin, have this peculiar power. And when one side is
relieved in this way, the anæsthesia is often found to have transferred
itself to the opposite side, which until then was well. Whether
these strange effects of magnets and metals be due to their direct
physiological action, or to a prior effect on the patient's mind
('expectant attention' or 'suggestion') is still a mooted question.
A still better awakener of sensibility is the hypnotic trance, into
which many of these patients can be very easily placed, and in which
their lost sensibility not infrequently becomes entirely restored.
Such returns of sensibility succeed the times of insensibility and
alternate with them. But Messrs. Pierre Janet[201] and A. Binet[202]
have shown that during the times of anæsthesia, and coexisting with it,
_sensibility to the anæsthetic parts is also there, in the form of a
secondary consciousness_ entirely cut off from the primary or normal
one, but susceptible of being _tapped_ and made to testify to its
existence in various odd ways.

Chief amongst these is what M. Janet calls 'the method of
_distraction_.' These hysterics are apt to possess a very narrow field
of attention, and to be unable to think of more than one thing at a
time. When talking with any person they forget everything else. "When
Lucie talked directly with any one," says M. Janet, "she ceased to
be able to hear any other person. You may stand behind her, call her
by name, shout abuse into her ears, without making her turn round;
or place yourself before her, show her objects, touch her, etc.,
without attracting her notice. When finally she becomes aware of you,
she thinks you have just come into the room again, and greets you
accordingly. This singular forgetfulness makes her liable to tell
all her secrets aloud, unrestrained by the presence of unsuitable
auditors."

Now M. Janet found in several subjects like this that if he came up
behind them whilst they were plunged in conversation with a third
party, and addressed them in a whisper, telling them to raise their
hand or perform other simple acts, they would obey the order given,
although their _talking_ intelligence was quite unconscious of
receiving it. Leading them from one thing to another, he made them
reply by signs to his whispered questions, and finally made them
answer in writing, if a pencil were placed in their hand. The primary
consciousness meanwhile went on with the conversation, entirely
unaware of these performances on the hand's part. The consciousness
which presided over these latter appeared in its turn to be quite as
little disturbed by the upper consciousness's concerns. This _proof
by 'automatic' writing_, of a secondary consciousness's existence, is
the most cogent and striking one; but a crowd of other facts prove the
same thing. If I run through them rapidly, the reader will probably be
convinced.

_The apparently anæsthetic hand_ of these subjects, for one thing,
_will often adapt itself discriminatingly_ to whatever object may be
put into it. With a pencil it will make writing movements; into a pair
of scissors it will put its fingers and will open and shut them, etc.,
etc. The primary consciousness, so to call it, is meanwhile unable to
say whether or no _anything_ is in the hand, if the latter be hidden
from sight. "I put a pair of eyeglasses into Léonie's anæsthetic
hand, this hand opens it and raises it towards the nose, but half way
thither it enters the field of vision of Léonie, who sees it and stops
stupefied: 'Why,' says she, 'I have an eye-glass in my left hand!'" M.
Binet found a very curious sort of connection between the apparently
anæsthetic skin and the mind in some Salpétrière-subjects. Things
placed in the hand were not felt, but _thought_ of (apparently in
visual terms) and in no wise referred by the subject to their starting
point in the hand's sensation. A key, a knife, placed in the hand
occasioned _ideas_ of a key or a knife, but the hand felt nothing.
Similarly the subject _thought of_ the number 3, 6, etc., if the hand
or finger was bent three or six times by the operator, or if he stroked
it three, six, etc., times.

In certain individuals there was found a still odder phenomenon, which
reminds one of that curious idiosyncrasy of 'colored hearing' of which
a few cases have been lately described with great care by foreign
writers. These individuals, namely, _saw_ the impression received by
the hand, but could not feel it; and the thing seen appeared by no
means associated with the hand, but more like an independent vision,
which usually interested and surprised the patient. Her hand being
hidden by a screen, she was ordered to look at another screen and to
tell of any visual image which might project itself thereon. Numbers
would then come, corresponding to the number of times the insensible
member was raised, touched, etc. Colored lines and figures would come,
corresponding to similar ones traced on the palm; the hand itself or
its fingers would come when manipulated and finally objects placed in
it would come; but on the hand itself nothing would ever be felt. Of
course simulation would not be hard here; but M. Binet disbelieves this
(usually very shallow) explanation to be a probable one in cases in
question.[203]

The usual way in which doctors measure the delicacy of our touch is by
the compass-points. Two points are normally felt as one whenever they
are too close together for discrimination; but what is 'too close' on
one part of the skin may seem very far apart on another. In the middle
of the back or on the thigh, less than 3 inches may be too close;
on the finger-tip a tenth of an inch is far enough apart. Now, as
tested in this way, with the appeal made to the primary consciousness,
which talks through the mouth and seems to hold the field alone, a
certain person's skin may be entirely anæsthetic and not feel the
compass-points at all; and yet this same skin will prove to have a
perfectly normal sensibility if the appeal be made to that other
secondary or sub-consciousness, which expresses itself automatically by
writing or by movements of the hand. M. Binet, M. Pierre Janet, and M.
Jules Janet have all found this. The subject, whenever touched, would
signify 'one point' or 'two points,' as accurately as if she were a
normal person. She would signify it only by these movements; and of the
movements themselves her primary self would be as unconscious as of the
facts they signified, for what the submerged consciousness makes the
hand do automatically is unknown to the consciousness which uses the
mouth.

Messrs. Bernheim and Pitres have also proved, by observations too
complicated to be given in this spot, that the hysterical blindness
is no real blindness at all. The eye of an hysteric which is totally
blind when the other or seeing eye is shut, will do its share of vision
perfectly well when _both_ eyes are open together. But even where both
eyes are semi-blind from hysterical disease, the method of automatic
writing proves that their perceptions exist, only cut off from
communication with the upper consciousness. M. Binet has found the hand
of his patients unconsciously writing down words which their eyes were
vainly endeavoring to 'see,' i.e., to bring to the upper consciousness.
Their submerged consciousness was of course seeing them, or the hand
could not have written as it did. Colors are similarly perceived by
the sub-conscious self, which the hysterically color-blind eyes cannot
bring to the normal consciousness. Pricks, burns, and pinches on the
anæsthetic skin, all unnoticed by the upper self, are recollected to
have been suffered, and complained of, as soon as the under self gets
a chance to express itself by the passage of the subject into hypnotic
trance.

It must be admitted, therefore, that _in certain persons_, at least,
_the total possible consciousness may be split into parts which coexist
but mutually ignore each other,_ and share the objects of knowledge
between them. More remarkable still, they are _complementary_. Give an
object to one of the consciousnesses, and by that fact you remove it
from the other or others. Barring a certain common fund of information,
like the command of language, etc., what the upper self knows the
under self is ignorant of, and _vice versâ_. M. Janet has proved this
beautifully in his subject Lucie. The following experiment will serve
as the type of the rest: In her trance he covered her lap with cards,
each bearing a number. He then told her that on waking she should
_not see_ any card whose number was a multiple of three. This is the
ordinary so-called 'post-hypnotic suggestion,' now well known, and
for which Lucie was a well-adapted subject. Accordingly, when she was
awakened and asked about the papers on her lap, she counted and said
she saw those only whose number was not a multiple of 3. To the 12,
18, 9, etc., she was blind. But the _hand_, when the sub-conscious
self was interrogated by the usual method of engrossing the upper
self in another conversation, wrote that the only cards in Lucie's
lap were those numbered 12, 18, 9, etc., and on being asked to pick
up all the cards which were there, picked up these and let the others
lie. Similarly when the sight of certain things was suggested to the
sub-conscious Lucie, the normal Lucie suddenly became partially or
totally blind. "What is the matter? I can't see!" the normal personage
suddenly cried out in the midst of her conversation, when M. Janet
whispered to the secondary personage to make use of her eyes. The
anæsthesias, paralyses, contractions and other irregularities from
which hysterics suffer seem then to be due to the fact that their
secondary personage has enriched itself by robbing the primary one
of a function which the latter ought to have retained. The curative
indication is evident: get at the secondary personage, by hypnotization
or in whatever other way, and make her _give up_ the eye, the skin, the
arm, or whatever the affected part may be. The normal self thereupon
regains possession, sees, feels, or is able to move again. In this way
M. Jules Janet easily cured the well-known subject of the Salpétrière,
Wit...., of all sorts of afflictions which, until he discovered the
secret of her deeper trance, it had been difficult to subdue. "Cessez
cette mauvaise plaisanterie," he said to the secondary self--and the
latter obeyed. The way in which the various personages share the stock
of possible sensations between them seems to be amusingly illustrated
in this young woman. When awake, her skin is insensible everywhere
except on a zone about the arm where she habitually wears a gold
bracelet. This zone has feeling; but in the deepest trance, when all
the rest of her body feels, this particular zone becomes absolutely
anæsthetic.

Sometimes the mutual ignorance of the selves leads to incidents
which are strange enough. The acts and movements performed by the
sub-conscious self are withdrawn from the conscious one, and the
subject will do all sorts of incongruous things of which he remains
quite unaware. "I order Lucie [by the method of _distraction_] to make
a _pied de nez_, and her hands go forthwith to the end of her nose.
Asked what she is doing, she replies that she is doing nothing, and
continues for a long time talking, with no apparent suspicion that her
fingers are moving in front of her nose. I make her walk about the
room; she continues to speak and believes herself sitting down."

M. Janet observed similar acts in a man in alcoholic delirium. Whilst
the doctor was questioning him, M. J. made him by whispered suggestion
walk, sit, kneel, and even lie down on his face on the floor, he
all the while believing himself to be standing beside his bed. Such
_bizarreries_ sound incredible, until one has seen their like. Long
ago, without understanding it, I myself saw a small example of the way
in which a person's knowledge may be shared by the two selves. A young
woman who had been writing automatically was sitting with a pencil
in her hand, trying to recall at my request the name of a gentleman
whom she had once seen. She could only recollect the first syllable.
Her hand meanwhile, without her knowledge, wrote down the last two
syllables. In a perfectly healthy young man who can write with the
planchette, I lately found the hand to be entirely anæsthetic during
the writing act; I could prick it severely without the Subject knowing
the fact. The _writing on the planchette_, however, accused me in
strong terms of hurting the hand. Pricks on the _other_ (non-writing)
hand, meanwhile, which awakened strong protest from the young man's
vocal organs, were denied to exist by the self which made the
planchette go.[204]

_We get exactly similar results in the so-called post-hypnotic
suggestion._ It is a familiar fact that certain subjects, when told
during a trance to perform an act or to experience an hallucination
after waking, will when the time comes, obey the command. How is the
command registered? How is its performance so accurately timed? These
problems were long a mystery, for the primary personality remembers
nothing of the trance or the suggestion, and will often trump up an
improvised pretext for yielding to the unaccountable impulse which
possesses the man so suddenly and which he cannot resist. Edmund
Gurney was the first to discover, by means of automatic writing, that
the secondary self is awake, keeping its attention constantly fixed
on the command and watching for the signal of its execution. Certain
trance-subjects who were also automatic writers, when roused from
trance and put to the planchette,--not knowing then what they wrote,
and having their upper attention fully engrossed by reading aloud,
talking, or solving problems in mental arithmetic,--would inscribe the
orders which they had received, together with notes relative to the
time elapsed and the time yet to run before the execution.[205] It is
therefore to no 'automatism' in the mechanical sense that such acts
are due: a self presides over them, a split-off, limited and buried,
but yet a fully conscious, self. More than this, the buried self often
comes to the surface and drives out the other self whilst the acts are
performing. In other words, the subject lapses into trance again when
the moment arrives for execution, and has no subsequent recollection
of the act which he has done. Gurney and Beaunis established this
fact, which has since been verified on a large scale; and Gurney also
showed that the patient became _suggestible_ again during the brief
time of the performance. M. Janet's observations, in their turn, well
illustrate the phenomenon.

 "I tell Lucie to keep her arms raised after she shall have awakened.
 Hardly is she in the normal state, when up go her arms above her head,
 but she pays no attention to them. She goes, comes, converses, holding
 her arms high in the air. If asked what her arms are doing, she is
 surprised at such a question, and says very sincerely: 'My hands are
 doing nothing; they are just like yours.'... I command her to weep,
 and when awake she really sobs, but continues in the midst of her
 tears to talk of very gay matters. The sobbing over, there remained no
 trace of this grief, which seemed to have been quite sub-conscious."

The primary self often has to invent an hallucination by which to mask
and hide from its own view the deeds which the other self is enacting.
Léonie 3[206] writes real letters whilst Léonie 1 believes that she
is knitting; or Lucie 2 really comes to the doctor's office, whilst
Lucie 1 believes herself to be at home. This is a sort of delirium. The
alphabet, or the series of numbers, when handed over to the attention
of the secondary personage may for the time be lost to the normal
self. Whilst the hand writes the alphabet, obediently to command, the
'subject,' to her great stupefaction, finds herself unable to recall
it, etc. Few things are more curious than these relations of mutual
exclusion, of which all gradations exist between the several partial
consciousnesses.

       *       *       *       *       *

How far this splitting up of the mind into separate consciousnesses may
exist in each one of us is a problem. M. Janet holds that it is only
possible where there is abnormal weakness, and consequently a defect
of unifying or co-ordinating power. An hysterical woman abandons part
of her consciousness because she is too weak nervously to hold it
together. The abandoned part meanwhile may solidify into a secondary or
sub-conscious self. In a perfectly sound subject, on the other hand,
what is dropped out of mind at one moment keeps coming back at the
next. The whole fund of experiences and knowledges remains integrated,
and no split-off portions of it can get organized stably enough to form
subordinate selves. The stability, monotony, and stupidity of these
latter is often very striking. The post-hypnotic sub-consciousness
seems to think of nothing but the order which it last received;
the cataleptic sub-consciousness, of nothing but the last position
imprinted on the limb. M. Janet could cause definitely circumscribed
reddening and tumefaction of the skin on two of his subjects, by
suggesting to them in hypnotism the hallucination of a mustard-poultice
of any special shape. "J'ai tout le temps pensé à votre sinapisme,"
says the subject, when put back into trance after the suggestion has
taken effect. A man N., whom M. Janet operated on at long intervals,
was betweenwhiles tampered with by another operator, and when put
to sleep again by M. Janet, said he was 'too far away to receive
orders, being in Algiers.' The other operator, having suggested that
hallucination, had forgotten to remove it before waking the subject
from his trance, and the poor passive trance-personality had stuck for
weeks in the stagnant dream. Léonie's sub-conscious performances having
been illustrated to a caller, by a '_pied de nez_' executed with her
left hand in the course of conversation, when, a year later, she meets
him again, up goes the same hand to her nose again, without Léonie's
normal self suspecting the fact.

       *       *       *       *       *

All these facts, taken together, form unquestionably the beginning
of an inquiry which is destined to throw a new light into the very
abysses of our nature. It is for that reason that I have cited them at
such length in this early chapter of the book. They prove one thing
conclusively, namely, that _we must never take a person's testimony,
however sincere, that he has felt nothing, as proof positive that
no feeling has been there._ It may have been there as part of the
consciousness of a 'secondary personage,' of whose experiences the
primary one whom we are consulting can naturally give no account. In
hypnotic subjects (as we shall see in a later chapter) just as it
is the easiest thing in the world to paralyze a movement or member
by simple suggestion, so it is easy to produce what is called a
systematized anæsthesia by word of command. A systematized anæsthesia
means an insensibility, not to any one element of things, but to some
one concrete thing or class of things. The subject is made blind or
deaf to a certain person in the room and to no one else, and thereupon
denies that that person is present, or has spoken, etc. M. P. Janet's
Lucie, blind to some of the numbered cards in her lap (p. 207 above),
is a case in point. Now when the object is simple, like a red wafer
or a black cross, the subject, although he denies that he sees it when
he looks straight at it, nevertheless gets a 'negative after-image' of
it when he looks away again, showing that the _optical impression_ of
it has been received. Moreover reflection shows that such a subject
must _distinguish the object from others like it in order to be blind
to it._ Make him blind to one person in the room, set all the persons
in a row, and tell him to count them. He will count all but that one.
But how can he tell _which_ one not to count without recognizing who
he is? In like manner, make a stroke on paper or blackboard, and tell
him it is not there, and he will see nothing but the clean paper or
board. Next (he not looking) surround the original stroke with other
strokes exactly like it, and ask him what he sees. He will point out
one by one all the new strokes, and omit the original one every time,
no matter how numerous the new strokes may be, or in what order they
are arranged. Similarly, if the original single stroke to which he is
blind be _doubled_ by a prism of some sixteen degrees placed before one
of his eyes (both being kept open), he will say that he now sees _one_
stroke, and point in the direction in which the image seen through the
prism lies, ignoring still the original stroke.

Obviously, then, he is not blind to the _kind_ of stroke in the least.
He is blind only to one individual stroke of that kind in a particular
position on the board or paper--that is to a particular complex object;
and, paradoxical as it may seem to say so, he must distinguish it with
great accuracy from others like it, in order to remain blind to it when
the others are brought near. He discriminates it, as a preliminary to
not seeing it at all.

Again, when by a prism before one eye a previously invisible line has
been made visible to that eye, and the other eye is thereupon closed
or screened, _its_ closure makes no difference; the line still remains
visible. But if then the prism be removed, the line will disappear even
to the eye which a moment ago saw it, and both eyes will revert to
their original blind state.

We have, then, to deal in these cases neither with a blindness of the
eye itself, nor with a mere failure to notice, but with something much
more complex; namely, an active counting out and positive exclusion of
certain objects. It is as when one 'cuts' an acquaintance, 'ignores'
a claim, or 'refuses to be influenced' by a consideration. But the
perceptive activity which works to this result is disconnected from the
consciousness which is personal, so to speak, to the subject, and makes
of the object concerning which the suggestion is made, its own private
possession and prey.[207]

The mother who is asleep to every sound but the stirrings of her
babe, evidently has the babe-portion of her auditory sensibility
systematically awake. Relatively to that, the rest of her mind is
in a state of systematized anæsthesia. That department, split off
and disconnected from the sleeping part, can none the less wake the
latter up in case of need. So that on the whole the quarrel between
Descartes and Locke as to whether the mind ever sleeps is less near
to solution than ever. On _a priori_ speculative grounds Locke's view
that thought and feeling may at times wholly disappear seems the more
plausible. As glands cease to secrete and muscles to contract, so the
brain should sometimes cease to carry currents, and with this minimum
of its activity might well coexist a minimum of consciousness. On the
other hand, we see how deceptive are appearances, and are forced to
admit that a part of consciousness may sever its connections with other
parts and yet continue to be. On the whole it is best to abstain from a
conclusion. The science of the near future will doubtless answer this
question more wisely than we can now.

Let us turn now to consider the


RELATIONS OF CONSCIOUSNESS TO SPACE.


This is the problem known in the history of philosophy as the _question
of the seat of the soul_. It has given rise to much literature, but
we must ourselves treat it very briefly. Everything depends on what
we conceive the soul to be, an extended or an inextended entity. If
the former, it may occupy a seat. If the latter, it may not; though
it has been thought that even then it might still have a _position_.
Much hair-splitting has arisen about the possibility of an inextended
thing nevertheless being _present_ throughout a certain amount of
extension. We must distinguish the kinds of presence. In some manner
our consciousness is 'present' to everything with which it is in
relation. I am _cognitively_ present to Orion whenever I perceive that
constellation, but I am not _dynamically_ present there, I work no
effects. To my brain, however, I am dynamically present, inasmuch as
my thoughts and feelings seem to react upon the processes thereof. If,
then, by the seat of the mind is meant nothing more than the locality
with which it stands in immediate dynamic relations, we are certain
to be right in saying that its seat is somewhere in the cortex of the
brain. Descartes, as is well known, thought that the inextended soul
was immediately present to the pineal gland. Others, as Lotze in his
earlier days, and W. Volkmann, think its position must be at some
point of the structureless matrix of the anatomical brain-elements,
at which point they suppose that all nerve-currents may cross and
combine. The scholastic doctrine is that the soul is totally present,
both in the whole and in each and every part of the body. This mode
of presence is said to be due to the soul's inextended nature and to
its simplicity. Two extended entities could only correspond in space
with one another, part to part,--but not so does the soul, which has
no parts, correspond with the body. Sir Wm. Hamilton and Professor
Bowen defend something like this view. I. H. Fichte, Ulrici, and, among
American philosophers, Mr. J. E. Walter,[208] maintain the soul to be a
space-filling principle. Fichte calls it the inner body, Ulrici likens
it to a fluid of non-molecular composition. These theories remind us
of the 'theosophic' doctrines of the present day, and carry us back to
times when the soul as vehicle of consciousness was not discriminated,
as it now is, from the vital principle presiding over the formation of
the body. Plato gave head, breast, and abdomen to the immortal reason,
the courage, and the appetites, as their seats respectively. Aristotle
argues that the heart is the sole seat. Elsewhere we find the blood,
the brain, the lungs, the liver the kidneys even, in turn assigned as
seat of the whole or part of the soul.[209]

The truth is that if the thinking principle is extended we neither know
its form nor its seat; whilst if unextended, it is absurd to speak
of its having any space-relations at all. Space-relations we shall
see hereafter to be _sensible_ things. The only objects that can have
mutual relations of position are objects that are perceived coexisting
in the same felt space. A thing not perceived at all, such as the
inextended soul must be, cannot coexist with any perceived objects in
this way. No lines can be felt stretching from it to the other objects.
It can form no terminus to any space-interval. It can therefore in no
intelligible sense enjoy position. Its relations cannot be spatial,
but must be exclusively cognitive or dynamic, as we have seen. So far
as they are dynamic, to talk of the soul being 'present' is only a
figure of speech. Hamilton's doctrine that the soul is present to the
whole body is at any rate false: for cognitively its presence extends
far beyond the body, and dynamically it does not extend beyond the
brain.[210]


THE RELATIONS OF MINDS TO OTHER OBJECTS


are either relations to _other minds_, or to _material things_. The
material things are either the mind's _own brain_, on the one hand, or
_anything else_, on the other. The relations of a mind to its own brain
are of a unique and utterly mysterious sort; we discussed them in the
last two chapters, and can add nothing to that account.

The mind's relations to other objects than the brain are _cognitive
and emotional_ relations exclusively, so far as we know. It _knows_
them, and it inwardly _welcomes or rejects_ them, but it has no other
dealings with them. When it seems to _act_ upon them, it only does so
through the intermediary of its own body, so that not it but the body
is what acts on them, and the brain must first act upon the body. The
same is true when other things seem to act on it--they only act on
the body, and through that on its brain.[211] All that it _can_ do
_directly_ is to know other things, misknow or ignore them, and to find
that they interest it, in this fashion or in that.

Now the _relation of knowing_ is the most mysterious thing in the
world. If we ask how one thing _can_ know another we are led into the
heart of _Erkenntnisstheorie_ and metaphysics. The psychologist, for
his part, does not consider the matter so curiously as this. Finding
a world before him which he cannot but believe that _he_ knows, and
setting himself to study his own past thoughts, or someone else's
thoughts, of what he believes to be that same world; he cannot but
conclude that those other thoughts know it after their fashion even as
he knows it after his. Knowledge becomes for him an ultimate relation
that must be admitted, whether it be explained or not, just like
difference or resemblance, which no one seeks to explain.

Were our topic Absolute Mind instead of being the concrete minds of
individuals dwelling in the natural world, we could not tell whether
that Mind had the function of knowing or not, as knowing is commonly
understood. We might learn the complexion of its thoughts; but, as we
should have no realities outside of it to compare them with,--for if
we had, the Mind would not be Absolute,--we could not criticise them,
and find them either right or wrong; and we should have to call them
simply the thoughts, and not the _knowledge_, of the Absolute Mind.
Finite minds, however, can be judged in a different way, because the
psychologist himself can go bail for the independent reality of the
objects of which they think. He knows these to exist outside as well as
inside the minds in question; he thus knows whether the minds think and
_know_, or only think; and though his knowledge is of course that of a
fallible mortal, there is nothing in the conditions that should make it
more likely to be wrong in this case than in any other.

Now by what tests does the psychologist decide whether the state of
mind he is studying is a bit of knowledge, or only a subjective fact
not referring to anything outside itself?

He uses the tests we all practically use. If the state of mind
_resembles_ his own idea of a certain reality; or if without resembling
his idea of it, it seems to imply that reality and refer to it by
operating upon it through the bodily organs; or even if it resembles
and operates on some other reality that implies, and leads up to,
and terminates in, the first one,--in either or all of these cases
the psychologist admits that the state of mind takes cognizance,
directly or remotely, distinctly or vaguely, truly or falsely, of the
reality's nature and position in the world. If, on the other hand, the
mental state under examination neither resembles nor operates on any
of the realities known to the psychologist, he calls it a subjective
state pure and simple, possessed of no cognitive worth. If, again,
it resemble a reality or a set of realities as he knows them, but
altogether fail to operate on them or modify their course by producing
bodily motions which the psychologist sees, then the psychologist, like
all of us, may be in doubt. Let the mental state, for example, occur
during the sleep of its subject. Let the latter dream of the death of
a certain man, and let the man simultaneously die. Is the dream a mere
coincidence, or a veritable cognition of the death? Such puzzling cases
are what the Societies for 'Psychical Research' are collecting and
trying to interpret in the most reasonable way.

If the dream were the only one of the kind the subject ever had in
his life, if the context of the death in the dream differed in many
particulars from the real death's context, and if the dream led to
no action about the death, unquestionably we should all call it a
strange coincidence, and naught besides. But if the death in the dream
had a long context, agreeing point for point with every feature that
attended the real death; if the subject were constantly having such
dreams, all equally perfect, and if on awaking he had a habit of acting
immediately as if they were true and so getting 'the start' of his more
tardily informed neighbors,--we should probably all have to admit that
he had some mysterious kind of clairvoyant power, that his dreams in
an inscrutable way knew just those realities which they figured, and
that the word 'coincidence' failed to touch the root of the matter.
And whatever doubts any one preserved would completely vanish if it
should appear that from the midst of his dream he had the power of
_interfering_ with the course of the reality, and making the events in
it turn this way or that, according as he dreamed they should. Then at
least it would be certain that he and the psychologist were dealing
with the _same_. It is by such tests as these that we are convinced
that the waking minds of our fellows and our own minds know the same
external world.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The psychologist's attitude towards cognition_ will be so important in
the sequel that we must not leave it until it is made perfectly clear.
_It is a thoroughgoing dualism._ It supposes two elements, mind knowing
and thing known, and treats them as irreducible. Neither gets out of
itself or into the other, neither in any way _is_ the other, neither
_makes_ the other. They just stand face to face in a common world, and
one simply knows, or is known unto, its counterpart. This singular
relation is not to be expressed in any lower terms, or translated into
any more intelligible name. Some sort of _signal_ must be given by the
thing to the mind's brain, or the knowing will not occur--we find as a
matter of fact that the mere _existence_ of a thing outside the brain
is not a sufficient cause for our knowing it: it must strike the brain
in some way, as well as be there, to be known. But the brain being
struck, the knowledge is constituted by a new construction that occurs
altogether _in_ the mind. The thing remains the same whether known or
not.[212] And when once there, the knowledge may remain there, whatever
becomes of the thing.

By the ancients, and by unreflecting people perhaps to-day, knowledge
is explained as the _passage_ of something from without into the
mind--the latter, so far, at least, as its sensible affections go,
being passive and receptive. But even in mere sense-impression the
duplication of the object by an inner construction must take place.
Consider, with Professor Bowne, what happens when two people converse
together and know each other's mind.

 "No thoughts leave the mind of one and cross into the mind of the
 other. When we speak of an exchange of thought, even the crudest mind
 knows that this is a mere figure of speech.... To perceive another's
 thought, we must construct his thought within ourselves;... this
 thought is our own and is strictly original with us. At the same time
 we owe it to the other; and if it had not originated with him, it
 would probably not have originated with us. But what has the other
 done?... This: by an entirely mysterious world-order, the speaker is
 enabled to produce a series of signs which are totally unlike [the]
 thought, but which, by virtue of the same mysterious order, act
 as a series of incitements upon the hearer, so that he constructs
 within himself the corresponding mental state. The act of the speaker
 consists in availing himself of the proper incitements. The act of
 the hearer is immediately only the reaction of the soul against the
 incitement.... All communion between finite minds is of this sort....
 Probably no reflecting person would deny this conclusion, but when
 we say that what is thus true of perception of another's thought
 is equally true of the perception of the outer world in general,
 many minds will be disposed to question, and not a few will deny it
 outright. Yet there is no alternative but to affirm that to perceive
 the universe we must construct it in thought, and that our knowledge
 of the universe is but the unfolding of the mind's inner nature....
 By describing the mind as a waxen tablet, and things as impressing
 themselves upon it, we seem to get great insight until we think to
 ask where this extended tablet is, and how things stamp themselves
 on it, and how the perceptive act would be explained even if they
 did.... The immediate antecedents of sensation and perception are
 a series of nervous changes in the brain. Whatever we know of the
 outer world is revealed only in and through these nervous changes.
 But these are totally unlike the objects assumed to exist as their
 causes. If we might conceive the mind as in the light, and in direct
 contact with its objects, the imagination at least would be comforted;
 but when we conceive the mind as coming in contact with the outer
 world only in the dark chamber of the skull, and then not in contact
 with the objects perceived, but only with a series of nerve-changes
 of which, moreover, it knows nothing, it is plain that the object
 is a long way off. All talk of pictures, impressions, etc., ceases
 because of the lack of all the conditions to give such figures any
 meaning. It is not even clear that we shall ever find our way out
 of the darkness into the world of light and reality again. We begin
 with complete trust in physics and the senses, and are forthwith
 led away from the object into a nervous labyrinth, where the object
 is entirely displaced by a set of nervous changes which are totally
 unlike anything but themselves. Finally, we land in the dark chamber
 of the skull. The object has gone completely, and knowledge has not
 yet appeared. Nervous signs are the raw material of all knowledge of
 the outer world according to the most decided realism. But in order
 to pass beyond these signs into a knowledge of the outer world, we
 must posit an interpreter who shall read back these signs into their
 objective meaning. But that interpreter, again, must implicitly
 contain the meaning of the universe within itself; and these signs are
 really but excitations which cause the soul to unfold what is within
 itself. Inasmuch as by common consent the soul communicates with the
 outer world only through these signs, and never comes nearer to the
 object than such signs can bring it, it follows that the principles
 of interpretation must be in the mind itself, and that the resulting
 construction is primarily only an expression of the mind's own nature.
 All reaction is of this sort; it expresses the nature of the reacting
 agent, and knowledge comes under the same head, this fact makes it
 necessary for us either to admit a pre-established harmony between the
 laws and nature of thought and the laws and nature of things, or else
 to allow that the objects of perception, the universe as it appears,
 are purely phenomenal, being but the way in which the mind reacts
 against the ground of its sensations."[213]

The dualism of Object and Subject and their pre-established harmony are
what the psychologist as such must assume, whatever ulterior monistic
philosophy he may, as an individual who has the right also to be a
metaphysician, have in reserve. I hope that this general point is now
made clear, so that we may leave it, and descend to some distinctions
of detail.

       *       *       *       *       *

_There are two kinds of knowledge_ broadly and practically
distinguishable: we may call them respectively _knowledge of
acquaintance_ and _knowledge-about_. Most languages express the
distinction; thus, _γνῶναι, εὶδέναι; noscere, scire; kennen, wissen;
connaître, savoir_.[214] I am acquainted with many people and things,
which I know very little about, except their presence in the places
where I have met them. I know the color blue when I see it, and the
flavor of a pear when I taste it; I know an inch when I move my finger
through it; a second of time, when I feel it pass; an effort of
attention when I make it; a difference between two things when I notice
it; but _about_ the inner nature of these facts or what makes them
what they are, I can say nothing at all. I cannot impart acquaintance
with them to any one who has not already made it himself. I cannot
_describe_ them, make a blind man guess what blue is like, define to a
child a syllogism, or tell a philosopher in just what respect distance
is just what it is, and differs from other forms of relation. At most,
I can say to my friends, Go to certain places and act in certain ways,
and these objects will probably come. All the elementary natures of the
world, its highest genera, the simple qualities of matter and mind,
together with the kinds of relation that subsist between them, must
either not be known at all, or known in this dumb way of acquaintance
without _knowledge-about_. In minds able to speak at all there is, it
is true, _some_ knowledge about everything. Things can at least be
classed, and the times of their appearance told. But in general, the
less we analyze a thing, and the fewer of its relations we perceive,
the less we know about it and the more our familiarity with it is of
the acquaintance-type. The two kinds of knowledge are, therefore, as
the human mind practically exerts them, relative terms. That is, the
same thought of a thing may be called knowledge-about it in comparison
with a simpler thought, or acquaintance with it in comparison with a
thought of it that is more articulate and explicit still.

The grammatical sentence expresses this. Its 'subject' stands for an
object of acquaintance which, by the addition of the predicate, is to
get something known about it. We may already know a good deal, when
we hear the subject named--its name may have rich connotations. But,
know we much or little then, we know more still when the sentence is
done. We can relapse at will into a mere condition of acquaintance with
an object by scattering our attention and staring at it in a vacuous
trance-like way. We can ascend to knowledge _about_ it by rallying our
wits and proceeding to notice and analyze and think. What we are only
acquainted with is only _present_ to our minds; we _have_ it, or the
idea of it. But when we know about it, we do more than merely have
it; we seem, as we think over its relations, to subject it to a sort
of _treatment_ and to _operate_ upon it with our thought. The words
_feeling_ and _thought_ give voice to the antithesis. Through feelings
we become acquainted with things, but only by our thoughts do we know
about them. Feelings are the germ and starting point of cognition,
thoughts the developed tree. The minimum of grammatical subject, of
objective presence, of reality known about, the mere beginning of
knowledge, must be named by the word that says the least. Such a word
is the interjection, as _lo! there! ecco! voilà!_ or the article or
demonstrative pronoun introducing the sentence, as _the, it, that_. In
