CHAPTER V.

THE AUTOMATON-THEORY.


In describing the functions of the hemispheres a short way back, we
used language derived from both the bodily and the mental life, saying
now that the animal made indeterminate and unforeseeable reactions,
and anon that he was swayed by considerations of future good and
evil; treating his hemispheres sometimes as the seat of memory and
ideas in the psychic sense, and sometimes talking of them as simply a
complicated addition to his reflex machinery. This sort of vacillation
in the point of view is a fatal incident of all ordinary talk about
these questions; but I must now settle my scores with those readers to
whom I already dropped a word in passing (see Footnote 6) and who have
probably been dissatisfied with my conduct ever since.

Suppose we restrict our view to facts of one and the same plane, and
let that be the bodily plane: cannot all the outward phenomena of
intelligence still be exhaustively described? Those mental images,
those 'considerations,' whereof we spoke,--presumably they do not
arise without neural processes arising simultaneously with them,
and presumably each consideration corresponds to a process _sui
generis_, and unlike all the rest. In other words, however numerous
and delicately differentiated the train of ideas may be, the train
of brain-events that runs alongside of it must in both respects be
exactly its match, and we must postulate a neural machinery that offers
a living counterpart for every shading, however fine, of the history
of its owner's mind. Whatever degree of complication the latter may
reach, the complication of the machinery must be quite as extreme,
otherwise we should have to admit that there may be mental events to
which no brain-events correspond. But such an admission as this the
physiologist is reluctant to make. It would violate all his beliefs.
'No psychosis without neurosis,' is one form which the principle of
continuity takes in his mind.

But this principle forces the physiologist to make still another step.
If neural action is as complicated as mind; and if in the sympathetic
system and lower spinal cord we see what, so far as we know, is
unconscious neural action executing deeds that to all outward intent
may be called intelligent; what is there to hinder us from supposing
that even where we know consciousness to be there, the still more
complicated neural action which we believe to be its inseparable
companion is alone and of itself the real agent of whatever intelligent
deeds may appear? "As actions of a certain degree of complexity are
brought about by mere mechanism, why may not actions of a still greater
degree of complexity be the result of a more refined mechanism?" The
conception of reflex action is surely one of the best conquests of
physiological theory; why not be radical with it? Why not say that just
as the spinal cord is a machine with few reflexes, so the hemispheres
are a machine with many, and that that is all the difference? The
principle of continuity would press us to accept this view.

But what on this view could be the function of the consciousness
itself? _Mechanical_ function it would have none. The sense-organs
would awaken the brain-cells; these would awaken each other in rational
and orderly sequence, until the time for action came; and then the last
brain-vibration would discharge downward into the motor tracts. But
this would be a quite autonomous chain of occurrences, and whatever
mind went with it would be there only as an 'epiphenomenon,' an inert
spectator, a sort of 'foam, aura, or melody' as Mr. Hodgson says,
whose opposition or whose furtherance would be alike powerless over
the occurrences themselves. When talking, some time ago, we ought
not, accordingly, _as physiologists_, to have said anything about
'considerations' as guiding the animal. We ought to have said 'paths
left in the hemispherical cortex by former currents,' and nothing more.

Now so simple and attractive is this conception from the consistently
physiological point of view, that it is quite wonderful to see how late
it was stumbled on in philosophy, and how few people, even when it
has been explained to them, fully and easily realize its import. Much
of the polemic writing against it is by men who have as yet failed to
take it into their imaginations. Since this has been the case, it seems
worth while to devote a few more words to making it plausible, before
criticising it ourselves.

To Descartes belongs the credit of having first been bold enough to
conceive of a completely self-sufficing nervous mechanism which should
be able to perform complicated and apparently intelligent acts. By a
singularly arbitrary restriction, however, Descartes stopped short at
man, and while contending that in beasts the nervous machinery was all,
he held that the higher acts of man were the result of the agency of
his rational soul. The opinion that beasts have no consciousness at
all was of course too paradoxical to maintain itself long as anything
more than a curious item in the history of philosophy. And with its
abandonment the very notion that the nervous system _per se_ might work
the work of intelligence, which was an integral, though detachable
part of the whole theory, seemed also to slip out of men's conception,
until, in this century, the elaboration of the doctrine of reflex
action made it possible and natural that it should again arise. But it
was not till 1870, I believe, that Mr. Hodgson made the decisive step,
by saying that feelings, no matter how intensely they may be present,
can have no causal efficacy whatever, and comparing them to the colors
laid on the surface of a mosaic, of which the events in the nervous
system are represented by the stones.[155] Obviously the stones are
held in place by each other and not by the several colors which they
support.

About the same time Mr. Spalding, and a little later Messrs. Huxley
and Clifford, gave great publicity to an identical doctrine,
though in their case it was backed by less refined metaphysical
considerations.[156]

A few sentences from Huxley and Clifford may be subjoined to make the
matter entirely clear. Professor Huxley says:

 "The consciousness of brutes would appear to be related to the
 mechanism of their body simply as a collateral product of its working,
 and to be as completely without any power of modifying that working as
 the steam-whistle which accompanies the work of a locomotive engine
 is without influence on its machinery. Their volition, if they have
 any, is an emotion _indicative_ of physical changes, not a _cause_ of
 such changes.... The soul stands related to the body as the bell of a
 clock to the works, and consciousness answers to the sound which the
 bell gives out when it is struck.... Thus far I have strictly confined
 myself to the automatism of brutes.... It is quite true that, to the
 best of my judgment, the argumentation which applies to brutes holds
 equally good of men; and, therefore, that all states of consciousness
 in us, as in them, are immediately caused by molecular changes of the
 brain-substance. It seems to me that in men, as in brutes, there is
 no proof that any state of consciousness is the cause of change in
 the motion of the matter of the organism. If these positions are well
 based, it follows that our mental conditions are simply the symbols
 in consciousness of the changes which take place automatically in the
 organism; and that, to take an extreme illustration, the feeling we
 call volition is not the cause of a voluntary act, but the symbol of
 that state of the brain which is the immediate cause of that act. We
 are conscious automata."

Professor Clifford writes:

 "All the evidence that we have goes to show that the physical world
 gets along entirely by itself, according to practically universal
 rules.... The train of physical facts between the stimulus sent into
 the eye, or to any one of our senses, and the exertion which follows
 it, and the train of physical facts which goes on in the brain, even
 when there is no stimulus and no exertion,--these are perfectly
 complete physical trams, and every step is fully accounted for by
 mechanical conditions.... The two things are on utterly different
 platforms--the physical facts go along by themselves, and the mental
 facts go along by themselves. There is a parallelism between them,
 but there is no interference of one with the other. Again, if anybody
 says that the will influences matter, the statement is not untrue, but
 it is nonsense. Such an assertion belongs to the crude materialism of
 the savage. The only thing which influences matter is the position
 of surrounding matter or the motion of surrounding matter.... The
 assertion that another man's volition, a feeling in his consciousness
 that I cannot perceive, is part of the train of physical facts which
 I may perceive,--this is neither true nor untrue, but nonsense; it
 is a combination of words whose corresponding ideas will not go
 together.... Sometimes one series is known better, and sometimes
 the other; so that in telling a story we speak sometimes of mental
 and sometimes of material facts. A feeling of chill made a man run;
 strictly speaking, the nervous disturbance which coexisted with that
 feeling of chill made him run, if we want to talk about material
 facts; or the feeling of chill produced the form of sub-consciousness
 which coexists with the motion of legs, if we want to talk about
 mental facts.... When, therefore, we ask: 'What is the physical link
 between the ingoing message from chilled skin and the outgoing message
 which moves the leg? 'and the answer is, 'A man's will,' we have as
 much right to be amused as if we had asked our friend with the picture
 what pigment was used in painting the cannon in the foreground, and
 received the answer, 'Wrought iron.' It will be found excellent
 practice in the mental operations required by this doctrine to imagine
 a train, the fore part of which is an engine and three carriages
 linked with iron couplings, and the hind part three other carriages
 linked with iron couplings; the bond between the two parts being made
 up out of the sentiments of amity subsisting between the stoker and
 the guard."

To comprehend completely the consequences of the dogma so confidently
enunciated, one should unflinchingly apply it to the most complicated
examples. The movements of our tongues and pens, the flashings of our
eyes in conversation, are of course events of a material order, and as
such their causal antecedents must be exclusively material. If we knew
thoroughly the nervous system of Shakespeare, and as thoroughly all
his environing conditions, we should be able to show why at a certain
period of his life his hand came to trace on certain sheets of paper
those crabbed little black marks which we for shortness' sake call
the manuscript of Hamlet. We should understand the rationale of every
erasure and alteration therein, and we should understand all this
without in the slightest degree acknowledging the existence of the
thoughts in Shakespeare's mind. The words and sentences would be taken,
not as signs of anything beyond themselves, but as little outward
facts, pure and simple. In like manner we might exhaustively write
the biography of those two hundred pounds, more or less, of warmish
albuminoid matter called Martin Luther, without ever implying that it
felt.

But, on the other hand, nothing in all this could prevent us from
giving an equally complete account of either Luther's or Shakespeare's
spiritual history, an account in which every gleam of thought and
emotion should find its place. The mind-history would run alongside
of the body-history of each man, and each point in the one would
correspond to, but not react upon, a point in the other. So the melody
floats from the harp-string, but neither checks nor quickens its
vibrations; so the shadow runs alongside the pedestrian, but in no way
influences his steps.

Another inference, apparently more paradoxical still, needs to be
made, though, as far as I am aware, Dr. Hodgson is the only writer
who has explicitly drawn it. That inference is that feelings, not
causing nerve-actions, cannot even cause each other. To ordinary
common sense, felt pain is, as such, not only the cause of outward
tears and cries, but also the cause of such inward events as sorrow,
compunction, desire, or inventive thought. So the consciousness of
good news is the direct producer of the feeling of joy, the awareness
of premises that of the belief in conclusions. But according to
the automaton-theory, each of the feelings mentioned is only the
correlate of some nerve-movement whose _cause_ lay wholly in a previous
nerve-movement. The first nerve-movement called up the second; whatever
feeling was attached to the second consequently found itself following
upon the feeling that was attached to the first. If, for example, good
news was the consciousness correlated with the first movement, then
joy turned out to be the correlate in consciousness of the second.
But all the while the items of the nerve series were the only ones in
causal continuity; the items of the conscious series, however inwardly
rational their sequence, were simply juxtaposed.


REASONS FOR THE THEORY.


The 'conscious automaton-theory,' as this conception is generally
called, is thus a radical and simple conception of the manner in
which certain facts may possibly occur. But between conception and
belief, proof ought to lie. And when we ask, 'What proves that all
this is more than a mere conception of the possible?' it is not easy
to get a sufficient reply. If we start from the frog's spinal cord and
reason by continuity, saying, as that acts so intelligently, _though
unconscious_, so the higher centres, _though conscious_, may have the
intelligence they show quite as mechanically based; we are immediately
met by the exact counter-argument from continuity, an argument actually
urged by such writers as Pflüger and Lewes, which starts from the acts
of the hemispheres, and says: "As _these_ owe _their_ intelligence to
the consciousness which we know to be there, so the intelligence of
the spinal cord's acts must really be due to the invisible presence of
a consciousness lower in degree." All arguments from continuity work
in two ways: you can either level up or level down by their means. And
it is clear that such arguments as these can eat each other up to all
eternity.

There remains a sort of philosophic faith, bred like most faiths from
an æsthetic demand. Mental and physical events are, on all hands,
admitted to present the strongest contrast in the entire field of
being. The chasm which yawns between them is less easily bridged over
by the mind than any interval we know. Why, then, not call it an
absolute chasm, and say not only that the two worlds are different,
but that they are independent? This gives us the comfort of all simple
and absolute formulas, and it makes each chain homogeneous to our
consideration. When talking of nervous tremors and bodily actions, we
may feel secure against intrusion from an irrelevant mental world.
When, on the other hand, we speak of feelings, we may with equal
consistency use terms always of one denomination, and never be annoyed
by what Aristotle calls 'slipping into another kind.' The desire on
the part of men educated in laboratories not to have their physical
reasonings mixed up with such incommensurable factors as feelings is
certainly very strong. I have heard a most intelligent biologist say:
"It is high time for scientific men to protest against the recognition
of any such thing as consciousness in a scientific investigation." In
a word, feeling constitutes the 'unscientific' half of existence, and
any one who enjoys calling himself a 'scientist' will be too happy to
purchase an untrammelled homogeneity of terms in the studies of his
predilection, at the slight cost of admitting a dualism which, in the
same breath that it allows to mind an independent status of being,
banishes it to a limbo of causal inertness, from whence no intrusion or
interruption on its part need ever be feared.

Over and above this great postulate that matters must be kept simple,
there is, it must be confessed, still another highly abstract reason
for denying causal efficacity to our feelings. We can form no positive
image of the _modus operandi_ of a volition or other thought affecting
the cerebral molecules.

 "Let us try to imagine an idea, say of food, producing a movement, say
 of carrying food to the mouth.... What is the method of its action?
 Does it assist the decomposition of the molecules of the gray matter,
 or does it retard the process, or does it alter the direction in
 which the shocks are distributed? Let us imagine the molecules of the
 gray matter combined in such a way that they will fall into simpler
 combinations on the impact of an incident force. Now suppose the
 incident force, in the shape of a shock from some other centre, to
 impinge upon these molecules. By hypothesis it will decompose them,
 and they will fall into the simpler combination. How is the idea of
 food to prevent this decomposition? Manifestly it can do so only by
 increasing; the force which binds the molecules together. Good! Try
 to imagine the idea of a beefsteak binding two molecules together.
 It is impossible. Equally impossible is it to imagine a similar idea
 loosening the attractive force between two molecules."[157]

This passage from an exceedingly clever writer expresses admirably
the difficulty to which I allude. Combined with a strong sense of the
'chasm' between the two worlds, and with a lively faith in reflex
machinery, the sense of this difficulty can hardly fail to make one
turn consciousness out of the door as a superfluity so far as one's
explanations go. One may bow her out politely, allow her to remain as
an 'epiphenomenon' (invaluable word!), but one insists that matter
shall hold all the power.

 "Having thoroughly recognized the fathomless abyss that separates mind
 from matter, and having so blended the very notion into his very
 nature that there is no chance of his ever forgetting it or failing
 to saturate with it all his meditations, the student of psychology
 has next to appreciate the association between these two orders of
 phenomena.... They are associated in a manner so intimate that some
 of the greatest thinkers consider them different aspects of the same
 process.... When the rearrangement of molecules takes place in the
 higher regions of the brain, a change of consciousness simultaneously
 occurs.... The change of consciousness never takes place without the
 change in the brain; the change in the brain never ... without the
 change in consciousness. But _why_ the two occur together, or what
 the link is which connects them, we do not know, and most authorities
 believe that we never shall and never can know. Having firmly and
 tenaciously grasped these two notions, of the absolute separateness
 of mind and matter, and of the invariable concomitance of a mental
 change with a bodily change, the student will enter on the study of
 psychology with half his difficulties surmounted."[158]

Half his difficulties ignored, I should prefer to say. For this
'concomitance' in the midst of 'absolute separateness' is an utterly
irrational notion. It is to my mind quite inconceivable that
consciousness should have _nothing to do_ with a business which it
so faithfully attends. And the question, 'What has it to do?' is one
which psychology has no right to 'surmount,' for it is her plain duty
to consider it. The fact is that the whole question of interaction
and influence between things is a metaphysical question, and cannot
be discussed at all by those who are unwilling to go into matters
thoroughly. It is truly enough hard to imagine the 'idea of a beefsteak
binding two molecules together;' but since Hume's time it has been
equally hard to imagine _anything_ binding them together. The whole
notion of 'binding' is a mystery, the first step towards the solution
of which is to clear scholastic rubbish out of the way. Popular
science talks of 'forces,' 'attractions' or 'affinities' as binding
the molecules; but clear science, though she may use such words to
abbreviate discourse, has no use for the conceptions, and is satisfied
when she can express in simple 'laws' the bare space-relations of the
molecules as functions of each other and of time. To the more curiously
inquiring mind, however, this simplified expression of the bare facts
is not enough; there must be a 'reason' for them, and something must
'determine' the laws. And when one seriously sits down to consider what
sort of a thing one _means_ when one asks for a 'reason,' one is led so
far afield, so far away from popular science and its scholasticism, as
to see that even such a fact as the existence or non-existence in the
universe of 'the idea of a beefsteak' may not be wholly indifferent to
other facts in the same universe, and in particular may have something
to do with determining the distance at which two molecules in that
universe shall lie apart. If this is so, then common-sense, though the
intimate nature of causality and of the connection of things in the
universe lies beyond her pitifully bounded horizon, has the root and
gist of the truth in her hands when she obstinately holds to it that
feelings and ideas are causes. However inadequate our ideas of causal
efficacy may be, we are less wide of the mark when we say that our
ideas and feelings have it, than the Automatists are when they say they
haven't it. As in the night all cats are gray, so in the darkness of
metaphysical criticism all causes are obscure. But one has no right
to pull the pall over the psychic half of the subject only, as the
automatists do, and to say that _that_ causation is unintelligible,
whilst in the same breath one dogmatizes about _material_ causation
as if Hume, Kant, and Lotze had never been born. One cannot thus
blow hot and cold. One must be impartially _naif_ or impartially
critical. If the latter, the reconstruction must be thorough-going or
'metaphysical,' and will probably preserve the common-sense view that
ideas are forces, in some translated form. But Psychology is a mere
natural science, accepting certain terms uncritically as her data, and
stopping short of metaphysical reconstruction. Like physics, she must
be _naive_; and if she finds that in her very peculiar field of study
ideas _seem_ to be causes, she had better continue to talk of them
as such. She gains absolutely nothing by a breach with common-sense
in this matter, and she loses, to say the least, all naturalness
of speech. If feelings are causes, of course their effects must be
furtherances and checkings of internal cerebral motions, of which in
themselves we are entirely without knowledge. It is probable that for
years to come we shall have to infer what happens in the brain either
from our feelings or from motor effects which we observe. The organ
will be for us a sort of vat in which feelings and motions somehow go
on stewing together, and in which innumerable things happen of which we
catch but the statistical result. Why, under these circumstances, we
should be asked to forswear the language of our childhood I cannot well
imagine, especially as it is perfectly compatible with the language of
physiology. The feelings can produce nothing absolutely new, they can
only reinforce and inhibit reflex currents which already exist, and the
original organization of these by physiological forces must always be
the ground-work of the psychological scheme.

My conclusion is that to urge the automaton-theory upon us, as it is
now urged, on purely _a priori_ and _quasi-_metaphysical grounds, is an
_unwarrantable impertinence in the present state of psychology_.


REASONS AGAINST THE THEORY.


But there are much more positive reasons than this why we ought to
continue to talk in psychology as if consciousness had causal efficacy.
The _particulars of the distribution of consciousness_, so far as we
know them, _point to its being efficacious_. Let us trace some of them.

It is very generally admitted, though the point would be hard to prove,
that consciousness grows the more complex and intense the higher we
rise in the animal kingdom. That of a man must exceed that of an
oyster. From this point of view it seems an organ, superadded to the
other organs which maintain the animal in the struggle for existence;
and the presumption of course is that it helps him in some way in the
struggle, just as they do. But it cannot help him without being in some
way efficacious and influencing the course of his bodily history. If
now it could be shown in what way consciousness _might_ help him, and
if, moreover, the defects of his other organs (where consciousness is
most developed) are such as to make them need just the kind of help
that consciousness would bring provided it _were_ efficacious; why,
then the plausible inference would be that it came just _because_ of
its efficacy--in other words, its efficacy would be inductively proved.

Now the study of the phenomena of consciousness which we shall make
throughout the rest of this book will show us that consciousness is
at all times primarily _a selecting agency_.[159] Whether we take it
in the lowest sphere of sense, or in the highest of intellection, we
find it always doing one thing, choosing one out of several of the
materials so presented to its notice, emphasizing and accentuating that
and suppressing as far as possible all the rest. The item emphasized is
always in close connection with some _interest_ felt by consciousness
to be paramount at the time.

But what are now the defects of the nervous system in those animals
whose consciousness seems most highly developed? Chief among them must
be _instability_. The cerebral hemispheres are the characteristically
'high' nerve-centres, and we saw how indeterminate and unforeseeable
their performances were in comparison with those of the basal ganglia
and the cord. But this very vagueness constitutes their advantage.
They allow their possessor to adapt his conduct to the minutest
alterations in the environing circumstances, any one of which may be
for him a sign, suggesting distant motives more powerful than any
present solicitations of sense. It seems as if certain mechanical
conclusions should be drawn from this state of things. An organ,
swayed by slight impressions is an organ whose natural state is one of
unstable equilibrium. We may imagine the various lines of discharge
in the cerebrum to be almost on a par in point of permeability--what
discharge a given small impression will produce may be called
_accidental_, in the sense in which we say it is a matter of accident
whether a rain-drop falling on a mountain ridge descend the eastern
or the western slope. It is in this sense that we may call it a
matter of accident whether a child be a boy or a girl. The ovum is so
unstable a body that certain causes too minute for our apprehension
may at a certain moment tip it one way or the other. The natural law
of an organ constituted after this fashion can be nothing but a law
of caprice. I do not see how one could reasonably expect from it any
certain pursuance of useful lines of reaction, such as the few and
fatally determined performances of the lower centres constitute within
their narrow sphere. The dilemma in regard to the nervous system seems,
in short, to be of the following kind. We may construct one which
will react infallibly and certainly, but it will then be capable of
reacting to very few changes in the environment--it will fail to be
adapted to all the rest. We may, on the other hand, construct a nervous
system potentially adapted to respond to an infinite variety of minute
features in the situation; but its fallibility will then be as great
as its elaboration. We can never be sure that its equilibrium will
be upset in the appropriate direction. In short, a high brain may do
many things, and may do each of them at a very slight hint. But its
hair-trigger organization makes of it a happy-go-lucky, hit-or-miss
affair. It is as likely to do the crazy as the sane thing at any given
moment. A low brain does few things, and in doing them perfectly
forfeits all other use. The performances of a high brain are like dice
thrown forever on a table. Unless they be loaded, what chance is there
that the highest number will turn up oftener than the lowest?

All this is said of the brain as a physical machine pure and simple.
_Can consciousness increase its efficiency by loading its dice?_ Such
is the problem.

Loading its dice would mean bringing a more or less constant pressure
to bear in favor of _those_ of its performances which make for the most
permanent interests cf the brain's owner; it would mean a constant
inhibition of the tendencies to stray aside.

Well, just such pressure and such inhibition are what consciousness
_seems_ to be exerting all the while. And the interests in whose favor
it seems to exert them are _its_ interests and its alone, interests
which it _creates_, and which, but for it, would have no status in the
realm of being whatever. We talk, it is true, when we are darwinizing,
as if the mere _body_ that owns the brain had interests; we speak
about the utilities of its various organs and how they help or hinder
the body's survival; and we treat the survival as if it were an
absolute end, existing as such in the physical world, a sort of actual
_should-be_, presiding over the animal and judging his reactions,
quite apart from the presence of any commenting intelligence outside.
We forget that in the absence of some such superadded commenting
intelligence (whether it be that of the animal itself, or only ours
or Mr. Darwin's), the reactions cannot be properly talked of as
'useful' or 'hurtful' at all. Considered merely physically, all that
can be said of them is that _if_ they occur in a certain way survival
will as a matter of fact prove to be their incidental consequence.
The organs themselves, and all the rest of the physical world, will,
however, all the time be quite indifferent to this consequence, and
would quite as cheerfully, the circumstances changed, compass the
animal's destruction. In a word, survival can enter into a purely
physiological discussion only as an _hypothesis made by an onlooker_,
about the future. But the moment you bring a consciousness into the
midst, survival ceases to be a mere hypothesis. No longer is it, "_if_
survival is to occur, then so and so must brain and other organs work."
It has now become an imperative decree: "Survival _shall_ occur, and
therefore organs _must_ so work!" _Real_ ends appear for the first
time now upon the world's stage. The conception of consciousness as a
purely cognitive form of being, which is the pet way of regarding it
in many idealistic schools, modern as well as ancient, is thoroughly
anti-psychological, as the remainder of this book will show. Every
actually existing consciousness seems to itself at any rate to be a
_fighter for ends_, of which many, but for its presence, would not be
ends at all. Its powers of cognition are mainly subservient to these
ends, discerning which facts further them and which do not.

Now let consciousness only be what it seems to itself, and it will help
an instable brain to compass its proper ends. The movements of the
brain _per se_ yield the means of attaining these ends mechanically,
but only out of a lot of other ends, if so they may be called, which
are not the proper ones of the animal, but often quite opposed. The
brain is an instrument of possibilities, but of no certainties. But the
consciousness, with its own ends present to it, and knowing also well
which possibilities lead thereto and which away, will, if endowed with
causal efficacy, reinforce the favorable possibilities and repress the
unfavorable or indifferent ones. The nerve-currents, coursing through
the cells and fibres, must in this case be supposed strengthened by
the fact of their awaking one consciousness and dampened by awaking
another. _How_ such reaction of the consciousness upon the currents may
occur must remain at present unsolved: it is enough for my purpose to
have shown that it may not uselessly exist, and that the matter is less
simple than the brain-automatists hold.

All the facts of the natural history of consciousness lend color
to this view. Consciousness, for example, is only intense when
nerve-processes are hesitant. In rapid, automatic, habitual action
it sinks to a minimum. Nothing could be more fitting than this, if
consciousness have the teleological function we suppose; nothing more
meaningless, if not. Habitual actions are certain, and being in no
danger of going astray from their end, need no extraneous help. In
hesitant action, there seem many alternative possibilities of final
nervous discharge. The feeling awakened by the nascent excitement of
each alternative nerve-tract seems by its attractive or repulsive
quality to determine whether the excitement shall abort or shall become
complete. Where indecision is great, as before a dangerous leap,
consciousness is agonizingly intense. Feeling, from this point of view,
may be likened to a cross-section of the chain of nervous discharge,
ascertaining the links already laid down, and groping among the fresh
ends presented to it for the one which seems best to fit the case.

       *       *       *       *       *

The phenomena of 'vicarious function' which we studied in Chapter II
seem to form another bit of circumstantial evidence. A machine in
working order acts fatally in one way. Our consciousness calls this the
right way. Take out a valve, throw a wheel out of gear or bend a pivot,
and it becomes a different machine, acting just as fatally in another
way which we call the wrong way. But the machine itself knows nothing
of wrong or right: matter has no ideals to pursue. A locomotive will
carry its train through an open drawbridge as cheerfully as to any
other destination.

A brain with part of it scooped out is virtually a new machine, and
during the first days after the operation functions in a thoroughly
abnormal manner. As a matter of fact, however, its performances
become from day to day more normal, until at last a practised eye
may be needed to suspect anything wrong. Some of the restoration is
undoubtedly due to 'inhibitions' passing away. But if the consciousness
which goes with the rest of the brain, be there not only in order
to take cognizance of each functional error, but also to exert
an efficient pressure to check it if it be a sin of commission,
and to lend a strengthening hand if it be a weakness or sin of
omission,--nothing seems more natural than that the remaining parts,
assisted in this way, should by virtue of the principle of habit grow
back to the old teleological modes of exercise for which they were at
first incapacitated. Nothing, on the contrary, seems at first sight
more unnatural than that they should vicariously take up the duties of
a part now lost without those _duties as such_ exerting any persuasive
or coercive force. At the end of Chapter XXVI I shall return to this
again.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is yet another set of facts which seem explicable on the
supposition that consciousness has causal efficacy. _It is a well-known
fact that pleasures are generally associated with beneficial, pains
with detrimental, experiences._ All the fundamental vital processes
illustrate this law. Starvation, suffocation, privation of food, drink
and sleep, work when exhausted, burns, wounds, inflammation, the
effects of poison, are as disagreeable as filling the hungry stomach,
enjoying rest and sleep after fatigue, exercise after rest, and a
sound skin and unbroken bones at all times, are pleasant. Mr. Spencer
and others have suggested that these coincidences are due, not to any
pre-established harmony, but to the mere action of natural selection
which would certainly kill off in the long-run any breed of creatures
to whom the fundamentally noxious experience seemed enjoyable. An
animal that should take pleasure in a feeling of suffocation would, if
that pleasure were efficacious enough to make him immerse his head in
water, enjoy a longevity of four or five minutes. But if pleasures and
pains have no efficacy, one does not see (without some such _a priori_
rational harmony as would be scouted by the 'scientific' champions
of the automaton-theory) why the most noxious acts, such as burning,
might not give thrills of delight, and the most necessary ones, such
as breathing, cause agony. The exceptions to the law are, it is true,
numerous, but relate to experiences that are either not vital or not
universal. Drunkenness, for instance, which though noxious, is to many
persons delightful, is a very exceptional experience. But, as the
excellent physiologist Pick remarks, if all rivers and springs ran
alcohol instead of water, either all men would now be born to hate it
or our nerves would have been selected so as to drink it with impunity.
The only considerable attempt, in fact, that has been made to explain
the _distribution_ of our feelings is that of Mr. Grant Allen in his
suggestive little work _Physiological Æsthetics_; and his reasoning is
based exclusively on that causal efficacy of pleasures and pains which
the 'double-aspect' partisans so strenuously deny.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus, then, from every point of view the circumstantial evidence
against that theory is strong. _A priori_ analysis of both brain-action
and conscious action shows us that if the latter were efficacious it
would, by its selective emphasis, make amends for the indeterminateness
of the former; whilst the study _a posteriori_ of the _distribution_
of consciousness shows it to be exactly such as we might expect in an
organ added for the sake of steering a nervous system grown too complex
to regulate itself. The conclusion that it is useful is, after all
this, quite justifiable. But, if it is useful, it must be so through
its causal efficaciousness, and the automaton-theory must succumb
to the theory of common-sense. I, at any rate (pending metaphysical
reconstructions not yet successfully achieved), shall have no
hesitation in using the language of common-sense throughout this book.


FOOTNOTES:

[155] The Theory of Practice, vol. i, p. 416 ff.

[156] The present writer recalls how in 1869, when still a medical
student, he began to write an essay showing how almost every one who
speculated about brain-processes illicitly interpolated into his
account of them links derived from the entirely heterogeneous universe
of Feeling. Spencer, Hodgson (in his Time and Space), Maudsley,
Lockhart Clarke, Bain, Dr. S. Carpenter, and other authors were cited
as having been guilty of the confusion. The writing was soon stopped
because he perceived that the view which he was upholding against these
authors was a pure conception, with no proofs to be adduced of its
reality. Later it seemed to him that whatever _proofs_ existed really
told in favor of their view.

[157] Chas. Mercier: The Nervous System and the Mind (1888), p. 9.

[158] _Op. cit._ p. 11.

[159] See in particular the end of Chapter IX.




