letter comes the later in the alphabet, the letter L or the first
letter of the most beautiful tree?" etc.; or "which is less, 15 or 20
_minus_ 8?"[357] etc. etc. etc. Even in this series of reactions _the
time was much quicker token the reacter turned his attention in advance
towards the answer than when he turned it towards the question_. The
shorter reaction-time was seldom more than one fifth of a second; the
longer, from four to eight times as long.

To understand such results, one must bear in mind that in these
experiments the reacter always knew in advance in a general way the
_kind_ of question which he was to receive, and consequently the
_sphere within which_ his possible answer lay.[358] In turning his
attention, therefore, from the outset towards the answer, those
brain-processes in him which were connected with this entire 'sphere'
were kept sub-excited, and the question could then discharge with a
minimum amount of lost time that particular answer out of the 'sphere'
which belonged especially to it. When, on the contrary, the attention
was kept looking towards the question exclusively and averted from
the possible reply, all this preliminary sub-excitement of motor
tracts failed to occur, and the entire process of answering had to
be gone through with _after_ the question was heard. No wonder that
the time was prolonged. It is a beautiful example of the summation
of stimulations, and of the way in which expectant attention, even
when not very strongly focalized, will prepare the motor centres, and
shorten the work which a stimulus has to perform on them, in order to
produce a given effect when it comes.


THE INTIMATE NATURE OF THE ATTENTIVE PROCESS.


We have now a sufficient number of facts to warrant our considering
this more recondite question. And two physiological processes, of which
we have got a glimpse, immediately suggest themselves as possibly
forming in combination a complete reply. I mean

1. _The accommodation or adjustment of the sensory organs_; and

2. _The anticipatory preparation from within of the ideational centres
concerned with the object to which the attention is paid._

1. The sense-organs and the bodily muscles which favor their exercise
are adjusted most energetically in sensorial attention, whether
immediate and reflex, or derived. But there are good grounds for
believing that even intellectual attention, attention to the _idea_ of
a sensible object, is also accompanied with some degree of excitement
of the sense-organs to which the object appeals. The preparation of the
ideational centres exists, on the other hand, wherever our interest in
the object--be it sensible or ideal--is _derived_ from, or in any way
connected with, other interests, or the presence of other objects, in
the mind. It exists as well when the attention thus derived is classed
as passive as when it is classed as voluntary. So that on the whole
we may confidently conclude--since in mature life we never attend to
anything without our interest in it being in some degree derived from
its connection with other objects--that _the two processes of sensorial
adjustment and ideational preparation probably coexist in all our
concrete attentive acts._

The two points must now be proved in more detail. First, as respects
the sensorial adjustment.

That it is present when we attend to _sensible_ things is obvious. When
we look or listen we accommodate our eyes and ears involuntarily, and
we turn our head and body as well; when we taste or smell we adjust
the tongue, lips, and respiration to the object; in feeling a surface
we move the palpatory organ in a suitable way; in all these acts,
besides making involuntary muscular contractions of a positive sort,
we inhibit others which might interfere with the result--we close the
eyes in tasting, suspend the respiration in listening, etc. The result
is a more or less massive organic feeling that attention is going on.
This organic feeling comes, in the way described on page 302, to be
contrasted with that of the objects which it accompanies, and regarded
as peculiarly ours, whilst the objects form the not-me. We treat it
as a sense of our _own activity_, although it comes in to us from
our organs after they are accommodated, just as the feeling of any
object does. Any object, if _immediately_ exciting, causes a reflex
accommodation of the sense-organ, and this has two results--first, the
object's increase in clearness; and second, the feeling of activity in
question. Both are sensations of an 'afferent' sort.

But in _intellectual_ attention, as we have already seen, (p. 300),
similar feelings of activity occur. Fechner was the first, I believe,
to analyze these feelings, and discriminate them from the stronger ones
just named. He writes:

 "When we transfer the attention from objects of one sense to those of
 another, we have an indescribable feeling (though at the same time
 one perfectly determinate, and reproducible at pleasure), of altered
 _direction_ or differently localized tension (_Spannung_). We feel
 a strain forward in the eyes, one directed sidewise in the ears,
 increasing with the degree of our attention, and changing according as
 we look at an object carefully, or listen to something attentively;
 and we speak accordingly of _straining the attention_. The difference
 is most plainly felt when the attention oscillates rapidly between eye
 and ear; and the feeling localizes itself with most decided difference
 in regard to the various sense-organs, according as we wish to
 discriminate a thing delicately by touch, taste, or smell.

 "But now I have, when I try to vividly recall a picture of memory or
 fancy, a feeling perfectly analogous to that which I experience when
 I seek to apprehend a thing keenly by eye or ear; and this analogous
 feeling is very differently localized. While in sharpest possible
 attention to real objects (as well as to after-images) the strain
 is plainly forwards, and when the attention changes from one sense
 to another only alters its direction between the several external
 sense-organs, leaving the rest of the head free from strain, the
 case is different in memory or fancy, for here the feeling withdraws
 entirely from the external sense-organs, and seems rather to take
 refuge in that part of the head which the brain fills; if I wish, for
 example, to recall a place or person it will arise before me with
 vividness, not according as I strain my attention forwards, but rather
 in proportion as I, so to speak, retract it backwards."[359]

In myself the 'backward retraction' which is felt during attention
to ideas of memory, etc., seems to be principally constituted by the
feeling of an actual rolling outwards and upwards of the eyeballs, such
as occurs in sleep, and is the exact opposite of their behavior when we
look at a physical thing. I have already spoken of this feeling on page
300.[360] The reader who doubts the presence of these organic feelings
is requested to read the whole of that passage again.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been said, however, that we may attend to an object on the
periphery of the visual field and yet not accommodate the eye for
it. Teachers thus notice the acts of children in the school-room at
whom they appear not to be looking. Women in general train their
peripheral visual attention more than men. This would be an objection
to the _invariable and universal_ presence of movements of adjustment
as ingredients of the attentive process. Usually, as is well known,
no object lying in the marginal portions of the field of vision can
catch our attention without at the same time 'catching our eye'--that
is, fatally provoking such movements of rotation and accommodation as
will focus its image on the fovea, or point of greatest sensibility.
Practice, however, enables us, _with effort_, to attend to a marginal
object whilst keeping the eyes immovable. The object under these
circumstances never becomes perfectly distinct--the place of its image
on the retina makes distinctness impossible--but (as anyone can satisfy
himself by trying) we become more vividly conscious of it than we were
before the effort was made. Helmholtz states the fact so strikingly
that I will quote his observation in full. He was trying to combine
in a single solid percept pairs of stereoscopic pictures illuminated
instantaneously by the electric spark. The pictures were in a dark box
which the spark from time to time lighted up; and, to keep the eyes
from wandering betweenwhiles, a pin-hole was pricked through the middle
of each picture, through which the light of the room came, so that
each eye had presented to it during the dark intervals a single bright
point. With parallel optical axes the points combined into a single
image; and the slightest movement of the eyeballs was betrayed by this
image at once becoming double. Helmholtz now found that simple linear
figures could, when the eyes were thus kept immovable, be perceived
as solids at a single flash of the spark. But when the figures were
complicated photographs, many successive flashes were required to grasp
their totality.

 "Now it is interesting," he says, "to find that, although we keep
 steadily fixating the pin-holes and never allow their combined image
 to break into two, we can, nevertheless, before the spark comes, keep
 our attention voluntarily turned to any particular portion we please
 of the dark field, so as then, when the spark comes, to receive an
 impression only from such parts of the picture as lie in this region.
 In this respect, then, our attention is quite independent of the
 position and accommodation of the eyes, and of any known alteration in
 these organs; and free to direct itself by a conscious and voluntary
 effort upon any selected portion of a dark and undifferenced field
 of view. This is one of the most important observations for a future
 theory of attention."[361]

Hering, however, adds the following detail:

 "Whilst attending to the marginal object we must always," he says,
 "_attend at the same time_ to the object directly fixated. If even for
 a single instant we let the latter slip out of our mind, our eye moves
 towards the former, as may be easily recognized by the after-images
 produced, or by the muscular sounds heard. The case is then less
 properly to be called one of translocation, than one of unusually wide
 _dispersion_, of the attention, in which dispersion the largest share
 still falls upon the thing directly looked at,"[362]

and consequently directly accommodated for. Accommodation exists here,
then, as it does elsewhere, and without it we should lose a part
of our sense of attentive activity. In fact, the _strain_ of that
activity (which is remarkably great in the experiment) is due in part
to unusually strong contractions of the muscles needed to keep the
eyeballs still, which produce unwonted feelings of pressure in those
organs.

       *       *       *       *       *

2. But if the peripheral part of the picture in this experiment be
not physically accommodated for, what is meant by its sharing our
attention? What happens when we 'distribute' or 'disperse' the latter
upon a thing for which we remain unwilling to 'adjust'? This leads us
to that second feature in the process, the '_ideational preparation_'
of which we spoke. _The effort to attend to the marginal region of
the picture consists in nothing more nor less than the effort to form
as clear an idea as is possible of what is there portrayed._ The idea
is to come to the help of the sensation and make it more distinct. It
comes with effort, and such a mode of coming is the remaining part of
what we know as our attention's 'strain' under the circumstances.
Let us show how universally present in our acts of attention this
reinforcing imagination, this inward reproduction, this anticipatory
thinking of the thing we attend to, is.

It must as a matter of course be present when the attention is of the
intellectual variety, for the thing attended to then _is_ nothing but
an idea, an inward reproduction or conception. If then we prove ideal
construction of the object to be present in _sensorial_ attention, it
will be present everywhere. When, however, sensorial attention is at
its height, it is impossible to tell how much of the percept comes from
without and how much from within; but if we find that the _preparation_
we make for it always partly consists of the creation of an imaginary
duplicate of the object in the mind, which shall stand ready to receive
the outward impression as if in a matrix, that will be quite enough to
establish the point in dispute.

In Wundt's and Exner's experiments quoted above, the lying in wait for
the impressions, and the preparation to react, consist of nothing but
the anticipatory imagination of what the impressions or the reactions
are to be. Where the stimulus is unknown and the reaction undetermined,
time is lost, because no stable image can under such circumstances
be formed in advance. But where both nature and time of signal and
reaction are foretold, so completely does the expectant attention
consist in premonitory imagination that, as we have seen (Footnote 273;
pp. 373, 377), it may mimic the intensity of reality, or at any rate
produce reality's motor effects. It is impossible to read Wundt's and
Exner's pages of description and not to interpret the '_Apperception_'
and '_Spannung_' and other terms as equivalents of _imagination_. With
Wundt, in particular, the word _Apperception_ (which he sets great
store by) is quite interchangeable with both imagination and attention.
All three are names for the excitement from within of ideational
brain-centres, for which Mr. Lewes's name of _preperception_ seems the
best possible designation.

Where the impression to be caught is very weak, the way not to miss it
is to sharpen our attention for it by preliminary contact with it in a
stronger form.

 "If we wish to begin to observe overtones, it is advisable, just
 before the sound which is to be analyzed, to sound very softly the
 note of which we are in search.... The piano and harmonium are well
 fitted for this use, as both give overtones that are strong. Strike
 upon the piano first the _g'_ [of a certain musical example previously
 given in the text]; then, when its vibrations have objectively ceased,
 strike powerfully the note _c_, in whose sound _g'_ is the third
 overtone, and keep your attention steadily bent upon the pitch of the
 just heard _g'_; you will now hear this tone sounding in the midst of
 the _c_.... If you place the resonator which corresponds to a certain
 overtone, for example _g'_ of the sound _c_, against your ear, and
 then make the note _c_ sound, you will hear _g'_ much strengthened by
 the resonator.... This strengthening by the resonator can be used to
 make the naked ear attentive to the sound which it is to catch. For
 when the resonator is gradually removed, the _g'_ grows weaker; but
 the attention, once directed to it, holds it now more easily fast, and
 the observer hears the tone _g'_ now in the natural unaltered sound of
 the note with his unaided ear."[363]

Wundt, commenting on experiences of this sort, says that

 "on carefully observing, one will always find that one tries first
 to recall the image in memory of the tone to be heard, and that then
 one hears it in the total sound. The same thing is to be noticed
 in weak or fugitive visual impressions. Illuminate a drawing by
 electric sparks separated by considerable intervals, and after the
 first, and often after the second and third spark, hardly anything
 will be recognized. But the confused image is held fast in memory;
 each successive illumination completes it; and so at last we attain
 to a clearer perception. The primary motive to this inward activity
 proceeds usually from the outer impression itself. We hear a sound in
 which, from certain associations, we suspect a certain overtone; the
 next thing is to recall the overtone in memory; and finally we catch
 it in the sound we hear. Or perhaps we see some mineral substance
 we have met before; the impression awakens the memory-image, which
 again more or less completely melts with the impression itself. In
 this way every idea takes a certain time to penetrate to the focus
 of consciousness. And during this time we always find in ourselves
 the peculiar _feeling_ of attention.... The phenomena show that an
 _adaptation_ of attention to the impression takes place. The surprise
 which unexpected impressions give us is due essentially to the fact
 that our attention, at the moment when the impression occurs, is not
 accommodated for it. The accommodation itself is of the double sort,
 relating as it does to the intensity as well as to the quality of
 the stimulus. Different qualities of impression require disparate
 adaptations. And we remark that our feeling of the _strain_ of our
 inward attentiveness increases with every increase in the strength of
 the impressions on whose perception we are intent."[364]

The natural way of conceiving all this is under the symbolic form
of a brain-cell played upon from two directions. Whilst the object
excites it from without, other brain-cells, or perhaps spiritual
forces, arouse it from within. The latter influence is the 'adaptation
of the attention.' _The plenary energy of the brain-cell demands the
co-operation of both factors:_ not when merely present, but when both
present and attended to, is the object fully perceived.

A few additional experiences will now be perfectly clear. Helmholtz,
for instance, adds this observation to the passage we quoted a while
ago concerning the stereoscopic pictures lit by the electric spark.

 "These experiments," he says, "are interesting as regards the part
 which attention plays in the matter of double images.... For in
 pictures so simple that it is relatively difficult for me to see
 them double, I can succeed in seeing them double, even when the
 illumination is only instantaneous, the moment I strive to _imagine in
 a lively way how they ought then to look_. The influence of attention
 is here pure; for all eye movements are shut out."[365]

In another place[366] the same writer says:

 "When I have before my eyes a pair of stereoscopic drawings which
 are hard to combine, it is difficult to bring the lines and points
 that correspond, to cover each other, and with every little motion of
 the eyes they glide apart. _But if I chance to gain a lively mental
 image (Anschauungsbild) of the represented solid form_ (a thing that
 often occurs by lucky chance), I then move my two eyes with perfect
 certainty over the figure without the picture separating again."

Again, writing of retinal rivalry, Helmholtz says:

 "It is not a trial of strength between two sensations, but depends on
 our fixing or failing to fix the attention. Indeed, there is scarcely
 any phenomenon so well fitted for the study of the causes which are
 capable of determining the attention. It is not enough to form the
 conscious intention of seeing first with one eye and then with the
 other; _we must form as clear a notion as possible of what we expect
 to see. Then it will actually appear_."[367]

In figures 37 and 38, where the result is ambiguous, we can make the
change from one apparent form to the other by imagining strongly in
advance the form we wish to see. Similarly in those puzzles where
certain lines in a picture form by their combination an object that has
no connection with what the picture ostensibly represents; or indeed in
every case where an object is inconspicuous and hard to discern from
the background; we may not be able to see it for a long time; but,
having once seen it, we can attend to it again whenever we like, on
account of the mental duplicate of it which our imagination now bears.
In the meaningless French words '_pas de lieu Rhône que nous_,' who
can recognize immediately the English 'paddle your own canoe'?[368]
But who that has once noticed the identity can fail to have it arrest
his attention again? When watching for the distant clock to strike,
our mind is so filled with its image that at every moment we think
we hear the longed-for or dreaded sound. So of an awaited footstep.
Every stir in the wood is for the hunter his game; for the fugitive
his pursuers. Every bonnet in the street is momentarily taken by the
lover to enshroud the head of his idol. The image in the mind _is_ the
attention; the _preperception_, as Mr. Lewes calls it, is half of the
perception of the looked-for thing.[369]

[Illustration: FIGS. 37 & 38.]

It is for this reason that men have no eyes but for those aspects of
things which they have already been taught to discern. Any one of us
can notice a phenomenon after it has once been pointed out, which not
one in ten thousand could ever have discovered for himself. Even in
poetry and the arts, some one has to come and tell us what aspects we
may single out, and what effects we may admire, before our æsthetic
nature can 'dilate' to its full extent and never 'with the wrong
emotion.' In kindergarten instruction one of the exercises is to make
the children see how many features they can point out in such an object
as a flower or a stuffed bird. They readily name the features they
know already, such as leaves, tail, bill, feet. But they may look for
hours without distinguishing nostrils, claws, scales, etc., until their
attention is called to these details; thereafter, however, they see
them every time. In short, _the only things which we commonly see are
those which we preperceive_. and the only things which we preperceive
are those which have been labelled for us, and the labels stamped into
our mind. If we lost our stock of labels we should be intellectually
lost in the midst of the world.

       *       *       *       *       *

Organic adjustment, then, and ideational preparation or preperception
are concerned in all attentive acts. An interesting theory is defended
by no less authorities than Professors Bain[370] and Ribot,[371] and
still more ably advocated by Mr. N. Lange,[372] who will have it
that the ideational preparation itself is a consequence of muscular
adjustment, so that the latter may be called the essence of the
attentive process throughout. This at least is what the theory of these
authors practically amounts to, though the former two do not state it
in just these terms. The proof consists in the exhibition of cases of
intellectual attention which organic adjustment accompanies, or of
objects in thinking which we have to execute a movement. Thus Lange
says that when he tries to imagine a certain colored circle, he finds
himself first making with his eyes the movement to which the circle
corresponds, and _then_ imagining the color, etc., as a consequence of
the movement.

 "Let my reader," he adds, "close his eyes and think of an extended
 object, for instance a _pencil_. He will easily notice that he first
 makes a slight movement [of the eyes] corresponding to the straight
 line, and that he often gets a weak feeling of innervation of the hand
 as if touching the pencil's surface. So, in thinking of a certain
 sound, we turn towards its direction or repeat muscularly its rhythm,
 or articulate an imitation of it."[373]

But it is one thing to point out the presence of muscular contractions
as constant concomitants of our thoughts, and another thing to
say, with Herr Lange, that thought is _made possible_ by muscular
contraction alone. It may well be that where the object of thought
consists of two parts, one perceived by movement and another not, the
part perceived by movement is habitually called up first and fixed
in the mind by the movement's execution, whilst the other part comes
secondarily as the movement's mere associate. But even were this the
rule with all men (which I doubt[374]), it would only be a practical
habit, not an ultimate necessity. In the chapter on the Will we shall
learn that movements themselves are results of images coming before the
mind, images sometimes of feelings in the moving part, sometimes of the
movement's effects on eye and ear, and sometimes (if the movement be
originally reflex or instinctive), of its natural stimulus or exciting
cause. It is, in truth, contrary to all wider and deeper analogies to
deny that any quality of feeling whatever can directly rise up in the
form of an idea, and to assert that only ideas of movement can call
other ideas to the mind.

So much for adjustment and preperception. The only third process I can
think of as always present is the inhibition of irrelevant movements
and ideas. This seems, however, to be a feature incidental to voluntary
attention rather than the essential feature of attention at large,[375]
and need not concern us particularly now. Noting merely the intimate
connection which our account so far establishes between attention,
on the one hand, and imagination, discrimination, and memory, on the
other, let us draw a couple of practical inferences, and then pass to
the more speculative problem that remains.

       *       *       *       *       *

The practical inferences are pedagogic. First, _to strengthen attention
in children_ who care nothing for the subject they are studying and
let their wits go wool-gathering. The interest here must be 'derived'
from something that the teacher associates with the task, a reward or a
punishment if nothing less external comes to mind. Prof. Ribot says:

 "A child refuses to read; he is incapable of keeping his mind fixed
 on the letters, which have no attraction for him; but he looks with
 avidity upon the pictures contained in a book. 'What do they mean?'
 he asks. The father replies: 'When you can read, the book will tell
 you.' After several colloquies like this, the child resigns himself
 and falls to work, first slackly, then the habit grows, and finally
 he shows an ardor which has to be restrained. This is a case of the
 genesis of voluntary attention. An artificial and indirect desire has
 to be grafted on a natural and direct one. Reading has no immediate
 attractiveness, but it has a borrowed one, and that is enough. The
 child is caught in the wheelwork, the first step is made."

I take another example, from M. B. Perez:[376]

 "A child of six years, habitually prone to mind-wandering, sat down
 one day to the piano of his own accord to repeat an air by which his
 mother had been charmed. His exercises lasted an hour. The same child
 at the age of seven, seeing his brother busy with tasks in vacation,
 went and sat at his father's desk. 'What are you doing there?' his
 nurse said, surprised at so finding him. 'I am,' said the child,
 'learning a page of German; it isn't very amusing, but it is for an
 agreeable surprise to mamma.'"

Here, again, a birth of voluntary attention, grafted this time on a
sympathetic instead of a selfish sentiment like that of the first
example. The piano, the German, awaken no spontaneous attention; but
they arouse and maintain it by borrowing a force from elsewhere.[377]

Second, take that mind-wandering which at a later age may trouble us
_whilst reading or listening to a discourse_. If attention be the
reproduction of the sensation from within, the habit of reading not
merely with the eye, and of listening not merely with the ear, but of
articulating to one's self the words seen or heard, ought to deepen
one's attention to the latter. Experience shows that this is the
case. I can keep my wandering mind a great deal more closely upon a
conversation or a lecture if I actively re-echo to myself the words
than if I simply hear them; and I find a number of my students who
report benefit from voluntarily adopting a similar course.[378]

Second, _a teacher who wishes to engage the attention of his class
must knit his novelties on to things of which they already have
preperceptions_. The old and familiar is readily attended to by
the mind and helps to hold in turn the new, forming, in Herbartian
phraseology, an '_Apperceptionsmasse_' for it. Of course it is in every
case a very delicate problem to know what 'Apperceptionsmasse' to use.
Psychology can only lay down the general rule.


IS VOLUNTARY ATTENTION A RESULTANT OR A FORCE?


When, a few pages back, I symbolized the 'ideational preparation'
element in attention by a brain-cell played upon from within, I added
'by other brain-cells, or by some spiritual force,' without deciding
which. The question 'which?' is one of those central psychologic
mysteries which part the schools. When we reflect that the turnings
of our attention form the nucleus of our inner self; when we see (as
in the chapter on the Will we shall see) that volition is nothing but
attention; when we believe that our autonomy in the midst of nature
depends on our not being pure effect, but a cause,--

    _Principium quoddam quod fati fœdera rumpat,_
    _Ex infinito ne causant causa sequatur--_

we must admit that the question whether attention involve such a
principle of spiritual activity or not is metaphysical as well as
psychological, and is well worthy of all the pains we can bestow on its
solution. It is in fact the pivotal question of metaphysics, the very
hinge on which our picture of the world shall swing from materialism,
fatalism, monism, towards spiritualism, freedom, pluralism,--or else
the other way.

It goes back to the automaton-theory. If feeling is an inert
accompaniment, then of course the brain-cell can be played upon only
by other brain-cells, and the attention which we give at any time
to any subject, whether in the form of sensory adaptation or of
'preperception,' is the fatally predetermined _effect_ of exclusively
material laws. If, on the other hand, the feeling which coexists with
the brain-cells' activity reacts dynamically upon that activity,
furthering or checking it, then the attention is in part, at least,
a _cause_. It does not necessarily follow, of course, that this
reactive feeling should be 'free' in the sense of having its amount
and direction undetermined in advance, for it might very well be
predetermined in all these particulars. If it were so, our attention
would not be _materially_ determined, nor yet would it be 'free' in the
sense of being spontaneous or unpredictable in advance. The question is
of course a purely speculative one, for we have no means of objectively
ascertaining whether our feelings react on our nerve-processes or not;
and those who answer the question in either way do so in consequence
of general analogies and presumptions drawn from other fields. As mere
_conceptions_, the effect-theory and the cause-theory of attention are
equally clear; and whoever affirms either conception to be true must do
so on metaphysical or universal rather than on scientific or particular
grounds.

       *       *       *       *       *

As regards _immediate sensorial attention_ hardly any one is tempted to
regard it as anything but an effect.[379] We are 'evolved' so as to
respond to special stimuli by special accommodative acts which produce
clear perceptions on the one hand in us, and on the other hand such
feelings of inner activity as were above described. The accommodation
and the resultant feeling _are_ the attention. We don't bestow it, the
object draws it from us. The object has the initiative, not the mind.

_Derived attention, where there is no voluntary effort, seems also
most plausibly to be a mere effect._ The object again takes the
initiative and draws our attention to itself, not by reason of its
own intrinsic interest, but because it is connected with some other
interesting thing. Its brain-process is connected with another that is
either excited, or tending to be excited, and the liability to share
the excitement and become aroused is the liability to 'preperception'
in which the attention consists. If I have received an insult, I may
not be actively thinking of it all the time, yet the thought of it
is in such a state of heightened irritability, that the place where
I received it or the man who inflicted it cannot be mentioned in my
hearing without my attention bounding, as it were, in that direction,
as the imagination of the whole transaction revives. Where such a
stirring-up occurs, organic adjustment must exist as well, and the
ideas must innervate to some degree the muscles. Thus the whole process
of involuntary derived attention is accounted for if we grant that
there is something interesting enough to arouse and fix the thought
of whatever may be connected with it. This fixing _is_ the attention;
and it carries with it a vague sense of activity going on, and of
acquiescence, furtherance, and adoption, which makes us feel the
activity to be our own.

This reinforcement of ideas and impressions by the pre-existing
contents of the mind was what Herbart had in mind when he gave the name
of _apperceptive_ attention to the variety we describe. We easily see
now why the lover's tap should be heard--it finds a nerve-centre half
ready in advance to explode. We see how we can attend to a companion's
voice in the midst of noises which pass unnoticed though objectively
much louder than the words we hear. Each word is _doubly_ awakened;
once from without by the lips of the talker, but already before that
from within by the premonitory processes irradiating from the previous
words, and by the dim arousal of all processes that are connected with
the 'topic' of the talk. The irrelevant noises, on the other hand, are
awakened only once. They form an unconnected train. The boys at school,
inattentive to the teacher except when he begins an anecdote, and then
all pricking up their ears, are as easily explained. The words of the
anecdote shoot into association with exciting objects which react and
fix them; the other words do not. Similarly with the grammar heard by
the purist and Herbart's other examples quoted on page 418.

Even where the attention is voluntary, it is possible to conceive of
it as an effect, and not a cause, a product and not an agent. The
things we attend to _come to us_ by their own laws. Attention _creates_
no idea; an idea must already be there before we can attend to it.
Attention only fixes and retains what the ordinary laws of association
bring 'before the footlights' of consciousness. But the moment we admit
this we see that the attention _per se_, the _feeling_ of attending
need no more fix and retain the ideas than it need bring them. The
associates which bring them also fix them by the interest which they
lend. In short, voluntary and involuntary attention may be essentially
the same. It is true that where the ideas are intrinsically very
unwelcome and the effort to attend to them is great, it seems to us
as if the frequent renewal of the effort were the very cause by which
they are held fast, and we naturally think of the effort as an original
force. In fact it is only to the _effort to attend_, not to the mere
_attending_, that we are seriously tempted to ascribe spontaneous
power. We think we can make more of it _if we will_; and the amount
which we make does not seem a fixed function of the ideas themselves,
as it would necessarily have to be if our effort were an effect and not
a spiritual force. But even here it is possible to conceive the facts
mechanically and to regard the effort as a mere effect.

Effort is felt only where there is a conflict of interests in the
mind. The idea A may be intrinsically exciting to us. The idea Z may
derive its interest from association with some remoter good. A may
be our sweetheart, Z may be some condition of our soul's salvation.
Under these circumstances, if we succeed in attending to Z at all it
is always with expenditure of effort. The 'ideational preparation,'
the 'preperception' of A keeps going on of its own accord, whilst
that of Z needs incessant pulses of voluntary reinforcement--that
is, we have the _feeling_ of voluntary reinforcement (or effort) at
each successive moment in which the thought of Z flares brightly up
in our mind. Dynamically, however, that may mean only this: that the
associative processes which make Z triumph are really the stronger, and
in A's absence would make us give a 'passive' and unimpeded attention
to Z; but, so long as A is present, some of of their force is used to
inhibit the processes concerned with A. Such inhibition is a partial
neutralization of the brain-energy which would otherwise be available
for fluent thought. But what is lost for thought is converted into
feeling, in this case into the peculiar feeling of effort, difficulty,
or strain.

The stream of our thought is like a river. On the whole easy simple
flowing predominates in it, the drift of things is with the pull of
gravity, and effortless attention is the rule. But at intervals an
obstruction, a set-back, a log-jam occurs, stops the current, creates
an eddy, and makes things temporarily move the other way. If a real
river could feel, it would feel these eddies and set-backs as places
of effort. "I am here flowing," it would say, "in the direction of
greatest resistance, instead of flowing, as usual, in the direction of
least. My effort is what enables me to perform this feat." Really, the
effort would only be a passive index that the feat was being performed.
The agent would all the while be the total downward drift of the rest
of the water, forcing _some_ of it upwards in this spot; and although,
_on the average_, the direction of least resistance is downwards, that
would be no reason for its not being upwards now and then. Just so with
our voluntary acts of attention. They are momentary arrests, coupled
with a peculiar feeling, of portions of the stream. But the arresting
force, instead of being this peculiar feeling itself, may be nothing
but the processes by which the collision is produced. The feeling of
effort may be 'an accompaniment,' as Mr. Bradley says, 'more or less
superfluous,' and no more contribute to the result than the pain in a
man's finger, when a hammer falls on it, contributes to the hammer's
weight. Thus the notion that our effort in attending is an original
faculty, a force additional to the others of which brain and mind are
the seat, may be an abject superstition. Attention may have to go, like
many a faculty once deemed essential, like many a verbal phantom, like
many an idol of the tribe. It may be an excrescence on Psychology. No
need of it to drag ideas before consciousness or fix them, when we see
how perfectly they drag and fix each other there.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have stated the effect-theory as persuasively as I can.[380] It
is a clear, strong, well-equipped conception, and like all such, is
fitted to carry conviction, where there is no contrary proof. The
feeling of effort certainly _may_ be an inert accompaniment and not the
active element which it seems. No measurements are as yet performed
(it is safe to say none ever will be performed) which can show that
it contributes energy to the result. We _may_ then regard attention
as a superfluity, or a 'Luxus,' and dogmatize against its causal
function with no feeling in our hearts but one of pride that we are
applying Occam's razor to an entity that has multiplied itself 'beyond
necessity.'

But Occam's razor, though a very good rule of method, is certainly no
law of nature. The laws of stimulation and of association may well
be indispensable actors in all attention's performances, and may
even be a good enough 'stock-company' to carry on many performances
without aid; and yet they _may_ at times simply form the background
for a 'star-performer,' who is no more their 'inert accompaniment' or
their 'incidental product' than Hamlet is Horatio's and Ophelia's.
Such a star-performer would be the voluntary effort to attend, if it
were an original psychic force. Nature _may_, I say, indulge in these
complications; and the conception that she has done so in this case
is, I think, just as clear (if not as 'parsimonious' logically) as the
conception that she has not. To justify this assertion, _let us ask
just what the effort to attend would effect if it were an original
force_.

It would deepen and prolong the stay in consciousness of innumerable
ideas which else would fade more quickly away. The delay thus gained
might not be more than a second in duration--but that second might be
_critical_; for in the constant rising and falling of considerations
in the mind, where two associated systems of them are nearly in
equilibrium it is often a matter of but a second more or less of
attention at the outset, whether one system shall gain force to occupy
the field and develop itself, and exclude the other, or be excluded
itself by the other. When developed, it may make us act; and that act
may seal our doom. When we come to the chapter on the Will, we shall
see that the whole drama of the voluntary life hinges on the amount
of attention, slightly more or slightly less, which rival motor ideas
may receive. But the whole feeling of reality, the whole sting and
excitement of our voluntary life, depends on our sense that in it
things are _really being decided_ from one moment to another, and that
it is not the dull rattling off of a chain that was forged innumerable
ages ago. This appearance, which makes life and history tingle with
such a tragic zest, _may_ not be an illusion. As we grant to the
advocate of the mechanical theory that it may be one, so he must
grant to us that it may _not_. And the result is two conceptions of
possibility face to face with no facts definitely enough known to stand
as arbiter between them.

Under these circumstances, one can leave the question open whilst
waiting for light, or one can do what most speculative minds do,
that is, look to one's general philosophy to incline the beam. The
believers in mechanism do so without hesitation, and they ought not
to refuse a similar privilege to the believers in a spiritual force.
I count myself among the latter, but as my reasons are ethical they
are hardly suited for introduction into a psychological work.[381]
The last word of psychology here is ignorance, for the 'forces'
engaged are certainly too delicate and numerous to be followed in
detail. Meanwhile, in view of the strange arrogance with which the
wildest materialistic speculations persist in calling themselves
'science,' it is well to recall just what the reasoning is, by which
the effect-theory of attention is confirmed. It is an argument from
analogy, drawn from rivers, reflex actions and other material phenomena
where no consciousness _appears_ to exist at all, and extended to
cases where consciousness seems the phenomenon's essential feature.
_The consciousness doesn't count,_ these reasoners say; it doesn't
exist for science, it is _nil_; you mustn't think about it at all. The
intensely reckless character of all this needs no comment. It is making
the mechanical theory true _per fas aut nefas_. For the sake of that
theory we make inductions from phenomena to others that are startlingly
_unlike_ them; and we assume that a complication which Nature has
introduced (the presence of feeling and of effort, namely) is not
worthy of scientific recognition at all. Such conduct may conceivably
be _wise_, though I doubt it; but scientific, as contrasted with
metaphysical, it cannot seriously be called.[382]


INATTENTION.


Having spoken fully of attention, let me add a word about _inattention_.

We do not notice the ticking of the clock, the noise of the city
streets, or the roaring of the brook near the house; and even the
din of a foundry or factory will not mingle with the thoughts of its
workers, if they have been there long enough. When we first put on
spectacles, especially if they be of certain curvatures, the bright
reflections they give of the windows, etc., mixing with the field of
view, are very disturbing. In a few days we ignore them altogether.
Various entoptic images, _muscæ volitantes_, etc., although constantly
present, are hardly ever known. The pressure of our clothes and
shoes, the beating of our hearts and arteries, our breathing, certain
steadfast bodily pains, habitual odors, tastes in the mouth, etc., are
examples from other senses, of the same lapse into unconsciousness
of any too unchanging content--a lapse which Hobbes has expressed in
the well-known phrase, "_Semper idem sentire ac non sentire ad idem
revertunt_."

The cause of the unconsciousness is certainly not the mere blunting of
the sense-organs. Were the sensation important, we should notice it
well enough; and we can at any moment notice it by expressly throwing
our attention upon it,[383] provided it have not become so inveterate
that inattention to it is ingrained in our very constitution, as in the
case of the _muscæ volitantes_ the double retinal images, etc. But even
in these cases artificial conditions of observation and patience soon
give us command of the impression which we seek. The inattentiveness
must then be a habit grounded on higher conditions than mere sensorial
fatigue.

Helmholtz has formulated a general law of inattention which we shall
have to study in the next chapter but one. Helmholtz's law is that we
leave all impressions unnoticed which are valueless to us as signs by
which to _discriminate things_. At most such impressions fuse with
their consorts into an aggregate effect. The upper partial tones
which make human voices differ make them differ as wholes only--we
cannot dissociate the tones themselves. The odors which form integral
parts of the characteristic taste of certain substances, meat, fish,
cheese, butter, wine, do not come as odors to our attention. The
various muscular and tactile feelings that make up the perception of
the attributes 'wet,' 'elastic,' 'doughy,' etc., are not singled out
separately for what they are. And all this is due to an inveterate
habit we have contracted, of passing from them immediately to their
import and letting their substantive nature alone. They have formed
connections in the mind which it is now difficult to break; they are
constituents of processes which it is hard to arrest, and which differ
altogether from what the processes of catching the attention would be.
In the cases Helmholtz has in mind, not only we but our ancestors have
formed these habits. In the cases we started from, however, of the
mill-wheel, the spectacles, the factory din, the tight shoes, etc., the
habits of inattention are more recent, and the manner of their genesis
seems susceptible, hypothetically at least, of being traced.

How _can_ impressions that are not needed by the intellect be thus
shunted off from all relation to the rest of consciousness? Professor
G. E. Müller has made a plausible reply to this question, and most of
what follows is borrowed from him.[384] He begins with the fact that

 "When we first come out of a mill or factory, in which we have
 remained long enough to get wonted to the noise, we feel as if
 something were _lacking_. Our total feeling of existence is different
 from what it was when we were in the mill.... A friend writes to me:
 'I have in my room a little clock which does not run quite twenty-four
 hours without winding. In consequence of this, it often stops. So
 soon as this happens, I notice it, whereas I naturally fail to notice
 it when going. When this first began to happen, there was this
 modification: I suddenly felt an undefined uneasiness or sort of void,
 without being able to say what was the matter; and only after some
 consideration did I find the cause in the stopping of the clock.'"

That the stopping of an unfelt stimulus may itself be felt is a
well-known fact: the sleeper in church who wakes when the sermon
ends; the miller who does the same when his wheel stands still, are
stock examples. Now (since every impression falling on the nervous
system must propagate itself somewhither), Müller suggests that
impressions which come to us when the thought-centres are preoccupied
with other matters may thereby be blocked or inhibited from invading
these centres, and may then overflow into lower paths of discharge.
And he farther suggests that if this process recur often enough, the
side-track thus created will grow so permeable as to be used, no matter
what may be going on in the centres above. In the acquired inattention
mentioned, the constant stimulus always caused disturbance _at first_;
and consciousness of it was extruded successfully only when the brain
was _strongly excited_ about other things. Gradually the extrusion
became easier, and at last automatic.

The side-tracks which thus learn to draft off the stimulations that
interfere with thought cannot be assigned with any precision. They
probably terminate in organic processes, or insignificant muscular
contractions which, when stopped by the cessation of their instigating
cause, immediately give us the feeling that something is gone from our
existence (as Müller says), or (as his friend puts it) the feeling of a
void.[385]

Müller's suggestion awakens another. It is a well-known fact that
persons striving to keep their attention on a difficult subject will
resort to movements of various unmeaning kinds, such as pacing the
room, drumming with the fingers, playing with keys or watch-chain,
scratching head, pulling mustache, vibrating foot, or what not,
according to the individual. There is an anecdote of Sir W. Scott,
when a boy, rising to the head of his class by cutting off from the
jacket of the usual head-boy a button which the latter was in the habit
of twirling in his fingers during the lesson. The button gone, its
owner's power of reciting also departed.--Now much of this activity
is unquestionably due to the overflow of emotional excitement during
anxious and concentrated thought. It drains away nerve-currents
which if pent up within the thought-centres would very likely make
the confusion there worse confounded. But may it not also be a means
of drafting off all the irrelevant sensations of the moment, and so
keeping the attention more exclusively concentrated upon its inner
task? Each individual usually has his own peculiar habitual movement of
this sort. A downward nerve-path is thus kept constantly open during
concentrated thought; and as it seems to be a law of frequent (if not
of universal) application, that incidental stimuli tend to discharge
through paths that are already discharging rather than through
others, the whole arrangement might protect the thought-centres from
interference from without. Were this the true _rationale_ of these
peculiar movements, we should have to suppose that the sensations
produced by each phase of the movement itself are also drafted off
immediately by the next phase and help to keep the circular process
agoing. I offer the suggestion for what it is worth; the connection
of the movements themselves with the continued effort of attention is
certainly a genuine and curious fact.


FOOTNOTES:

[322] Bain mentions attention in the Senses and the Intellect, p. 558,
and even gives a theory of it on pp. 370-374 of the Emotions of the
Will. I shall recur to this theory later on.

[323] "The first and most important, but also the most difficult, task
at the outset of an education is to overcome gradually the inattentive
dispersion of mind which shows itself wherever the organic life
preponderates over the intellectual. The training of animals ... must
be in the first instance based on the awakening of attention (cf.
Adrian Leonard, _Essai sur l'Education des Animaux_, Lille, 1842), that
is to say, we must seek to make them gradually perceive separately
things which, if left to themselves, would not be attended to, because
they would fuse with a great sum of other sensorial stimuli to a
confused total impression of which each separate item only darkens and
interferes with the rest. Similarly at first with the human child. The
enormous difficulties of deaf-mute- and especially of idiot-instruction
is principally due to the slow and painful manner in which we succeed
in bringing out from the general confusion of perception single items
with sufficient sharpness." (Waitz, Lehrb. d. Psychol., p. 632.)

[324] Elements, part i, chap. ii, _fin._

[325] Lectures on Metaphysics, lecture xiv.

[326] Nature, vol. iii, p. 281 (1871).

[327] If a lot of dots or strokes on a piece of paper be exhibited for
a moment to a person in _normal_ condition, with the request that he
say how many are there, he will find that they break into groups in his
mind's eye, and that whilst he is analyzing and counting one group in
his memory the others dissolve. In short, the impression made by the
dots changes rapidly into something else. In the _trance-subject_, on
the contrary, it seems to _stick_; I find that persons in the hypnotic
state easily count the dots in the mind's eye so long as they do not
much exceed twenty in number.

[328] Mr. Cattell made Jevons's experiment in a much more precise way
(Philosophische Studien, iii, 121 ff.). Cards were ruled with short
lines, varying in number from four to fifteen, and exposed to the eye
for a hundredth of a second. When the number was but four or five, no
mistakes as a rule were made. For higher numbers the tendency was to
under- rather than to over-estimate. Similar experiments were tried
with letters and figures, and gave the same result. When the letters
formed familiar words, three times as many of them could be named as
when their combination was meaningless. If the words formed a sentence,
twice as many of them could be caught as when they had no connection.
"The sentence was then apprehended as a whole. If not apprehended thus,
almost nothing is apprehended of the several words; but if the sentence
as a whole is apprehended, then the words appear very distinct."--Wundt
and his pupil Dietze had tried similar experiments on rapidly repeated
strokes of sound. Wundt made them follow each other in groups, and
found that groups of twelve strokes at most could be recognized and
identified when they succeeded each other at the most favorable rate,
namely, from three to five tenths of a second (Phys. Psych., ii, 215).
Dietze found that by mentally subdividing the groups into sub-groups
as one listened, as many as forty strokes could be identified as a
whole. They were then grasped as eight sub-groups of five, or as five
of eight strokes each. (Philosophische Studien, ii, 362.)--Later in
Wundt's Laboratory, Bechterew made observations on two _simultaneously_
elapsing series of metronome strokes, of which one contained one
stroke more than the other. The most favorable rate of succession was
0.3 sec., and he then discriminated a group of 18 from one of 18 + 1,
apparently. (Neurologisches Centralblatt, 1889, 272.)

[329] Revue Scientifique, vol. 39, p. 684 (May 28, 1887).

[330] Cf. Chr. Wolff: Psychologia Empirica, § 245. Wolff's account of
the phenomena of attention is in general excellent.

[331] Pflüger's Archiv, xi, 429-31.

[332] Physiol. Psych., 2d ed. ii, pp. 238-40.

[333] _Ib._ p. 262.

[334] Physiol. Psych., 2d ed. ii, 264-6.

[335] This was the original 'personal equation' observation of Bessel.
An Observer looked through his equatorial telescope to note the moment
at which a star crossed the meridian, the latter being marked in the
telescopic field of view by a visible thread, beside which other
equidistant threads appear. "Before the star reached the thread he
looked at the clock, and then, with eye at telescope, counted the
seconds by the beat of the pendulum. Since the star seldom passed
the meridian at the exact moment of a beat, the observer, in order
to estimate fractions, had to note its position at the stroke before
and at the stroke after the passage, and to divide the time as the
meridian-line seemed to divide the space. If, e.g., one had counted
20 seconds, and at the 21st the star seemed removed by _ac_ from the
meridian-thread _c_, whilst at the 22d it was at the distance _bc_;
then, if _ac: bc_:: 1: 2, the star would have passed at 21 1/8 seconds.
The conditions resemble those in our experiment: the star is the
index-hand, the threads are the scale; and a time-displacement is to
be expected, which with high rapidities may be positive, and negative
with low. The astronomic observations do not permit us to measure its
absolute amount; but that it exists is made certain by the fact than
after all other possible errors are eliminated, there still remains
between different observers a personal difference which is often much
larger than that between mere reaction-times, amounting ... sometimes
to more than a second." (_Op. cit._ p. 270.)

[Illustration: FIG. 35.]

[336] Philosophische Studien, ii, 601.

[337] Physiol. Psych., 2d ed. ii, 273-4; 3d ed. ii, 339; Philosophische
Studien, ii, 621 ff.--I know that I am stupid, but I confess I find
these theoretical statements, especially Wundt's, a little hazy.
Herr v. Tschisch considers it impossible that the perception of the
index's position should come in too late, and says it demands no
particular attention (p. 622). It seems, however, that this can hardly
be the case. Both observers speak of the difficulty of seeing the
index at the right moment. The case is quite different from that of
distributing the attention impartially over simultaneous momentary
sensations. The bell or other signal gives a momentary sensation, the
index a continuous one, of motion. To note any one _position_ of the
latter is to _interrupt_ this sensation of motion and to substitute an
entirely different percept--one, namely, of position--for it, during
a time however brief. This involves a sudden change in the manner of
attending to the revolutions of the index; which change _ought_ to
take place neither sooner nor later than the momentary impression, and
_fix_ the index as it is then and there visible. Now this is not a case
of simply getting two sensations at once and so feeling them--which
would be an harmonious act; but of _stopping one_ and changing it into
another, whilst we simultaneously get a third. Two of these acts are
discrepant, and the whole three rather interfere with each other. It
becomes hard to 'fix' the index at the very instant that we catch the
momentary impression; so we fall into a way of fixing it either at the
last possible moment before, or at the first possible moment after, the
impression comes.

This at least seems to me the more probable state of affairs. If we
fix the index before the impression really comes, that means that
we perceive it too late. But why do we fix it _before_ when the
impressions come slow and simple, and _after_ when they come rapid and
complex? And why under certain conditions is there no displacement
at all? The answer which suggests itself is that when there is just
enough leisure between the impressions for the attention to adapt
itself comfortably both to them and to the index (one second in W.'s
experiments), it carries on the two processes at once; when the leisure
is excessive, the attention, following its own laws of ripening, and
being _ready_ to note the index before the other impression comes,
notes it _then_, since that is the moment of easiest action, whilst
the impression, which comes a moment later, interferes with noting
it again; and finally, that when the leisure is insufficient, the
momentary impressions, being the more fixed data, are attended to
first, and the index is fixed a little later on. The noting of the
index at too early a moment would be the noting of a real fact, with
its analogue in many other rhythmical experiences. In reaction-time
experiments, for example, when, in a regularly recurring series, the
stimulus is once in a while omitted, the observer sometimes reacts
as if it came. Here, as Wundt somewhere observes, we catch ourselves
acting merely because our inward preparation is complete. The
'fixing' of the index is a sort of action; so that my interpretation
tallies with facts recognized elsewhere; but Wundt's explanation (if
I understand it) of the experiments requires us to believe that an
observer like v. Tschisch shall steadily and without exception get an
hallucination of a bell-stroke before the latter occurs, and _not hear
the real bell-stroke afterwards_. I doubt whether this is possible,
and I can think of no analogue to it in the rest of our experience.
The whole subject deserves to be gone over again. To Wundt is due
the highest credit for his patience in working out the facts. His
explanation of them in his earlier work (Vorlesungen üb. Menschen und
Thierseele, i, 37-42, 365-371) consisted merely in the appeal to the
unity of consciousness, and may be considered quite crude.

[338] Note that the permanent interests are themselves grounded in
certain objects and relations in which our interest is immediate and
instinctive.

[339] Herbart: Psychologie als Wissenschaft, § 128.

[340] Sir W. Hamilton. Metaphysics, lecture xiv.

[341] Mental Physiol., § 124. The oft-cited case of soldiers not
perceiving that they are wounded is of an analogous sort.

[342] Prof. J. M. Cattell made experiments to which we shall refer
further on, on the degree to which reaction-times might be shortened by
distracting or voluntarily concentrating the attention. He says of the
latter series that "the averages show that the attention can be kept
strained, that is, the centres kept in a state of unstable equilibrium,
for one second" (Mind, xi, 240).

[343] Physiologische Optik, § 32.

[344] "'Genius,' says Helvetius, 'is nothing but a continued attention
(_une attention suivie_).' 'Genius,' says Buffon, 'is only a protracted
patience (_une longue patience_).' 'In the exact sciences, at least,'
says Cuvier, 'it is the patience of a sound intellect, when invincible,
which truly constitutes genius.' And Chesterfield has also observed
that 'the power of applying an attention, steady and undissipated, to
a single object, is the sure mark of a superior genius.'" (Hamilton:
Lect. on Metaph., lecture xiv.)

[345] See, e.g., Ulrici: Leib u. Seele, ii, 28; Lotze: Metaphysik, §
273; Fechner, Revision d. Psychophysik, xix; G. E. Müller: Zur Theorie
d. sinnl. Aufmerksamkeit, $ 1; Stumpf: Tonpsychologie, i, 71.

[346] Fechner, _op. cit._ p. 271.

[347] Tonpsychologie, i, p. 71.

[348] Compare, on clearness as the essential fruit of attention,
Lotze's Metaphysic, § 273.

[349] Elements, part i, chap. ii.

[350] Physiol. Psych., 2d ed. ii, 226.

[351] By a negative value of the reaction-time Wundt means the case of
the reactive movement occurring _before_ the stimulus.

[352] _Op. cit._ ii, 239.

[353] The reader must not suppose this phenomenon to be of frequent
occurrence. Experienced observers, like Exner and Cattell, deny having
met with it in their personal experience.

[354] _Op. cit._ pp. 241-5.

[355] It should be added that Mr. J. M. Cattell (Mind, xi, 33) found,
on repeating Wundt's experiments with a disturbing noise upon two
practised observers, that the simple reaction-time either for light
or sound was hardly perceptibly increased. Making strong voluntary
concentration of attention shortened it by about 0.013 seconds on an
average (p. 240). Performing mental additions whilst waiting for the
stimulus lengthened it more than anything, apparently. For other,
less careful, observations, compare Obersteiner, in Brain, i, 439.
Cattell's negative results show how far some persons can abstract their
attention from stimuli by which others would be disturbed.--A. Bartels
(Versuche über die Ablenkung d. Aufmerksamkeit, Dorpat, 1889) found
that a stimulus to one eye sometimes prevented, sometimes improved, the
perception of a quickly ensuing very faint stimulus to the other.

[356] Cf. Wundt, Physiol. Psych., 1st ed. p. 794.

[357] Beiträge zur Experimentellen Psychologie, Heft i, pp. 73-106
(1889).

[358] To say the very least, he always brought his articulatory
innervation close to the discharging point. Herr M. describes a
tightening of the head-muscles as characteristic of the attitude of
attention to the reply.

[359] Psychophysik, Bd. ii, pp. 475-6.

[360] I must say that I am wholly unconscious of the peculiar feelings
in the scalp which Fechner goes on to describe. "The feeling of
strained attention in the different sense-organs seems to be only a
muscular one produced in using these various organs by setting in
motion, by a sort of reflex action, the muscles which belong to them.
One can ask, then, with what particular muscular contraction the sense
of strained attention in the effort to recall something is associated?
On this question my own feeling gives me a decided answer; it comes to
me distinctly, not as a sensation of tension in the inside of the head,
but as a feeling of strain and contraction in the scalp with a pressure
from without inwards over the whole cranium, undoubtedly caused by a
contraction of the muscles of the scalp. This harmonizes very well with
the German popular expression _den Kopf zusammennehmen_, etc., etc. In
a former illness, in which I could not endure the slightest effort of
continuous thought, and had no theoretical bias on this question, the
muscles of the scalp, especially those of the occiput, assumed a fairly
morbid degree of sensibility whenever I tried to _think_." (_Ibid._
pp. 490-491.) In an early writing by Professor Mach, after speaking
of the way in which by attention we decompose complex musical sounds
into their elements, this investigator continues: "It is more than
a figure of speech when one says that we 'search' among the sounds.
This hearkening search is very observably a bodily activity, just like
attentive looking in the case of the eye. If, obeying the drift of
physiology, we understand by attention nothing mystical, but a bodily
disposition, it is most natural to seek it in the variable tension
of the muscles of the ear. Just so, what common men call attentive
looking reduces itself mainly to accommodating and setting of the
optic axes.... According to this, it seems to me a very plausible view
that quite generally Attention has its seat in the mechanism of the
body. If nervous work is being done through certain channels, that by
itself is a mechanical ground for other channels being closed." (Wien.
Sitzungsberichte, Math. Naturw., xlviii, 2, 297. 1863.)

[361] Physiol. Optik, p. 741.

[362] Hermann's Handbuch, iii, i, 548.

[363] Helmholtz: Tonempfindungen, 3d ed. 85-9 (Engl. tr., 2d ed. 50,
51; see also pp. 60-1).

[364] Physiol. Psych., ii, 209.

[365] Physiol. Optik, 741.

[366] P. 728.

[367] Popular Scientific Lectures, Eng. Trans., p. 295.

[368] Similarly in the verses which some one tried to puzzle me with
the other day: "_Gui n'a beau dit, qui sabot dit, nid a beau dit elle?_"

[369] I cannot refrain from referring in a note to an additional set
of facts instanced by Lotze in his Medizinische Psychologie, § 431,
although I am not satisfied with the explanation, fatigue of the
sense-organ, which _he_ gives. "In quietly lying and contemplating a
wall-paper pattern, sometimes it is the ground, sometimes the design,
which is clearer and consequently comes nearer.... Arabesques of
monochromic many-convoluted lines now strike us as composed of one,
now of another connected linear system, and all without any intention
on our part. [This is beautifully seen in Moorish patterns; but a
simple diagram like Fig. 39 also shows it well. We see it sometimes
as two large triangles superposed, sometimes as a hexagon with angles
spanning its sides, sometimes as six small triangles stuck together at
their corners.]... Often it happens in revery that when we stare at a
picture, suddenly some one of its features will be lit up with especial
clearness, although neither its optical character nor its meaning
discloses any motive for such an arousal of the attention.... To one
in process of becoming drowsy the surroundings alternately fade into
darkness and abruptly brighten up. The talk of the bystanders seems now
to come from indefinite distances; but at the next moment it startles
us by its threatening loudness at our very ear," etc. These variations,
which everyone will have noticed, are, it seems to me, easily
explicable by the very unstable equilibrium of our ideational centres,
of which constant change is the law. We _conceive_ one set of lines as
object, the other as background, and forthwith the first set becomes
the set we _see_. There need be no _logical_ motive for the conceptual
change, the irradiations of brain-tracts by each other, according to
accidents of nutrition, 'like sparks in burnt-up paper,' suffice. The
changes during drowsiness are still more obviously due to this cause.

[Illustration: FIG. 39.]

[370] The Emotions and the Will, 3d ed. p. 370.

[371] Psychologie de l'Attention (1889), p. 32 ff.

[372] Philosophische Studien, iv, 413 ff.

[373] See Lange, _loc. cit._ p. 417, for another proof of his view,
drawn from the phenomenon of retinal rivalry.

[374] Many of my students have at my request experimented with imagined
letters of the alphabet and syllables, and they tell me that they
can see them inwardly as total colored pictures without following
their outlines with the eye. I am myself a bad visualizer, and make
movements all the while.--M. L. Marillier, in an article of eminent
introspective power which appeared after my text was written (Remarques
sur le Mécanisme de l'Attention, in Revue Philosophique, vol. xxvii, p.
566), has contended against Ribot and others for the non-dependence of
sensory upon motor images in their relations to attention. I am glad to
cite him as an ally.

[375] Drs. Ferrier (Functions of the Brain, §§ 102-3) and Obersteiner
(Brain, i, 439 ff.) treat it as the essential feature. The author
whose treatment of the subject is by far the most thorough and
satisfactory is Prof. G. E. Müller, whose little work Zur Théorie der
sinnlichen Aufmerksamkeit, Inauguraldissertation, Leipzig, Edelmann
(1874?), is for learning and acuteness a model of what a monograph
should be. I should like to have quoted from it, but the Germanism
of its composition makes quotation quite impossible. See also G. H.
Lewes: Problems of Life and Mind, 3d Series, Prob. 2, chap. 10; G.
H. Schneider: Der menschliche Wille, 294 ff., 309 ff.; C. Stumpf:
Tonpsychologie, i, 67-75; W. B. Carpenter: Mental Physiology, chap. 3;
Cappie in 'Brain,' July 1886 (hyperæmia-theory); J. Sully in 'Brain,'
Oct. 1890.

[376] L'Enfant de trois à sept Ans, p. 108.

[377] Psychologie de l'Attention, p. 53.

[378] Repetition of this sort does not confer _intelligence_ of what
is said, it only keeps the mind from wandering into other channels.
The intelligence sometimes comes in beats, as it were, at the end of
sentences, or in the midst of words which were mere words until then.
See above, p. 281.

[379] The reader will please observe that I am saying all that can
_possibly_ be said in favor of the effect-theory, since, inclining
as I do myself to the cause-theory, I do not want to undervalue the
enemy. As a matter of fact, one might begin to take one's stand against
the effect theory at the outset, with the phenomenon of immediate
sensorial attention. One might say that attention causes the movements
of adjustment of the eyes, for example, and is not merely their effect.
Hering writes most emphatically to this effect: "The movements from
one point of fixation to another are occasioned and regulated by the
changes of place of the attention. When an object, seen at first
indirectly, draws our attention to itself, the corresponding movement
of the eye follows without further ado, as a consequence of the
attention's migration and of our effort to make the object distinct.
The wandering of the attention entails that of the fixation point.
Before its movement begins, its goal is already in consciousness and
grasped by the attention, and the location of this spot in the total
space seen is what determines the direction and amount of the movement
of the eye." (Hermann's Handbuch, p. 534.) I do not here insist on
this, because it is hard to tell whether the attention or the movement
comes first (Hering's reasons, pp. 535-6, also 544-6, seem to me
ambiguous), and because, even if the attention to the object does come
first, it may be a mere effect of stimulus and association. Mach's
theory that the _will to look_ is the _space-feeling itself_ may be
compared with Hering's in this place. See Mach's Beiträge zur Analyse
der Empfindungen (1886), pp. 55 ff.

[380] F. H. Bradley, "Is there a Special Activity of Attention?" in
'Mind,' xi, 305, and Lipps, Grundtatsachen, chaps. iv and xxx, have
stated it similarly.

[381] More will be said of the matter when we come to the chapter on
the Will.

[382] See, for a defence of the notion of inward activity, Mr. James
Ward's searching articles in 'Mind,' xii, 45 and 564.

[383] It must be admitted that some little time will often elapse
before this effort succeeds. As a child, I slept in a nursery with a
very loud-ticking clock, and remember my astonishment more than once,
on listening for its tick, to find myself unable to catch it for what
seemed a long space of time; then suddenly it would break into my
consciousness with an almost startling loudness.--M. Delbœuf somewhere
narrates how, sleeping in the country near a mill-dam, he woke in the
night and thought the water had ceased to flow, but on looking out of
the open window saw it flowing in the moonlight, and then heard it too.

[384] Zur Theorie d. sinnl. Aufmerksamkeit, p. 128 foll.

[385] I have begun to inquire experimentally whether any of the
measurable functions of the workmen change after the din of machinery
stops at a workshop. So far I have found no constant results as regards
either pulse, breathing, or strength of squeeze by the hand. I hope to
prosecute the inquiry farther (May, 1890).




