CHAPTER XI.

ATTENTION.


Strange to say, so patent a fact as the perpetual presence of selective
attention has received hardly any notice from psychologists of the
English empiricist school. The Germans have explicitly treated of it,
either as a faculty or as a resultant, but in the pages of such writers
as Locke, Hume, Hartley, the Mills, and Spencer the word hardly occurs,
or if it does so, it is parenthetically and as if by inadvertence.[322]
The motive of this ignoring of the phenomenon of attention is obvious
enough. These writers are bent on showing how the higher faculties of
the mind are pure products of 'experience;' and experience is supposed
to be of something simply _given_. Attention, implying a degree of
reactive spontaneity, would seem to break through the circle of pure
receptivity which constitutes 'experience,' and hence must not be
spoken of under penalty of interfering with the smoothness of the tale.

But the moment one thinks of the matter, one sees how false a notion
of experience that is which would make it tantamount to the mere
presence to the senses of an outward order. Millions of items of the
outward order are present to my senses which never properly enter
into my experience. Why? Because they have no _interest_ for me. _My
experience is what I agree to attend to._ Only those items which I
_notice_ shape my mind--without selective interest, experience is
an utter chaos. Interest alone gives accent and emphasis, light and
shade, background and foreground--intelligible perspective, in a word.
It varies in every creature, but without it the consciousness of
every creature would be a gray chaotic indiscriminateness, impossible
for us even to conceive. Such an empiricist writer as Mr. Spencer,
for example, regards the creature as absolutely passive clay, upon
which 'experience' rains down. The clay will be impressed most deeply
where the drops fall thickest, and so the final shape of the mind
is moulded. Give time enough, and all sentient things ought, at
this rate, to end by assuming an identical mental constitution--for
'experience,' the sole shaper, is a constant fact, and the order of
its items must end by being exactly reflected by the passive mirror
which we call the sentient organism. If such an account were true, a
race of dogs bred for generations, say in the Vatican, with characters
of visual shape, sculptured in marble, presented to their eyes, in
every variety of form and combination, ought to discriminate before
long the finest shades of these peculiar characters. In a word, they
ought to become, if time were given, accomplished _connoisseurs_ of
sculpture. Anyone may judge of the probability of this consummation.
Surely an eternity of experience of the statues would leave the dog as
inartistic as he was at first, for the lack of an original interest to
knit his discriminations on to. Meanwhile the odors at the bases of
the pedestals would have organized themselves in the consciousness of
this breed of dogs into a system of 'correspondences' to which the most
hereditary caste of _custodi_ would never approximate, merely because
to them, as human beings, the dog's interest in those smells would
for ever be an inscrutable mystery. These writers have, then, utterly
ignored the glaring fact that subjective interest may, by laying its
weighty index-finger on particular items of experience, so accent them
as to give to the least frequent associations far more power to shape
our thought than the most frequent ones possess. The interest itself,
though its genesis is doubtless perfectly _natural, makes_ experience
more than it is made by it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every one knows what attention is. It is the taking possession by
the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out of what seem several
simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought. Focalization,
concentration, of consciousness are of its essence. It implies
withdrawal from some things in order to deal effectively with others,
and is a condition which has a real opposite in the confused, dazed,
scatter-brained state which in French is called _distraction_, and
_Zerstreutheit_ in German.

We all know this latter state, even in its extreme degree. Most people
probably fall several times a day into a fit of something like this:
The eyes are fixed on vacancy, the sounds of the world melt into
confused unity, the attention is dispersed so that the whole body is
felt, as it were, at once, and the foreground of consciousness is
filled, if by anything, by a sort of solemn sense of surrender to
the empty passing of time. In the dim background of our mind we know
meanwhile what we ought to be doing: getting up, dressing ourselves,
answering the person who has spoken to us, trying to make the next
step in our reasoning. But somehow we cannot _start_; the _pensée de
derrière la tête_ fails to pierce the shell of lethargy that wraps our
state about. Every moment we expect the spell to break, for we know
no reason why it should continue. But it does continue, pulse after
pulse, and we float with it, until--also without reason that we can
discover--an energy is given, something--we know not what--enables us
to gather ourselves together, we wink our eyes, we shake our heads,
the background-ideas become effective, and the wheels of life go round
again.

This curious state of inhibition can for a few moments be produced at
will by fixing the eyes on vacancy. Some persons can voluntarily empty
their minds and 'think of nothing.' With many, as Professor Exner
remarks of himself, this is the most efficacious means of falling
asleep. It is difficult not to suppose something like this scattered
condition of mind to be the usual state of brutes when not actively
engaged in some pursuit. Fatigue, monotonous mechanical occupations
that end by being automatically carried on, tend to produce it in men.
It is not sleep; and yet when aroused from such a state, a person
will often hardly be able to say what he has been thinking about
Subjects of the hypnotic trance seem to lapse into it when left to
themselves; asked what they are thinking of, they reply, 'of nothing
particular'![323]

The abolition of this condition is what we call the awakening of
the attention. One principal object comes then into the focus of
consciousness, others are temporarily suppressed. The awakening
may come about either by reason of a stimulus from without, or in
consequence of some unknown inner alteration; and the change it
brings with it amounts to a concentration upon one single object with
exclusion of aught besides, or to a condition anywhere between this and
the completely dispersed state.


TO HOW MANY THINGS CAN WE ATTEND AT ONCE?


The question of _the 'span' of consciousness_ has often been asked and
answered--sometimes _a priori_, sometimes by experiment. This seems the
proper place for us to touch upon it; and our answer, according to the
principles laid down in Chapter IX, will not be difficult. The number
of _things_ we may attend to is altogether indefinite, depending on the
power of the individual intellect, on the form of the apprehension, and
on what the things are. When apprehended conceptually as a connected
system, their number may be very large. But however numerous the
things, they can only be known in a single pulse of consciousness for
which they form one complex 'object' (p. 276 ff.), so that properly
speaking there is before the mind at no time a plurality of _ideas_,
properly so called.

The 'unity of the soul' has been supposed by many philosophers, who
also believed in the distinct atomic nature of 'ideas,' to preclude the
presence to it of more than one objective fact, manifested in one idea,
at a time. Even Dugald Stuart opines that every _minimum visibile_ of a
pictured figure

 "constitutes just as distinct an object of attention to the mind as if
 it were separated by an interval of empty space from the rest.... It
 is impossible for the mind to attend to more than one of these points
 at once; and as the perception of the figure implies a knowledge of
 the relative situation of the different points with respect to each
 other, we must conclude that the perception of figure by the eye is
 the result of a number of different acts of attention. These acts
 of attention, however, are performed with such rapidity, that the
 effect, with respect to us, is the same as if the perception were
 instantaneous."[324]

Such glaringly artificial views can only come from fantastic
metaphysics or from the ambiguity of the word 'idea,' which, standing
sometimes for mental state and sometimes for thing known, leads men to
ascribe to the thing, not only the unity which belongs to the mental
state, but even the simplicity which is thought to reside in the Soul.

When the things are apprehended by the _senses_, the number of them
that can be attended to at once is small, "_Pluribus intentus, minor
est ad singula sensus_."

 "By Charles Bonnet the Mind is allowed to have a distinct notion
 of six objects at once; by Abraham Tucker the number is limited to
 four; while Destutt Tracy again amplifies it to six. The opinion
 of the first and last of these philosophers" [continues Sir Wm.
 Hamilton] "seems to me correct. You can easily make the experiments
 for yourselves, but you must beware of grouping the objects into
 classes. If you throw a handful of marbles on the floor, you will find
 it difficult to view at once more than six, or seven at most, without
 confusion; but if you group them into twos, or threes, or fives, you
 can comprehend as many groups as you can units; because the mind
 considers these groups only as units--it views them as wholes, and
 throws their parts out of consideration."[325]

Professor Jevons, repeating this observation, by counting
instantaneously beans thrown into a box, found that the number 6
was guessed correctly 120 times out of 147, 5 correctly 102 times
out of 107, and 4 and 3 always right.[326] It is obvious that such
observations decide nothing at all about our attention, properly
so called. They rather measure in part the distinctness of our
vision--especially of the primary-memory-image[327]--in part the amount
of association in the individual between seen arrangements and the
names of numbers.[328]

Each number-name is a way of grasping the beans as one total object.
In such a total object, all the parts converge harmoniously to the one
resultant concept; no single bean has special discrepant associations
of its own; and so, with _practice_, they may grow quite numerous ere
we fail to estimate them aright. But where the 'object' before us
breaks into parts disconnected with each other, and forming each as it
were a separate object or system, not conceivable in union with the
rest, it becomes harder to apprehend all these parts at once, and the
mind tends to let go of one whilst it attends to another. Still, within
limits this can be done. M. Paulhan has experimented carefully on the
matter by declaiming one poem aloud whilst he repeated a different one
mentally, or by writing one sentence whilst speaking another, or by
performing calculations on paper whilst reciting poetry.[329] He found
that

 "the most favorable condition for the doubling of the mind was its
 simultaneous application to two easy and heterogeneous operations. Two
 operations of the same sort, two multiplications, two recitations, or
 the reciting one poem and writing another, render the process more
 uncertain and difficult."

The attention often, but not always, oscillates during these
performances; and sometimes a word from one part of the task slips
into another. I myself find when I try to simultaneously recite one
thing and write another that the beginning of each word or segment of
a phrase is what requires the attention. Once started, my pen runs on
for a word or two as if by its own momentum. M. Paulhan compared the
time occupied by the same two operations done simultaneously or in
succession, and found that there was often a considerable gain of time
from doing them simultaneously. For instance:

 "I write the first four verses of Athalie, whilst reciting eleven of
 Musset. The whole performance occupies 40 seconds. But reciting alone
 takes 22 and writing alone 31, or 53 altogether, so that there is a
 difference in favor of the simultaneous operations."

Or again:

 "I multiply 421 312 212 by 2; the operation takes 6 seconds; the
 recitation of 4 verses also takes 6 seconds. But the two operations
 done at once only take 6 seconds, so that there is no loss of time
 from combining them."

Of course these time-measurements lack precision. With three systems of
object (writing with _each_ hand whilst reciting) the operation became
much more difficult.

If, then, by the original question, how many ideas or things can we
attend to at once, be meant how many entirely disconnected systems or
processes of conception can go on simultaneously, the answer is, _not
easily more than one, unless the processes are very habitual; but then
two, or even three,_ without very much oscillation of the attention.
Where, however, the processes are less automatic, as in the story of
Julius Cæsar dictating four letters whilst he writes a fifth,[330]
there must be a rapid oscillation of the mind from one to the next, and
no consequent gain of time. Within any one of the systems the parts may
be numberless, but we attend to them collectively when we conceive the
whole which they form.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the things to be attended to are small sensations, and when the
effort is to be exact in noting them, it is found that attention to one
interferes a good deal with the perception of the other. A good deal
of fine work has been done in this field, of which I must give some
account.

It has long been noticed, when expectant attention is concentrated
upon one of two sensations, that the other one is apt to be displaced
from consciousness for a moment and to appear subsequent; although in
reality the two may have been contemporaneous events. Thus, to use
the stock example of the books, the surgeon would sometimes see the
blood flow from the arm of the patient whom he was bleeding, _before_
he saw the instrument penetrate the skin. Similarly the smith may see
the sparks fly _before_ he sees the hammer smite the iron, etc. There
is thus a certain difficulty in perceiving the exact _date_ of two
impressions when they do not interest our attention equally, and when
they are of a disparate sort.

Professor Exner, whose experiments on the _minimal perceptible
succession_ in time of two sensations we shall have to quote in another
chapter, makes some noteworthy remarks about the way in which the
attention must be _set_ to catch the interval and the right order of
the sensations, when the time is exceeding small. The point was to
tell whether two signals were simultaneous or successive; and, if
successive, which one of them came first.

The first way of attending which he found himself to fall into, was
when the signals did not differ greatly--when, e.g., they were similar
sounds heard each by a different ear. Here he lay in wait for the
_first_ signal, whichever it might be, and identified it the next
moment in memory. The second, which could then always be known by
default, was often not clearly distinguished in itself. When the time
was too short, the first could not be isolated from the second at all.

The second way was to accommodate the attention for a certain _sort_
of signal, and the next moment to become aware in memory of whether it
came before or after its mate.

 "This way brings great uncertainty with it. The impression not
 prepared for comes to us in the memory more weak than the other,
 obscure as it were, badly fixed in time. We tend to take the
 subjectively stronger stimulus, that which we were intent upon, for
 the first, just as we are apt to take an objectively stronger stimulus
 to be the first. Still, it may happen otherwise. In the experiments
 from touch to sight it often seemed to me as if the impression for
 which the attention was _not_ prepared were there already when the
 other came."

Exner found himself employing this method oftenest when the impressions
differed strongly.[331]

In such observations (which must not be confounded with those where
the two signals were identical and their successiveness known as
mere _doubleness_, without distinction of which came first), it is
obvious that each signal must combine stably in our perception with a
_different_ instant of time. It is the simplest possible case of two
discrepant concepts simultaneously occupying the mind. Now the case of
the signals being _simultaneous_ seems of a different sort. We must
turn to Wundt for observations fit to cast a nearer light thereon.

The reader will remember the reaction-time experiments of which we
treated in Chapter III. It happened occasionally in Wundt's experiments
that the reaction-time was reduced to zero or even assumed a negative
value, which, being translated into common speech, means that the
observer was sometimes so intent upon the signal that his reaction
_actually coincided in time with it, or even preceded it,_ instead of
coming a fraction of a second after it, as in the nature of things it
should. More will be said of these results anon. Meanwhile Wundt, in
explaining them, says this:

 "In general _we have a very exact feeling of the simultaneity of two
 stimuli,_ if they do not differ much in strength. And in a series of
 experiments in which a warning precedes, at a fixed interval, the
 stimulus, we involuntarily try to react, not only as promptly as
 possible, but also in such wise that our movement may coincide with
 the stimulus itself. We seek to make our own feelings of touch and
 innervation [muscular contraction] objectively _contemporaneous with
 the signal_ which we hear; and experience shows that in many cases we
 approximately succeed. In these cases we have a distinct consciousness
 of hearing the signal, reacting upon it, and feeling our reaction take
 place,--all at one and the same moment."[332]

In another place, Wundt adds:

 "The difficulty of these observations and the comparative infrequency
 with which the reaction-time can be made thus to disappear shows how
 hard it is, when our attention is intense, to keep it fixed even on
 _two_ different ideas at once. Note besides that when this happens,
 one always tries to bring the ideas into a certain connection, to
 grasp them as components of a certain complex representation. Thus in
 the experiments in question, it has often seemed to me that I produced
 by my own recording movement the sound which the ball made in dropping
 on the board."[333]

The 'difficulty,' in the cases of which Wundt speaks, is that of
forcing two non-simultaneous events into apparent combination with
the same instant of time. There is no difficulty, as he admits, in so
dividing our attention between two _really_ simultaneous impressions
as to feel them to be such. The cases he describes are really cases
of anachronistic perception, of subjective time-displacement, to use
his own term. Still more curious cases of it have been most carefully
studied by him. They carry us a step farther in our research, so I will
quote them, using as far as possible his exact words:

 "The conditions become more complicated when we receive a series
 of impressions separated by distinct intervals, into the midst of
 which a heterogeneous impression is suddenly brought. Then comes
 the question, with which member of the series do we perceive the
 additional impression to coincide? with that member with whose
 presence it really coexists, or is there some aberration?... If the
 additional stimulus belongs to a different sense very considerable
 aberrations may occur.

 "The best way to experiment is with a number of visual impressions
 (which one can easily get from a moving object) for the series, and
 with a sound as the disparate impression. Let, e.g., an index-hand
 move over a circular scale with uniform and sufficiently slow
 velocity, so that the impressions it gives will not fuse, but permit
 its position at any instant to be distinctly seen. Let the clockwork
 which turns it have an arrangement which rings a bell once in every
 revolution, but at a point which can be varied, so that the observer
 need never know in advance just when the bell-stroke takes place.
 In such observations three cases are possible. The bell-stroke can
 be perceived either exactly at the moment to which the index points
 when it sounds--in this case there will be no time-displacement; or
 we can combine it with a later position of the index--... _positive
 time-displacement_, as we shall call it; or finally we can combine
 it with a position of the index earlier than that at which the sound
 occurred--and this we will call a _negative displacement_. The most
 natural displacement would apparently be the positive, since for
 apperception a certain time is always required.... But experience
 shows that the opposite is the case: it happens most frequently
 that the sound appears earlier than its real date--far less often
 coincident with it, or later. It should be observed that in all
 these experiments it takes some time to get a distinctly perceived
 combination of the sound with a particular position of the index,
 and that a single revolution of the latter is never enough for the
 purpose. The motion must go on long enough for the sounds themselves
 to form a regular series--the outcome being a simultaneous perception
 of two distinct series of events, of which either may by changes in
 its rapidity modify the result. The first thing one remarks is that
 the sound belongs in a certain region of the scale; only gradually
 is it perceived to combine with a particular position of the index.
 But even a result gained by observation of many revolutions may be
 deficient in certainty, for accidental combinations of attention
 have a great influence upon it. If we deliberately try to combine
 the bell-stroke with an arbitrarily chosen position of the index, we
 succeed without difficulty, provided this position be not too remote
 from the true one. If, again, we cover the whole scale, except a
 single division over which we may see the index pass, we have a strong
 tendency to combine the bell-stroke with this actually seen position;
 and in so doing may easily overlook more than 1/4 of a second of
 time. Results, therefore, to be of any value, must be drawn from
 long-continued and very numerous observations, in which such irregular
 oscillations of the attention neutralize each other according to the
 law of great numbers, and allow the true laws to appear. Although
 my own experiments extend over many years (with interruptions), they
 are not even yet numerous enough to exhaust the subject--still, they
 bring out the principal laws which the attention follows under such
 conditions."[334]

Wundt accordingly distinguishes the _direction_ from the _amount_ of
the apparent displacement in time of the bell-stroke. The direction
depends on the rapidity of the movement of the index and (consequently)
on that of the succession of the bell-strokes. The moment at which
the bell struck was estimated by him with the least tendency to
error, when the revolutions took place once in a second. Faster than
this, _positive_ errors began to prevail; slower, _negative_ ones
almost always were present. On the other hand, if the rapidity went
_quickening_, errors became _negative_; if _slowing, positive_. The
amount of error is, in general, the greater the slower the speed and
its alterations. Finally, individual differences prevail, as well as
differences in the same individual at different times.[335]

Wundt's pupil von Tschisch has carried out these experiments on a still
more elaborate scale,[336] using, not only the single bell-stroke, but
2, 3, 4, or 5 simultaneous impressions, so that the attention had to
note the place of the index at the moment when a whole group of things
was happening. The single bell-stroke was always heard too early by
von Tschisch--the displacement was invariably 'negative.' As the other
simultaneous impressions were added, the displacement first became
zero and finally positive, i.e. the impressions were connected with a
position of the index that was too late. This retardation was greater
when the simultaneous impressions were disparate (electric tactile
stimuli on different places, simple touch-stimuli, different sounds)
than when they were all of the same sort. The increment of retardation
became relatively less with each additional impression, so that it is
probable that six impressions would have given almost the same result
as five, which was the maximum number used by Herr von T.

Wundt explains all these results by his previous observation that a
reaction sometimes antedates the signal (see above, p. 411). The mind,
he supposes, is so intent upon the bell-strokes that its 'apperception'
keeps ripening periodically after each stroke in anticipation of the
next. Its most natural rate of ripening may be faster or slower than
the rate at which the strokes come. If faster, then it hears the
stroke too early; if slower, it hears it too late. The position of
the index on the scale, meanwhile, is noted at the moment, early or
late, at which the bell-stroke is subjectively heard. Substituting
several impressions for the single bell-stroke makes the ripening of
the perception slower, and the index is seen too late. So, at least,
do I understand the explanations which Herren Wundt and v. Tschisch
give.[337]

This is all I have to say about the difficulty of having two discrepant
concepts together, and about the number of things to which we can
simultaneously attend.


THE VARIETIES OF ATTENTION.


The things to which we attend are said to _interest_ us. Our interest
in them is supposed to be the _cause_ of our attending. What makes an
object interesting we shall see presently; and later inquire in what
sense interest may cause attention. Meanwhile

Attention may be divided into kinds in various ways. It is either to

_a_) Objects of sense (sensorial attention); or to

_b_) Ideal or represented objects (intellectual attention). It is either

_c_) Immediate; or

_d_) Derived: immediate, when the topic or stimulus is interesting in
itself, without relation to anything else; derived, when it owes its
interest to association with some other immediately interesting thing.
What I call derived attention has been named 'apperceptive' attention.
Furthermore, Attention may be either

_e_) Passive, reflex, non-voluntary, effortless; or

_f_) Active and voluntary.

_Voluntary attention is always derived_; we never make an _effort_ to
attend to an object except for the sake of some _remote_ interest which
the effort will serve. But both sensorial and intellectual attention
may be either passive or voluntary.

In _passive immediate sensorial attention_ the stimulus is a
sense-impression, either very intense, voluminous, or sudden,--in which
case it makes no difference what its nature may be, whether sight,
sound, smell, blow, or inner pain,--or else it is an _instinctive_
stimulus, a perception which, by reason of its nature rather than its
mere force, appeals to some one of our normal congenital impulses and
has a directly exciting quality. In the chapter on Instinct we shall
see how these stimuli differ from one animal to another, and what most
of them are in man: strange things, moving things, wild animals, bright
things, pretty things, metallic things, words, blows, blood, etc.,
etc., etc.

Sensitiveness to immediately exciting sensorial stimuli characterizes
the attention of childhood and youth. In mature age we have generally
selected those stimuli which are connected with one or more so-called
permanent interests, and our attention has grown irresponsive to the
rest.[338] But childhood is characterized by great active energy, and
has few organized interests by which to meet new impressions and decide
whether they are worthy of notice or not, and the consequence is that
extreme mobility of the attention with which we are all familiar in
children, and which makes their first lessons such rough affairs. Any
strong sensation whatever produces accommodation of the organs which
perceive it, and absolute oblivion, for the time being, of the task in
hand. This reflex and passive character of the attention which, as a
French writer says, makes the child seem to belong less to himself than
to every object which happens to catch his notice, is the first thing
which the teacher must overcome. It never is overcome in some people,
whose work, to the end of life, gets done in the interstices of their
mind-wandering.

The passive sensorial attention is _derived_ when the impression,
without being either strong or of an instinctively exciting nature, is
connected by previous experience and education with things that are
so. These things may be called the _motives_ of the attention. The
impression draws an interest from them, or perhaps it even fuses into
a single complex object with them; the result is that it is brought
into the focus of the mind. A faint tap _per se_ is not an interesting
sound; it may well escape being discriminated from the general rumor
of the world. But when it is a signal, as that of a lover on the
window-pane, it will hardly go unperceived. Herbart writes:

 "How a bit of bad grammar wounds the ear of the purist! How a false
 note hurts the musician! or an offence against good manners the man
 of the world! How rapid is progress in a science when its first
 principles have been so well impressed upon us that we reproduce them
 mentally with perfect distinctness and ease! How slow and uncertain,
 on the other hand, is our learning of the principles themselves, when
 familiarity with the still more elementary percepts connected with the
 subject has not given us an adequate predisposition!--Apperceptive
 attention may be plainly observed in very small children when,
 hearing the speech of their elders, as yet unintelligible to them,
 they suddenly catch a single known word here and there, and repeat
 it to themselves; yes! even in the dog who looks round at us when
 we speak of him and pronounce his name. Not far removed is the
 talent which mind-wandering school-boys display during the hours of
 instruction, of noticing every moment in which the teacher tells a
 story. I remember classes in which, instruction being uninteresting,
 and discipline relaxed, a buzzing murmur was always to be heard,
 which invariably stopped for as long a time as an anecdote lasted.
 How could the boys, since they seemed to hear nothing, notice when
 the anecdote began? Doubtless most of them always heard something
 of the teacher's talk; but most of it had no connection with their
 previous knowledge and occupations, and therefore the separate words
 no sooner entered their consciousness than they fell out of it again;
 but, on the other hand, no sooner did the words awaken old thoughts,
 forming strongly-connected series with which the new impression easily
 combined, than out of new and old together a total interest resulted
 which drove the vagrant ideas below the threshold of consciousness,
 and brought for a while settled attention into their place."[339]

_Passive intellectual attention_ is immediate when we follow in thought
a train of images exciting or interesting _per se_; derived, when the
images are interesting only as means to a remote end, or merely because
they are associated with something which makes them dear. Owing to the
way in which immense numbers of real things become integrated into
single objects of thought for us, there is no clear line to be drawn
between immediate and derived attention of an intellectual sort. When
absorbed in intellectual attention we may become so inattentive to
outer things as to be 'absent-minded,' 'abstracted,' or '_distraits_.'
All revery or concentrated meditation is apt to throw us into this
state.

 "Archimedes, it is well known, was so absorbed in geometrical
 meditation that he was first aware of the storming of Syracuse by his
 own death-wound, and his exclamation on the entrance of the Roman
 soldiers was: _Noli turbare circulos meos!_ In like manner Joseph
 Scaliger, the most learned of men, when a Protestant student in
 Paris, was so engrossed in the study of Homer that he became aware
 of the massacre of St. Bartholomew, and of his own escape, only on
 the day subsequent to the catastrophe. The philosopher Carneades was
 habitually liable to fits of meditation so profound that, to prevent
 him sinking from inanition, his maid found it necessary to feed him
 like a child. And it is reported of Newton that, while engaged in his
 mathematical researches, he sometimes forgot to dine. Cardan, one of
 the most illustrious of philosophers and mathematicians, was once,
 upon a journey, so lost in thought that he forgot both his way and
 the object of his journey. To the questions of his driver whether he
 should proceed, he made no answer; and when he came to himself at
 nightfall, he was surprised to find the carriage at a standstill, and
 directly under a gallows. The mathematician Vieta was sometimes so
 buried in meditation that for hours he bore more resemblance to a dead
 person than to a living, and was then wholly unconscious of everything
 going on around him. On the day of his marriage the great Budæus
 forgot everything in his philological speculations, and he was only
 awakened to the affairs of the external world by a tardy embassy from
 the marriage-party, who found him absorbed in the composition of his
 _Commentarii_."[340]

The absorption may be so deep as not only to banish ordinary
sensations, but even the severest pain. Pascal, Wesley, Robert Hall,
are said to have had this capacity. Dr. Carpenter says of himself that

 "he has frequently begun a lecture whilst suffering neuralgic pain
 so severe as to make him apprehend that he would find it impossible
 to proceed; yet no sooner has he by a determined effort fairly
 launched himself into the stream of thought, than he has found himself
 continuously borne along without the least distraction, until the
 end has come, and the attention has been released; when the pain has
 recurred with a force that has overmastered all resistance, making him
 wonder how he could have ever ceased to feel it."[341]

Dr. Carpenter speaks of launching himself by a determined _effort_.
This effort characterizes what we called _active or voluntary
attention_. It is a feeling which every one knows, but which most
people would call quite indescribable. We get it in the sensorial
sphere whenever we seek to catch an impression of extreme _faintness_,
be it of sight, hearing, taste, smell, or touch; we get it whenever we
seek to _discriminate_ a sensation merged in a mass of others that are
similar; we get it whenever we _resist the attractions_ of more potent
stimuli and keep our mind occupied with some object that is naturally
unimpressive. We get it in the intellectual sphere under exactly
similar conditions: as when we strive to sharpen and make distinct
an idea which we but vaguely seem to have; or painfully discriminate
a shade of meaning from its similars; or resolutely hold fast to a
thought so discordant with our impulses that, if left unaided, it would
quickly yield place to images of an exciting and impassioned kind.
All forms of attentive effort would be exercised at once by one whom
we might suppose at a dinner-party resolutely to listen to a neighbor
giving him insipid and unwelcome advice in a low voice, whilst all
around the guests were loudly laughing and talking about exciting and
interesting things.

_There is no such thing as voluntary attention sustained for more
than a few seconds at a time._ What is called sustained voluntary
attention is a repetition of successive efforts which bring back the
topic to the mind.[342] The topic once brought back, if a congenial
one, _develops_; and if its development is interesting it engages
the attention passively for a time. Dr. Carpenter, a moment back,
described the stream of thought, once entered, as 'bearing him along.'
This passive interest may be short or long. As soon as it flags, the
attention is diverted by some irrelevant thing, and then a voluntary
effort may bring it back to the topic again; and so on, under favorable
conditions, for hours together. During all this time, however, note
that it is not an identical _object_ in the psychological sense (p.
275), but a succession of mutually related objects forming an identical
_topic_ only, upon which the attention is fixed. _No one can possibly
attend continuously to an object that does not change._

Now there are always some objects that for the time being _will not
develop_. They simply _go out_; and to keep the mind upon anything
related to them requires such incessantly renewed effort that the most
resolute Will ere long gives out and lets its thoughts follow the more
stimulating solicitations after it has withstood them for what length
of time it can. There are topics known to every man from which he shies
like a frightened horse, and which to get a glimpse of is to shun.
Such are his ebbing assets to the spendthrift in full career. But why
single out the spendthrift when to every man actuated by passion the
thought of interests which negate the passion can hardly for more than
a fleeting instant stay before the mind? It is like 'memento mori' in
the heyday of the pride of life. Nature rises at such suggestions, and
excludes them from the view:--How long, O healthy reader, can you now
continue thinking of your tomb?--In milder instances the difficulty
is as great, especially when the brain is fagged. One snatches at
any and every passing pretext, no matter how trivial or external, to
escape from the odiousness of the matter in hand. I know a person, for
example, who will poke the fire, set chairs straight, pick dust-specks
from the floor, arrange his table, snatch up the newspaper, take down
any book which catches his eye, trim his nails, waste the morning
_anyhow_, in short, and all without premeditation,--simply because the
only thing he _ought_ to attend to Is the preparation of a noonday
lesson in formal logic which he detests. Anything but _that!_

Once more, the object must change. When it is one of sight, it will
actually become invisible; when of hearing, inaudible,--if we attend
to it too unmovingly. Helmholtz, who has put his sensorial attention
to the severest tests, by using his eyes on objects which in common
life are expressly overlooked, makes some interesting remarks on this
point in his chapter on retinal rivalry.[343] The phenomenon called
by that name is this, that if we look with each eye upon a different
picture (as in the annexed stereoscopic slide), sometimes one picture,
sometimes the other, or parts of both, will come to consciousness, but
hardly ever both combined. Helmholtz now says:

 "I find that I am able to attend voluntarily, now to one and now to
 the other system of lines; and that then this system remains visible
 alone for a certain time, whilst the other completely vanishes.
 This happens, for example, whenever I try to count the lines first
 of one and then of the other system.... But it is extremely hard to
 chain the attention down to one of the systems for long, unless we
 associate with our looking some distinct purpose which keeps the
 activity of the attention perpetually renewed. Such a one is counting
 the lines, comparing their intervals, or the like. An equilibrium
 of the attention, persistent for any length of time, is under no
 circumstances attainable. The natural tendency of attention when left
 to itself is to wander to ever new things; and so soon as the interest
 of its object is over, so soon as nothing new is to be noticed there,
 it passes, in spite of our will, to something else. If we wish to
 keep it upon one and the same object, we must seek constantly to find
 out something new about the latter, especially if other powerful
 impressions are attracting us away."

[Illustration: FIG. 36.]

And again criticising an author who had treated of attention as an
activity absolutely subject to the conscious will, Helmholtz writes:

 "This is only restrictedly true. We move our eyes by our will; but one
 without training cannot so easily execute the intention of making them
 converge. At any moment, however, he can execute that of looking at a
 near object, in which act convergence is involved. Now just as little
 can we carry out our purpose to keep our attention steadily fixed
 upon a certain object, when our interest in the object is exhausted,
 and the purpose is inwardly formulated in this abstract way. _But
 we can set ourselves new questions about the object, so that a new
 interest in it arises, and then the attention will remain riveted._
 The relation of attention to will is, then, less one of immediate than
 of mediate control."

These words of Helmholtz are of fundamental importance. And if true of
sensorial attention, how much more true are they of the intellectual
variety! The _conditio sine quâ non_ of sustained attention to a given
topic of thought is that we should roll it over and over incessantly
and consider different aspects and relations of it in turn. Only in
pathological states will a fixed and ever monotonously recurring idea
possess the mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now we can see why it is that what is called sustained attention
is the easier, the richer in acquisitions and the fresher and more
original the mind. In such minds, subjects bud and sprout and grow. At
every moment, they please by a new consequence and rivet the attention
afresh. But an intellect unfurnished with materials, stagnant,
unoriginal, will hardly be likely to consider any subject long. A
glance exhausts its possibilities of interest. Geniuses are commonly
believed to excel other men in their power of sustained attention.[344]
In most of them, it is to be feared, the so-called 'power' is of the
passive sort. Their ideas coruscate, every subject branches infinitely
before their fertile minds, and so for hours they may be rapt. _But
it is their genius making them attentive, not their attention making
geniuses of them._ And, when we come down to the root of the matter,
we see that they differ from ordinary men less in the character of
their attention than in the nature of the objects upon which it is
successively bestowed. In the genius, these form a concatenated series,
suggesting each other mutually by some rational law. Therefore we call
the attention 'sustained' and the topic of meditation for hours 'the
same.' In the common man the series is for the most part incoherent,
the objects have no rational bond, and we call the attention wandering
and unfixed.

It is probable that genius tends actually to prevent a man from
acquiring habits of voluntary attention, and that moderate intellectual
endowments are the soil in which we may best expect, here as elsewhere,
the virtues of the will, strictly so called, to thrive. But, whether
the attention come by grace of genius or by dint of will, the longer
one does attend to a topic the more mastery of it one has. And the
faculty of voluntarily bringing back a wandering attention, over
and over again, is the very root of judgment, character, and will.
No one is _compos sui_ if he have it not. An education which should
improve this faculty would be _the_ education _par excellence_. But
it is easier to define this ideal than to give practical directions
for bringing it about. The only general pedagogic maxim bearing on
attention is that the more interest the child has in advance in the
subject, the better he will attend. Induct him therefore in such a way
as to knit each new thing on to some acquisition already there; and if
possible awaken curiosity, so that the new thing shall seem to come as
an answer, or part of an answer, to a question pre-existing in his mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

At present having described the varieties, let us turn to


THE EFFECTS OF ATTENTION.


Its remote effects are too incalculable to be recorded. The practical
and theoretical life of whole species, as well as of individual beings,
results from the selection which the habitual direction of their
attention involves. In Chapters XIV and XV some of these consequences
will come to light. Suffice it meanwhile that each of us literally
_chooses_, by his ways of attending to things, what sort of a universe
he shall appear to himself to inhabit.

The immediate effects of attention are to make us:

_a_) perceive--

_b_) conceive--

_c_) distinguish--

_d_) remember--

better than otherwise we could--both more successive things and each
thing more clearly. It also

(_e_) shortens 'reaction-time.'

       *       *       *       *       *

_a_ and _b_. Most people would say that a sensation attended to becomes
stronger than it otherwise would be. This point is, however, not quite
plain, and has occasioned some discussion.[345] From the strength or
intensity of a sensation must be distinguished its clearness; and to
increase _this_ is, for some psychologists, the utmost that attention
can do. When the facts are surveyed, however, it must be admitted that
to some extent the relative intensity of two sensations may be changed
when one of them is attended to and the other not. Every artist knows
how he can make a scene before his eyes appear warmer or colder in
color, according to the way he sets his attention. If for warm, he soon
begins to _see_ the red color start out of everything; if for cold, the
blue. Similarly in listening for certain notes in a chord, or overtones
in a musical sound, the one we attend to sounds probably a little more
loud as well as more emphatic than it did before. When we mentally
break a series of monotonous strokes into a rhythm, by accentuating
every second or third one, etc., the stroke on which the stress of
attention is laid seems to become stronger as well as more emphatic.
The increased visibility of optical after-images and of double images,
which close attention brings about, can hardly be interpreted otherwise
than as a real strengthening of the retinal sensations themselves.
And this view is rendered particularly probable by the fact that an
imagined visual object may, if attention be concentrated upon it long
enough, acquire before the mind's eye almost the brilliancy of reality,
and (in the case of certain exceptionally gifted observers) leave a
negative after-image of itself when it passes away (see Chapter XVIII).
Confident expectation of a certain intensity or quality of impression
will often make us sensibly see or hear it in an object which really
falls far short of it. In face of such facts it is rash to say that
attention cannot make a sense-impression more intense.

But, on the other hand, the intensification which may be brought about
seems never to lead the judgment astray. As we rightly perceive and
name the same color under various lights, the same sound at various
distances; so we seem to make an analogous sort of allowance for
the varying amounts of attention with which objects are viewed; and
whatever changes of feeling the attention may bring we charge, as it
were, to the attention's account, and still perceive and conceive the
object as the same.

 "A gray paper appears to us no lighter, the pendulum-beat of a clock
 no louder, no matter how much we increase the strain of our attention
 upon them. No one, by doing this, can make the gray paper look
 white, or the stroke of the pendulum sound like the blow of a strong
 hammer,--everyone, on the contrary, feels the increase as that of his
 own conscious activity turned upon the thing."[346]

Were it otherwise, we should not be able to note _intensities_ by
attending to them. Weak impressions would, as Stumpf says,[347] become
stronger by the very fact of being observed.

 "I should not be able to observe faint sounds at all, but only such
 as appeared to me of maximal strength, or at least of a strength that
 increased with the amount of my observation. In reality, however, I
 can, with steadily increasing attention, follow a diminuendo perfectly
 well."

The subject is one which would well repay exact experiment, if methods
could be devised. Meanwhile there is no question whatever that
attention augments the _clearness_ of all that we perceive or conceive
by its aid. But what is meant by clearness here?

       *       *       *       *       *

_c. Clearness_, so far as attention produces it, _means distinction
from other things_ and _internal analysis or subdivision_. These are
essentially products of intellectual _discrimination_, involving
comparison, memory, and perception of various relations. The attention
_per se_ does not distinguish and analyze and relate. The most we can
say is that it is a condition of our doing so. And as these processes
are to be described later, the clearness they produce had better not be
farther discussed here. The important point to notice here is that it
is not attention's _immediate_ fruit.[348]

       *       *       *       *       *

_d._ Whatever future conclusion we may reach as to this, we cannot deny
that _an object once attended to will remain in the memory_, whilst
one inattentively allowed to pass will leave no traces behind. Already
in Chapter VI (see pp. 163 ff.) we discussed whether certain states
of mind were 'unconscious,' or whether they were not rather states to
which no attention had been paid, and of whose passage recollection
could afterwards find no vestiges. Dugald Stewart says:[349] "The
connection between attention and memory has been remarked by many
authors." He quotes Quintilian, Locke, and Helvetius; and goes on
at great length to explain the phenomena of 'secondary automatism'
(see above, p. 114 ff.) by the presence of a mental action grown so
inattentive as to preserve no memory of itself. In our chapter on
Memory, later on, the point will come up again.

       *       *       *       *       *

_e_) Under this head, the _shortening of reaction-time_, there is a
good deal to be said of Attention's effects. Since Wundt has probably
worked over the subject more thoroughly than any other investigator
and made it peculiarly his own, what follows had better, as far as
possible, be in his words. The reader will remember the method and
results of experimentation on 'reaction-time,' as given in Chapter III.

The facts I proceed to quote may also be taken as a supplement to that
chapter. Wundt writes:

 "When we wait with strained attention for a stimulus, it will often
 happen that instead of registering the stimulus, we react upon some
 entirely different impression,--and this not through confounding the
 one with the other. On the contrary, we are perfectly well aware
 at the moment of making the movement that we respond to the wrong
 stimulus. Sometimes even, though not so often, the latter may be
 another kind of sensation altogether,--one may, for example, in
 experimenting with sound, register a flash of light, produced either
 by accident or design. We cannot well explain these results otherwise
 than by assuming that the strain of the attention towards the
 impression we expect coexists with a preparatory innervation of the
 motor centre for the reaction, which innervation the slightest shock
 then suffices to turn into an actual discharge. This shock may be
 given by any chance impression, even by one to which we never intended
 to respond. When the preparatory innervation has once reached this
 pitch of intensity, the time that intervenes between the stimulus and
 the contraction of the muscles which react, may become vanishingly
 small."[350]

 "The perception of an impression is facilitated when the impression
 is preceded by a warning which announces beforehand that it is about
 to occur. This case is realized whenever several stimuli follow each
 other at equal intervals,--when, e.g. we note pendulum movements by
 the eye, or pendulum-strokes by the ear. Each single stroke forms
 here the signal for the next, which is thus met by a fully prepared
 attention. The same thing happens when the stimulus to be perceived
 is preceded, at a certain interval, by a single warning: the time is
 always notably shortened.... I have made comparative observations on
 reaction-time with and without a warning signal. The impression to be
 reacted on was the sound made by the dropping of a ball on the board
 of the 'drop apparatus.'... In a first series no warning preceded the
 stroke of the ball; in the second, the noise made by the apparatus in
 liberating the ball served as a signal.... Here are the averages of
 two series of such experiments:

   Height of Fall.              Average.    Mean Error.  No. of Expts.

   25 cm.         {No warning   0.253       0.051        13
                  {Warning      0.076       0.060        17


    5 cm.         {No warning   0.266       0.036        14
                  {Warning      0.175       0.035        17


 "... In a long series of experiments, (the interval between warning
 and stimulus remaining the same) the reaction-time grows less and
 less, and it is possible occasionally to reduce it to a vanishing
 quantity (a few thousandths of a second), to zero, or even to a
 negative value.[351]... The only ground that we can assign for this
 phenomenon is _the preparation (vorbereitende Spannung) of the
 attention_. It is easy to understand that the reaction-time should be
 shortened by this means; but that it should sometimes sink to zero
 and even assume negative values, may appear surprising. Nevertheless
 this latter case is also explained by what happens in the simple
 reaction-time experiments" just referred to, in which, "when the
 strain of the attention has reached its climax, the movement we stand
 ready to execute escapes from the control of on will, and we register
 a wrong signal. In these other experiments, in which a warning
 foretells the moment of the stimulus, it is also plain that attention
 accommodates itself so exactly to the latter's reception that _no
 sooner is it objectively given than it is fully apperceived, and with
 the apperception the motor discharge coincides_."[352]

Usually, when the impression is fully anticipated, attention prepares
the motor centres so completely for both stimulus and reaction that
the only time lost is that of the physiological conduction downwards.
But even this interval may disappear, i.e. the stimulus and reaction
may become objectively contemporaneous; or more remarkable still,
the reaction may be discharged before the stimulus has actually
occurred.[353] Wundt, as we saw some pages back (p. 411), explains this
by the effort of the mind so to react that we may feel our own movement
and the signal which prompts it, both at the same instant. As the
execution of the movement must precede our feeling of it, so it must
also precede the stimulus, if that and our movement are to be felt at
once.

The peculiar theoretic interest of these experiments lies in their
_showing expectant attention and sensation to be continuous or
identical processes, since they may have identical motor effects_.
Although other exceptional observations show them likewise to be
continuous _subjectively_, Wundt's experiments do not: he seems never,
at the moment of reacting prematurely, to have been misled into the
belief that the real stimulus was there.

As concentrated attention accelerates perception, so, conversely,
perception of a stimulus is _retarded by anything which either baffles
or distracts the attention_ with which we await it.

 "If, e.g., we make reactions on a sound in such a way that weak and
 strong stimuli irregularly alternate so that the observer can never
 expect a determinate strength with any certainty, the reaction-time
 for _all_ the various signals is increased,--and so is the average
 error. I append two examples.... In Series I a strong and a weak
 sound alternated regularly, so that the intensity was each time known
 in advance. In II they came irregularly.

    I. _Regular Alternation._

                          Average Time.  Average Error.  No. of Expts.

   Strong sound           0.116"         0.010"          18
   Weak sound             0.127"         0.012"           9

   II. _Irregular Alternation._

   Strong sound           0.189"         0.038"           9
   Weak sound             0.298"         0.076"          15


 "Still greater is the increase of the time when, unexpectedly into a
 series of strong impressions, a weak one is interpolated, or _vice
 versâ_. In this way I have seen the time of reaction upon a sound
 so weak as to be barely perceived rise to 0.4" or 0.5", and for a
 strong sound to 0 25". It is also matter of general experience that a
 stimulus expected in a general way, but for whose intensity attention
 cannot be adapted in advance, demands a longer reaction-time. In
 such cases ... the reason for the difference can only lie in the
 fact that wherever a preparation of the attention is impossible, the
 time of both perception and volition is prolonged. Perhaps also the
 conspicuously large reaction-times which are got with stimuli so faint
 as to be just perceptible may be explained by the attention tending
 always to adapt itself for something more than this minimal amount
 of stimulus, so that a state ensues similar to that in the case of
 unexpected stimuli.... Still more than by previously unknown stimuli
 is the reaction-time prolonged by _wholly unexpected_ impressions.
 This is sometimes accidentally brought about, when the observer's
 attention, instead of being concentrated on the coming signal, is
 dispersed. It can be realized purposely by suddenly thrusting into
 a long series of equidistant stimuli a much shorter interval which
 the observer does not expect. The mental effect here is like that of
 being startled;--often the startling is outwardly visible. The time
 of reaction may then easily be lengthened to one quarter of a second
 with strong signals, or with weak ones to a half-second. Slighter, but
 still very noticeable, is the retardation when the experiment is so
 arranged that the observer, ignorant whether the stimulus is to be an
 impression of light, sound, or touch, cannot keep his attention turned
 to any particular sense-organ in advance. One notices then at the same
 time a peculiar unrest, as the feeling of strain which accompanies the
 attention keeps vacillating between the several senses.

 "Complications of another sort arise when what is registered is
 an impression anticipated both in point of quality and strength,
 but accompanied by other stimuli which make the concentration of
 the attention difficult. The reaction-time is here always more or
 less prolonged. The simplest case of the sort is where a momentary
 impression is registered in the midst of another, and continuous,
 sensorial-stimulation of considerable strength. The continuous
 stimulus may belong to the same sense as the stimulus to be reacted
 on, or to another. When it is of the same sense, the retardation it
 causes may be partly due to the distraction of the attention by it,
 but partly also to the fact that the stimulus to be reacted on stands
 out less strongly than if alone, and practically becomes a less
 intense sensation. But other factors in reality are present; for we
 find the reaction-time more prolonged by the concomitant stimulation
 when the stimulus is weak than when it is strong I made experiments
 in which the principal impression, or signal for reaction, was a
 bell-stroke whose strength could be graduated by a spring against the
 hammer with a movable counterpoise. Each set of observations comprised
 two series; in one of which the bell-stroke was registered in the
 ordinary way, whilst in the other a toothed wheel belonging to the
 chronometric apparatus made during the entire experiment a steady
 noise against a metal spring. In one half of the latter series (A)
 the bell-stroke was only moderately strong, so that the accompanying
 noise diminished it considerably, without, however, making it
 indistinguishable. In the other half (B) the bell-sound was so loud as
 to be heard with perfect distinctness above the noise.

                             Mean.  Maximum.  Minimum.  No. of
                                                        Experiments.
 A            {Without noise  0.189  0.214     0.156    21
 (Bell-stroke {With noise     0.313  0.499     0.183    16
 moderate)    {

 B            {Without noise  0.158  0.206     0.133    20
 (Bell-stroke {With noise     0.203  0.295     0.140    19
 loud)        {


 "Since, in these experiments, the sound B even with noise made a
 considerably stronger impression than the sound A without, we must
 see in the figures a direct influence of the disturbing noise on the
 process of reaction. This influence is freed from mixture with other
 factors when the momentary stimulus and the concomitant disturbance
 appeal to different senses. I chose, to test this, sight and hearing.
 The momentary signal was an induction-spark leaping from one platinum
 point to another against a dark background. The steady stimulation was
 the noise above described.

 Spark.         Mean.  Maximum.  Minimum.  No. of Expts.
 Without noise  0.222  0.284     0.158     20
 With noise     0.300  0.390     0.250     18


 "When one reflects that in the experiments with one and the same sense
 the relative intensity of the signal is always depressed [which by
 itself is a retarding condition] the amount of retardation in these
 last observations makes it probable that _the disturbing influence
 upon attention is greater when the stimuli are disparate than when
 they belong to the same sense_. One does not, in fact, find it
 particularly hard to register immediately, when the bell rings in the
 midst of the noise; but when the spark is the signal one has a feeling
 of being coerced, as one turns away from the noise towards it. This
 fact is immediately connected with other properties of our attention.
 The effort of the latter is accompanied by various corporeal
 sensations, according to the sense which is engaged. The innervation
 which exists during the effort of attention is therefore probably a
 different one for each sense-organ."[354]

Wundt then, after some theoretical remarks which we need not quote now,
gives a table of retardations, as follows:

                                                         Retardation.
   1.  Unexpected strength of impression:
       _a_) Unexpectedly strong sound                    0.073
       _b_) Unexpectedly weak sound                      0.171
   2.  Interference by like stimulus (sound by sound)    0.045[355]
   3.  Interference by unlike stimulus (light by sound)  0.078

It seems probable, from these results obtained with elementary
processes of mind, that all processes, even the higher ones of
reminiscence, reasoning, etc., whenever attention is concentrated upon
them instead of being diffused and languid, are thereby more rapidly
performed.[356]

       *       *       *       *       *

Still more interesting reaction-time observations have been made by
Münsterberg. The reader will recollect the fact noted in Chapter
III (p. 93) that reaction-time is shorter when one concentrates his
attention on the expected movement than when one concentrates it on the
expected signal. Herr Münsterberg found that this is equally the case
when the reaction is no simple reflex, but can take place only after
an intellectual operation. In a series of experiments the five fingers
were used to react with, and the reacter had to use a different finger
according as the signal was of one sort or another. Thus when a word in
the nominative case was called out he used the thumb, for the dative
he used another finger; similarly adjectives, substantives, pronouns,
numerals, etc., or, again, towns, rivers, beasts, plants, elements;
or poets, musicians, philosophers, etc., were co-ordinated each with
its finger, so that when a word belonging to either of these classes
was mentioned, a particular finger and no other had to perform the
reaction. In a second series of experiments the reaction consisted
in the utterance of a word in answer to a question, such as "name an
edible fish," etc.; or "name the first drama of Schiller," etc.; or
"which is greater, Hume or Kant?" etc.; or (first naming apples and
cherries, and several other fruits) "which do you prefer, apples or
cherries?" etc.; or "which is Goethe's finest drama?" etc.; or "which
