CHAPTER CC.

A CHAPTER OF KINGS.

   FIMBUL-FAMBI _heitr
   Sá er fatt kann segia,
   That er ósnotvrs athal._

  _Fimbul-fambi (fatuus) vocatur
   Qui pauca novit narrare:
   Ea est hominis insciti proprietas._

EDDA, _Háva Mál_.


There are other monarchies in the inferior world, besides that of the 
Bees, though they have not been registered by Naturalists, nor studied 
by them.

For example, the King of the Fleas keeps his court at Tiberias, as Dr. 
Clarke discovered to his cost, and as Mr. Cripps will testify for him.

The King of the Crocodiles resides in Upper Egypt; he has no tail, but 
Dr. Southey has made one for him.

The Queen Muscle may be found at the Falkland Islands.

The Oysters also have their King, according to Pliny. Theirs seems to 
be a sort of patriarchical monarchy, the King, or peradventure the 
Queen, Oyster being distinguished by its size and age, perhaps 
therefore the parent of the bed; for every bed, if Pliny err not, has 
its sovereign. In Pliny's time the diver made it his first business to 
catch the royal Oyster, because his or her Majesty being of great age 
and experience, was also possessed of marvellous sagacity, which was 
exercised for the safety of the commonweal; but if this were taken the 
others might be caught without difficulty, just as a swarm of Bees may 
be secured after the Queen is made prisoner. Seeing, however, that his 
Oyster Majesty is not to be heard of now at any of the Oyster shops in 
London, nor known at Colchester or Milton, it may be that liberal 
opinions have, in the march of intellect, extended to the race of 
Oysters, that monarchy has been abolished among them, and that 
republicanism prevails at this day throughout all Oysterdom, or at 
least in those parts of it which be near the British shores. It has 
been observed also by a judicious author that no such King of the 
Oysters has been found in the West Indian Pearl fisheries.

The King of the Bears rules over a territory which is on the way to 
the desert of Hawaida, and Hatim Tai married his daughter, though the 
said Hatim was long unwilling to become a Mac Mahon by marriage.

“I was told by the Sheikh Othman and his son, two pious and credible 
persons,” says the traveller Ibn Batista, “that the monkies have a 
leader whom they follow as if he were their King, (this was in 
Ceylon). About his head is tied a turban composed of the leaves of 
trees, (for a crown;) and he reclines upon a staff, (which is his 
sceptre). At his right and left hand are four Monkies with rods in 
their hands, (gold sticks), all of which stand at his head whenever 
the leading Monkey, (his Majesty) sits. His wives and children are 
daily brought in on these occasions, and sit down before him; then 
comes a number of Monkies (his privy council) which sit and form an 
assembly about him. After this each of them comes with a nut, a lemon 
or some of the mountain fruit, which he throws down before the leader. 
He then eats (dining in public, like the King of France) together with 
his wives, and children, and the four principal Monkies: they then all 
disperse. One of the Jogres also told me, that he once saw the four 
Monkies standing in the presence of the leader, and beating another 
Monkey with rods; after which they plucked off all his hair.”

The Lion is the King of Beasts. Hutchinson, however, opines that Bulls 
may be ranked in a higher class; for helmets are fortified with their 
horns, which is a symbol of pre-eminence. Certainly he says, both the 
Bull and Lion discover the King, but the Bull is a better and more 
significant representative of a King than the Lion. But neither Bull 
nor Lion is King of all Beasts, for a certain person whose name being 
anagrammatized rendereth Johnny the Bear, is notoriously the King of 
the Bears at this time: even Ursa Major would not dispute his title. 
And a certain honourable member of the House of Commons would by the 
tottle of that whole House be voted King of the Bores.

The King of the Codfish frequents the shores of Finmark. He has a sort 
of chubbed head, rising in the shape of a crown, his forehead is 
broad, and the lower jaw bone projects a little, in other parts he 
resembles his subjects, whom he leads and directs in their migrations. 
The Laplanders believe that the fisherman who takes him, will from 
that time forth be fortunate, especially in fishing; and they shew 
their respect for his Cod-Majesty when he is taken, by hanging him up 
whole to dry, instead of cutting off his head as they do to the common 
fish.

In Japan the Tai, which the Dutch call Steenbrassem, is the King of 
Fish, because it is sacred to their sea-god Jebis, and because of its 
splendid colours, and also, perhaps, because of its exorbitant price, 
it being so scarce, that for a court entertainment, or on other 
extraordinary occasions, one is not to be had under a thousand 
cobangs.

Among the Gangas or Priests of Congo, is one whose official title is 
Mutuin, and who calls himself King of the Water, for by water alone he 
professes to heal all diseases. At certain times all who need his aid 
are assembled on the banks of a river. He throws an empty vessel in, 
repeats some mysterious words, then takes it out full and distributes 
the water as an universal medicine.

The Herring has been called the King of Fish, because of its 
excellence, the Herring, as all Dutchmen know, and as all other men 
ought to know, exceeding every other fish in goodness. Therefore it 
may have been that the first dish which used to be brought to table in 
this country on Easter Day, was a Red Herring on horseback, set in a 
corn sallad.

Others have called the Whale, King of Fish. But Abraham Rees, D.D. and 
F.R.S. of Cyclopedian celebrity, assures us that the whale 
notwithstanding its piscine appearance, and its residence in the 
waters, has no claim to a place among fishes. Uncle Toby would have 
whistled Lillabullero at being told that the Whale was not a fish. The 
said Abraham Rees, however, of the double Dees, who is, as the 
advertisement on the cover of his own Cyclopedia, informs us, “of 
acknowledged learning and industry, and of unquestionable experience 
in this (the Cyclopedian) department of literary labour,” candidly 
admits that the Ancients may surely be excused for thinking Whales 
were fish. But how can Abraham Rees be excused for denying the Whale's 
claim to a place among the inhabitants of the Great Deep,—which was 
appointed for him at the Creation.

But the Great Fish who is undoubtedly the King of Fish, and of all 
creatures that exist in the sea, Whales, Mermen-and-Maids included, is 
the fish Arez, which Ormuzd created, and placed in the water that 
surrounds Hom, the King of Trees, to protect that sacred arboreal 
Majesty against the Great Toad sent there by Ahriman to destroy it.

It is related in the same archives of cosmogony that the King of the 
Goats is a White Goat, who carries his head in a melancholy and 
cogitabund position, regarding the ground,—weighed down perhaps by the 
cares of royalty; that the King of the Sheep has his left ear 
white,—from whence it may appear that the Royal Mutton is a black 
sheep, which the Royal Ram of the Fairy Tales is not: that the King of 
the Camels has two white ears: and that the King of the Bulls is 
neither Apis, nor John Bull, but a Black Bull with yellow ears. 
According to the same archives, a White Horse with yellow ears and 
full eyes is King of the Horses;—doubtless the Mythological Horse King 
would acknowledge Nobs for his Vicegerent. The Ass King is also white: 
his Asinine Majesty has no Vicegerent. The number of competitors being 
so great that he has appointed a regency.

The King of Dogs is yellow. The King of Hares red.

There are Kings among the Otters in the Highland waters, and also 
among their relations the Sea Otters. The royal Otter is larger than 
his subjects, and has a white spot upon the breast. He shuns 
observation, which it is sometimes provident for Kings to do, 
especially under such circumstances as his, for his skin is in great 
request, among soldiers and sailors; it is supposed to ensure victory, 
to secure the wearer from being wounded, to be a prophylactic in times 
of contagious sickness, and a preservative in shipwreck. But it is not 
easy to find an Otter King, and when found there is danger in the act 
of regicide, for he bears a charmed life. The moment in which he is 
killed proves fatal to some other creature, either man or beast, whose 
mortal existence is mysteriously linked with his. The nature of the 
Otter monarchy has not been described, it is evident, however, that 
his ministers have no loaves to dispose of,—but then they have plenty 
of fishes.

The Ant, who, when Solomon entered the Valley of Ants with his armies 
of Genii and men and birds, spoke to the nation of Ants, saying, O 
Ants, enter ye not your habitations, lest Solomon and his host tread 
you under foot, and perceive it not,—that wise pismire is said by 
certain commentators upon the Koran to have been the Queen of the 
Ants.

Men have held the Eagle to be the King of Birds; but notwithstanding 
the authority of Horace, the Gods know otherwise, for they appointed 
the Tchamrosch to that dignity, at the beginning. Some writers indeed 
would have the Eagle to be Queen, upon the extraordinary ground that 
all Eagles are hens; though in what manner the species is perpetuated 
these persons have not attempted to shew.

The Carrion Crows of Guiana have their King, who is a White Crow 
_(rara avis in terris)_ and has wings tipt with black. When a flight 
of these birds arrive at the prey which they have scented from afar, 
however ravenous they may be, they keep at a respectful distance from 
the banquet, till his Carrion Majesty has satisfied himself. But there 
is another Bird, in South America, whom all the Birds of prey of every 
species acknowledge for their natural sovereign, and carry food to him 
in his nest, as their tribute.

The King of the Elks is so huge an elk that other elks look like 
pismires beside him. His legs are so long, and his strength withal 
such, that when the snow lies eight feet deep it does not in the least 
impede his pace. He has an arm growing out of his shoulder, and a 
large suite who attend upon him wherever he goes, and render him all 
the service he requires.

I have never heard anything concerning the King of the Crickets except 
in a rodomontade of Matthew Merrygreeks, who, said Ralph Roister 
Doister,

        bet him on Christmas day
  That he crept in a hole, and had not a word to say.

Among the many images of Baal, one was the form or representation of a 
Fly, and hence, says Master Perkins, he is called Baalzebub the Lord 
of Flies, because he was thought to be the chiefest Fly in the world. 
That is he was held to be the King of the Flies. I wish the King of 
the Spiders would catch him.

The King of the Peacocks may be read of in the Fairy Tales. The 
Japanese name for a crane is Tsuri and the common people in that 
country always give that bird the same title which is given to their 
first secular Emperor, Tsiri-sama—my great Lord Crane.

The Basilisk, or crowned Cockatrice, who is the chick of a Cock's egg, 
is accounted the King of Serpents. And as it has been said that there 
is no Cock Eagle, so upon more probable cause it is affirmed that 
there is no female Basilisk, that is no Henatrice, the Cock laying 
only male eggs. But the most venomous of this kind is only an earthly 
and mortal vicegerent, for the true King of Serpents is named 
Sanc-ha-naga, and formerly held his court in Chacragiri, a mountain in 
the remote parts of the East, where he and his serpentine subjects 
were oppressed by the Rational Eagle Garuda. In the spirit of an 
imperial Eagle, Garuda required from them a serpent every day for his 
dinner, which was regarded by the serpents as a most unpleasant 
tribute, especially by such as were full grown and in good condition; 
for the Rational Eagle being large and strong enough to carry Vishnu 
on his back, expected always a good substantial snake sufficient for a 
meal. Sanc-ha-naga, like a Patriot King endeavoured to deliver his 
liege subjects from this consuming tyranny; the attempt drew upon him 
the wrath of Garuda, which would soon have been followed by his 
vengeance, and the King of Serpents must have been devoured himself, 
if he and all the snakes had not retired, as fast as they could 
wriggle to Sanc-ha-vana, in Sanc-ha-dwip, which is between Cali and 
the Sea; there they found an asylum near the palace of Carticeya, son 
of the mountain goddess Parvats, and Commander of the Celestial 
Armies. Carticeya is more powerful than Garuda, and therefore the 
divine Eagle is too rational to invade them while they are under his 
protection. It would have been more fortunate for the world if the 
King of Serpents had not found any one to protect him; for whatever 
his merits may be towards his subjects, he is a most pestilent 
Potentate, the breath of his nostrils is a fiery wind which destroys 
and consumes all creatures and all herbs within an hundred _yojanas_ 
of his abode, and which in fact is the Simoom, so fatal to those who 
travel in the deserts. The sage Agastya for a time put a stop to this 
evil, for he, by the virtue of his self-inflection, obtained such 
power, that he caught Sanc-ha-naga, and carried him about in an 
earthen vessel. That vessel however must have been broken in some 
unhappy hour, for the fiery and poisonous wind is now as frequent as 
ever in the deserts.

The Hindoos say that whoever performs yearly and daily rites in honour 
of the King of the Serpents, will acquire immense riches. _This_ King 
of the Serpents, I say, to wit Sanc'-ha-naga,—(or Sanc' ha-mucha, as 
he is also called from the shape of his mouth resembling that of a 
shell)—because there is another King of the Serpents, Karkotaka by 
name, whom the sage Narada for deceiving him, punished once by casting 
him into a great fire, and confining him there by a curse till he was 
delivered in the manner which the reader may find related in the 14th 
book of Nela and Damarante, as translated by Mr. Milman from the 
Sanscrit.

The Locusts according to Agur in the Book of Proverbs have no King, 
although they go forth all of them by bands. Perhaps their form of 
government has changed, for the Moors of Morocco inform us that they 
have a sovereign, who leads forth their innumerable armies; and as his 
nation belongs to the Mahometan world, his title is Sultan Jereed.

The Rose is the Queen of the Garden

           _plebei cedite flores;
  Hortorum regina suos ostendit honores._[1]

[Footnote 1: RAPIN.]

Bampfield Moore Carew was King of the Beggars; and James Bosvill, was 
King of the Gypsies. He lies buried in Rossington Churchyard, near 
Doncaster, and for many years the gypsies from the south visited his 
grave annually, and among other rites poured a flagon of ale upon it.

There was a personage at Oxford who bore in that University the 
distinguished title of Rex Rafforum. After taking his degree he 
exchanged it for that of the Reverend.

The _Scurræ_,—(we have no word in our language which designates men 
who profess and delight in indulging an ill-mannered and worse-minded 
buffoonery,)—the _Scurræ_ also have their King. He bears a Baron's 
coronet.

The throne of the Dandies has been vacant since the resignation of the 
personage dignified and distinguished by the title of Beau Brummel.

By an advertisement in the Times of Friday, June 18, 1830, I learn 
that the beautiful and stupendous Bradwell Ox, is at present the 
“truly wonderful King of the Pastures,” the said King Ox measuring 
fourteen feet in girth, and sixteen feet in length, being eighteen 
hands high, and five years and a half old, and weighing four thousand 
five hundred pounds, or more than five hundred and sixty stone, which 
is nearly double the size of large oxen in general.

Under the Twelve Cæsars, (and probably it might deserve the title long 
after them,) the Via Appia was called the Queen of Roads. That from 
Hyde Park Corner is _Regina viarum_ in the 19th century.

Easter Sunday has been called the King of Days, though Christmas Day 
might dispute the sovereignty, being in Greek the Queen day of the 
Kalendar. _Ἡ βασιλίσσα ἡμέρα_ Justin Martyr calls it.

Who is King of the Booksellers? There is no King among them at this 
time, but there is a Directory of five Members, Longman, Rees, Orme, 
Brown and Green in the East; the Emperor Murraylemagne, whom Byron 
used to call the Grand Murray, reigned alone in the West, till Henry 
Colburn divided his empire, and supported the station which he had 
assumed by an army of trumpeters which he keeps in constant pay.

If the Books had a King that monarchy must needs be an elective one, 
and the reader of these volumes knows where the election would fall. 
But literature being a Republic, this cannot be the King of Books. 
Suffice it that it is a BOOK FOR A KING, or, for our SOVEREIGN LADY 
THE QUEEN.




INTERCHAPTER XXI.

MEASURE FOR MEASURE.

           _Le Plebe è bestia
  Di cento teste, e non rinchiude in loro
  Pur oncia di saper._

CHIABRERA.


The Public, will, I very well know, make free with me _more suo_, as 
it thinks it has a right to do with any one who comes before it with 
anything designed for its service, whether it be for its amusement, 
its use, or its instruction. Now my Public, I will _more meo_ make 
free with you—that we may be so far upon equal terms.

  _οὐδὲν δεῖ παραμπέχειν λόγους._[1]

You have seldom or never had the truth spoken to you when you have 
been directly addressed. You have been called the enlightened Public, 
the generous Public, the judicious Public, the liberal Public, the 
discerning Public, and so forth. Nay your bare title THE PUBLIC, 
oftentimes stands alone _par excellence_ in its plain majesty like 
that of the king, as if needing no affix to denote its inherent and 
pre-eminent importance. But I will speak truth to you my Public.

  Be not deceived! I have no bended knees,
  No supple tongue, no speeches steep'd in oil,
  No candied flattery, nor honied words![2]

[Footnote 1: EURIPIDES.]

[Footnote 2: RANDOLPH'S ARISTIPPUS.]

I must speak the truth to you my Public,

  _Sincera verità non vuol tacersi._[3]

Where your enlightenedness (if there be such a word) consists and your 
generosity, and your judgement, and your liberality, and your 
discernment, and your majesty to boot,—to express myself as Whitfield 
or Rowland Hill would have done in such a case (for they knew the 
force of language)—I must say, it would puzzle the Devil to tell. _Il 
faut librement avec verité francher ce mot, sans en estre repris; ou 
si l'on est, c'est très-mal à propos._[4]

[Footnote 3: CHIABRERA.]

[Footnote 4: BRANTOME.]

I will tell you what you are; you are a great, ugly, many headed 
beast, with a great many ears which are long, hairy, ticklish, 
moveable, erect and never at rest.

Look at your picture in Southey's Hexameters,—that poem in which his 
laureated Doctorship writes verses by the yard instead of the foot,—he 
describes you as “many headed and monstrous,”

                      with numberless faces,
  Numberless bestial ears, erect to all rumours, and restless,
  And with numberless mouths which are fill'd with lies as with
    arrows.

Look at that Picture my Public!—It is very like you!

For individual readers I profess just as much respect as they 
individually deserve. There are a few persons in every generation for 
whose approbation,—rather let it be said for whose gratitude and 
love,—it is worth while “to live laborious days,” and for these 
readers of this generation and the generations that are to follow,—for 
these

  Such as will join their profit with their pleasure,
  And come to feed their understanding parts;—
  For these I'll prodigally spend myself,
  And speak away my spirit into air;
  For these I'll melt my brain into invention,
  Coin new conceits, and hang my richest words
  As polished jewels in their bounteous ears.[5]

[Footnote 5: BEN JONSON.]

Such readers, they who to their learning add knowledge, and to their 
knowledge wisdom and to their wisdom benevolence, will say to me

  _ὦ καλὰ λέγων, πολὺ δ᾽ ἄμεινον᾽ ἔτι τῶν λόγων
             ἐργασάμεν᾽, εἴθ᾽ ἐπέλ—
             θοις ἅπαντά μοι σαφῶς·
             ὡς ἐγώ μοι δοκῶ
   κἂν μακρὰν ὁδὸν διελθεῖν ὥς᾽ ἀκοῦσαι.
   πρὸς τάδ᾽ ὦ βέλτιστε θαῤῥήσας λέγ᾽, ὡς ἃ—
             παντες ἡδόμεσθά σοι._[6]

But such readers are very few. Walter Landor said that if ten such 
persons should approve his writings, he would call for a division and 
count a majority. To please them is to obtain an earnest of enduring 
fame; for which, if it be worth any thing, no price can be too great. 
But for the aggregate any thing is good enough. Yes my Public, Mr. 
Hume's arithmetic and Mr. Brougham's logic, Lord Castlereagh's syntax, 
Mr. Irving's religion and Mr. Carlisle's irreligion, the politics of 
the Edinburgh Review and the criticism of the Quarterly, Thames water, 
Brewer's beer, Spanish loans, old jokes, new constitutions, Irish 
eloquence, Scotch metaphysics, Tom and Jerry, Zimmerman on Solitude, 
Chancery Equity and Old Bailey Law, Parliamentary wit, the patriotism 
of a Whig Borough-monger, and the consistency of a British cabinet; 
_Et s'il y a encore quelque chose à dire, je le tiens pour dit;_—

[Footnote 6: ARISTOPHANES.]

Yes my Public,

  Nor would I you should look for other looks,
  Gesture, or compliment from me.[7]

[Footnote 7: BEN JONSON.]

_Minus dico quam vellem, et verba omninò frigidiora hæc quam ut satis 
exprimant quod concipio:_[8] these and any thing worse than these,—if 
worse than what is worst can be imagined, will do for you. If there be 
any thing in infinite possibility more worthless than these, more 
floccical-naucical, nihilish-pilish, assisal-teruncial, more good for 
nothing than good for nothingness itself, it is good enough for you.

[Footnote 8: PICUS MIRANDULA.]




INTERCHAPTER XXII.

VARIETY OF STILES.

  _Qualis vir, talis oratio._

ERASMI ADAGIA.


Authors are often classed, like painters, according to the school, in 
which they have been trained, or to which they have attached 
themselves. But it is not so easy to ascertain this in literature as 
it is in painting; and if some of the critics who have thus 
endeavoured to class them, were sent to school themselves and there 
whipt into a little more learning, so many silly classifications of 
this kind would not mislead those readers who suppose in the 
simplicity of their own good faith, that no man presumes to write upon 
a subject which he does not understand.

Stiles may with more accuracy be classed, and for this purpose metals 
might be used in literature as they are in heraldry. We might speak of 
the golden stile, the silver, the iron, the leaden, the pinchbeck and 
the bronze.

Others there are which cannot be brought under any of these 
appellations. There is the Cyclopean stile, of which Johnson is the 
great example; the sparkling, or micacious, possessed by Hazlitt, and 
much affected in Reviews and Magazines; the oleaginous, in which Mr. 
Charles Butler bears the palm, or more appropriately the olive branch: 
the fulminating—which is Walter Landor's, whose conversation has been 
compared to thunder and lightning; the impenetrable—which is sometimes 
used by Mr. Coleridge; and the Jeremy-Benthamite, which cannot with 
propriety be distinguished by any other name than one derived from its 
unparellelled and unparallellable author.

_Ex stilo,_ says Erasmus, _perpendimus ingenium cujusque, omnemque 
mentis habitum ex ipsâ dictionis ratione conjectamus. Est enim tumidi, 
stilus turgidus; abjecti, humilis, exanguis; asperi, scaber; 
amarulenti, tristis ac maledicus; deliciis affluentis, picturatus ac 
dissolutus; Breviter, omne vitæ simulacrum, omnis animi vis, in 
oratione perinde ut in speculo repræsentatur, ac vel intima pectoris, 
arcanis quibusdam vestigiis, deprehenduntur._

There is the lean stile, of which Nathaniel Lardner, and William Coxe 
may be held up as examples; and there is the larded one, exemplified 
in Bishop Andrews, and in Burton, the Anatomist of Melancholy; Jeremy 
Taylor's is both a flowery and a fruitful stile: Harvey the 
Meditationist's a weedy one. There are the hard and dry; the weak and 
watery; the manly and the womanly; the juvenile and the anile; the 
round and the pointed; the flashy and the fiery; the lucid and the 
opaque; the luminous and the tenebrous; the continuous and the 
disjointed. The washy and the slap-dash are both much in vogue, 
especially in magazines and reviews; so are the barbed and the 
venomed. The High-Slang stile is exhibited in the Court Journal and in 
Mr. Colburn's novels; the Low Slang in Tom and Jerry, Bell's Life in 
London, and most Magazines, those especially which are of most 
pretensions.

The flatulent stile, the feverish, the aguish, and the atrabilious are 
all as common as the diseases of body from which they take their name, 
and of mind in which they originate; and not less common than either 
is the dyspeptic stile, proceeding from a weakness in the digestive 
faculty.

Learned, or if not learned, Dear Reader, I had much to say of stile, 
but the under written passage from that beautiful book, Xenophon's 
Memorabilia Socratis, has induced me, as the Latins say, _stilum 
vertere_, and to erase a paragraph written with ink in which the gall 
predominated.

_Ἐγὼ δ᾽ οὖν καὶ αὐτὸς, ὦ Αντιφῶν, ὥσπερ ἄλλός τις ἢ ἵππῳ ἀγαθῷ ἢ κυνὶ 
ἢ ὂρνιθι ἥδεται, οὕτω καὶ ἒτι μᾶλλον ἥδομαι τοῖς φίλοις ἀγαθοῖς· καὶ, 
ἐάν τι σχῶ ἀγαθὸν διδάσκω, καὶ ἄλλοις σύνιστημι, παρ᾽ ὧν ἂν ἡγῶμαι 
ὠφελήσεσθαί τι αὐτοὺς εἰς ἀρετήν᾽ καὶ, τοὺς θησαυροὺς τῶν πάλι σοφῶν 
ἀνδρῶν, οὕς ἐκεῖνοι κατέλιπον ἐν βιβλίοις γράφεντες, ἀνελίττων κοινῆ 
σὺν τοῖς φίλοις διέρχομαι· καὶ ἄν τι ὁρῶμεν ἀγαθὸν, ἐκλεγόμεθα, καὶ 
μέγα νομίζομεν κέρδος, ἐὰν ἀλλήλοις ὠφέλιμοι γιγνώμεθα._




INTERCHAPTER XXIII.

A LITTLE ADVICE BESTOWED UPON THE SCORNFUL READER IN A SHORT 
INTERCHAPTER.

No man is so foolish, but may give another good counsel sometimes; and 
no man is so wise, but may easily err, if he will take no other's 
counsel but his own.

BEN JONSON.


I will now bestow a little advice upon the scornful reader.

And who, the Devil, are you exclaims that reader, who are impertinent 
enough to offer your advice, and fool enough to suppose that I shall 
listen to it?

Whatever your opinion may be, Sir, concerning an Evil Principle, 
whether you hold with the thorough-paced Liberals, that there is no 
Principle at all, (and in one sense, exemplify this in your own 
conduct,) or with the Unitarians that there is no Evil one; or whether 
you incline to the Manichean scheme of Two Principles, which is said 
to have its advocates,—in either case the diabolical expletive in your 
speech is alike reprehensible: you deserve a reprimand for it; and you 
are hereby reprimanded accordingly.—Having discharged this duty, I 
answer your question in the words of Terence, with which I doubt not 
you are acquainted, because they are to be found in the Eton grammar: 
_Homo sum, nihil humani à me alienum puto._

And what the Devil have the words of Terence to do with my query?

You are again reprimanded Sir. If it be a bad thing to have the Devil 
at one's elbow, it cannot be a good one to have him at ones tongue's 
end. The sentence is sufficiently applicable. It is a humane thing to 
offer advice where it is wanted, and a very humane thing to write and 
publish a book which is intended to be either useful or delightful to 
those who read it.

A humane thing to write a book!—Martin of Galway's humanity is not a 
better joke than that!

Martin of Galway's humanity is no joke, Sir. He has began a good work, 
and will be remembered for it with that honour which is due to all who 
have endeavoured to lessen the sum of suffering and wickedness in this 
wicked world.

Answer me one question, Mr. Author, if you please. If your book is 
intended to be either useful or delightful, why have you filled it 
with such a parcel of nonsense?

What you are pleased to call by that name, Mr. Reader, may be either 
sense or nonsense according to the understanding which it meets with. 
_Quicquid recipitur, recipitur in modum recipientis._ Look in the 
seventh Chapter of the second book of Esdras, and at the twenty-fifth 
verse you will find the solution of your demand.

And do you suppose I shall take the trouble of looking into the Bible 
to please the humour of such a fellow as you?

If you do not, Sir, there are others who will; and more good may arise 
from looking into that book,—even upon such an occasion,—than either 
they or I can anticipate.

And so, scornful reader, wishing thee a better mind, and an 
enlightened understanding, I bid thee gladly and heartily farewell!




END OF VOL. VI.




W. Nicol, 60, Pall Mall.




