CHAPTER CLXXXI.

NO DEGREE OF UGLINESS REALLY UNFORTUNATE.—FIDUS CORNELIUS COMPARED TO 
A PLUCKED OSTRICH.—WILKES' CLAIM TO UGLINESS CONSIDERED AND NEGATIVED 
BY DR. JOHNSON, NOTWITHSTANDING HOGARTH'S PORTRAIT.—CAST OF THE EYE À 
LA MONTMORENCY.—ST. EVREMOND AND TURENNE.—WILLIAM BLAKE THE PAINTER, 
AND THE WELSH TRIADS.—CURIOUS EXTRACT FROM THAT VERY CURIOUS AND RARE 
BOOK, THE DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OF HIS OWN PICTURES,—AND A PAINFUL ONE 
FROM HIS POETICAL SKETCHES.

“_If thou beest not so handsome as thou wouldest have been thank God 
thou art not more unhandsome than thou art._ 'Tis His mercy thou art 
not the mark for passenger's fingers to point at, an Heteroclite in 
nature, with some member defective or redundant. Be glad that thy clay 
cottage hath all the necessary forms thereto belonging, though the 
outside be not so fairly plaistered as some others.”

FULLER'S HOLY STATE, B. iii. c. 15.


I asked him once if there was not a degree of ugliness which might be 
deemed unfortunate, because a consciousness of it affected the 
ill-favoured individual so as to excite in him discontent and envy, 
and other evil feelings. He admitted that in an evil disposition it 
might have this tendency; but he said a disposition which was 
injuriously affected by such a cause, would have had other 
propensities quite as injurious in themselves and in their direction, 
evolved and brought into full action by an opposite cause. To 
exemplify this he instanced the two brothers Edward IV. and Richard 
III.

Fidus Cornelius burst into tears in the Roman Senate, because Corbulo 
called him a plucked ostrich: _adversus alia maledicta mores et vitam 
convulnerantia, frontis illi firmitas constitit; adversus hoc tam 
absurdum lacrimæ prociderunt; tanta animorum imbecillitas est ubi 
ratio discessit._ But instances of such weakness, the Doctor said, are 
as rare as they are ridiculous. Most people see themselves in the most 
favourable light. “Ugly!” a very ugly, but a very conceited fellow 
exclaimed one day when he contemplated himself in a looking-glass; 
“ugly! and yet there's something genteel in the face!” There are more 
coxcombs in the world than there are vain women; in the one sex there 
is a weakness for which time soon brings a certain cure, in the other 
it deserves a harsher appellation.

As to ugliness, not only in this respect do we make large allowances 
for ourselves, but our friends make large allowances for us also. Some 
one praised Palisson to Madame de Sevigné for the elegance of his 
manners, the magnanimity, the rectitude and other virtues which he 
ought to have possessed; _hé bien_ she replied, _pour moi je ne 
connois que sa laideur; qu'on me le dedouble donc._ Wilkes, who 
pretended as little to beauty, as he did to public virtue, when he was 
off the stage used to say, that in winning the good graces of a lady 
there was not more than three days difference between himself and the 
handsomest man in England. One of his female partizans praised him for 
his agreeable person, and being reminded of his squinting, she replied 
indignantly, that it was not more than a gentleman ought to squint. So 
rightly has Madame de Villedieu observed that

  _En mille occasions l'amour a sçeu prouver
   Que tout devient pour luy, matiere à sympathie,
   Quand il fait tant que d'en vouloir trouver._

She no doubt spoke sincerely, according to the light wherein, in the 
obliquity of her intellectual eyesight she beheld him. Just as that 
prince of republican and unbelieving bigots, Thomas Holles said of the 
same person, “I am sorry for the irregularities of Wilkes; they are 
however only as spots in the sun!” “It is the weakness of the many,” 
says a once noted Journalist “that when they have taken a fancy to a 
man, or to the name of a man they take a fancy even to his failings.” 
But there must have been no ordinary charm in the manners of John 
Wilkes, who in one interview overcame Johnson's well-founded and 
vehement dislike. The good nature of his countenance, and its vivacity 
and cleverness made its physical ugliness be overlooked; and probably 
his cast of the eye, which was a squint of the first water, seemed 
only a peculiarity which gave effect to the sallies of his wit.

Hogarth's portrait of him he treated with characteristic good humour, 
and allowed it “to be an excellent compound caricature, or a 
caricature of what Nature had already caricatured. I know but one 
short apology said he, to be made for this gentleman, or to speak more 
properly, for the _person_ of Mr. Wilkes; it is, that he did not make 
himself; and that he never was solicitous about the _case_ (as 
Shakespeare calls it) only so far as to keep it clean and in health. I 
never heard that he ever hung over the glassy stream, like another 
Narcissus admiring the image in it; nor that he ever stole an amorous 
look at his counterfeit in a side mirror. His form, such as it is, 
ought to give him no pain, while it is capable of giving so much 
pleasure to others. I believe he finds himself tolerably happy in the 
clay cottage to which he is tenant for life, because he has learned to 
keep it in pretty good order. While the share of health and animal 
spirits which heaven has given out, should hold out, I can scarcely 
imagine he will be one moment peevish about the outside of so 
precarious, so temporary a habitation; or will ever be brought to our 
_Ingenium Galbæ malè habitat:—Monsieur est mal logé._” This was part 
of a note for his intended edition of Churchill.

Squinting, according to a French writer, is not unpleasing, when it is 
not in excess. He is probably right in this observation. A slight 
obliquity of vision sometimes gives an archness of expression, and 
always adds to the countenance a peculiarity, which when the 
countenance has once become agreeable to the beholder, renders it more 
so. But when the eye-balls recede from each other to the outer verge 
of their orbits, or approach so closely that nothing but the 
intervention of the nose seems to prevent their meeting, a sense of 
distortion is produced, and consequently of pain. _Il y a des gens_, 
says Vigneul Marville, _qui ne sauroient regarder des louches sans en 
sentir quelque douleur aux yeux. Je suis des ceux-la._ This is because 
the deformity is catching, which it is well known to be in children; 
the tendency to imitation is easily excited in a highly sensitive 
frame—as in them; and the pain felt in the eyes gives warning that 
this action which is safe only while it is unconscious and unobserved, 
is in danger of being deranged.

A cast of the eye _à la Montmorency_ was much admired at the Court of 
Louis XIII. where the representative of that illustrious family had 
rendered it fashionable by his example. Descartes is said to have 
liked all persons who squinted for his nurse's sake, and the anecdote 
tells equally in favour of her and of him.

St. Evremond says in writing the Eulogy of Turenne. _Je ne m'amuserai 
point à depeindre tous les traits de son visage. Les caractéres des 
Grands Hommes n'ont rien de commun avec les portraits des belles 
femmes. Mais je puis dire en gros qu'il avoit quelque chose d'auguste 
et d'agréable; quelque chose en sa physionomie qui faisoit concevoir 
je ne sai quoi de grand en son ame, et en son esprit. On pouvoit juger 
à le voir, que par un disposition particuliere la Nature l'avoit 
préparé à faire tout ce qu'il a fait._ If Turenne had not been an 
ill-looking man, the skilful eulogist would not thus have excused 
himself from giving any description of his countenance; a countenance 
from which indeed, if portraits belie it not, it might be inferred 
that nature had prepared him to change his party during the civil 
wars, as lightly as he would have changed his seat at a card-table,—to 
renounce the Protestant faith, and to ravage the Palatinate. _Ne 
souvenez-vous pas de la physionomie funeste de ce grand homme,_ says 
Bussy Rabutin to Madame de Sevigné. An Italian bravo said _che non 
teneva specchio in camera, perche quando si crucciava diveniva tanto 
terribile nell' aspetto, che veggendosi haria fatto troppo gran paura 
a se stesso._[1]

[Footnote 1: IL CORTEGIANO, 27.]

Queen Elizabeth could not endure the sight of deformity; when she went 
into public her guards it is said removed all misshapen and hideous 
persons out of her way.

Extreme ugliness has once proved as advantageous to its possessor as 
extreme beauty, if there be truth in those Triads wherein the Three 
Men are recorded who escaped from the battle of Camlan. They were 
Morvran ab Teged, in consequence of being so ugly, that every body 
thinking him to be a Demon out of Hell fled from him; Sandde 
Bryd-Angel, or Angel-aspect, in consequence of being so fine of form, 
so beautiful and fair, that no one raised a hand against him—for he 
was thought to be an Angel from Heaven: and Glewlwyd Gavaelvawr, or 
Great-grasp (King Arthur's porter) from his size and strength, so that 
none stood in his way, and every body ran before him; excepting these 
three, none escaped, from Camlan,—that fatal field where King Arthur 
fell with all his chivalry.

That painter of great but insane genius, William Blake, of whom Allan 
Cunningham has written so interesting a memoir, took this Triad for 
the subject of a picture, which he called the Ancient Britons. It was 
one of his worst pictures,—which is saying much; and he has 
illustrated it with one of the most curious commentaries in his very 
curious and very rare descriptive Catalogue of his own Pictures.

It begins with a translation from the Welsh, supplied to him no doubt 
by that good simple-hearted, Welsh-headed man, William Owen, whose 
memory is the great store-house of all Cymric tradition and lore of 
every kind.

“In the last battle of King Arthur only Three Britons escaped; these 
were the Strongest Man, the Beautifullest Man, and the Ugliest Man. 
These Three marched through the field unsubdued as Gods; and the Sun 
of Britain set, but shall arise again with tenfold splendour, when 
Arthur shall awake from sleep, and resume his dominion over earth and 
ocean.

“The three general classes of men,” says the painter, “who are 
represented by the most Beautiful, the most Strong, and the most Ugly, 
could not be represented by any historical facts but those of our own 
countrymen, the Ancient Britons, without violating costumes. The 
Britons (say historians) were naked civilised men, learned, studious, 
abstruse in thought and contemplation; naked, simple, plain in their 
acts and manners; wiser than after ages. They were overwhelmed by 
brutal arms, all but a small remnant. Strength, Beauty and Ugliness 
escaped the wreck, and remain for ever unsubdued, age after age.

“The British Antiquities are now in the Artist's hands; all his 
visionary contemplations relating to his own country and its ancient 
glory, when it was, as it again shall be, the source of learning and 
inspiration. He has in his hands poems of the highest antiquity. Adam 
was a Druid, and Noah. Also Abraham was called to succeed the 
Druidical age, which began to turn allegoric and mental signification 
into corporeal command; whereby human sacrifice would have depopulated 
the earth. All these things are written in Eden. The artist is an 
inhabitant of that happy country; and if every thing goes on as it has 
begun, the work of vegetation and generation may expect to be opened 
again to Heaven, through Eden, as it was in the beginning.

“The Strong Man represents the human sublime. The Beautiful Man 
represents the human pathetic, which was in the ban of Eden divided 
into male and female. The Ugly Man represents the human reason. They 
were originally one man, who was fourfold: he was self divided and his 
real humanity drawn on the stems of generation; and the form of the 
fourth was like the Son of God. How he became divided is a subject of 
great sublimity and pathos. The Artist has written it, under 
inspiration, and will if God please, publish it. It is voluminous, and 
contains the ancient history of Britain, and the world of Satan and of 
Adam.

“In the mean time he has painted this picture, which supposes that in 
the reign of that British Prince, who lived in the fifth century, 
there were remains of those naked heroes in the Welsh mountains. They 
are now. Gray saw them in the person of his Bard on Snowdon; there 
they dwell in naked simplicity; happy is he who can see and converse 
with them, above the shadows of generation and death. In this picture, 
believing with Milton the ancient British history, Mr. Blake has done 
as all the ancients did, and as all the moderns who are worthy of 
fame, given the historical fact in its poetical vigour; so as it 
always happens; and not in that dull way that some historians pretend, 
who being weakly organised themselves, cannot see either miracle or 
prodigy. All is to them a dull round of probabilities and 
possibilities; but the history of all times and places is nothing else 
but improbabilities and impossibilities,—what we should say was 
impossible, if we did not see it always before our eyes.

“The antiquities of every nation under Heaven are no less sacred than 
those of the Jews, they are the same thing, as Jacob Bryant and all 
antiquaries have proved. How other antiquities came to be neglected 
and disbelieved, while those of the Jews are collected and arranged is 
an enquiry, worthy of both the Antiquarian and the Divine. All had 
originally one language, and one religion, this was the religion of 
Jesus, the everlasting Gospel. Antiquity preached the Gospel of Jesus, 
the reasoning historian, turner and twister of courses and 
consequences, such as Hume, Gibbon, and Voltaire, cannot with all 
their artifice, turn or twist one fact, or disarrange self evident 
action and reality. Reasons and opinions concerning acts are not 
history. Acts themselves alone are history, and they are neither the 
exclusive property of Hume, Gibbon, and Voltaire, Echard, Rapin, 
Plutarch, nor Herodotus. Tell me the acts O historian, and leave me to 
reason upon them as I please; away with your reasoning and your 
rubbish. All that is not action is not worth reading. Tell me the 
What; I do not want you to tell me the Why, and the How; I can find 
that out myself, as well as you can, and I will not be fooled by you 
into opinions, that you please to impose, to disbelieve what you think 
improbable, or impossible. His opinion, who does not see spiritual 
agency, is not worth any man's reading; he who rejects a fact because 
it is improbable, must reject all History, and retain doubts only.

“It has been said to the Artist, take the Apollo for the model of your 
beautiful man, and the Hercules for your strong man, and the Dancing 
Fawn for your ugly man. Now he comes to his trial. He knows that what 
he does is not inferior to the grandest antiques. Superior they cannot 
be, for human power cannot go beyond either what he does, or what they 
have done, it is the gift of God, it is inspiration and vision. He had 
resolved to emulate those precious remains of antiquity. He has done 
so, and the result you behold. His ideas of strength and beauty have 
not been greatly different. Poetry as it exists now on earth, in the 
various remains of ancient authors, Music as it exists in old tunes or 
melodies, Painting and Sculpture as it exists in the remains of 
antiquity and in the works of more modern genius, is Inspiration, and 
cannot be surpassed; it is perfect and eternal: Milton, Shakspeare, 
Michael Angelo, Rafael, the finest specimens of ancient Sculpture and 
Painting, and Architecture, Gothic, Grecian, Hindoo and Egyptian are 
the extent of the human mind. The human mind cannot go beyond the gift 
of God, the Holy Ghost. To suppose that Art can go beyond the finest 
specimens of Art that are now in the world, is not knowing what Art 
is; it is being blind to the gifts of the Spirit.

“It will be necessary for the Painter to say something concerning his 
ideas of Beauty, Strength and Ugliness.

“The beauty that is annexed and appended to folly, is a lamentable 
accident and error of the mortal and perishing life; it does but 
seldom happen; but with this unnatural mixture the sublime Artist can 
have nothing to do; it is fit for the burlesque. The beauty proper for 
sublime Art, is lineaments, or forms and features that are capable of 
being the receptacle of intellect; accordingly the Painter has given 
in his beautiful man, his own idea of intellectual Beauty. The face 
and limbs (?) that deviates or alters least, from infancy to old age, 
is the face and limbs (?) of greatest Beauty and Perfection.

“The Ugly likewise, when accompanied and annexed to imbecillity and 
disease, is a subject for burlesque and not for historical grandeur; 
the artist has imagined the Ugly man; one approaching to the beast in 
features and form, his forehead small, without frontals; his nose high 
on the ridge, and narrow; his chest and the stamina of his make, 
comparatively little, and his joints and his extremities large; his 
eyes with scarce any whites, narrow and cunning, and everything 
tending toward what is truly ugly; the incapability of intellect.

“The Artist has considered his strong man as a receptacle of Wisdom, a 
sublime energizer; his features and limbs do not spindle out into 
length, without strength, nor are they too large and unwieldy for his 
brain and bosom. Strength consists in accumulation of power to the 
principal seat, and from thence a regular gradation and subordination; 
strength in compactness, not extent nor bulk.

“The strong man acts from conscious superiority, and marches on in 
fearless dependence on the divine decrees, raging with the 
inspirations of a prophetic mind. The Beautiful man acts from duty, 
and anxious solicitude for the fates of those for whom he combats. The 
Ugly man acts from love of carnage, and delight in the savage 
barbarities of war, rushing with sportive precipitation into the very 
teeth of the affrighted enemy.

“The Roman Soldiers rolled together in a heap before them: ‘like the 
rolling thing before the whirlwind:’ each shew a different character, 
and a different expression of fear, or revenge, or envy, or blank 
horror, or amazement, or devout wonder and unresisting awe.

“The dead and the dying, Britons naked, mingled with armed Romans, 
strew the field beneath. Amongst these, the last of the Bards who were 
capable of attending warlike deeds, is seen falling, outstretched 
among the dead and the dying; singing to his harp in the pains of 
death.

“Distant among the mountains are Druid Temples, similar to Stone 
Henge. The sun sets behind the mountains, bloody with the day of 
battle.

“The flush of health in flesh, exposed to the open air, nourished by 
the spirits of forests and floods, in that ancient happy period, which 
history has recorded, cannot be like the sickly daubs of Titian or 
Rubens. Where will the copier of nature, as it now is, find a 
civilized man, who has been accustomed to go naked. Imagination only 
can furnish us with colouring appropriate, such as is found in the 
frescoes of Rafael, and Michael Angelo: the disposition of forms 
always directs colouring in works of true art. As to a modern man, 
stripped from his load of clothing, he is like a dead corpse. Hence 
Rubens, Titian, Correggio, and all of that class, are like leather and 
chalk; their men are like leather, and their women like chalk, for the 
disposition of their forms will not admit of grand colouring; in Mr. 
B's Britons, the blood is seen to circulate in their limbs; he defies 
competition in colouring.”

My regard for thee, dear Reader, would not permit me to leave 
untranscribed this very curious and original piece of composition. 
Probably thou hast never seen, and art never likely to see either the 
“Descriptive Catalogue” or the “Poetical Sketches” of this insane and 
erratic genius, I will therefore end the chapter with the _Mad Song_ 
from the latter,—premising only _Dificultosa provincia es la que 
emprendo, y à muchos parecerà escusada; mas para la entereza desta 
historia, ha parecido no omitir aguesta parte._[2]

  The wild winds weep,
    And the night is a-cold;
  Come hither, Sleep,
    And my griefs unfold:
  But lo! the morning peeps
    Over the eastern steep;
  And the rustling birds of dawn
    The earth do scorn.

  Lo! to the vault
    Of paved heaven,
  With sorrow fraught
    My notes are driven:
  They strike the ear of night
    Make weep the eyes of day;
  They make mad the roaring winds
    And with tempests play.

  Like a fiend in a cloud
    With howling woe,
  After night I do croud
    And with night will go;
  I turn my back to the east,
    From whence comforts have increas'd;
  For light doth seize my brain
    With frantic pain.

[Footnote 2: LUIS MUÑOZ. VIDA DEL P. L. DE GRANADA.]




