CHAPTER CLXXII.

DESCARTES' NOTION CONCERNING THE PROLONGATION OF LIFE. A SICILIAN 
PROPOSAL FOR BREEDING UP CHILDREN TO BE IMMORTAL. ASGILL'S ARGUMENT 
AGAINST THE NECESSITY OF DYING.

  O harmless Death! whom still the valiant brave,
    The wise expect, the sorrowful invite;
  And all the good embrace, who know the Grave
    A short dark passage to eternal light.

SIR WILLIAM DAVENANT.


Sir Kenelm Digby went to Holland for the purpose of conversing with 
Descartes, who was then living in retirement at Egmont. Speculative 
knowledge, Digby said to him, was no doubt a refined and agreeable 
pursuit, but it was too uncertain and too useless to be made a man's 
occupation, life being so short that one has scarcely time to acquire 
well the knowledge of necessary things. It would be far more worthy of 
a person like Descartes, he observed, who so well understood the 
construction of the human frame, if he would apply himself to discover 
means of prolonging its duration, rather than attach himself to the 
mere speculation of philosophy. Descartes made answer that this was a 
subject on which he had already meditated; that as for rendering man 
immortal, it was what he would not venture to promise, but that he was 
very sure he could prolong his life to the standard of the Patriarchs.

Saint-Evremond to whom Digby repeated this, says that this opinion of 
Descartes was well known both to his friends in Holland and in France. 
The Abbé Picot, his disciple and his martyr, was so fully persuaded of 
it that it was long before he would believe his master was dead, and 
when at length unwillingly convinced of what it was no longer possible 
to deny or doubt, he exclaimed, _que c'en étoit fait et que la fin du 
Genre humain alloit venir!_

A certain Sicilian physician who commented upon Galen was more 
cautious if not more modest than Descartes. He affirmed that it was 
certainly possible to render men immortal, but then they must be bred 
up from the earliest infancy with that view; and he undertook so to 
train and render them,—if they were fit subjects.—Poor children! if it 
had indeed been possible thus to divest them of their reversionary 
interest in Heaven.

A much better way of abolishing death was that which Asgill imagined, 
when he persuaded himself from Scripture that it is in our power to go 
to Heaven without any such unpleasant middle passage. Asgill's is the 
worst case of intolerance that has occurred in this country since 
persecution has ceased to affect life or member.

This remarkable man was born about the middle of the seventeenth 
century and bred to the Law in Lincoln's Inn under Mr. Eyre a very 
eminent lawyer of those days. In 1698 he published a treatise with 
this title—“Several assertions proved, in order to create another 
species of money than Gold and Silver,” and also an “Essay on a 
Registry for Titles of Lands.” Both subjects seem to denote that on 
these points he was considerably advanced beyond his age. But the 
whole strength of his mind was devoted to his profession, in which he 
had so completely trammelled and drilled his intellectual powers that 
he at length acquired a habit of looking at all subjects in a legal 
point of view. He could find flaws in an hereditary title to the 
crown. But it was not to seek flaws that he studied the Bible; he 
studied it to see whether he could not claim under the Old and New 
Testament something more than was considered to be his share. The 
result of this examination was that in the year 1700 he published “An 
Argument proving that according to the Covenant of Eternal Life 
revealed in the Scriptures Man may be translated from hence into that 
Eternal Life without passing through death, although the Human Nature 
of Christ himself could not be thus translated till he had passed 
through death.”

That, the old motto, (says he) worn upon tomb-stones, “Death is the 
Gate of Life,” is a lie, by which men decoy one another into death, 
taking it to be a thorough-fare into Eternal Life, whereas it is just 
so far out of the way. For die when we will, and be buried where we 
will, and lie in the grave as long as we will, we must all return from 
thence and stand again upon the Earth before we can ascend into the 
Heavens. “_Hinc itur ad astra._” He admitted that “this custom of the 
world to die hath gained such a prevalency over our minds by 
prepossessing us of the necessity of death, that it stands ready to 
swallow his argument whole without digesting it.” But the dominion of 
death, he said, is supported by our fear of it, by which it hath 
bullied the world to this day. Yet “the custom of the World to die is 
no argument one way or other;” however, because he knew that custom 
itself is admitted as an evidence of title, upon presumption that such 
custom had once a reasonable commencement and that this reason doth 
continue, it was incumbent upon him to answer this Custom by shewing 
the time and reason of its commencement and that the reason was 
determined.

“First then,” says he, “I do admit the custom or possession of Death 
over the world to be as followeth: that Death did reign from Adam to 
Moses by an uninterrupted possession over all men women and children, 
created or born, except one breach made upon it in that time by Enoch; 
and hath reigned from Moses unto this day by the like uninterrupted 
possession, except one other breach made upon it in this time by 
Elijah. And this is as strong a possession as can be alledged against 
me.

“The religion of the World now is that Man is born to die. But from 
the beginning it was not so, for Man was made to live. God made not 
Death till Man brought it upon himself by his delinquency. Adam stood 
as fair for Life as Death, and fairer too, because he was in the 
actual possession of Life,—as Tenant thereof at the Will of God, and 
had an opportunity to have made that title perpetual by the Tree of 
Life, which stood before him with the Tree of Knowledge of Good and 
Evil. And here 'tis observable how the same act of man is made the 
condition both of his life and death: ‘put forth thy hand and pull and 
eat and die,’ or ‘put forth thy hand and pull and eat and live for 
ever.’ 'Tis not to be conceived that there was any physical virtues in 
either of these Trees whereby to cause life or death; but God having 
sanctified them by those two different names, he was obliged to make 
good his own characters of them, by commanding the whole Creation to 
act in such a manner as that Man should feel the effects of this word, 
according to which of the Trees he first put forth his hand. And it is 
yet more strange, that man having life and death set before him at the 
same time and place, and both to be had upon the same condition, that 
he should single out his own death and leave the Tree of Life 
untouched. And what is further strange, even after his election of 
death he had an interval of time before his expulsion out of Paradise, 
to have retrieved his fate by putting forth his hand to the Tree of 
Life; and yet he omitted this too!

“But by all this it is manifest that as the form or person of man in 
his first creation was capable of eternal life without dying, so the 
fall of man which happened to him after his creation hath not disabled 
his person from that capacity of eternal life. And therefore durst Man 
even then have broken through the Cherubim and flaming sword, or could 
he now any way come at the Tree of Life, he must yet live for ever, 
notwithstanding his sin committed in Paradise and his expulsion out of 
it. But this Tree of Life now seems lost to Man; and so he remains 
under the curse of that other Tree, ‘in the day that thou eatest 
thereof thou shalt die.’ Which sentence of the Law is the cause of the 
death of Man, and was the commencement of the Custom of Death in the 
World, and by the force of this Law Death has kept the possession 
(before admitted) to this day.

“By his act of delinquency and the sentence upon it, Adam stood 
attainted and became a dead man in law, though he was not executed 
till about nine hundred years afterwards.” Lawyer as Asgill was, and 
legally as he conducts his whole extraordinary argument, he yet offers 
a moral extenuation of Adam's offence. Eve after her eating and Adam 
before his eating, were, he says, in two different states, she in the 
state of Death, and he in the State of Life; and thereby his was much 
the harder case. For she by her very creation was so much a part of 
himself that he could not be happy while she was miserable. The loss 
of her happiness so much affected him by sympathy that all his other 
enjoyments could do him no good; and therefore since he thought it 
impossible for her to return into the same state with him, he chose, 
rather than be parted from her, to hazard himself in the same state 
with her. Asgill then resumes his legal view of the case: the offence 
he says was at last joint and several; the sentence fell upon Mankind 
as descendants from these our common ancestors, and so upon Christ 
himself. And this is the reason why in the genealogy of our Saviour as 
set down by two Evangelists his legal descent by Joseph is only 
counted upon, “because all legal descents are accounted from the 
father.” As he was born of a Virgin to preserve his nature from the 
defilement of humanity, so was he of a Virgin espoused to derive upon 
himself the curse of the Law by a legal father: for which purpose it 
was necessary that the birth of Christ should, in the terms of the 
Evangelist, be on this wise and no otherwise. And hence the Genealogy 
of Christ is a fundamental part of Eternal Life.

The reader will soon perceive that technically as Asgill treated his 
strange argument, he was sincerely and even religiously convinced of 
its importance and its truth. “Having shewn,” he proceeds, “how this 
Law fell upon Christ, it is next incumbent on me to shew that it is 
taken away by his death, and consequently that the long possession of 
Death over the World can be no longer a title against Life. But when I 
say this Law is taken away, I don't mean that the words of it are 
taken away; for they remain with us to this day and being matter of 
Record must remain for ever; but that it is satisfied by other matter 
of Record, by which the force of it is gone. Law satisfied is no Law, 
as a debt satisfied is no debt. Now the specific demand of the Law was 
Death; and of a man; and a man made under the Law. Christ qualified 
himself to be so: and as such suffered under it, thus undergoing the 
literal sentence. This he might have done and not have given the Law 
satisfaction, for millions of men before him had undergone it and yet 
the Law was nevertheless dissatisfied with them and others, but He 
declared _It is finished_ before he gave up the ghost. By the dignity 
of his person he gave that satisfaction which it was impossible for 
mankind to give.”

For the Law, he argues, was not such a civil contract that the breach 
of it could be satisfied; it was a Law of Honour, the breach whereof 
required personal satisfaction for the greatest affront and the 
highest act of ingratitude to God, inasmuch as the slighter the thing 
demanded is, the greater is the affront in refusing it. “Man by his 
very creation entered into the labours of the Creator and became Lord 
of the Universe which was adapted to his enjoyments. God left him in 
possession of it upon his parole of honour, only that he would 
acknowledge it to be held of Him, and as the token of this tenure that 
he would only forbear from eating of one tree, withal telling him that 
if he did eat of it, his life should go for it. If man had had more 
than his life to give, God would have had it of him. This was rather a 
resentment of the affront, than any satisfaction for it; and therefore 
to signify the height of this resentment God raises man from the dead 
to demand further satisfaction from him. Death is a commitment to the 
prison of the Grave till the Judgement of the Great Day; and then the 
grand Habeas Corpus will issue to the Earth and to the Sea, to give up 
their dead: to remove the Bodies, with the cause of their commitment.

“Yet was this a resentment without malice; for as God maintained his 
resentment under all his love, so He maintained his love under all his 
resentment. For his love being a love of kindness flowing from his own 
nature, could not be diminished by any act of man; and yet his honour 
being concerned to maintain the truth of his word, he could not 
falsify that to gratify his own affection. And thus he bore the 
passion of his own love, till he had found out a salvo for his honour 
by that Son of Man who gave him satisfaction at once by the dignity of 
his person. Personal satisfactions by the Laws of Honour are esteemed 
sufficient or not, according to the equality or inequality between the 
persons who give or take the affront. Therefore God to vindicate his 
honour was obliged to find out a person for this purpose equal to 
Himself: the invention of which is called the manifold wisdom of God, 
the invention itself being the highest expression of the deepest love, 
and the execution of it, in the death of Christ, the deepest 
resentment of the highest affront.

“Now inasmuch as the person of our Saviour was superior to the human 
nature, so much the satisfaction by his death surmounted the offence. 
He died under the Law but he did not arise under it, having taken it 
away by his death. The life regained by him in his resurrection was by 
Conquest, by which, according to all the Laws of Conquest, the Law of 
Death is taken away. For by the Laws of Conquest the Laws of the 
conquered are _ipso facto_ taken away, and all records and writings 
that remain of them are of no more force than waste paper. Hence the 
title of Christ to Eternal Life is become absolute,—by absolute”—says 
this theologo-jurist,—“I mean discharged from all tenure or condition, 
and consequently from all forfeiture. And as his title to life is thus 
become absolute by Conquest, so the direction of it is become eternal 
by being annexed to the Person of the Godhead: thus Christ ever since 
his resurrection did, and doth, stand seized of an absolute and 
indefeazable Estate of Eternal Life, without any tenure or condition 
or other matter or thing to change or determine it for ever.” “I had 
reason” says Asgill “thus to assert the title of Christ at large; 
because this is the title by and under which I am going to affirm my 
argument and to claim Eternal Life for myself and all the world.”

“And first I put it upon the Profession of Divinity to deny one word 
of the fact as I have repeated it. Next I challenge the Science of the 
Law to shew such another Title as this is. And then I defy the 
Logicians to deny my Argument: of which this is the abstract: That the 
Law delivered to Adam before the Fall is the original cause of Death 
in the World: That this Law is taken away by the Death of Christ: That 
therefore the legal power of death is gone. And I am so far from 
thinking this Covenant of Eternal Life to be an allusion to the forms 
of Title amongst men, that I rather adore it as the precedent for them 
all; believing with that great Apostle that the things on Earth are 
but the patterns of things in the Heavens where the Originals are 
kept.” This he says because he has before made it appear that in the 
Covenant of Eternal Life all things requisite to constitute a legal 
instrument are found, to wit, the date, the parties, the contents, and 
consideration, the sealing, and execution, the witnesses, and the 
Ceremony required of Man, whereby to execute it on his part and take 
the advantage of it.

By the sacrifice which our Lord offered of himself, this technical but 
sincere and serious enthusiast argues, more than an atonement was 
made. “And that this superabundancy might not run to waste, God 
declared that Man should have Eternal Life absolute as Christ himself 
had it; and hence Eternal Life is called the Gift of God through our 
Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, over and above our redemption. Why 
then,” he asks, “doth Death remain in the World? Why because Man knows 
not the Way of Life—‘the way of Life they have not known.’ Because our 
faith is not yet come to us—‘when the Son of Man comes shall he find 
faith upon the earth?’ Because Man is a beast of burden that knows not 
his own strength in the virtue of the Death and the power of the 
Resurrection of Christ. Unbelief goes not by reason or dint of 
argument, but is a sort of melancholy madness, by which if we once 
fancy ourselves bound, it hath the same effect upon us as if we really 
were so. Death is like Satan, who appears to none but those who are 
afraid of him: Resist the Devil and he will flee from you. Because 
Death had once dominion over us, we think it hath and must have it 
still. And this I find within myself, that though I can't deny one 
word I have said in fact or argument, yet I can't maintain my belief 
of it without making it more familiar to my understanding, by turning 
it up and down in my thoughts and ruminating upon some proceedings 
already made upon it in the World.

“The Motto of the Religion of the World is _Mors Janua Vitæ_; if we 
mean by this the Death of Christ, we are in the right; but if we mean 
our own Death then we are in the wrong. Far be it from me to say that 
Man may not attain to Eternal Life, though he should die; for the Text 
runs double. ‘_I am the Resurrection and the Life; he that liveth and 
believeth on me, shall never die; and though he were dead he shall 
live._’ This very Text shows that there is a nearer way of entering 
into Eternal Life than by the way of Death and Resurrection. Whatever 
circumstances a man is under at the time of his death, God is bound to 
make good this Text to him, according to which part of it he builds 
his faith upon; if he be dead there's a necessity for a resurrection; 
but if he be alive there's no occasion for Death or Resurrection 
either. This text doth not maintain two religions, but two articles of 
faith in the same religion, and the article of faith for a present 
life without dying is the higher of the two.

“No man can comprehend the heights and depths of the Gospel at his 
first entrance into it; and in point of order, ‘the last enemy to be 
destroyed is Death.’ The first essay of Faith is against Hell, that 
though we die we may not be damned; and the full assurance of this is 
more than most men attain to before Death overtakes them, which makes 
Death a terror to men. But they who attain it can sing a requiem ‘Lord 
now lettest thou thy Servant depart in peace!’ and if God takes them 
at their word, they lie down in the faith of the Resurrection of the 
Just. But whenever he pleases to continue them, after that attainment, 
much longer above ground, that time seems to them an interval of 
perfect leisure, till at last espying Death itself, they fall upon it 
as an enemy that must be conquered, one time or other, through faith 
in Christ. This is the reason why it seems intended that a respite of 
time should be allotted to believers after the first Resurrection and 
before the dissolution of the World, for perfecting that faith which 
they began before their death but could not attain to in the first 
reach of life: for Death being but a discontinuance of Life, wherever 
men leave off at their death, they must begin at their resurrection. 
Nor shall they ascend after their resurrection, till they have 
attained to this faith of translation, and by that very faith they 
shall be then convinced that they need not have died.

“When Elijah courted death under the juniper tree in the wilderness, 
and ‘said—now Lord, take away my life, for I am not better than my 
fathers,’ that request shews that he was not educated in this faith of 
translation, but attained it afterwards by study. Paul tells ‘we shall 
not all die but we shall all be changed;’ yet though he delivered this 
to be his faith in general, he did not attain to such a particular 
knowledge of the way and manner of it as to prevent his own death: he 
tells us he had not yet attained the Resurrection of the dead, but was 
pressing after it. He had but a late conversion, and was detained in 
the study of another part of divinity, the confirming the New 
Testament by the Old and making them answer one another,—a point 
previous to the faith of translation, and which must be learned before 
it—in order to it. But this his pressing (though he did not attain,) 
hath much encouraged me,” says Asgill, “to make this enquiry, being 
well assured that he would not have thus pursued it, had he not 
apprehended more in it than the vulgar opinion.

“We don't think ourselves fit to deal with one another in human 
affairs till our age of one and twenty. But to deal with our offended 
Maker, to counterplot the malice of fallen Angels, and to rescue 
ourselves from eternal ruin, we are generally as well qualified before 
we can speak plain, as all our life-time after. Children can say over 
their religion at four or five years old, and their parents that 
taught them can do no more at four or five and fifty. The common Creed 
of the Christian religion may be learned in an hour: and one days 
philosophy will teach a man to die. But to know the virtue of the 
Death and Power of the Resurrection of Christ, is a science calculated 
for the study of Men and Angels for ever.

“But if man may be thus changed without death, and that it is of no 
use to him in order to Eternal Life; what then is Death? Or, whereunto 
serveth it? What is it? Why 'tis a misfortune fallen upon man from the 
beginning, and from which he has not yet dared to attempt his 
recovery: and it serves as a Spectre to fright us into a little better 
life (perhaps) than we should lead without it. Though God hath formed 
this Covenant of Eternal Life, Men have made an agreement with Death 
and Hell, by way of composition to submit to Death, in hope of 
escaping Hell by that obedience; and under this allegiance we think 
ourselves bound never to rebel against it! The study of Philosophy is 
to teach men to die, from the observations of Nature; the profession 
of Divinity is to enforce the doctrine from Revelation: and the 
science of the Law is to settle our civil affairs pursuant to these 
resolutions. The old men are making their last Wills and Testaments; 
and the young are expecting the execution of them by the death of the 
testators; and thus

  _Mortis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis._

I was under this Law of Death once; and while I lay under it, I felt 
the terror of it, till I had delivered myself from it by those 
thoughts which must convince them that have them. And in this thing 
only, I wish, for their sakes, that all men were as I am. The reason 
why I believe that this doctrine is true, is, because God hath said 
it: yet I could not thus assert it by argument, if I did not conceive 
it with more self-conviction than I have from any maxims or positions 
in human science. The Covenant of Eternal Life is a Law of itself and 
a science of itself, which can never be known by the study of any 
other science. It is a science out of Man's way, being a pure 
invention of God. Man knows no more how to save himself than he did to 
create himself; but to raise his ambition for learning this, God 
graduates him upon his degree of knowledge in it, and gives him badges 
of honour as belonging to that degree, upon the attainment whereof a 
man gains the title of a Child of the Resurrection: to which title 
belongs this badge of honour, to die no more but make our exit by 
translation, as Christ, who was the first of this Order, did before 
us. And this world being the academy to educate Man for Heaven, none 
shall ever enter there till they have taken this degree here.

“Let the Dead bury the Dead! and the Dead lie with the Dead! And the 
rest of the Living go lie with them! I'll follow him that was dead, 
and is alive, and living for ever. And though I am now single, yet I 
believe that this belief will be general before the general change, of 
which Paul speaks, shall come; and that then, and not before, shall be 
the Resurrection of the Just, which is called the first Resurrection; 
and after that the Dead so arisen, with the Living, then alive, shall 
have learned this faith, which shall qualify them to be caught up 
together in the air, then shall be the General Resurrection, after 
which Time shall be no more.

“The beginning of this faith, like all other parts of the Kingdom of 
Heaven will be like a grain of mustard seed, spreading itself by 
degrees till it overshadow the whole earth. And since ‘the things 
concerning Him must have an end,’ in order to this they must have a 
beginning. But whoever leads the van will make the world start, and 
must expect for himself to walk up and down, like Cain, with a mark on 
his forehead, and run the gauntlet for an Ishmaelite, having every 
man's hand against him because his hand is against every man; than 
which nothing is more averse to my temper. This makes me think of 
publishing with as much regret as he that ran way from his errand when 
sent to Niniveh: but being just going to cross the water—(he was going 
to Ireland,—) I dared not leave this behind me undone, lest a Tempest 
send me back again to do it. And to shelter myself a little, (though I 
knew my speech would betray me) I left the Title page anonymous. Nor 
do I think that any thing would now extort my name from me but the 
dread of the sentence, ‘he that is ashamed of me and of my words, of 
him will I be ashamed before my Father and his Angels:’ for fear of 
which I dare not but subscribe my argument, though with a trembling 
hand; having felt two powers within me all the while I have been about 
it, one bids me write, and the other bobs my elbow. But since I have 
wrote this, as Pilate did his inscription, without consulting any one, 
I'll be absolute as he was; ‘what I have written, I have written.’

“Having pursued that command, ‘Seek first the Kingdom of God,’ I yet 
expect the performance of that promise, ‘to receive in this life an 
hundred fold, and in the world to come life everlasting.’ I have a 
great deal of business yet in this world, without doing of which 
Heaven itself would be uneasy to me: but when that is done I know no 
business I have with the dead, and therefore do depend that I shall 
not go hence by ‘returning to the dust,’ which is the sentence of that 
law from which I claim a discharge: but that I shall make my exit by 
way of translation, which I claim as a dignity belonging to that 
Degree in the Science of Eternal Life of which I profess myself a 
graduate. And if after this I die like other men, I declare myself to 
die of no religion. Let no one be concerned for me as a desperade: I 
am not going to renounce the other part of our religion, but to add 
another article of faith to it, without which I cannot understand the 
rest. And if it be possible to believe too much in God, I desire to be 
guilty of that sin.

“Behold ye despisers and wonder! Wonder to see Paradise lost, with the 
Tree of Life in the midst of it! Wonder and curse at Adam for an 
original fool, who in the length of one day never so much as thought 
to put forth his hand, for him and us, and pull and eat and live for 
ever! Wonder at and damn ourselves for fools of the last impression, 
that in the space of seventeen hundred years never so much as thought 
to put forth our hands, every one for himself, and seal and execute 
the Covenant of Eternal Life.

“To be even with the World at once, he that wonders at my faith, I 
wonder at his unbelief. The Blood of Christ hath an incident quality 
which cleaneth from sin; and he that understands this never makes any 
use of his own personal virtues as an argument for his own salvation, 
lest God should overbalance against him with his sins; nor doth God 
ever object a man's sins to him in the day of his faith; therefore 
till I am more sinful than He was holy, my sins are no objection 
against my faith. And because in Him is all my hope, I care not 
(almost) what I am myself.

“It is observed in the mathematics that the practice doth not always 
answer the theory; and that therefore there is no dependence upon the 
mere notions of it as they lie in the brain, without putting them 
together in the form of a tool or instrument, to see how all things 
fit. This made me distrust my own thoughts till I had put them 
together, to see how they would look in the form of an argument. But 
in doing this, I thank God I have found every joint and article to 
come into its own place and fall in with and suit one another to a 
hair's breadth, beyond my expectation: or else I could not have had 
the confidence to produce this as an engine in Divinity to convey man 
from Earth to Heaven. I am not making myself wings to fly to Heaven 
with, but only making myself ready for that conveyance which shall be 
sent me. And if I should lose myself in this untrodden path of Life, I 
can still find out the beaten Road of Death blindfold. If therefore, 
after this, ‘I go the way of my fathers’ I freely waive that haughty 
epitaph, _magnis tamen excidit ausis_, and instead knock under table 
that Satan hath beguiled me to play the fool with myself, in which 
however he hath shewed his masterpiece; for I defy the whole clan of 
Hell to produce another lye so like to truth as this is. But if I act 
my motto, and go the way of an Eagle in the air, then have I played a 
trump upon Death and shewn myself a match for the Devil.

“And while I am thus fighting with Death and Hell, it looks a little 
like foul play for Flesh and Blood to interpose themselves against me. 
But if any one hath spite enough to give me a polt, thinking to 
falsify my faith by taking away my life, I only desire them first to 
qualify themselves for my executioners, by taking this short test in 
their own consciences: whoever thinks that any thing herein contained 
is not fair dealing with God and Man, let him—or her—burn this book, 
and cast a stone at him that wrote it.”




