CHAPTER CLXXXII.

AN IMPROVEMENT IN THE FORM OF THE HUMAN LEG SUGGESTED BY A PHYSICIAN. 
THE DOCTOR'S CURE OF A BROKEN SHIN AND INVENTION OF A SHIN-SHIELD.

_Res fisci est, ubicunque natat._ Whatsoever swims upon any water, 
belongs to this exchequer.

JEREMY TAYLOR. _Preface to the Duct. Dub._


Some Dr. Moreton is said to have advanced this extraordinary opinion 
in a treatise upon the beauty of the human structure, that had the 
calf of the leg been providentially set before, instead of being 
preposterously placed behind, it would have been evidently better, for 
as much as the shin-bone could not then have been so easily broken.

I have no better authority for this than a magazine extract. But there 
have been men of science silly enough to entertain opinions quite as 
absurd, and presumptuous enough to think themselves wiser than their 
Maker.

Supposing the said Dr. Moreton has not been unfairly dealt with in 
this statement, it would have been a most appropriate reward for his 
sagacity if some one of the thousand and one wonder-working Saints of 
the Pope's Calendar had reversed his own calves for him, placed them 
in front, conformably to his own notion of the fitness of things, and 
then left him to regulate their motions as well as he could. The 
_Gastrocnemius_ and the _Solæus_ would have found themselves in a new 
and curious relation to the _Rectus femoris_ and the two _Vasti_, and 
the anatomical reformer would have learnt feelingly to understand the 
term of antagonizing muscles in a manner peculiar to himself.

The use to which this notable philosopher would have made the calf of 
the leg serve, reminds me of a circumstance that occurred in our 
friend's practice. An old man hard upon threescore and ten, broke his 
shin one day by stumbling over a chair; and although a hale person who 
seemed likely to attain a great age by virtue of a vigorous 
constitution, which had never been impaired through ill habits or 
excesses of any kind, the hurt that had been thought little of at 
first became so serious in its consequences, that a mortification was 
feared. Daniel Dove was not one of those practitioners who would let a 
patient die under their superintendence _secundum artem_, rather than 
incur the risque of being censured for trying in desperate cases any 
method not in  the regular course of practise: and recollecting what 
he had heard when a boy, that a man whose leg and life were in danger 
from just such an accident, had been saved by applying yeast to the 
wound, he tried the application. The dangerous symptoms were presently 
removed by it; a kindly process was induced, the wound healed, and the 
man became whole again.

Dove was then a young man; and so many years have elapsed since old 
Joseph Todhunter was gathered to his fathers, that it would now 
require an antiquarian's patience to make out the letters of his name 
upon his mouldering headstone. All remembrance of him (except among 
his descendants, if any there now be) will doubtless have past away, 
unless he should be recollected in Doncaster by the means which Dr. 
Dove devised for securing him against another such accident.

The Doctor knew that the same remedy was not to be relied on a second 
time, when there would be less ability left in the system to second 
its effect. He knew that in old age the tendency of Nature is to 
dissolution, and that accidents which are trifling in youth, or middle 
age, become fatal at a time when Death is ready to enter at any breach 
and Life to steal out through the first flaw in its poor crazy 
tenement. So, having warned Todhunter of this, and told him that he 
was likely to enjoy many years of life, if he kept a whole skin on his 
shins, he persuaded him to wear spatterdashes, quilted in front and 
protected there with whalebone, charging him to look upon them as the 
most necessary part of his clothing, and to let them be the last 
things which he doffed at night, and the first which he donn'd in the 
morning.

The old man followed this advice; lived to the great age of 
eighty-five, enjoyed his faculties to the last; and then died so 
easily, that it might truly be said he fell asleep.

My friend loved to talk of this case; for Joseph Todhunter had borne 
so excellent a character through life, and was so cheerful and so 
happy, as well as so venerable an old man, that it was a satisfaction 
for the Doctor to think he had been the means of prolonging his days.




CHAPTER CLXXXIII.

VIEWS OF OLD AGE, MONTAGNE, DANIEL CORNEILLE, LANGUET, PASQUIER, DR. 
JOHNSON, LORD CHESTERFIELD, ST. EVREMOND.

                What is age
  But the holy place of life, the chapel of ease
  For all men's wearied miseries?

MASSINGER.


Montagne takes an uncomfortable view of old age. _Il me semble_, he 
says, _qu'en la vieillesse, nos ames sont subjectes à des maladies et 
imperfections plus importunes qu'en la jeunesse. Je le disois estant 
jeune, lors on me donnoit de mon menton par le nez; je le dis encore à 
cette heure, que mon poil gris me donne le credit. Nous appellons 
sagesse la difficulté de nos humeurs, le desgoust des choses 
presentes: mais à la verité, nous ne quittons pas tant les vices, 
comme nous les changeons; et, à mon opinion, en pis. Outre une sotte 
et caduque fierté, un babil ennuyeux, ces humeures espineuses et 
inassociables, et la superstition, et un soin ridicule des richesses, 
lors que l'usage en est perdu, j'y trouve plus d'envie, d'injustice, 
et de malignité. Elle nous attache plus de rides en l'esprit qu'au 
visage: et ne se void point d'ames ou fort rares, qui en vieillissant 
ne sentent l'aigre, et le moisi._

Take this extract, my worthy friends who are not skilled in French, or 
know no more of it than a Governess may have taught you,—in the 
English of John Florio, Reader of the Italian tongue unto the 
Sovereign Majesty of Anna, Queen of England, Scotland, &c. and one of 
the gentlemen of her Royal privy chamber, the same Florio whom some 
commentators upon very insufficient grounds, have supposed to have 
been designed by Shakespere in the Holofernes of Love's Labour's Lost.

“Methinks our souls in age are subject unto more importunate diseases 
and imperfections than they are in youth. I said so being young, when 
my beardless chin was upbraided me, and I say it again, now that my 
gray beard gives me authority. We entitle wisdom, the frowardness of 
our humours, and the distaste of present things; but in truth we 
abandon not vices so much as we change them; and in mine opinion for 
the worse. Besides a silly and ruinous pride, cumbersome tattle, 
wayward and unsociable humours, superstition, and a ridiculous carking 
for wealth, when the use of it is well nigh lost. I find the more 
envy, injustice and malignity in it. It sets more wrinkles in our 
minds than in our foreheads, nor are there any spirits, or very rare 
ones, which in growing old taste not sourly and mustily.”

In the same spirit, recollecting perhaps this very passage of the 
delightful old Gascon, one of our own poets says,

        Old age doth give by too long space,
  Our souls as many wrinkles as our face;

and the same thing, no doubt in imitation of Montagne has been said by 
Corneille in a poem of thanks addressed to Louis XIV., when that King 
had ordered some of his plays to be represented during the winter of 
1685, though he had ceased to be a popular writer,

  _Je vieillis, ou du moins, ils se le persuadent;
   Pour bien écrire encor j'ai trop long tems écrit,
   Et les rides du front passent jusqu' à l'esprit._

The opinion proceeded not in the poet Daniel from perverted 
philosophy, or sourness of natural disposition, for all his affections 
were kindly, and he was a tender-hearted, wise, good man. But he wrote 
this in the evening of his days, when he had

                out lived the date
  Of former grace, acceptance and delight,

when,

        those bright stars from whence
  He had his light, were set for evermore;

and when he complained that years had done to him

                              this wrong,
  To make him write too much, and live too long;

so that this comfortless opinion may be ascribed in him rather to a 
dejected state of mind, than to a clear untroubled judgement. But 
Hubert Languet must have written more from observation and reflection 
than from feeling, when he said in one of his letters to Sir Philip 
Sidney, “you are mistaken if you believe that men are made better by 
age; for it is very rarely so. They become indeed more cautious, and 
learn to conceal their faults and their evil inclinations; so that if 
you have known any old man in whom you think some probity were still 
remaining, be assured that he must have been excellently virtuous in 
his youth.” _Erras si credis homines fieri ætate meliores; id nam est 
rarissimum. Fiunt quidem cautiores, et vitia animi, ac pravos suos 
affectus occultare discunt: quod si quem senem novisti in quo aliquid 
probitatis superesse judices, crede eum in adolescentiâ fuisse 
optimum._

Languet spoke of its effects upon others. Old Estienne Pasquier in 
that uncomfortable portion of his _Jeux Poëtiques_ which he entitles 
_Vieillesse Rechignée_ writes as a self-observer, and his picture is 
not more favourable.

  _Je ne nourry dans moy qu'une humeur noire,
   Chagrin, fascheux, melancholic, hagard,
   Grongneux, despit, presomptueux, langard,
   Je fay l'amour au bon vin et au boire._

But the bottle seems not to have put him in good humour either with 
others or himself.

  _Tout la monde me put; je vy de telle sort,
     Que je ne fay meshuy que tousser et cracher,
     Que de fascher autruy, et d'autruy me fascher;
   Je ne supporte nul, et nul ne me supporte.
   Un mal de corps je sens, un mal d'esprit je porte;
     Foible de corps je veux, mais je ne puis marcher;
     Foible de esprit je n'oze à mon argent toucher,
   Voilà les beaux effects que la vieillesse apporte!
     O combien est heureux celuy qui, de ses ans
     Jeune, ne passe point la fleur de son printans,
   Ou celuy qui venu s'en retourne aussi vite!
     Non: je m'abuze; ainçois ces maux ce sont appas
     Qui me feront un jour trouver doux mon trespas,
   Quand il plaira a Dieu que ce monde je quitte._

   The miserable life I lead is such,
     That now the world loathes me and I loathe it;
     What do I do all day but cough and spit,
   Annoying others, and annoyed as much!
   My limbs no longer serve me, and the wealth
     Which I have heap'd, I want the will to spend.
   So mind and body both are out of health,
     Behold the blessings that on age attend!
   Happy whose fate is not to overlive
   The joys which youth, and only youth can give,
     But in his prime is taken, happy he!
   Alas, that thought is of an erring heart,
   These evils make me willing to depart
     When it shall please the Lord to summon me.

The Rustic, in Hammerlein's curious dialogues _de Nobilitate et 
Rusticitate_, describes his old age in colours as dark as Pasquier's; 
_plenus dierum_, he says, _ymmo senex valde, id est, octogenarius, et 
senio confractus, et heri et nudiustercius, ymmo plerisque 
revolutionibus annorum temporibus, corporis statera recurvatus, 
singulto, tussito, sterto, ossito, sternuto, balbutio, catharizo, 
mussico, paraleso, gargariso, cretico, tremo, sudo, titillo, digitis 
sæpe geliso, et insuper (quod deterius est) cor meum affligitur, et 
caput excutitur, languet spiritus, fetet anhelitus, caligant oculi et 
facillant_[1] _articuli, nares confluunt, crines defluunt, tremunt 
tactus et deperit actus, dentes putrescunt et aures surdescunt; de 
facili ad iram provocor, difficili revocor, cito credo, tarde 
discedo._

[Footnote 1: _Facillant_ is here evidently the same as _vacillant_. 
For the real meaning of _facillo_ the reader is referred to Du Cange 
in v. or to Martinii Lexicon.]

The effects of age are described in language not less characteristic 
by the Conte Baldessar Castiglione in his Cortegiano. He is explaining 
wherefore the old man is always “_laudator temporis acti_;” and thus 
he accounts for the universal propensity;—_gli anni fuggendo se ne 
portan seco molte commodità, e tra l' altre levano dal sangue gran 
parte de gli spiriti vitali; onde la complession si muta, e divengon 
debili gli organi, per i quali l' anima opera le sue virtù. Però de i 
cori nostri in quel tempo, come allo autunno le fogli de gli arbori, 
caggiono i soavi fiori di contento; e nel loco de i sereni et chiari 
pensieri, entra la nubilosa e turbida tristitia di mille calamità 
compagnata, di modo che non solamente il corpo, ma l' animo anchora è 
infermo; ne de i passati piaceri reserva altro che una tenace memoria, 
e la imagine di quel caro tempo della tenera eta, nella quale quando 
ci troviamo, ci pare che sempre il cielo, e la terra, e ogni cosa 
faccia festa, e rida intorno à gli occhi nostri e nel pensiero, come 
in un delitioso et vago giardino, fiorisca la dolce primavera d' 
allegrezza: onde forse saria utile, quando gia nella fredda stagione 
comincia il sole della nostra vita, spogliandoci de quei piaceri, 
andarsene verso l' occaso, perdere insieme con essi anchor la lor 
memoria, e trovar_ (_come disse Temistocle_) _un' arte, che a scordar 
insegnasse; perche tanto sono fallaci i sensi del corpo nostro, che 
spesso ingannano anchora il giudicio della mente. Però parmi che i 
vecchi siano alla condition di quelli, che partendosi dal porto, 
tengon gli occhi in terra, e par loro che la nave stia ferma, e la 
riva si parta; e pur è il contrario; che il porto, e medesimamente il 
tempo, e i piaceri restano nel suo stato, e noi con la nave della 
mortalità fuggendo n' andiamo, l' un dopo l' altro, per quel 
procelloso mare che ogni cosa assorbe et devora; ne mai piu pigliar 
terra ci è concesso; anzi sempre da contrarii venti combattuti, al 
fine in qualche scoglio la nave rompemo._

Take this passage, gentle reader, as Master Thomas Hoby has translated 
it to my hand.

“Years wearing away carry also with them many commodities, and among 
others take away from the blood a great part of the lively spirits; 
that altereth the complection, and the instruments wax feeble whereby 
the soul worketh his effects. Therefore the sweet flowers of delight 
vade[2] away in that season out of our hearts, as the leaves fall from 
the trees after harvest; and instead of open and clear thoughts, there 
entereth cloudy and troublous heaviness, accompanied with a thousand 
heart griefs: so that not only the blood, but the mind is also feeble, 
neither of the former pleasures retaineth it any thing else but a fast 
memory, and the print of the beloved time of tender age, which when we 
have upon us, the heaven, the earth and each thing to our seeming 
rejoiceth and laugheth always about our eyes, and in thought (as in a 
savoury and pleasant garden) flourisheth the sweet spring time of 
mirth: So that peradventure, it were not unprofitable when now, in the 
cold season, the sun of our life, taking away from us our delights 
beginneth to draw toward the West, to lose therewithall the 
mindfulness of them, and to find out as Themistocles saith, an art to 
teach us to forget; for the senses of our body are so deceivable, that 
they beguile many times also the judgement of the mind. Therefore, 
methinks, old men be like unto them that sailing in a vessel out of an 
haven, behold the ground with their eyes, and the vessel to their 
seeming standeth still, and the shore goeth; and yet is it clean 
contrary, for the haven, and likewise the time and pleasures, continue 
still in their estate, and we with the vessel of mortality flying 
away, go one after another through the tempestuous sea that swalloweth 
up and devoureth all things, neither is it granted us at any time to 
come on shore again; but, always beaten with contrary winds, at the 
end we break our vessel at some rock.”

[Footnote 2: ‘Vade’ is no doubt the true word here. The double sense 
of it,—that is, to _fade_, or to _go away_,—may be seen in Todd's 
Johnson and in Nares' Glossary. Neither of them quote the following 
lines from the Earl of Surrey's Poems. They occur in his Ecclesiastes.

  We, that live on the earth, draw toward our decay,
  Our children fill our place awhile, and then they vade away.

And again,

  New fancies daily spring, which vade, returning mo.]

“Why Sir,” said Dr. Johnson, “a man grows better humoured as he grows 
older. He improves by experience. When young he thinks himself of 
great consequence, and every thing of importance. As he advances in 
life, he learns to think himself of no consequence, and little things 
of little importance, and so he becomes more patient and better 
pleased.” This was the observation of a wise and good man, who felt in 
himself as he grew old, the effect of Christian principles upon a kind 
heart and a vigorous understanding. One of a very different stamp came 
to the same conclusion before him; _Crescit ætate pulchritudo 
animorum_, says, Antonio Perez, _quantum minuitur eorundem corporum 
venustas._

One more of these dark pictures. “The heart” says Lord Chesterfield, 
“never grows better by age; I fear rather worse; always harder. A 
young liar will be an old one; and a young knave will only be a 
greater knave as he grows older. But should a bad young heart, 
accompanied with a good head, (which by the way, very seldom is the 
case) really reform, in a more advanced age, from a consciousness of 
its folly, as well as of its guilt; such a conversion would only be 
thought prudential and political, but never sincere.”

It is remarkable that Johnson, though, as has just been seen, he felt 
in himself and saw in other good men, that the natural effect of time 
was to sear away asperities of character

  Till the smooth temper of their age should be
  Like the high leaves upon the Holly Tree,

yet he expressed an opinion closely agreeing with this of Lord 
Chesterfield. “A man, he said, commonly grew wicked as he grew older, 
at least he but changed the vices of youth, head-strong passion and 
wild temerity, for treacherous caution and desire to circumvent.” 
These he can only have meant of wicked men. But what follows seems to 
imply a mournful conviction that the tendency of society is to foster 
our evil propensities and counteract our better ones: “I am always, he 
said, on the young people's side when there is a dispute between them 
and the old ones; for you have at least a charm for virtue, till age 
has withered its very root.” Alas, this is true of the irreligious and 
worldly-minded, and it is generally true because they composed the 
majority of our corrupt contemporaries.

But Johnson knew that good men became better as they grew older, 
because his philosophy was that of the Gospel. Something of a 
philosopher Lord Chesterfield was, and had he lived in the days of 
Trajan or Hadrian, might have done honour to the school of Epicurus. 
But if he had not in the pride of his poor philosophy shut both his 
understanding and his heart against the truths of revealed religion, 
in how different a light would the evening of his life have closed.

_Une raison essentielle_, says the Epicurean Saint Evremond, _qui nous 
oblige à nous retirer quand nous sommes vieux, c'est qu'il faut 
prevenir le ridicule où l'age nous fait tomber presque toujours._ And 
in another place he says, _certes le plus honnéte-homme dont personne 
n'a besoin, a de la peine a s'exempter du ridicule en vieillissant._ 
This was the opinion of a courtier, a sensualist, and a Frenchman.

I cannot more appositely conclude this chapter than by a quotation 
ascribed, whether truly or not, to St. Bernard. _Maledictum caput 
canum et cor vanum, caput tremulum et cor emulum, canities in vertice 
et pernicies in mente: facies rugosa et lingua nugosa, cutis sicca et 
fides ficta; visus caligans et caritas claudicans; labium pendens et 
dens detrahens; virtus debilis et vita flebilis; dies uberes et 
fructus steriles, amici multi, et actus stulti._




