CHAPTER CLXXVI.

THE DOCTOR DISCOVERS THE ANTIQUITY OF THE NAME OF DOVE FROM PERUSING 
JACOB BRYANT'S ANALYSIS OF ANCIENT MYTHOLOGY.—CHRISTOPHER AND 
FERDINAND COLUMBUS.—SOMETHING ABOUT PIGEON-PIE, AND THE REASON WHY THE 
DOCTOR WAS INCLINED TO THINK FAVOURABLY OF THE SAMARITANS.

An I take the humour of a thing once, I am like your tailor's needle; 
I go through.

BEN JONSON.


Dove also was a name which abounded with mystical significations, and 
which derived peculiar significance from its mysterious conjunction 
with Daniel. Had it not been said “Be ye wise as serpents and harmless 
as Doves?” To him the text was personally applicable in both parts. 
Dove he was by birth. Daniel by baptism or the second birth, and 
Daniel was Dan, and Dan shall be a serpent by the way.

But who can express his delight when in perusing Jacob Bryant's 
Analysis of ancient Mythology, he found that so many of the most 
illustrious personages of antiquity proved to be Doves, when their 
names were truly interpreted or properly understood! That erudite 
interpreter of hidden things taught him that the name of the Dove was 
Iön and Iönah, whence in immediate descent the Oän and Oannes of 
Berosus and Abydenus, and in longer but lineal deduction Æneas, 
Hannes, Hanno, Ionah, _Ιοάννης_, Johannes, Janus, Eanus among the 
elder Romans, Giovanni among the later Italians, Juan, Joam, Jean, 
John, Jan, Iwain, Ivan, Ewan, Owen, Evan, Hans, Ann, Hannah, Nannette, 
Jane, Jeannette, Jeanne, Joanna and Joan; all who had ever borne these 
names, or any name derived from the same radical, as doubtless many 
there were in those languages of which he had no knowledge, nor any 
means of acquiring it, being virtually Doves. Did not Bryant expressly 
say that the prophet Jonah was probably so named as a messenger of the 
Deity, the mystic Dove having been from the days of Jonah regarded as 
a sacred symbol among all nations where any remembrance of the 
destruction and renovation of mankind was preserved! It followed 
therefore that the prophet Jonah, Hannibal, St. John, Owen Glendower, 
Joan of Arc, Queen Anne, Miss Hannah More, and Sir Watkin Williams 
Wynn, were all of them his namesakes, to pretermit or pass over Pope 
Joan, Little John, and Jack the Giantkiller. And this followed, not 
like the derivation of King Pepin from _Ὅσπερ_, by a jump in the 
process, such as that from _διάπερ_ to napkin; nor like the equally 
well known identification of a Pigeon with an Eel Pye, in the logic of 
which the Doctor would have detected a fallacy, but in lawful 
etymology, and according to the strict interpretation of words. If he 
looked for the names through the thinner disguise of language there 
was Semiramis who having been fed by Doves, was named after them. What 
was Zurita the greatest historian of Arragon, but a young stock Dove? 
What were the three Palominos so properly enumerated in the 
Bibliotheca of Nicolas Antonio. Pedro the Benedictine in whose sermons 
a more than ordinary breathing of the spirit might not unreasonably be 
expected from his name; Francisco who translated into Castillian the 
Psychomachia of the Christian poet Aurelius Prudentius, and Diego the 
Prior of Xodar, whose _Liber de mutatione aeris, in quo assidua, et 
mirabilis mutationis temporum historia, cum suis causis, enarratur_, 
he so greatly regretted that he had never been able to procure: what 
were these Palominos? what but Doves?—Father Colombiere who framed the 
service for the Heart of Jesus which was now so fashionable in 
Catholic countries, was clearly of the Dove genus. St. Columba was a 
decided Dove; three there were certainly, the Senonian, the Cordovan 
and the Cornish: and there is reason to believe that there was a 
fourth also, a female Dove, who held a high rank in St. Ursula's great 
army of virgins. Columbo the Anatomist, deservedly eminent as one of 
those who by their researches led the way for Harvey, he also was a 
Dove. Lastly,—and the Doctor in fine taste always reserved the 
greatest glory of the Dove name, for the conclusion of his 
discourse—lastly, there was Christopher Columbus, whom he used to call 
his famous namesake. And he never failed to commend Ferdinand Columbus 
for the wisdom and piety with which he had commented upon the mystery 
of the name, to remark that his father had conveyed the grace of the 
Holy Ghost to the New World, shewing to the people who knew him not 
who was God's beloved son, as the Holy Ghost had done in the figure of 
a Dove at the baptism of St. John, and bearing like Noah's Dove the 
Olive Branch, and the Oil of Baptism over the waters of the ocean.

And what would our onomatologist have said if he had learned to read 
these words in that curious book of the &c. family, the Oriental 
fragments of Major Edward Moor: “In respect to St. Columba, or Colomb, 
and other superstitious names and things in close relationship, I 
shall have in another place something to say. I shall try to connect 
_Col-omb_, with Kal-O'm,—those infinitely mysterious words of Hindu 
mythology: and with these, divers _Mythé_, converging into or 
diverging from O'M—A U M,—the Irish _Ogham_,—I A M,—_Amen, 
ΙΛω_,—Il-Kolmkill, &c. &c. &c.” Surely had the onomatologist lived to 
read this passage, he would forthwith have opened and corresponded 
with the benevolent and erudite etcæterarist of Bealings.

These things were said in his deeper moods. In the days of courtship 
he had said in song that Venus's car was drawn by Doves, regretting at 
the time that an allusion which came with such peculiar felicity from 
him, should appear to common readers to mean nothing more than what 
rhymers from time immemorial had said before him. After marriage he 
often called Mrs. Dove his Turtle, and in his playful humours when the 
gracefulness of youth had gradually been superseded by a certain 
rotundity of form, he sometimes named her _φάττα_ his ring-dove. Then 
he would regret that she had not proved a stock-dove,—and if she 
frowned at him, or looked grave, she was his pouting pigeon.

One inconvenience however Mrs. Dove felt from his reverence for the 
name. He never suffered a pigeon-pie at his table. And when he read 
that the Samaritans were reproached with retaining a trace of Assyrian 
superstition because they held it unlawful to eat this bird, he was 
from that time inclined to think favourably of the schismatics of 
Mount Gerizim.




