CHAPTER CXCIV.

A MUSIC LESSON FROM MASTER THOMAS MACE TO BE PLAYED BY LADY FAIR:—A 
STORY, THAN WHICH THERE IS NONE PRETTIER IN THE HISTORY OF MUSIC.

  What shall I say? Or shall I say no more?
  I must go on! I'm brim-full, running o'er.
  But yet I'll hold, because I judge ye wise;
  And few words unto such may well suffice.
  But much—much more than this I could declare;
  Yet for some certain reasons I'll forbear.
  But less than this I could not say; because,
  If saying less, I should neglect my cause,
  For 'tis the Doctor's cause I plead so strong for,
  And 'tis his cause compleated that I long for,
  And 'tis true doctrine certainly I preach,
  And 'tis that doctrine every priest should teach.

THOMAS MACE, TO ALL DIVINE READERS.


O Lady fair, before we say,

  Now cease my lute; this is the last
  Labour that thou and I shall waste,
  And ended is that we begun;
  My lute be still, for I have done:[1]

before we say this, O Lady fair, play I pray you the following lesson 
by good Master Mace. It will put you in tune for the story “not 
impertinent” concerning it, which he thought fit to relate, although, 
he said, many might chuse to smile at it. You may thank Sir John 
Hawkins for having rendered it from tablature into the characters of 
musical notation.

[Illustration: music score.]

[Footnote 1: SIR THOMAS WYAT.]

“This Lesson,” says Master Mace, “I call my Mistress, and I shall not 
think it impertinent to detain you here a little longer than ordinary 
in speaking something of it, the occasion of it, and why I give it 
that name. And I doubt not, but the relation I shall give may conduce 
to your advantage in several respects, but chiefly in respect of 
Invention.

“You must first know, That it is a lesson, though old; yet I never 
knew it disrelished by any, nor is there any one lesson in this Book 
of that age, as it is; yet I do esteem it (in its kind) with the best 
Lesson in the Book, for several good reasons, which I shall here set 
down.

“It is, this very winter, just forty years since I made it—and yet it 
is new, because all like it,—and then when I was past being a suitor 
to my best beloved, dearest, and sweetest living Mistress, but not 
married, yet contriving the best, and readiest way towards it; And 
thus it was,

“That very night, in which I was thus agitated in my mind concerning 
her, my living Mistress,—she being in Yorkshire, and myself at 
Cambridge, close shut up in my chamber, still and quiet, about ten or 
eleven o'clock at night, musing and writing letters to her, her 
Mother, and some other Friends, in summing up and determining the 
whole matter concerning our Marriage. You may conceive I might have 
very intent thoughts all that time, and might meet with some 
difficulties, for as yet I had not gained her Mother's consent,—so 
that in my writings I was sometimes put to my studyings. At which 
times, my Lute lying upon my table, I sometimes took it up, and walked 
about my chamber, letting my fancy drive which way it would, (for I 
studied nothing, at that time, as to Music,)—yet my secret genius or 
fancy, prompted my fingers, do what I could, into this very humour. So 
that every time I walked, and took up my Lute, in the interim, betwixt 
writing and studying, this Air would needs offer itself unto me 
continually; insomuch that, at the last, (liking it well, and lest it 
should be lost,) I took paper and set it down, taking no further 
notice of it at that time. But afterwards it passed abroad for a very 
pleasant and delightful Air amongst all. Yet I gave it no name till a 
long time after, nor taking more notice of it, in any particular kind, 
than of any other my Composures of that nature.

“But after I was married, and had brought my wife home to Cambridge, 
it so fell out that one rainy morning I stay'd within, and in my 
chamber my wife and I were all alone, she intent upon her needlework, 
and I playing upon my Lute, at the table by her. She sat very still 
and quiet, listening to all I played without a word a long time, till 
at last, I hapned to play this lesson; which, so soon as I had once 
played, she earnestly desired me to play it again, ‘for,’ said she, 
‘That shall be called my Lesson.’

“From which words, so spoken, with emphasis and accent, it presently 
came into my remembrance, the time when, and the occasion of its being 
produced, and I returned her this answer, viz. That it may very 
properly be called your Lesson, for when I composed it you were wholly 
in my fancy, and the chief object and ruler of my thoughts; telling 
her how, and when it was made. And therefore, ever after, I thus 
called it MY MISTRESS, and most of my scholars since call it MRS. 
MACE, to this day.

“Thus I have detained you (I hope not too long,) with this short 
relation; nor should I have been so seemingly vain, as to have 
inserted it, but that I have an intended purpose by it, to give some 
advantage to the reader, and doubt not but to do it to those who will 
rightly consider what here I shall further set down concerning it.

“Now in reference to the occasion of it, &c. It is worth taking 
notice, That there are times and particular seasons, in which the 
ablest Master of his Art, shall not be able to command his Invention 
or produce things so to his content or liking, as he shall at other 
times; but he shall be (as it were,) stupid, dull, and shut up, as to 
any neat, spruce, or curious Invention.

“But again, at other times, he will have Inventions come flowing in 
upon him, with so much ease and freedom, that his greatest trouble 
will be to retain, remember, or set them down, in good order.

“Yet more particularly, as to the occasion of this Lesson, I would 
have you take notice, that as it was at such a time, when I was wholly 
and intimately possessed with the true and perfect idea of my living 
Mistress, who was at that time, lovely, fair, comely, sweet, debonair, 
uniformly-neat, and every way compleat; how could, possibly, my fancy 
run upon anything at that time, but upon the very simile, form, or 
likeness, of the same substantial thing.

“And that this Lesson doth represent, and shadow forth such a true 
relation, as here I have made, I desire you to take notice of it, in 
every particular; which I assure myself, may be of benefit to any, who 
shall observe it well.

“First, therefore, observe the two first Bars of it, which will give 
you the Fugue; which Fugue is maintained quite through the whole 
lesson.

“Secondly, observe the Form, and Shape of the whole lesson, which 
consists of two uniform, and equal strains; both strains having the 
same number of Bars.

“Thirdly, observe the humour of it; which you may perceive (by the 
marks and directions) is not common.

“These three terms, or things, ought to be considered in all 
compositions, and performances of this nature, viz. Ayres, or the 
like.

“The Fugue is lively, ayrey, neat, curious, and sweet, like my 
Mistress.

“The Form is uniform, comely, substantial, grave, and lovely, like my 
Mistress.

“The Humour is singularly spruce, amiable, pleasant, obliging, and 
innocent, like my Mistress.

“This relation to some may seem odd, strange, humorous, and 
impertinent; but to others (I presume) it may be intelligible and 
useful; in that I know, by good experience, that in Music, all these 
significations, (and vastly many more,) may, by an experienced and 
understanding Artist, be clearly, and most significantly expressed; 
yea, even as by language itself, if not much more effectually. And 
also, in that I know, that as a person is affected or disposed in his 
temper, or humour, by reason of what object of his mind soever, he 
shall at that time produce matter, (if he be put to it,) answerable to 
that temper, disposition, or humour, in which he is.

“Therefore I would give this as a caveat, or caution, to any, who do 
attempt to exercise their fancies in such matters of Invention, that 
they observe times, and seasons, and never force themselves to 
anything, when they perceive an indisposition; but wait for a fitter, 
and more hopeful season, for what comes most compleatly, comes most 
familiarly, naturally, and easily, without pumping for, as we use to 
say.

“Strive therefore to be in a good, cheerful, and pleasant humour 
always when you would compose or invent, and then, such will your 
productions be; or, to say better, chuse for your time of Study, and 
Invention, if you may, that time wherein you are so disposed, as I 
have declared. And doubtless, as it is in the study and productions of 
Music, so must it needs be in all other studies, where the use and 
exercise of fancy is requirable.

“I will therefore, take a little more pains than ordinary, to give 
such directions, as you shall no ways wrong, or injure my Mistress, 
but do her all the right you can, according to her true deserts.

“First, therefore, observe to play _soft_, and _loud_, as you see it 
marked quite through the Lesson.

“Secondly, use _that Grace_, which I call the _Sting_, where you see 
it set, and the _Spinger_ after it.

“And then, in the last four strains, observe the _Slides_, and 
_Slurs_, and you cannot fail to know my _Mistress's Humour_, provided 
you keep _true time_, which you must be extremely careful to do in all 
lessons: FOR TIME IS THE ONE HALF OF MUSIC.

“And now, I hope I shall not be very hard put to it, to obtain my 
pardon for all this trouble I have thus put you to, in the exercise of 
your patience; especially from those, who are so ingenious and 
good-natured, as to prize, and value, such singular and choice 
endowments, as I have here made mention of in so absolute and compleat 
a subject.”

MY MISTRESS OR MRS. MACE.

[Illustration: musical score.]

THOMAS MACE.

There is no prettier story in the history of Music than this; and what 
a loving, loveable, happy creature must he have been who could thus in 
his old age have related it!




