CHAPTER CLXXIV.

THE DOCTOR INDULGES IN THE WAY OF FANTASTIC AND TYPICAL SPECULATION ON 
HIS OWN NAME, AND ON THE POWERS OF THE LETTER D., WHETHER AS REGARDS 
DEGREES AND DISTINCTIONS, GODS AND DEMIGODS, PRINCES AND KINGS, 
PHILOSOPHERS, GENERALS OR TRAVELLERS.

My mouth's no dictionary; it only serves as the needful interpreter of 
my heart.

QUARLES.


There were few things in the way of fantastic and typical speculation 
which delighted the Doctor so much as the contemplation of his own 
name:

  DANIEL DOVE.

D. D. it was upon his linen and his seal. D. D. he used to say, 
designated the highest degree in the highest of the sciences, and he 
was D. D. not by the forms of a University, but by Nature or Destiny.

Besides, he maintained, that the letter D was the richest, the most 
powerful, the most fortunate letter in the alphabet, and contained in 
its form and origin more mysteries than any other.

It was a potential letter under which all powerful things were 
arranged; Dictators, Despots, Dynasties, Diplomas, Doctors, 
Dominations; Deeds and Donations and Decrees; Dioptrics and Dynamics; 
Dialectics and Demonstrations.

Diaphragm, Diathesis, Diet, Digestion, Disorder, Disease, Diagnosis; 
Diabrosis, Diaphragmatis, Diaphthora, Desudation, Defluxions, 
Dejection, Delirium, Delivery, Dyspepsy, Dysmenorrhœa, Dysorœxia, 
Dyspnœa, Dysuria, Dentition, Dropsy, Diabetes, Diarrhœa, Dysentery; 
then passing almost in unconscious but beautiful order from diseases 
to remedies and their consequences, he proceeded with Dispensation, 
Diluents, Discutients, Deobstruents, Demulcents, Detergents, 
Desiccatives, Depurantia, Diaphoretics, Dietetics, Diachylon, 
Diacodium, Diagrydium, Deligations, Decoctions, Doses, Draughts, 
Drops, Dressings, Drastics, Dissolution, Dissection. What indeed he 
would say, should we do in our profession without the Ds?

Or what would the Divines do without it—Danger, Despair, Death, Devil, 
Doomsday, Damnation; look to the brighter side, there is the Doxology, 
and you ascend to _Διὸς_, and Deus and Deity.

What would become of the farmer without Dung, or of the Musician 
without the Diapason? Think also of Duets in music and Doublets at 
Backgammon. And the soldier's toast in the old Play, “the two Ds Drink 
and your Duty.”[1]

[Footnote 1: Shirley, Honoria and Mammon.]

Look at the moral evils which are ranged under its banners, 
Dissentions, Discord, Duels, Dissimulation, Deceit, Dissipation, 
Demands, Debts, Damages, Divorce, Distress, Drunkenness, 
Dram-drinking, Distraction, Destruction.

When the Poet would describe things mournful and calamitous, whither 
doth he go for epithets of alliterative significance? where but to the 
letter D? there he hath Dim, Dusky, Drear, Dark, Damp, Dank, Dismal, 
Doleful, Dolorous, Disastrous, Dreadful, Desperate, Deplorable.

Would we sum up the virtues and praise of a perfect Woman, how should 
we do it but by saying that she was devout in religion, decorous in 
conduct, domestic in habits, dextrous in business, dutiful as a wife, 
diligent as a mother, discreet as a mistress, in manner debonnaire, in 
mind delicate, in person delicious, in disposition docile, in all 
things delightful. Then he would smile at Mrs. Dove and say, I love my 
love with a D. and her name is Deborah.

For degrees and distinctions, omitting those which have before been 
incidentally enumerated, are there not Dauphin and Dey, Dux, Duke, 
Doge. Dominus, with its derivatives Don, the Dom of the French and 
Portugueze, and the Dan of our own early language; Dame, Damsel, and 
Damoisel in the untranslated masculine. Deacons and Deans, those of 
the Christian Church, and of Madagascar whose title the French write 
Dian, and we should write Deen not to confound them with the 
dignitaries of our Establishment. Druids and Dervises, Dryads, 
Demigods and Divinities.

Regard the Mappa Mundi. You have Denmark and Dalecarlia, Dalmatia and 
the fertile Delta, Damascus, Delos, Delphi and Dodona, the Isles of 
Domingo and Dominica, Dublin and Durham and Dorchester and Dumfries, 
the shires of Devon, Dorset and Derby and the adjoining Bishoprick. 
Dantzic and Drontheim, the Dutchy of Deux Ponts; Delhi the seat of the 
Great Mogul, and that great city yet unspoiled, which

            Geryon's sons
  Call El Dorado,—

the Lakes Dembea and Derwentwater, the rivers Dwina, Danube and 
Delawar, Duero or Douro call it which you will, the Doubs and all the 
Dons, and our own wizard Dee,—which may be said to belong wholly to 
this letter, the vowels being rather for appearance than use.

Think also, he would say of the worthies, heroes and sages in D. 
David, and his namesake of Wales. Diogenes, Dædalus, Diomede, and 
Queen Dido, Decebalus the Dacian King, Deucalion, Datames the Carian 
whom Nepos hath immortalized, and Marshal Daun who so often kept the 
King of Prussia in check, and sometimes defeated him. Nay if I speak 
of men eminent for the rank which they held, or for their exploits in 
war, might I not name the Kings of Persia who bore the name of Darius, 
Demaratus of Sparta, whom the author of Leonidas hath well pourtrayed 
as retaining in exile a reverential feeling toward the country which 
had wronged him: and Deodatus, a name assumed by, or given to Lewis 
the 14th, the greatest actor of greatness that ever existed. Dion who 
lives for ever in the page of Plutarch; the Demetrii, the Roman Decii, 
Diocletian, and Devereux Earl of Essex, he by whom Cadiz was taken, 
and whose execution occasioned the death of the repentant Elizabeth by 
whom it was decreed. If of those who have triumphed upon the ocean 
shall we not find Dragat the far-famed corsair, and our own more 
famous and more dreadful Drake. Dandolo the Doge who at the age of  
[2] triumphed over the perfidious Greeks, and was first chosen by the 
victorious Latins to be the Emperor of Constantinople: Doria of whom 
the Genoese still boast. Davis who has left his name so near the 
Arctic Pole. Dampier of all travellers the most observant and most 
faithful.[3] Diaz who first attained that Stormy Cape, to which from 
his time the happier name of Good Hope hath been given; and Van Diemen 
the Dutchman. If we look to the learned, are there not Duns Scotus and 
Descartes. Madame Dacier and her husband. Damo the not-degenerate 
daughter of Pythagoras, and though a woman renowned for secrecy and 
silence; Dante and Davila, Dugdale and Dupin; Demosthenes, Doctor Dee, 
(he also like the wizard stream all our own) and Bishop Duppa to whom 
the _Εικὼν Βασιλικὴ_ whether truly or not, hath been ascribed: Sir 
Kenelm Digby by whom it hath been proved that Dogs make syllogisms; 
and Daniel Defoe. Here the Doctor always pronounced the christian name 
with peculiar emphasis, and here I think it necessary to stop, that 
the Reader may take breath.

[Footnote 2: The blank is in the original MS. Quære, _ninety-five_?]

[Footnote 3: “One of the most faithful, as well as exact and excellent 
of all voyage writers.” _Vindiciæ Eccl. Angl._ p. 115. Unhappily 
Southey's wish to continue this work was not responded to. The 
continuation would have proved invaluable now; for who, so well as he, 
knew the wiles of the Romish Church, and the subtilties of the 
Jesuit?]




