CHAPTER CXCVIII.

PETER HOPKINS' VIEWS OF ASTROLOGY. HIS SKILL IN CHIROMANCY, PALMISTRY, 
OR MANUAL DIVINATION WISELY TEMPERED.—SPANISH PROVERB AND SONNET BY 
BARTOLOME LEONARDO DE ARGENSOLA.—TIPPOO SULTAN.—MAHOMETAN 
SUPERSTITION.—W. Y. PLAYTES' PROSPECTUS FOR THE HORN BOOK FOR THE 
REMEMBRANCE OF THE SIGNS OF SALVATION.

  _Seguite dunque con la mente lieta,
   Seguite, Monsignor, che com' io dico,
   Presto presto sarete in su la meta._

LUDOVICO DOLCE.


Peter Hopkins had believed in astrology when he studied it in early 
life with his friend Grey; his faith in it had been overthrown by 
observation and reflection, and the unperceived influence of the 
opinions of the learned and scientific public; but there was more 
latent doubt in his incredulity than had ever lurked at the root of 
his belief.

He was not less skilled in the kindred, though more trivial art of 
Chiromancy, Palmistry, or Manual Divination, for the divine origin of 
which a verse in the Book of Job was adduced as scriptural proof; “He 
sealeth up the hand of every man, that all men may know his work.” The 
text appears more chiromantical in the Vulgate. _Qui in manu omnium 
hominum signa posuit._ Who has placed signs in the hand of all men. 
The uses of the science were represented to be such, as to justify 
this opinion of its origination: “For hereby,” says Fabian Withers, 
“thou shalt perceive and see the secret works of Nature, how aptly and 
necessarily she hath compounded and knit each member with other, 
giving unto the hand, as unto a table, certain signs and tokens 
whereby to discern and know the inward motions and affections of the 
mind and heart, with the inward state of the whole body; as also our 
inclination and aptness to all our external actions and doings. For 
what more profitable thing may be supposed or thought, than when a man 
in himself may foresee and know his proper and fatal accidents, and 
thereby to embrace and follow that which is good, and to avoid and 
eschew the evils which are imminent unto him, for the better 
understanding and knowledge thereof?”

But cautioning his readers against the error of those who perverted 
their belief in palmistry and astrology, and used it as a refuge or 
sanctuary for all their evil deeds, “we ought,” said he, “to know and 
understand that the Stars do not provoke or force us to anything, but 
only make us apt and prone; and being so disposed, allure as it were, 
and draw us forward to our natural inclination. In the which if we 
follow the rule of Reason, taking it to be our only guide and 
governor, they lose all the force, power and effect which they by any 
means may have in and upon us: contrariwise, if we give ourselves over 
to follow our own sensuality and natural dispositions, they work even 
the same effect on us—that they do in brute beasts.”

Farther he admonishes all “which should read or take any fruit of his 
small treatise, to use such moderation in perusing of the same that 
they do not by and by take in hand to give judgement either of their 
own, or other men's estates or nativities, without diligent 
circumspection and taking heed; weighing and considering how many ways 
a man may be deceived; as by the providence and discretion of the 
person on whom he gives judgement, also, the dispensation of God, and 
our fallible and uncertain speculation.” “Wherefore,” he continues, 
“let all men in seeking hereby to foresee their own fortune, take heed 
that by the promise of good, they be not elate, or high-minded, giving 
themselves over to otiosity or idleness, and trusting altogether to 
the Natural Influences; neither yet by any signs or tokens of 
adversity, to be dejected or cast down, but to take and weigh all 
things with such equality and moderation, directing their state of 
life and living to all perfectness and goodness, that they may be 
ready to embrace and follow all that which is good and profitable; and 
also not only to eschew and avoid, but to withstand and set at nought 
all evil and adverse fortune, whensoever it may happen unto them.”

Whoever studies the history of opinions, that is, of the aberrations, 
caprices and extravagancies of the human mind, may find some 
consolation in reflecting upon the practical morality which has been 
preached not only by men of the most erroneous faith, but even by 
fanatics, impostors and hypocrites, as if it were in the order of 
Providence that there should be no poison which had not also some 
medicinal virtue. The books of palmistry have been so worn by perusal 
that one in decent preservation is now among the rarities of 
literature; and it may be hoped that of the credulous numbers who have 
pored over them, many have derived more benefit from the wholesome 
lessons which were thus unexpectedly brought home to them, than they 
suffered detriment from giving ear to the profession of a fallacious 
art.

The lesson was so obvious that the Spaniards expressed it in one of 
their pithy proverbs, _es nuestra alma en nuestra palma._ The thought 
has been expanded into a sonnet by Bartolome Leonardo de Argensola, a 
poet whose strains of manly morality have not been exceeded in that 
language.

  _Fabio, pensar que el Padre soberano
     En esas rayas de la palma diestra
     (Que son arrugas de la piel) te muestra
   Los accidentes del discurso humano;
   Es beber con el vulgo el error vano
     De la ignorancia, su comun maestra.
     Bien te confieso, que la suerte nuestra,
   Mala, o buena, la puso en nuestra mano.
   Di, quién te estorvará el ser Rey, si vives
     Sin envidiar la suerte de los Reyes,
   Tan contento y pacifico en la tuya,
     Que estén ociosas para ti sus leyes;
   Y qualquier novedad que el Cielo influya,
     Como cosa ordinaria la recibes?_

   Fabius, to think that God hath interlined
     The human hand like some prophetic page,
   And in the wrinkles of the palm defined
     As in a map, our mortal pilgrimage,
   This is to follow, with the multitude
     Error and Ignorance, their common guides,
   Yet Heaven hath placed, for evil or for good,
     Our fate in our own hands, whate'er betides
   Being as we make it. Art thou not a king
     Thyself my friend, when envying not the lot
   Of thrones, ambition hath for thee no sting,
     Laws are to thee as they existed not,
   And in thy harmless station no event
     Can shake the calm of its assured content.

“Nature” says a Cheirologist, “was a careful workman in the creation 
of the human body. She hath set in the hand of man certain signs and 
tokens of the heart, brain and liver, because in them it is that the 
life of man chiefly consists, but she hath not done so of the eyes, 
ears, mouth, hands and feet, because those parts of the body seem 
rather to be made for a comeliness or beauty, than for any necessity.” 
What he meant to say was that any accident which threatened the three 
vital parts was betokened in the lines of the palm, but that the same 
fashioning was not necessary in relation to parts which might be 
injured without inducing the loss of life. Therefore every man's palm 
has in it the lines relating to the three noble parts, the more minute 
lines are only found on subjects of finer texture, and if they 
originally existed in husbandmen and others whose hands are rendered 
callous by their employments, they are effaced.

It was only cheirologically speaking that he disparaged what sailors 
in their emphatic language so truly call our precious eyes and limbs, 
not that he estimated them like Tippoo Sultan, who in one of his 
letters says, that if people persisted in visiting a certain person 
who was under his displeasure, “their ears and noses should be 
dispensed with.” This strange tyrant wrote odes in praise of himself, 
and describes the effect of his just government to be such, that in 
the security of his protection “the deer of the forest made their 
pillow of the lion and the tyger, and their mattress of the leopard 
and the panther.”

Tippoo did not consider ears and noses to be superfluities when in 
that wanton wickedness which seldom fails to accompany the possession 
of irresponsible power he spoke of dispensing with them. But in one 
instance arms and legs were regarded as worse than superfluous. Some 
years ago a man was exhibited who was born without either, and in that 
condition had found a woman base enough to marry him. Having got some 
money together, she one day set this wretched creature upon a 
chimney-piece, from whence he could not move, and went off with 
another man, stripping him of every thing that she could carry away. 
The first words he uttered, when some one came into the room and took 
him down, were an imprecation upon those people who had legs and arms, 
because, he said they were always in mischief!

The Mahommedans believe that every man's fate is written on his 
forehead, but that it can be read by those only whose eyes have been 
opened. The Brahmins say that the sutures of the skull describe in 
like manner the owner's destined fortune, but neither can this 
mysterious writing be seen by any one during his life, nor decyphered 
after his death. Both these notions are mere fancies which afford a 
foundation for nothing worse than fable. Something more extraordinary 
has been excogitated by W. Y. Playtes, Lecturer upon the Signs of the 
light of the Understanding. He announces to mankind that the prints of 
the nails of the Cross which our Lord shewed Thomas, are printed in 
the roots of the nails of the hands and feet of every man that is born 
into the world, for witnesses, and for leading us to believe in the 
truth of all the signs, and graven images and pictures that are seen 
in the Heavenly Looking Glass of Reflection, in the Sun and the Moon 
and the Stars. This Theosophist has published a short Prospectus of 
his intended work entitled the Horn Book for the remembrance of the 
Signs of Salvation, which Horn Book is (should subscriptions be 
forthcoming) to be published in one hundred and forty-four numbers, 
forming twelve octavo volumes of six hundred pages each, with fifty 
plates, maps and tables, and 365,000 marginal references,—being one 
thousand for every day in the year. Wonder not reader at the extent of 
this projected work; for, says the author, “the Cow of the Church of 
Truth giveth abundance of milk, for the Babes of Knowledge.” But for 
palmistry there was a plausible theory which made it applicable to the 
purposes of fraud.

Among the odd persons with whom Peter Hopkins had become acquainted in 
the course of his earlier pursuits, was a sincere student of the 
occult sciences, who, being a more refined and curious artist, 
whenever he cast the nativity of any one, took an impression from the 
palm of the hand, as from an engraved plate, or block. He had thus a 
fac-simile of what he wanted. According to Sir Thomas Browne, the 
variety in the lines is so great, that there is almost no strict 
conformity. Bewick in one of his works has in this manner printed his 
own thumb. There are French deeds of the 15th century which are signed 
by the imprint of five fingers dipt in ink, underwritten _Ce est la 
griffe de monseigneur._[1]

[Footnote 1: The Reader, who is curious in such matters, may turn to 
Ames and Herbert, (Dibdin, ii. 380.) for the hands in Holt's Lac 
Puerorum, emprynted at London by Wynkyn de Worde.]

Hopkins himself did not retain any lurking inclination to believe in 
this art. You could know without it, he said, whether a person were 
open-handed, or close-fisted, and this was a more useful knowledge 
than palmistry could give us. But the Doctor sometimes made use of it 
to amuse children, and gave them at the same time playful admonition, 
and wholesome encouragement.




