CHAPTER CLXXXIV.

FURTHER OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING OLD AGE. BISHOP REYNOLDS. OPINION OF 
THE DOCTOR CONCERNING BEASTS AND MEN. M. DE CUSTINE. THE WORLD IS TOO 
MUCH WITH US. WORDSWORTH. SIR WALTER RALEIGH.

In these reflections, which are of a serious, and somewhat of a 
melancholy cast, it is best to indulge; because it is always of use to 
be serious, and not unprofitable sometimes to be melancholy.

FREEMAN'S SERMONS.


“As usurers,” says Bishop Reynolds, “before the whole debt is paid, do 
fetch away some good parts of it for the loan, so before the debt of 
death be paid by the whole body, old age doth by little and little, 
take away sometimes one sense sometimes another, this year one limb, 
the next another; and causeth a man as it were to die daily. No one 
can dispel the clouds and sorrows of old age, but Christ who is the 
sun of righteousness and the bright morning star.”

Yet our Lord and Saviour hath not left those who are in darkness and 
the shadow of death, without the light of a heavenly hope at their 
departure, if their ways have not wilfully been evil,—if they have 
done their duty according to that law of nature which is written in 
the heart of man. It is the pride of presumptuous wisdom (itself the 
worst of follies) that has robbed the natural man of his consolation 
in old age, and of his hope in death, and exacts the forfeit of that 
hope from the infidel as the consequence and punishment of his sin. 
Thus it was in heathen times, as it now is in countries that are 
called christian. When Cicero speaks of those things which depend upon 
opinion, he says, _hujusmodi sunt probabilia; impiis apud inferos 
pœnas esse præparatas; eos, qui philosophiæ dent operam, non arbitrari 
Deos esse._ Hence it appears he regarded it as equally probable that 
there was an account to be rendered after death; and that those who 
professed philosophy would disbelieve this as a vulgar delusion, live 
therefore without religion, and die without hope, like the beasts that 
perish!

“_If_ they perish,” the Doctor, used always reverently to say when he 
talked upon this subject. Oh Reader, it would have done you good as it 
has done me, if you had heard him speak upon it, in his own beautiful 
old age! “_If_ they perish,” he would say. “That the beasts die 
without hope we may conclude; death being to them like falling asleep, 
an act of which the mind is not cognizant! But that they live without 
religion, he would not say,—that they might not have some sense of it 
according to their kind; nor that all things animate, and seemingly 
inanimate did not actually praise the Lord, as they are called upon to 
do by the Psalmist, and in the _Benedicite_!”

It is a pious fancy of the good old lexicographist Adam Littleton that 
our Lord took up his first lodging in a stable amongst the cattle, as 
if he had come to be the Saviour of them as well as of men; being by 
one perfect oblation of himself, to put an end to all other 
sacrifices, as well as to take away sins. This, he adds the Psalmist 
fears not to affirm speaking of God's mercy. “Thou savest,” says he, 
“both man and beast.”

The text may lead us further than Adam Littleton's interpretation.

“_Qu'on ne me parle plus de_ NATURE MORTE, says M. de Custine, in his 
youth and enthusiasm, writing from Mont-Auvert; _on sent ici que la 
Divinité est partout, et que les pierres sont pénétrées comme 
nous-mêmes d'une puissance créatrice! Quand on me dit que les rochers 
sont insensibles, je crois entendre un enfant soutenir que l'aiguille 
d'une montre ne marche pas, parce qu'il ne la voit pas se mouvoir._”

Do not, said our Philosopher, when he threw out a thought like this, 
do not ask me how this can be! I guess at every thing, and can account 
for nothing. It is more comprehensible to me that stocks and stones 
should have a sense of devotion, than that men should be without it. I 
could much more easily persuade myself that the birds in the air, and 
the beasts in the field have souls to be saved, than I can believe 
that very many of my fellow bipeds have any more soul than, as some of 
our divines have said, serves to keep their bodies from putrefaction. 
“God forgive me, worm that I am! for the sinful thought of which I am 
too often conscious,—that of the greater part of the human race, the 
souls are not worth saving!”—I have not forgotten the look which 
accompanied these words, and the tone in which he uttered them, 
dropping his voice toward the close.

We must of necessity, said he, become better or worse as we advance in 
years. Unless we endeavour to spiritualize ourselves, and supplicate 
in this endeavour for that Grace which is never withheld when it is 
sincerely and earnestly sought, age bodilizes us more and more, and 
the older we grow the more we are embruted and debased: so manifestly 
is the awful text verified which warns us that “unto every one which 
hath shall be given, and from him that hath not, even that he hath 
shall be taken away from him.” In some the soul seems gradually to be 
absorbed and extinguished in its crust of clay; in others as if it 
purified and sublimed the vehicle to which it was united. _Viget 
animus, et gaudet non multum sibi esse cum corpore; magnam oneris 
partem sui posuit._[1] Nothing therefore is more beautiful than a wise 
and religious old age; nothing so pitiable as the latter stages of 
mortal existence—when the World and the Flesh, and that false 
philosophy which is of the Devil, have secured the victory for the 
Grave!

[Footnote 1: SENECA.]

“He that hath led a holy life,” says one of our old Bishops, “is like 
a man which hath travelled over a beautiful valley, and being on the 
top of a hill, turneth about with delight, to take a view of it 
again.” The retrospect is delightful, and perhaps it is even more 
grateful if his journey has been by a rough and difficult way. But 
whatever may have been his fortune on the road, the Pilgrim who has 
reached the Delectable Mountains looks back with thankfulness and 
forward with delight.

And wherefore is it not always thus? Wherefore, but because as 
Wordsworth has said,

  The World is too much with us, late and soon
  Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers.

“Though our own eyes,” says Sir Walter Raleigh, “do every where behold 
the sudden and resistless assaults of Death, and Nature assureth us by 
never failing experience, and Reason by infallible demonstration, that 
our times upon the earth have neither certainty nor durability, that 
our bodies are but the anvils of pain and diseases, and our minds the 
hives of unnumbered cares, sorrows and passions; and that when we are 
most glorified, we are but those painted posts against which Envy and 
Fortune direct their darts; yet such is the true unhappiness of our 
condition, and the dark ignorance which covereth the eyes of our 
understanding, that we only prize, pamper, and exalt this vassal and 
slave of death, and forget altogether, or only remember at our 
cast-away leisure, the imprisoned immortal Soul, which can neither die 
with the reprobate, nor perish with the mortal parts of virtuous men; 
seeing God's justice in the one, and his goodness in the other, is 
exercised for evermore, as the everliving subjects of his reward and 
punishment. But when is it that we examine this great account? Never, 
while we have one vanity left us to spend! We plead for titles till 
our breath fail us; dig for riches whilst our strength enableth us; 
exercise malice while we can revenge; and then when time hath beaten 
from us both youth, pleasure and health, and that Nature itself hateth 
the house of Old Age, we remember with Job that ‘we must go the way 
from whence we shall not return, and that our bed is made ready for us 
in the dark.’ And then I say, looking over-late into the bottom of our 
conscience, which Pleasure and Ambition had locked up from us all our 
lives, we behold therein the fearful images of our actions past, and 
withal this terrible inscription that ‘God will bring every work into 
judgement that man hath done under the Sun.’

“But what examples have ever moved us? what persuasions reformed us? 
or what threatenings made us afraid? We behold other mens tragedies 
played before us; we hear what is promised and threatened; but the 
world's bright glory hath put out the eyes of our minds; and these 
betraying lights, with which we only see, do neither look up towards 
termless joys, nor down towards endless sorrows, till we neither know, 
nor can look for anything else at the world's hands.—But let us not 
flatter our immortal Souls herein! For to neglect God all our lives, 
and know that we neglect Him; to offend God voluntarily, and know that 
we offend Him, casting our hopes on the peace which we trust to make 
at parting, is no other than a rebellious presumption, and that which 
is the worst of all, even a contemptuous laughing to scorn, and 
deriding of God, his laws and precepts. _Frustrà sperant qui sic de 
misericordiâ Dei sibi blandiuntur;_ they hope in vain, saith Bernard, 
which in this sort flatter themselves with God's mercy.”




