CHAPTER CXCII.

MORE OF THE DOCTOR'S PHILOSOPHY, WHICH WILL AND WILL NOT BE LIKED BY 
THE LADIES, AND SOME OF THE AUTHOR'S WHICH WILL AND WILL NOT BY THE 
GENTLEMEN. THE READER IS INTRODUCED TO COUNT CASTIGLIONE, AND TO SIR 
JOHN CHEKE.

              _Ou tend l'auteur à cette heure?
   Que fait-il? Revient-il? Va-t-il? Ou s'il demeure?_

                        L'AUTEUR.

  _Non, je ne reviens pas, car je n'ai pas été;
   Je ne vais pas aussi, car je suis arrété;
   Et ne demeure point, car, tout de ce pas même
   Je pretens m'en aller._

MOLIERE.


The passage with which the preceding Chapter is concluded, is 
extracted from Sterne's Sermons, one of those discourses in which he 
tried the experiment of adapting the style of Tristram Shandy to the 
pulpit;—an experiment which proved as unsuccessful as it deserved to 
be. Gray however thought these sermons were in the style which in his 
opinion was most proper for the pulpit, and that they showed “a very 
strong imagination and a sensible head. But you see him, he adds, 
often tottering on the verge of laughter, and ready to throw his 
perriwig in the face of his audience.”

The extract which has been set before the reader is one of those 
passages which bear out Gray's judgement; it is of a good kind, and in 
its kind so good, that I would not weaken its effect, by inserting too 
near it the following Epigram from an old Magazine, addressed to a 
lady passionately fond of cards.

  Thou, whom at length incessant gaming dubs,
  Thrice honourable title! Queen of Clubs,
  Say what vast joys each winning card imparts,
  And that, too justly, called the King of Hearts.
  Say, when you mourn of cash and jewels spoil'd,
  May not the thief be Knave of Diamonds stil'd?
  One friend, howe'er, when deep remorse invades,
  Awaits thee Lady; 'tis the Ace of Spades!

It has been seen that the Doctor looked upon the love of gaming as a 
propensity given us to counteract that indolence which if not thus 
amused, would breed for itself both real and imaginary evils. And 
dancing he thought was just as useful in counteracting the factitious 
inactivity of women in their youth, as cards are for occupying the 
vacuity of their minds at a later period. Of the three 
semi-intellectual propensities, as he called them which men are born 
with, those for hunting and gaming are useful only in proportion, as 
the earth is uncultivated, and those by whom it is inhabited. In a 
well ordered society there would be no gamblers, and the Nimrods of 
such a society, must like the heroes in Tongataboo, be contented with 
no higher sport than rat-catching: but dancing will still retain its 
uses. It will always be the most graceful exercise for children at an 
age when all that they do is graceful; and it will always be that 
exercise which can best be regulated for them, without danger of their 
exerting themselves too much, or continuing in it too long. And for 
young women in a certain rank, or rather region of life,—the temperate 
zone of society,—those who are above the necessity of labour, and 
below the station in which they have the command of carriages and 
horses,—that is for the great majority of the middle class;—it is the 
only exercise which can animate them to such animal exertion as may 
suffice

  “To give the blood its natural spring and play.”[1]

[Footnote 1: SOUTHEY.]

Mr. Coleridge says (in his Table Talk) “that the fondness for dancing 
in English women is the reaction of their reserved manners: it is the 
only way in which they can throw themselves forth in natural liberty.” 
But the women are not more fond of it in this country, than they are 
in France and Spain. There can be no healthier pastime for them, (as 
certainly there is none so exhilarating, and exercise unless it be 
exhilarating is rarely healthful)—provided,—and upon this the Doctor 
always insisted,—provided it be neither carried on in hot rooms, nor 
prolonged to late hours. They order these things, he used to say, 
better in France; they order them better indeed anywhere than in 
England, and there was a time when they were ordered better among 
ourselves.

“The youth of this city,” says the honest old chronicler and historian 
of the metropolis his native place, “used on holidays, after evening 
prayers, to exercise their basters and bucklers, at their master's 
doors; and the maidens, one of them playing on a timbrel, to dance for 
garlands hanged athwart the streets, which open pastimes in my youth, 
being now suppressed, worser practises within doors are to be feared.”

Every one who is conversant with the Middle Ages, and with the 
literature of the reigns of Elizabeth, James and Charles I. must have 
perceived in how much kindlier relations the different classes of 
society existed toward each other in those days than they have since 
done. The very word independence had hardly found a place in the 
English language, or was known only as denoting a mischievous heresy. 
It is indeed, as one of our most thoughtful contemporaries has well 
said, an “unscriptural word,”—and “when applied to man, it directly 
contradicts the first and supreme laws of our nature; the very essence 
of which is universal dependence upon God, and universal 
interdependence on one another.”

The Great Rebellion dislocated the relations which had for some 
centuries thus happily subsisted; and the money getting system which 
has long been the moving principle of British society, has, aided by 
other injurious influences, effectually prevented the recovery which 
time, and the sense of mutual interest, and mutual duty, might 
otherwise have brought about. It was one characteristic of those old 
times, which in this respect deserve to be called good, that the 
different classes participated in the enjoyments of each other. There 
were the religious spectacles, which, instead of being reformed and 
rendered eminently useful as they might have been, were destroyed by 
the brutal spirit of puritanism. There were the Church festivals, till 
that same odious spirit endeavoured to separate, and has gone far 
toward separating, all festivity from religion. There were tournaments 
and city pageants at which all ranks were brought together: they are 
now brought together only upon the race-course. Christmas Mummers have 
long ceased to be heard of. The Morris dancers have all but 
disappeared even in the remotest parts of the kingdom. I know not 
whether a May-pole is now to be seen. What between manufactures and 
methodism England is no longer the merry England which it was once a 
happiness and an honour to call our country. Akenside's words “To the 
Country Gentlemen of England,” may be well remembered.

    And yet full oft your anxious tongues complain
    That lawless tumult prompts the rustic throng;
    That the rude Village-inmates now disdain
    Those homely ties which rul'd their fathers long.
    Alas, your fathers did by other arts
    Draw those kind ties around their simple hearts.
    And led in other paths their ductile will;
    By succour, faithful counsel, courteous cheer,
    Won them their ancient manners to revere,
  To prize their countries peace and heaven's due rites fulfil.

My friend saw enough of this change in its progress to excite in him 
many melancholy forebodings in the latter part of his life. He knew 
how much local attachment was strengthened by the recollection of 
youthful sports and old customs; and he well understood how little men 
can be expected to love their country, who have no particular 
affection for any part of it. Holidays he knew attached people to the 
Church, which enjoined their observance; but he very much doubted 
whether Sunday Schools would have the same effect.

In Beaumont and Fletcher's Play of the Prophetess, the countrymen 
discourse concerning the abdicated Emperor who has come to reside 
among them. One says to the other,

  Do you think this great man will continue here?

the answer is

  Continue here? what else? he has bought the great farm;
  A great man[2] with a great inheritance
  And all the ground about it, all the woods too
  And stock'd it like an Emperor. Now all our sports again
  And all our merry gambols, our May Ladies,
  Our evening dances on the green, our songs,
  Our holiday good cheer; our bagpipes now, boys,
  Shall make the wanton lasses skip again,
  Our sheep-shearings and all our knacks.

[Footnote 2: Southey has inserted a query here. “Qy Manor or Mansion.” 
It is usually printed as in the text.—See Act v. Sc. iii.]

It is said however in the _Cortegiano, che non saria conveniente che 
un gentilhuomo andasse ad honorare con la persona sua una festa di 
contado, dove i spettatori, et i compagni fussero gente ignobile._ 
What follows is curious to the history of manners. _Disse allhor' il 
S. Gasparo Pallavicino, nel paese nostro di Lombardia non s'hanno 
queste rispetti: anzi molti gentil'huomini giovani trovansi, che le 
feste ballano tuttol' di nel Sole co i villani, et con esti giocano a 
lanciar la barra, lottare, correre et saltare; et io non credo che sia 
male, perche ivi non si fa paragone della nobiltà, ma della forza, e 
destrezza, nelle quai cose spesso gli huomini di villa non vaglion 
meno che i nobili; et par che que quella domestichezza habbia in se 
una certa liberalità amabile._—An objection is made to this; _Quel 
ballar nel Sole, rispose M. Federico, a me non piace per modo alcuno; 
ne so che guadagno vi si trovi. Ma chi vuol pur lottar, correr et 
saltar co i villani, dee (al parer mio) farlo in modo di provarsi, et 
(come si suol dir) per gentilezza, non per contender con loro, et dee 
l'huomo esser quasi sicuro di vincere; altramente non vi si metta; 
perche sta troppo male, et troppo è brutta cosa, et fuor de la dignità 
vedere un gentilhuomo vinto da un villano, et massimamente alla lotta; 
però credo io che sia ben astenersi almano in presentia di molti, 
perche il guadagno nel vincere è pochissimo, et la perdita nell' esse 
vinto è grandissima._

That is, in the old version of Master Thomas Hoby; “it were not meet 
that a gentleman should be present in person, and a doer in such a 
matter in the country, where the lookers-on and the doers were of a 
base sort. Then said the Lord Gasper Pallavicino, in our country of 
Lombardy these matters are not passed upon; for you shall see there 
young gentlemen, upon the holydays, come dance all the day long in the 
sun with them of the country, and pass the time with them in casting 
the bar, in wrestling, running and leaping. And I believe it is not 
ill done; for no comparison is there made of nobleness of birth, but 
of force and slight; in which things many times the men of the country 
are not a whit inferior to gentlemen: and it seemeth this familiar 
conversation containeth in it a certain lovely freeness.” “The dancing 
in the sun,” answered Sir Frederick, “can I in no case away withal; 
and I cannot see what a man shall gain by it. But whoso will wrestle, 
run and leap with men of the country, ought, in my judgement, to do it 
after a sort; to prove himself, and (as they are wont to say) for 
courtesy, not to try mastery with them. And a man ought (in a manner) 
to be assured to get the upper hand, else let him not meddle withal; 
for it is too ill a sight, and too foul a matter, and without 
estimation, to see a gentleman overcome by a carter, and especially in 
wrestling. Therefore I believe it is well done to abstain from it, at 
the leastwise in the presence of many; if he be overcome, his gain is 
small, and his loss in being overcome very great.”

This translation is remarkable for having a Sonnet, or more correctly 
speaking, a quatorzain by Sackville prefixed to it, and at the end of 
the volume a letter of Sir John Cheke's to the translator, curious for 
its peculiar spelling, and for the opinion expressed in it that our 
language ought as much as possible to be kept pure and unmixed.

“I have taken sum pain,” he says, “at your request, cheflie in your 
preface; not in the reading of it, for that was pleasaunt unto me, 
boath for the roundnes of your saienges and welspeakinges of the saam, 
but in changing certein wordes which might verie wel be let aloan, but 
that I am verie curious in mi freendes matters, not to determijn, but 
to debaat what is best. Whearin I seek not the bestnes haplie bi 
truth, but bi mijn own phansie and sheo of goodnes.

“I am of this opinion that our own tung shold be written cleane and 
pure, unmixt and unmangeled with borowing of other tunges; wherein if 
we take not heed bi tijm, ever borowing and never payeng, she shall be 
fain to keep her house as bankrupt. For then doth our tung naturallie 
and praiseablie utter her meaning, when she boroweth no conterfectness 
of other tunges to attire her self withall, but useth plainlie her own 
with such shift as nature, craft, experiens, and folowing of other 
excellent doth lead her unto; and if she went at ani tijm (as being 
unperfight she must) yet let her borow with suche bashfulnes, that it 
mai appear, that if either the mould of our own tung could serve us to 
fascion a woord of our own, or if the old denisoned wordes could 
content and ease this neede, we wold not boldly venture of unknoven 
wordes. This I say, not for reproof of you, who have scarslie and 
necessarily used, whear occasion serveth, a strange word so, as it 
seemeth to grow out of the matter and not to be sought for; but for 
mijn our defens, who might be counted overstraight a deemer of 
thinges, if I gave not thys accompt to you, my freend and wijs, of mi 
marring this your handiwork.

“But I am called awai. I prai you pardon mi shortnes; the rest of my 
saienges should be but praise and exhortacion in this your doinges, 
which at moar leisor I shold do better.

  From my house in Wood street

  the 16 of July 1557.

                      Yours assured

                             JOAN CHEEK.”

Sir John Cheke died about two months after the date of this letter: 
and Hoby's translation was not published till 1561, because “there 
were certain places in it, which of late years being misliked of some 
that had the perusing of it, the Author thought it much better to keep 
it in darkness a while, then to put it in light, imperfect, and in 
piecemeal, to serve the time.” The book itself had been put in the 
list of prohibited works, and it was not till 1576 that the Conte 
Camillo Castiglione, the author's son, obtained permission to amend 
the obnoxious passages and publish an expurgated edition.

It would have vexed Sir John if he had seen with how little care the 
printer, and his loving friend Master Hoby observed his system of 
orthography, in this letter. For he never used the final e unless when 
it is sounded, which he denoted then by doubling it; he rejected the 
y, wrote u when it was long, with a long stroke over it, doubled the 
other vowels when they were long, and threw out all letters that were 
not pronounced. No better system of the kind has been proposed, and 
many worse. Little good would have been done by its adoption, and much 
evil, if the translators of the Bible had been required to proceed 
upon his principle of using no words but such as were true English of 
Saxon original. His dislike of the translation for corrupting as he 
thought the language into vocables of foreign growth, made him begin 
to translate the New Testament in his own way. The Manuscript in his 
own hand, as far as it had proceeded, is still preserved at Bene't 
College,[3] and it shows that he found it impracticable to observe his 
own rule. But though as a precisian he would have cramped and 
impoverished the language, he has been praised for introducing a short 
and expressive style, avoiding long and intricate periods, and for 
bringing “fair and graceful writing into vogue;” he wrote an excellent 
hand himself, and it is said that all the best scholars in those times 
followed his example, “so that fair writing and good learning seemed 
to commence together.”

[Footnote 3: This has been since printed with a good Glossary by the 
Rev. James Goodwin, Fellow and Tutor of Corpus Christi Coll. 
Cambridge, and is very curious. All that remains is the Gospel 
according to St. Matthew. As an instance of Cheke's Englishisms I may 
refer to the rendering of _προσήλυτον_ in c. xxiij. _v._ 15, by 
_freschman_. Some little of the MS. is lost.—See Preface, p. 10.]

O Soul of Sir John Cheke, thou wouldst have led me out of my way, if 
that had been possible,—if my ubiety did not so nearly resemble 
ubiquity, that in Anywhereness and Everywhereness I know where I am, 
and can never be lost till I get out of Whereness itself into Nowhere.




