CHAPTER CXCV.

ANOTHER LESSON WITH THE STORY AND MANNER OF ITS PRODUCTION.

  _Οὐδεὶς ἐρεῖ ποθ᾽, ὡς ὑπόβλητον λόγον,
   ———ἔλεξας, ἀλλὰ τῆς σαυτῦ φρενός._

SOPHOCLES.


Master Mace has another lesson which he calls Hab-Nab; it “has neither 
fugue, nor very good form,” he says, “yet a humour, although none of 
the best;” and his “story of the manner and occasion of Hab-Nab's 
production,” affords a remarkable counterpart to that of his favourite 
lesson.

“View every bar in it,” he says, “and you will find not any one Bar 
like another, nor any affinity in the least kind betwixt strain and 
strain, yet the Air pleaseth some sort of people well enough; but for 
my own part, I never was pleased with it; yet because some liked it, I 
retained it. Nor can I tell how it came to pass that I thus made it, 
only I very well remember, the time, manner, and occasion of its 
production, (which was on a sudden,) without the least premeditation, 
or study, and merely accidentally; and, as we use to say, _ex 
tempore_, in the _tuning of a lute_.

“And the occasion, I conceive, might possibly contribute something 
towards it, which was this.

“I had, at that very instant, when I made it, an agitation in hand, 
viz. The stringing up, and tuning of a Lute, for a person of an 
ununiform, and inharmonical disposition, (as to Music,) yet in herself 
well proportioned, comely, and handsome enough, and ingenious for 
other things, but to Music very unapt, and learned it only to please 
her friends, who had a great desire she should be brought to it, if 
possible, but never could, to the least good purpose; so that at the 
last we both grew weary; _for there is no striving against such a 
stream_.

“I say, this occasion possibly might be the cause of this so 
inartificial a piece, in regard that that person, at that time, was 
the chief object of my mind and thoughts. I call it inartificial, 
because the chief observation (as to good performance,) is wholly 
wanting. Yet it is true Music, and has such a form and humour, as may 
pass, and give content to many. Yet I shall never advise any to make 
things thus by hab-nab,[1] without any design, as was this. And 
therefore I give it that name.”

[Footnote 1: _Hab-Nab_ is a good old English word, derived from the 
Anglo-Saxon. Skinner is correct enough. “Temerè, sine consilio _ab_ 
AS. _Habban_ Habere, _Nabban_, non Habere, addito scilicet _na_, non, 
cum apostropho.” Will-nill, i.e. Will ye, or will ye not, is a 
parallel form. Every one will recollect the lines of Hudibras, (Part 
ii. Canto iii.)

  With that he circles draws, and squares,
  With cyphers, astral characters:
  Then looks 'em o'er to understand 'em
  Although set down, _hab nab_, at random.

Dr. Grey illustrates the expression from Don Quixote, “Let every man,” 
says Sancho Pancha, “take care what he talks or how he writes of other 
men, and not set down _at random_, _hab-nab_, _higgledy-piggledy_, 
what comes into his noddle.” Part ii. c. iii.

On referring to the original it will be seen that the Translator has 
used three words for one. “Cada uno mire como habla o' como escriba de 
las presonas, y no ponga _à troche moche_ lo primero que le viene al 
magin.”]

“There are abundance of such things to be met with, and from the hands 
of some, who fain would pass for good composers; yet most of them may 
be traced, and upon examination, their things found only to be snaps 
and catches; which they,—having been long conversant in Music, and can 
command an Instrument, through great and long practice, some of them 
very well,—have taken here and there (hab-nab,) from several airs and 
things of other men's works, and put them handsomely together, which 
then pass for their own compositions.

“Yet I say, it is no affront, offence, or injury, to any Master, for 
another to take his Fugue, or Point to work upon, nor dishonour for 
any Artist so to do, provided he shew by his Workmanship, a different 
Discourse, Form, or Humour. But it is rather a credit and a repute for 
him so to do; for by his works he shall be known. It being observable, 
That great Master Composers may all along be as well known by their 
Compositions, or their own compositions known to be of them, as the 
great and learned writers may be known by their styles and works.”




CHAPTER CXCVI.

FURTHER ACCOUNT OF MASTER THOMAS MACE,—HIS LIGHT HEART, HIS SORROWS, 
AND HIS POVERTY,—POORLY, POOR MAN, HE LIVED, POORLY, POOR MAN, HE 
DIED—PHINEAS FLETCHER.

  The sweet and the sour,
  The nettle and the flower,
  The thorn and the rose,
  This garland compose.

SMALL GARLAND OF PIOUS AND GODLY SONGS.


Little more is known of Thomas Mace than can be gathered from his 
book. By a good portrait of him in his sixty-third year, it appears 
that he was born in 1613, and by his arms that he was of gentle blood. 
And as he had more subscribers to his book in York than in any other 
place, (Cambridge excepted) and the name of Henry Mace, Clerk, occurs 
among them, it may be presumed that he was a native of that city, or 
of that county. This is the more likely, because when he was 
established at Cambridge in his youth, his true love was in Yorkshire; 
and at that time his travels are likely to have been confined between 
the place of his birth and of his residence.

The price of his book was twelve shillings in sheets; and as he 
obtained about three hundred subscribers, he considered this fair 
encouragement to publish. But when the work was compleated and the 
accounts cast up, he discovered that “in regard of his unexpected 
great charge, besides his unconceivable care and pains to have it 
compleatly done, it could not be well afforded at that price, to 
render him any tolerable or reasonable requital.” He gave notice 
therefore, that after it should have been published three months, the 
price must be raised; “adding thus much, (as being bold to say) that 
there were several pages, yea several lessons in this book, (according 
to the ordinary value, esteem, or way of procuring such things) which 
were every one of them of more value than the price of the whole book 
by far.”

It might be truly said of him, that

  Poorly, poor man, he lived, poorly, poor man he died.[1]

for he never attained to any higher preferment than that of being “one 
of the Clerks of Trinity College.” But it may be doubted whether any 
of those who partook more largely of the endowment of that noble 
establishment, enjoyed so large a portion of real happiness. We find 
him in the sixty-third year of his age, and the fortieth of his 
marriage, not rich, not what the world calls fortunate, but a 
contented, cheerful old man; even though “Time had done to him this 
wrong” that it had half deprived him of his highest gratification, for 
he had become so deaf that he could not hear his own lute. When Homer 
says of his own blind bard that the Muse gave him good and evil, 
depriving him of his eyes, but giving him the gift of song, we 
understand the compensation;

  _Τὸν πέρι Μοῦσ᾽ ἐφίλησε, δίδου δ᾽ ἀγαθόν τε κακόν τε,
   Ὀφθαλμῶν μὲν ἄμερσε, δίδου δ᾽ ἡδεῖαν ἀοιδήν·_

but what can compensate a musician for the loss of hearing! There is 
no inward ear to be the bliss of solitude. He could not like 
Pythagoras _ἀῤῥήτῳ τινὶ καὶ δυσεπινοήτῳ θειότητι χρώμενος_, by an 
effort of ineffable and hardly conceivable divinity retire into the 
depths of his own being, and there listen to that heavenly harmony of 
the spheres which to him alone of all the human race was made audible; 
_ἑαυτῷ γὰρ μόνῳ τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς ἀπάντων συνετὰ καὶ ἐπήκοα τὰ κοσμικὰ 
φθέγματα ἐνόμιζεν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς τῆς φυσικῆς πηγῆς καὶ ῥίζῆς._[2] Master 
Mace had no such supernatural faculty, and no such opinion of himself. 
But the happy old man devises a means of overcoming to a certain 
degree his defect by inventing what he called a Dyphone, or Double 
Lute of fifty strings, a representation of which is given in his book, 
as “the one only instrument in being of that kind, then lately 
invented by himself, and made with his own hands in the year 1672.”

[Footnote 1: PHINEAS FLETCHER.]

[Footnote 2: IAMBLICHI Liber de Pythagoricâ, Vitâ c. xv.]

“The occasion of its production was my necessity; viz. my great defect 
in hearing; adjoined with my unsatiable love and desire after the 
Lute. It being an instrument so soft, and past my reach of hearing, I 
did imagine it was possible to contrive a louder Lute, than ever any 
yet had been; whereupon, after divers casts and contrivances, I 
pitched upon this order, the which has (in a great degree) answered my 
expectation, it being absolutely the lustiest or loudest Lute that I 
ever yet heard. For although I cannot hear the least twang of any 
other Lute, when I play upon it, yet I can hear this in a very good 
measure, yet not so loud as to distinguish every thing I play, without 
the help of my teeth, which when I lay close to the edge of it, 
(there, where the lace is fixed,) I hear all I play distinctly. So 
that it is to me (I thank God!) one of the principal refreshments and 
contentments I enjoy in this world. What it may prove to others in its 
use and service, (if any shall think fit to make the like,) I know 
not, but I conceive it may be very useful, because of the several 
conveniences and advantages it has of all other Lutes.”

This instrument was on the one side a theorbo, on the other lute, 
having on the former part twenty-six strings, twenty-four on the 
latter. It had a fuller, plumper and lustier sound, he said, than any 
other lute, because the concave was almost as long again, being hollow 
from neck to mouth. “This is one augmentation of sound; there is yet 
another; which is from the strange and wonderful secret, which lies in 
the nature of sympathy, in unities, or the uniting of harmonical 
sounds, the one always augmenting the other. For let two several 
instruments lie asunder at any reasonable distance, when you play upon 
one, the other shall sound, provided they be both exactly tuned in 
unisons to each other; otherwise not. This is known to all curious 
inspectors into such mysteries. If this therefore be true, it must 
needs be granted, that when the strings of these two twins, 
accordingly put on, are tuned in unities and set up to a stiff lusty 
pitch, they cannot but more augment and advantage one the other.”

Some allowances he begged for it, because it was a new-made instrument 
and could not yet speak so well as it would do, when it came to age 
and ripeness, though it already gave forth “a very free, brisk, 
trouling, plump and sweet sound,” and because it was made by a hand 
that never before attempted the making of any instrument. He concludes 
his description of it, with what he calls a Recreative Fancy: saying, 
“because it is my beloved darling, I seemed, like an old doting body, 
to be fond of it; so that when I finished it, I bedecked it with these 
five rhymes following, fairly written upon each belly.

“First, round the Theorboe knot, thus,

  I am of old, and of Great Britain's fame,
    Theorboe was my name.

Then next, about the French Lute knot, thus,

  I'm not so old; yet grave, and much acute;
    My name was the French lute.

Then from thence along the sides, from one knot to the other, thus,

  But since we are thus joined both in one,
    Henceforth our name shall be the Lute Dyphone.

Then again cross-wise under the Theorboe-knot, thus,

  Lo here a perfect emblem seen in me,
  Of England and of France, their unity;
  Likewise that year they did each other aid,
  I was contrived, and thus compleatly made.

viz. When they united both against the Dutch and beat them soundly, 
A.D. 1672.

“Then lastly, under the French Lute knot, thus,

  Long have we been divided, now made one,
  We sang in sevenths; now in full unison.
  In this firm union, long may we agree,
  No unison is like Lute's harmony.

  Thus in its body, tis trim, spruce and fine
  But in its sp'rit, tis like a thing divine.”

Poor Mace formed the plan of a Music-room, and hoped to have erected 
it himself; “but it pleased God,” says he, “to disappoint and 
discourage me several ways, for such a work; as chiefly by the loss of 
my hearing, and by that means the emptiness of my purse, (my meaning 
may easily be guessed at,) I only wanted money enough but no good will 
thereunto.” However he engraved his plan, and annexed a description of 
it, “in hopes that at one time or other, there might arise some 
honourable and truly nobly-spirited person, or persons, who may 
consider the great good use and benefit of such a necessary 
convenience, and also find in his heart to become a benefactor to such 
an eminent good work,—for the promotion of the art and encouragement 
of the true lovers of it; there being great need of such a thing, in 
reference to the compleating and illustrating of the University 
Schools.”

What he designed was a room six yards square, having on each side 
three galleries for spectators, each something more than three yards 
deep. These were to be one story from the ground, “both for advantage 
of sound, and also to avoid the moisture of the earth, which is very 
bad, both for instrument and strings;” and the building was to be “in 
a clear and very delightful dry place, both free from water, the 
overhanging of trees, and common noises.” The room was for the 
performers, and it was to be “one step higher on the floor than the 
galleries the better to convey the sound to the auditors:”—“being thus 
clear and free from company, all inconvenience of talking, crowding, 
sweating and blustering, &c. are taken away; the sound has its free 
and uninterrupted passage; the performers are no ways hindered; and 
the instruments will stand more steadily in tune, (for no lutes, 
viols, pedals, harpsicons, &c. will stand in tune at such a time; no, 
nor voices themselves;) For I have known,” says he, “an excellent 
voice, well prepared for a solemn performance, who has been put up in 
a crowd, that when he has been to perform his part, could hardly 
speak, and by no other cause but the very distemper received by that 
crowd and overheat.”

The twelve galleries, though but little, would hold two hundred 
persons very well; and thus the uneasy and unhandsome accommodation, 
which has often happened to persons of quality, being crowded up, 
squeezed and sweated among persons of an inferior rank, might be 
avoided, “which thing alone, having such distinct reception for 
persons of different qualities, must needs be accounted a great 
conveniency.” But there was a scientific convenience included in the 
arrangement; for the lower walls were to be “wainscoted, hollow from 
the wall, and without any kind of carved, bossed, or rugged work, so 
that the sound might run glib and smooth all about, without the least 
interruption. And through that wainscot there must be several 
conveyances all out of the room—by grooves, or pipes to certain 
auditor's seats, where the hearer, as he sate, might at a small 
passage, or little hole, receive the pent-up sound, which let it be 
never so weak in the music-room, he, (though at the furthest end of 
the gallery) should hear as distinctly as any who were close by it.” 
The inlets into these pipes should be pretty large, a foot square at 
least, yet the larger the better, without all doubt, and so the 
conveyance to run proportionably narrower, till it came to the ear of 
the auditor, where it need not be above the wideness of one's finger 
end. “It cannot,” says he, “be easily imagined, what a wonderful 
advantage such a contrivance must needs be, for the exact and distinct 
hearing of music; without doubt far beyond all that ever has yet been 
used. For there is no instrument of touch, be it never so sweet, and 
touched with the most curious hand that can be, but in the very touch, 
if you be near unto it, you may perceive the touch to be heard; 
especially of viols and violins: but if you be at a distance, that 
harshness is lost, and conveyed unto the air, and you receive nothing 
but the pure sweetness of the instrument; so as I may properly say, 
you lose the body, but enjoy the soul or spirit thereof.”

Such a necessary, ample and most convenient erection would become, he 
thought, any nobleman, or gentleman's house; and there might be built 
together with it as convenient rooms for all services of a family, as 
by any other contrivance whatever, and as magnificently stately. Were 
it but once experienced, he doubted not, but that the advantages would 
apparently show themselves, and be esteemed far beyond what he had 
written, or that others could conceive.

The last notice which we have of good Master Mace is an advertisement, 
dated London, 1690, fourteen years after the publication of his book. 
Dr. Burney found it in the British Museum, in a collection of 
title-pages, devices and advertisements. It is addressed “to all 
Lovers of the best sort of Music.”

  Men say the times are strange;—tis true;
    'Cause many strange things hap to be.
  Let it not then seem strange to you
    That here one strange thing more you see.

That is, in Devereux Court, next the Grecian Coffee House, at the 
Temple back gate, there is a deaf person teacheth music to perfection; 
who by reason of his great age, viz. seventy-seven, is come to town, 
with his whole stock of rich musical furniture; viz. instruments and 
books, to put off, to whomsoever delights in such choice things; for 
he has nothing light or vain, but all substantial and solid MUSIC. 
Some particulars do here follow.

“First, There is a late invented Organ, which, for private use, 
exceeds all other fashioned organs whatever; and for which, 
substantial artificial reasons will be given; and, for its beauty, it 
may become a nobleman's dining-room.

“Second, There belongs to it a pair of fair, large-sized consort 
viols, chiefly fitted and suited for that, or consort use; and 'tis 
great pity they should be parted.

“Third, There is a pedal harpsicon, (the absolute best sort of consort 
harpsicon that has been invented; there being in it more than twenty 
varieties, most of them to come in with the foot of the player; 
without the least hindrance of play,) exceedingly pleasant.

“Fourth, Is a single harpsicon.

“Fifth. A new invented instrument, called a Dyphone, viz. a double 
lute; it is both theorboe and French lute compleat; and as easy to 
play upon as any other lute.

“Sixth, Several other theorboes, lutes and viols, very good.

“Seventh, Great store of choice collections of the works of the most 
famous composers that have lived in these last hundred years, as 
Latin, English, Italian and some French.

“Eighth, There is the publishers own Music's Monument; some few copies 
thereof he has still by him to put off, it being a subscribed book, 
and not exposed to common sale. All these will be sold at very easy 
rates, for the reasons aforesaid; and because, indeed, he cannot stay 
in town longer than four months, exactly.”

He further adds, “if any be desirous to partake of his experimental 
skill in this high noble art, during his stay in town, he is ready to 
assist them; and haply, they may obtain that from him, which they may 
not meet withal elsewhere. He teacheth these five things; viz. the 
theorboe, the French lute, and the viol, in all their excellent ways 
and uses; as also composition, together with the knack of procuring 
invention to young composers, (the general and greatest difficulty 
they meet withal;) this last thing not being attempted by any author, 
(as he knows of,) yet may be done, though some have been so wise, or 
otherwise to contradict it:

  _Sed experientia docuit._

“Any of these five things may be learned so understandingly, in this 
little time he stays, by such general rules as he gives, together with 
Music's Monument, (written principally to such purposes,) as that any, 
aptly inclined, may, for the future, teach themselves, without any 
other help.”

This is the last notice of poor Mace: poor he may be called, when at 
the age of seventy-seven he is found in London upon the forlorn hope 
of selling his instruments and his books, and getting pupils during 
this stay. It may be inferred that he had lost the son of whose 
musical proficiency he formerly spoke with so much pleasure; for 
otherwise this professional collection and stock in trade would hardly 
have been exposed to sale, but it appears that the good old man 
retained his mental faculties, and his happy and contented spirit.

Dr. Burney recommends the perusal of what he calls his matchless book 
“to all who have taste for excessive simplicity and quaintness, and 
can extract pleasure from the sincere and undissembled happiness of an 
author, who with exalted notions of his subject and abilities, 
discloses to his readers every inward working of self-approbation in 
as undisguised a manner, as if he were communing with himself in all 
the plenitude of mental comfort and privacy.”




