CHAPTER CLXXXVIII.

FOLLY IN PRINT, REFERRED TO, BUT (N.B.) NOT EXEMPLIFIED. THE FAIR MAID 
OF DONCASTER. DOUBTS CONCERNING THE AUTHENTICITY OF HER STORY. 
THEVENARD AND LOVE ON A NEW FOOTING. STARS AND GARTERS, A MONITORY 
ANECDOTE FOR OUR SEX, AND A WHOLESOME NOVELTY IN DRESS RECOMMENDED TO 
BOTH.

  They be at hand, Sir, with stick and fiddle,
  They can play a new dance, Sir, called hey, diddle, diddle.

KING CAMBYSES.


You have in the earlier chapters of this Opus, gentle Reader, heard 
much of the musical history of Doncaster; not indeed as it would have 
been related by that thoroughly good, fine-ear'd, kind-hearted, 
open-handed, happiest of musicians and men, Dr. Burney the first; and 
yet I hope thou mayest have found something in this relation which has 
been to thy pleasure in reading, and which, if it should be little to 
thy profit in remembrance, will be nothing to thy hurt. From music to 
dancing is an easy transition, but do not be afraid that I shall take 
thee to a Ball,—for I would rather go to the Treading Mill myself.

What I have to say of Doncaster dancing relates to times long before 
those to which my reminiscences belong.

In a collection of Poems entitled “Folly in Print”—(which title might 
be sufficiently appropriate for many such collections)—or a Book of 
Rhymes, printed in 1667, there is a Ballad called the Northern Lass, 
or the Fair Maid of Doncaster. Neither book or ballad has ever fallen 
in my way, nor has that comedy of Richard Broome's, which from its 
name Oldys supposed to have been founded upon the same story. I learn 
however in a recent and voluminous account of the English Stage from 
the Revolution (by a gentleman profoundly learned in the most 
worthless of all literature, and for whom that literature seems to 
have been quite good enough,) that Broome's play has no connection 
with the ballad, or with Doncaster. But the note in which Oldys 
mentions it has made me acquainted with this Fair Maid's propensity 
for dancing, and with the consequences that it brought upon her. Her 
name was Betty Maddox; a modern ballad writer would call her 
Elizabeth, if he adopted the style of the Elizabethan age; or Eliza if 
his taste inclined to the refinements of modern euphony. When an 
hundred horsemen wooed her, says Oldys, she conditioned that she would 
marry the one of them who could dance her down;

  You shall decide your quarrel by a dance,[1]

but she wearied them all; and they left her a maid for her pains.

  _Legiadria suos fervabat tanta per artus,
   Ut quæcunque potest fieri saltatio per nos
   Humanos, agili motu fiebat ab illâ._[2]

[Footnote 1: DRYDEN.]

[Footnote 2: MACARONICA.]

At that dancing match they must have footed it till, as is said in an 
old Comedy, a good country lass's capermonger might have been able to 
copy the figure of the dance from the impressions on the pavement.

For my own part I do not believe it to be a true story; they who 
please may. Was there one of the horsemen but would have said on such 
occasion, with the dancing Peruvians in one of Davenant's operatic 
dramas,

          Still round and round and round,
          Let us compass the ground.
          What man is he who feels
          Any weight at his heels,
  Since our hearts are so light, that, all weigh'd together,
  Agree to a grain, and they weigh not a feather.

I disbelieve it altogether, and not for its want of verisimilitude 
alone, but because when I was young there was no tradition of any such 
thing in the town where the venue of the action is laid; and therefore 
I conjecture that it is altogether a fictitious story, and may 
peradventure have been composed as a lesson for some young spinster 
whose indefatigable feet made her the terror of all partners.

The Welsh have a saying that if a woman were as quick with her feet as 
her tongue, she would catch lightning enough to kindle the fire in the 
morning; it is a fanciful saying, as many of the Welsh sayings are. 
But if Miss Maddox had been as quick with her tongue as her feet, 
instead of dancing an hundred horsemen down, she might have talked 
their hundred horses to death.

Why it was a greater feat than that of Kempe the actor, who in the age 
of odd performance danced from London to Norwich. He was nine days in 
dancing the journey and published an account of it under the title of 
his “Nine Day's Wonder.”[3] It could have been no “light fantastic 
toe” that went through such work; but one fit for the roughest game at 
football. At sight of the aweful foot to which it belonged, Cupid 
would have fled with as much reason as the Dragon of Wantley had for 
turning tail when Moor of Moor Hall with his spiked shoe-armour 
pursued him. He would have fled before marriage, for fear of being 
kicked out of the house after it. They must have been feet that 
instead of gliding and swimming, and treading the grass so trim, went 
as the old Comedy says lumperdee, clumperdee.[4]

[Footnote 3: Webster's Westward Ho. Act. v. Sc. i.—Anno 1600.]

[Footnote 4: RALPH ROISTER DOISTER.]

The Northern Lass was in this respect no Cinderella. Nor would any 
one, short of an Irish Giant have fallen in love with her slipper, as 
Thevenard the singer did with that which he saw by accident at a 
shoe-maker's, and enquiring for what enchanting person it was made, 
and judging of this earthly Venus as the proportions of Hercules have 
been estimated _ex pede_, sought her out, for love of her foot, 
commenced his addresses to her, and obtained her hand in marriage.

The story of Thevenard is true, at least it has been related and 
received as such; this of the Fair Maid of Doncaster is not even _ben 
trovato_. Who indeed shall persuade me, or who indeed will be 
persuaded, that if she had wished to drop the title of spinster and 
take her matrimonial degree, she would not have found some good excuse 
for putting an end to the dance when she had found a partner to her 
liking? A little of that wit which seldom fails a woman when it is 
needed, would have taught her how to do this with a grace, and make it 
appear that she was still an invincible dancer, though the Stars had 
decreed that in this instance she should lose the honour of the dance. 
Some accident might have been feigned like those by which the ancient 
epic poets, and their imitators contrive in their Games to disappoint 
those who are on the point of gaining the prize which is contended 
for.

If the Stars had favoured her, they might have predestined her to meet 
with such an accident as befel a young lady in the age of minuets. She 
was led out in a large assembly by her partner, the object of all 
eyes; and when the music began and the dance should have began also, 
and he was in motion, she found herself unable to move from the spot, 
she remained motionless for a few seconds, her colour changed from 
rose to ruby, presently she seemed about to faint, fell into the arms 
of those who ran to support her, and was carried out of the room. The 
fit may have been real, for though nothing ailed her, yet what had 
happened was enough to make any young woman faint in such a place. It 
was something far more embarrassing than the mishap against which 
Soame Jenyns cautions the ladies when he says,

  No waving lappets should the dancing fair,
  Nor ruffles edged with dangling fringes wear;
  Oft will the cobweb ornaments catch hold
  On the approaching button, rough with gold;
  Nor force nor art can then the bonds divide
  When once the entangled Gordian knot is tied.
  So the unhappy pair, by Hymen's power
  Together joined in some ill-fated hour,
  The more they strive their freedom to regain,
  The faster binds the indissoluble chain.

It was worse than this in the position in which she had placed herself 
according to rule, for beginning the minuet, she was fastened not by a 
spell, not by the influence of her malignant Stars, but by the hooks 
and eyes of her garters. The Countess of Salisbury's misfortune was as 
much less embarrassing as it was more celebrated.

No such misfortunes could have happened to that Countess who has been 
rendered illustrious thereby, nor to the once fair danceress, who 
would have dreaded nothing more than that her ridiculous distress 
should become publicly known, if they had worn _genouillères_, that is 
to say, knee-pieces. A necessary part of a suit of armour was 
distinguished by this name in the days of chivalry; and the article of 
dress which corresponds to it may be called kneelets, if for a new 
article we strike a new word in that mint of analogy, from which 
whatever is lawfully coined comes forth as the King's English. Dress 
and cookery are both great means of civilization, indeed they are 
among the greatest; both in their abuse are made subservient to luxury 
and extravagance, and so become productive of great evils, moral and 
physical; and with regard to both the physician may sometimes 
interfere with effect, when the moralist would fail. In diet the 
physician has more frequently to oppose the inclinations of his 
patient, than to gratify them; and it is not often that his advice in 
matters of dress meets with willing ears, although in these things the 
maxim will generally hold good, that whatever is wholesome is 
comfortable, and that whatever causes discomfort or uneasiness is more 
or less injurious to health. But he may recommend kneelets without 
having any objection raised on the score of fashion, or of vanity; and 
old and young may be thankful for the recommendation. Mr. 
Ready-to-halt would have found that they supported his weak joints and 
rendered him less liable to rheumatic attacks; and his daughter 
Much-afraid, if she had worn them when she “footed it handsomely,” 
might have danced without any fear of such accidents as happened to 
the Countess of old, or the heroine of the minuet in later times.

Begin therefore forthwith, dear Lady-readers, to knit _genouillères_ 
for yourselves, and for those whom you love. You will like them better 
I know by their French name, though English comes best from English 
lips; but so you knit and wear them, call them what you will.




