CHAPTER CLXXIII.

MORE CONCERNING ASGILL. HIS DEFENCE IN THE HOUSE OF COMMONS, HIS 
EXPULSION, FARTHER SPECULATIONS AND DEATH.

  Let not that ugly Skeleton appear!
  Sure Destiny mistakes; this Death's not mine!

DRYDEN.


The substance of Asgill's argument has been given in his own words, 
but by thus abstracting and condensing it his peculiar manner is lost. 
This though it consisted more perhaps in appearance than in reality, 
is characteristic of the author, and may be well exemplified in the 
concluding passage of one of his political pamphlets:

  “But I shall raise more choler by this way of writing,
   For writing and reading are in themselves commendable things,
   But 'tis the way of writing at which offence is taken,
   And this is the misfortune of an Author,
   That unless some are angry with him, none are pleased.
   Which puts him under this dilemma,
   That he must either ruin himself or his Printer.

“But to prevent either, as far as I can, I would rather turn Trimmer 
and compound too. And to end all quarrels with my readers (if they 
please to accept the proposal,

  And to shew withal that I am no dogmatical Author,)

I now say to them all, in print, what I once did to one of them, by 
word of mouth. Whoever meets with any thing in what I publish, which 
they don't like,

             _Let 'em strike it out._
  But to take off part of the Odium from me,
  They say others write like me,
  In short paragraphs:
  (An easy part of a mimick,)
  But with all my heart!
  I don't care who writes like me,
  So I do'nt write like them.”

Many a book has originated in the misfortunes of its Author. Want, 
imprisonment, and disablement by bodily infirmity from active 
occupation, have produced almost as many works in prose or rhyme, as 
leisure, voluntary exertion, and strong desire. Asgill's harmless 
heresy began in an involuntary confinement to which he was reduced in 
consequence of an unsuccessful speculation; he had engaged in this 
adventure (by which better word our forefathers designated what the 
Americans call a _spec_,) with the hope of increasing his fortune, 
instead of which he incurred so great a loss that he found it 
necessary to keep his chamber in the Temple for some years. There he 
fell to examining that “Book of Law and Gospel,” both which we call 
the Bible; and examining it as he would have perused an old deed with 
the hope of discovering in it some clause upon which to ground a claim 
at law, this thought, he says, first came into his head; but it was a 
great while coming out. He was afraid of his own thoughts, lest they 
were his own only, and as such a delusion. And when he had tried them 
with pen, ink and paper, and they seemed to him plainer and plainer 
every time he went over them, and he had formed them into an Argument, 
“to see how they would bear upon the proof,” even then he had no 
intention of making them public.

“But writing an ill hand,” says he, “I resolved to see how it would 
look in print. On this I gave the Printer my Copy, with money for his 
own labour, to print off some few for myself, and keep the press 
secret. But I remember before he got half way through, he told me his 
men fancied I was a little crazed, in which I also fancied he spoke 
one word for them and two for himself. However I bid him go on; and at 
last it had so raised his fancy that he desired my leave to print off 
one edition at the risque of his own charge, saying he thought some of 
the Anabaptists would believe it first. I being just then going for 
Ireland, admitted him, with this injunction, he should not publish 
them 'till I was got clear out of Middlesex; which I believe he might 
observe; though by what I heard afterwards, they were all about town 
by that time I got to St. Albans: and the book was in Ireland almost 
as soon as I was, (for a man's works will follow him,) with a noise 
after me that I was gone away mad.”

Asgill was told in Ireland that the cry which followed him would 
prevent his practice; it had a contrary effect, for “people went into 
Court to see him as a Monster and heard him talk like a man.” In the 
course of two years he gained enough by his profession to purchase 
Lord Kenmure's forfeited estate, and to procure a seat in the Irish 
House of Commons. The purchase made him enemies; as he was on the way 
to Dublin he met the news that his book had been burnt by Order of the 
House. He proceeded however, took the oaths and his seat, and the Book 
having been condemned and executed without hearing the author in its 
defence, nothing more was necessary than to prove him the Author and 
expel him forthwith, and this was done in the course of four days. 
After this he returned to England and obtained a seat for Bramber, 
apparently for the mere sake of securing himself against his 
creditors. This borough he represented for two years; but in the first 
Parliament after the Union some of the Scotch Members are said to have 
looked upon it as a disgrace to the House of Commons that a man who 
enjoyed his liberty only under privilege should sit there, and instead 
of attempting to remedy a scandal by straight forward means, they took 
the easier course of moving for a Committee to examine his book. Their 
report was that it was profane and blasphemous, highly reflecting upon 
the Christian Religion. He was allowed however to make his defence, 
which he thus began.

“Mr. Speaker, this day calls me to something I am both unapt and 
averse to—Preaching. For though, as you see, I have vented some of my 
thoughts in religion, yet I appeal to my conversation, whether I use 
to make that the subject of my discourse. However that I may not let 
this accusation go against me by a _Nihil dicit_, I stand up to make 
my defence. I have heard it from without doors that I intended to 
withdraw myself from this day's test and be gone; which would have 
given them that said it an opportunity to boast that they had once 
spoken truth. But _quo me fata trahunt_, I'll give no man occasion to 
write _fugam fecit_ upon my grave-stone.”

He then gave the history of his book and of his expulsion in Ireland, 
and thanked the House for admitting him to a defence before they 
proceeded to judgement. “I find,” said he, “the Report of the 
Committee is not levelled at the argument itself which I have 
advanced, nor yet against the treatise I have published to prove it, 
but against some expressions in that proof, and which I intend to give 
particular answers to. But there is something else laid to my charge 
as my design in publishing that argument, of higher concern to me than 
any expressions in the treatise, or any censure that can fall on me 
for it; as if I had wrote it with a malicious intention to expose the 
scriptures as false, because they seemed to contain what I asserted; 
and that therefore if that assertion did not hold true, the Scripture 
must be false. Now whether this was my intention or no, there is but 
one Witness in Heaven or Earth can prove, and that is He that made me, 
and in whose presence I now stand, and Who is able to strike me dead 
in my place; and to Him I now appeal for the truth of what I protest 
against: that I never did write or publish that argument with any 
intention to expose the Scriptures; but on the contrary, (though I was 
aware that I might be liable to that censure, which I knew not how to 
avoid) I did both write and publish it, under a firm belief of the 
truth of the Scriptures: and with a belief, (under that) that what I 
have asserted in that argument is within that truth. And if it be not, 
then I am mistaken in my argument and the Scripture remains true. Let 
God be true and every man a lyar. And having made this protestation, I 
am not much concerned whether I am believed in it or not; I had rather 
tell a truth than be believed in a lie at any time.”

He then justified the particular passage which had been selected for 
condemnation, resting his defence upon this ground, that he had used 
familiar expressions with the intent of being sooner read and more 
readily understood. There was indeed but a single word which savoured 
of irreverence, and certainly no irreverence was intended in its use: 
no one who fairly perused his argument but must have perceived that 
the levity of his manner in no degree detracted from the seriousness 
of his belief. “Yet,” said he, “if by any of those expressions I have 
really given offence to any well-meaning Christian, I am sorry for it, 
though I had no ill intention in it: but if any man be captious to 
take exceptions for exception sake, I am not concerned. I esteem my 
own case plain and short. I was expelled one House for having too much 
land; and I am going to be expelled another for having too little 
money. But if I may yet ask one question more; pray what is this 
blasphemous crime I here stand charged with? A belief of what we all 
profess, or at least what no one can deny. If the death of the body be 
included in the Fall, why is not the life of the body included in the 
Resurrection? And what if I have a firmer belief of this than some 
others have? Am I therefore a blasphemer? Or would they that believe 
less take it well of me to call them so. Our Saviour in his day took 
notice of some of little faith and some of great faith, without 
stigmatizing either of them with blasphemy for it. But I do not know 
how 'tis, we are fallen into such a sort of uniformity that we would 
fain have Religion into a Tyrant's bed, torturing one another into our 
own size of it only. But it grows late, and I ask but one saying more 
to take leave of my friends with. I do believe that had I turned this 
Defence into a Recantation, I had prevented my Expulsion: but I have 
reserved my last words as my ultimate reason against that Recantation. 
He that durst write that book, dares not deny it!”

“And what then?” said this eccentric writer, when five years 
afterwards he published his Defence. “Why then they called for 
candles; and I went away by the light of 'em: and after the previous 
question and other usual ceremonies, (as I suppose) I was expelled the 
House. And from thence I retired to a Chamber I once had in the 
Temple; and from thence I afterwards surrendered myself in discharge 
of my bail, and have since continued under confinement. And under that 
confinement God hath been pleased to take away, ‘the Desire of mine 
Eyes with a stroke,’ which hath however drowned all my other troubles 
at once; for the less are merged in the greater;

  _Qui venit hic fluctus, fluctus supereminet omnes._

And since I have mentioned her, I'll relate this of her. She having 
been educated a Protestant of the Church of England, by a Lady her 
Grandmother, her immediate parents and other relations being Roman 
Catholics, an honest Gentleman of the Romish persuasion, who knew her 
family, presented her, while she was my fellow-prisoner, with a large 
folio volume, being the history of the Saints canonized in that 
Church, for her reading; with intention, as I found, to incline her 
that way. With which, delighting in reading, she entertained herself 
'till she shad gone through it; and some time after that she told me 
that she had before some thoughts towards that religion, but that the 
reading that history had confirmed her against it.

“And yet she would never read the book I was expelled for 'till after 
my last expulsion; but then reading it through, told me she was 
reconciled to the reasons of it, though she could not say she believed 
it. However she said something of her own thoughts with it, that hath 
given me the satisfaction that she is ‘dead in Christ,’ and thereby 
sure of her part in the first Resurrection: the Dead in Christ shall 
arise first. And this _pars decessa mei_ leaving me half dead while 
she remains in the grave, hath since drawn me, in diving after her, 
into a nearer view and more familiar though more unusual thoughts of 
that first Resurrection than ever I had before. From whence I now find 
that nothing less than this _fluctus decumanus_ would have cast me 
upon, or qualified me for, this theme, if yet I am so qualified. And 
from hence I am advancing that common Article in our Creed, the 
Resurrection of the Dead, into a professed study; from the result of 
which study I have already advanced an assertion, which (should I vent 
alone) perhaps would find no better quarter in the world than what I 
have advanced already. And yet, though I say it that perhaps should 
not, it hath one quality we are all fond of,—it is News; and another 
we all should be fond of, it is good News: or at least, good to them 
that are so, ‘for to the froward all things are froward.’

“Having made this Discovery, or rather collected it from the Word of 
Life; I am advancing it into a Treatise whereby to prove it in special 
form, not by arguments of wit or sophistry, but from the evidence and 
demonstration of the truth as it is in Jesus: which should I 
accomplish I would not be prevented from publishing that edition to 
gain more than I lost by my former; nor for more than Balak ever 
intended to give, or than Balaam could expect to receive, for cursing 
the people of Israel, if God had not spoilt that bargain. I find it as 
old as the New Testament, ‘if by any means I may attain the 
Resurrection of the Dead.’ And though Paul did not then so attain, 
(not as if I had already attained,) yet he died in his calling, and 
will stand so much nearer that mark at his Resurrection. But if Paul, 
with that effusion of the Spirit upon him in common with the other 
Apostles, and that superabundant revelation given him above them all, 
by that rapture unto things unutterable, did not so attain in that his 
day; whence should I a mere Lay, (and that none of the best neither) 
without any function upon me, expect to perfect what he left so 
undone?—In pursuit of this study I have found, (what I had not before 
observed) that there are some means since left us towards this 
attainment, which Paul had not in his day; for there now remain extant 
unto the world, bound up with that now one entire record of the Bible, 
two famous Records of the Resurrection that never came to Paul's 
hands; and for want whereof, perhaps, he might not then so attain. But 
having now this intelligence of them, and fearing that in the day of 
Account I may have a special surcharge made upon me for these 
additional Talents and further Revelations; and bearing in mind the 
dreadful fate of that cautious insuring servant who took so much care 
to redeliver what he had received _in statu quo_ as he had it that it 
might not be said to be the worse for his keeping, I have rather 
adventured to defile those Sacred Records with my own study and 
thoughts upon them, than to think of returning them wrapt up in a 
napkin clean and untouched.

“Whether ever I shall accomplish to my own satisfaction what I am now 
so engaged in, I do not yet know; but 'till I do, I'll please myself 
to be laughed at by this cautious insuring world, as tainted with a 
frenzy of dealing in Reversions of Contingencies. However in the mean 
time I would not be thought to be spending this interval of my days by 
myself in beating the air, under a dry expectancy only of a thing so 
seemingly remote as the Resurrection of the Dead: like 
Courtiers-Extraordinary fretting out their soles with attendances in 
ante-rooms for things or places no more intended to be given them than 
perhaps they are fit to have them. For though I should fall short of 
the attainment I am attempting, the attempt itself hath translated my 
Prison into a Paradise; treating me with food and enamouring me with 
pleasures that man knows not of: from whence, I hope, I may without 
vanity say,

  _Deus nobis hæc otia fecit._”

What the farther reversion might be to which Asgill fancied he had 
discovered a title in the Gospels, is not known. Perhaps he failed in 
satisfying himself when he attempted to arrange his notions in logical 
and legal form, and possibly that failure may have weakened his 
persuasion of the former heresy: for though he lived twenty years 
after the publication of his Defence and the announcement of this 
second discovery in the Scriptures, the promised argument never 
appeared. His subsequent writings consist of a few pamphlets in favour 
of the Hanoverian succession. They were too inconsiderable to 
contribute much towards eking out his means of support, for which he 
was probably chiefly indebted to his professional knowledge. The 
remainder of his life was past within the Rules of the King's Bench 
Prison, where he died in 1738 at a very advanced age, retaining his 
vivacity and his remarkable powers of conversation to the last. If it 
be true that he nearly attained the age of an hundred (as one 
statement represents) and with these happy faculties unimpaired, he 
may have been tempted to imagine that he was giving the best and only 
convincing proof of his own argument. Death undeceived him, and Time 
has done him justice at last. For though it stands recorded that he 
was expelled the House of Commons as being the Author of a Book in 
which are contained many profane and blasphemous expressions, highly 
reflecting upon the Christian Religion! nothing can be more certain 
than that this censure was undeserved, and that his expulsion upon 
that ground was as indefensible as it would have been becoming, if, in 
pursuance of the real motives by which the House was actuated, an Act 
had been past disqualifying from that time forward any person in a 
state of insolvency from taking or retaining a seat there.

In the year 1760 I find him mentioned as “the celebrated gentleman 
commonly called ‘translated Asgill.’” His name is now seen only in 
catalogues, and his history known only to the curious:—“_Mais, c'est 
assez parlé de luy, et encore trop, ce diront aucuns, qui pourront 
m'en blasmer, et dire que j'estois bien de loisir quand j'escrivis 
cecy; mais ils seront bien plus de loisir de la lire, pour me 
reprendre._”[1]

[Footnote 1: BRANTOME.]




