CHAPTER CXCI.

A SERIOUS WORD IN SAD APOLOGY FOR ONE OF THE MANY FOOLISH WAYS IN 
WHICH TIME IS MIS-SPENT.

  Time as he passes us, has a dove's wing,
  Unsoil'd, and swift, and of a silken sound;
  But the World's Time, is Time in masquerade!
  Their's, should I paint him, has his pinions fledged,
  With motley plumes; and where the peacock shews
  His azure eyes, is tinctured black and red
  With spots quadrangular of diamond form,
  Ensanguined hearts, clubs typical of strife,
  And spades, the emblem of untimely graves.

COWPER.


Hunting, gaming and dancing are three propensities to which men are 
inclined equally in the savage and in the civilized,—in all stages of 
society from the rudest to the most refined, and in all its grades; 
the Doctor used to say they might be called semi-intellectual. The 
uses of hunting are obvious wherever there are wild animals which may 
be killed for food, or beasts of prey which for our own security it is 
expedient to destroy.

Indeed because hunting, hawking and fishing (all which according to 
Gwillim and Plato are comprised in the term Venation) tend to the 
providing of sustenance for man, Farnesius doth therefore account them 
all a species of agriculture. The great heraldic author approves of 
this comprehensive classification. But because the more heroic hunting 
in which danger is incurred from the strength and ferocity of the 
animals pursued, hath a resemblance of military practice, he delivers 
his opinion that “this noble kind of venation is privileged from the 
title of an Illiberal Art, being a princely and generous exercise; and 
those only, who use it for a trade of life, to make sure thereof, are 
to be marshalled in the rank of mechanics and illiberal artizans.” The 
Doctor admired the refinement of these authors, but he thought that 
neither lawful sporting, nor poaching could conveniently be 
denominated agricultural pursuits.

He found it not so easy to connect the love of gaming with any 
beneficial effect; some kind of mental emotion however, he argued, was 
required for rendering life bearable by creatures with whom sleep is 
not so compleatly an act of volition, that like dogs they can lie down 
and fall asleep when they like. For those persons therefore who are 
disposed either by education, capacity, or inclination to make any 
worthier exertion of their intellectual faculties, gaming, though 
infinitely dangerous as a passion, may be useful as a pastime. It has 
indeed a strong tendency to assume a dangerous type, and to induce as 
furious an excitement as drunkenness in its most ferocious form, but 
among the great card-playing public of all nations, long experience 
has produced an effect in mitigating it analogous to what the practice 
of inoculation has effected upon the small-pox. Vaccination would have 
afforded our philosopher a better illustration if it had been brought 
into notice during his life.

Pope has assigned to those women who neither toil or spin, “an old age 
of cards,” after “a youth of pleasure.” This perhaps is not now so 
generally the course of female life, in a certain class and under 
certain circumstances, as it was in his days and in the Doctor's. The 
Doctor, certainly was of opinion that if the senescent spinsters and 
dowagers within the circle of his little world, had not their cards as 
duly as their food, many of them would have taken to something worse 
in their stead. They would have sought for the excitement which they 
now found at the whist or quadrille table, from the bottle, or at the 
Methodist Meeting. In some way or other, spiritual or spirituous they 
must have had it;[1] and the more scandalous of these ways was not 
always that which would occasion the greatest domestic discomfort, or 
lead to the most injurious consequences. Others would have applied to 
him for relief from maladies which by whatever names they might be 
called, were neither more nor less than the effect of that _tædium 
vitæ_ which besets those who having no necessary employment have not 
devised any for themselves. And when he regarded the question in this 
light he almost doubted whether the invention of cards had not been 
more beneficial than injurious to mankind.

[Footnote 1: It happened during one of the lamented Southey's visits 
here at the Vicarage, West-Tarring, that a cargo of spirits was run 
close by. His remark was—“Better spirituous smuggling than spiritual 
pride.”]

It was not with an unkind or uncharitable feeling, still less with a 
contemptuous one that Anne Seward mentioning the death of a lady “long 
invalid and far advanced in life,” described her as “a civil social 
being, whose care was never to offend; who had the spirit of a 
gentlewoman in never doing a mean thing, whose mite was never withheld 
from the poor; and whose inferiority of understanding and knowledge 
found sanctuary at the card-table, that universal leveller of 
intellectual distinctions.” Let not such persons be despised in the 
pride of intellect! Let them not be condemned in the pride of self 
righteousness!

“Our law,” says the Puritan Matthew Mead, “supposes all to be of some 
calling, not only men but women, and the young ladies too; and 
therefore it calls them during their virgin state spinsters. But alas, 
the viciousness and degeneracy of this age hath forfeited the title. 
Many can _card_, but few can spin; and therefore you may write them 
_carders_, _dancers_, _painters_, _ranters_, _spenders_, rather than 
spinsters. Industry is worn out by pride and delicacy; the comb and 
the looking-glass possess the place and the hours of the spindle and 
the distaff; and their great business is to curl the locks, instead of 
twisting wool and flax. So that both male and females are prepared for 
all ill impressions by the mischief of an idle education.”

“There is something strange in it,” says Sterne, “that life should 
appear so short _in the gross_, and yet so long _in the detail_. 
Misery may make it so, you'll say;—but we will exclude it,—and still 
you'll find, though we all complain of the shortness of life what 
numbers there are who seem quite overstocked with the days and hours 
of it, and are constantly sending out into the highways and streets of 
the city, to compel guests to come in, and take it off their hands: to 
do this with ingenuity and forecast, is not one of the least arts and 
business of life itself; and they who cannot succeed in it, carry as 
many marks of distress about them, as bankruptcy itself could wear. Be 
as careless as we may, we shall not always have the power,—nor shall 
we always be in a temper to let the account run thus. When the blood 
is cooled, and the spirits which have hurried us on through half our 
days before we have numbered one of them, are beginning to 
retire;—then wisdom will press a moment to be heard,—afflictions, or a 
bed of sickness will find their hours of persuasion:—and should they 
fail, there is something yet behind:—old age will overtake us at the 
last, and with its trembling hand, hold up the glass to us.”




