CHAPTER CXCVII.

QUESTION PROPOSED, WHETHER A MAN BE MAGNIFIED OR MINIFIED BY 
CONSIDERING HIMSELF UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES, AND 
ANSWERED WITH LEARNING AND DISCRETION.

I find by experience that Writing is like Building, wherein the 
undertaker, to supply some defect, or serve some convenience which at 
first he foresaw not, is usually forced to exceed his first model and 
proposal, and many times to double the charge and expence of it.

DR. JOHN SCOTT.


Is man magnified or minified by considering himself as under the 
influence of the heavenly bodies,—not simply as being

  Moved round in earth's dismal course
    With rocks and stones and trees;[1]

but as affected by them in his constitution bodily and mental, and 
dependent on them for weal or woe, for good or evil fortune; as 
subjected, that is, according to astrological belief to

  The Stars, who, by I know not what strange right,
  Preside o'er mortals in their own despite,
  Who without reason, govern those who most,
  (How truly, judge from thence!) of reason boast;
  And by some mighty magic, yet unknown,
  Our actions guide, yet cannot guide their own.[2]

Apart from what one of our Platonic divines calls “the power of astral 
necessity, and uncontrollable impressions arising from the 
subordination and mental sympathy and dependence of all mundane 
causes,” which is the Platonist's and Stoic's “proper notion of 
fate;”[3] apart, I say, from this, and from the Calvinist's doctrine 
of predestination, is it a humiliating, or an elevating consideration, 
that the same celestial movements which cause the flux and reflux of 
the ocean, should be felt in the pulse of a patient suffering with a 
fever: and that the eternal laws which regulate the stars in their 
courses, should decide the lot of an individual?

[Footnote 1: WORDSWORTH.]

[Footnote 2: CHURCHILL.]

[Footnote 3: JOHN SMITH.]

Here again a distinction must be made,—between the physical theory and 
the pseudo-science. The former is but a question of more or less; for 
that men are affected by atmospherical influence is proved by every 
endemic disease; and invalids feel in themselves a change of weather 
as decidedly as they perceive its effect upon the weather-glass, the 
hygrometer, or the strings of a musical instrument. The sense of our 
weakness in this respect,—of our dependence upon causes over which we 
have no controul, and which in their operation and nature are 
inexplicable by us, must have a humbling and therefore a beneficial 
tendency in every mind disposed to goodness. It is in the order of 
Providence that we should learn from sickness and adversity lessons 
which health and prosperity never teach.

Some of the old theoretical physicians went far beyond this. Sachs von 
Lewenheimb compared the microcosm of man with the macrocosm in which 
he exists. The heart in the one, he said, is what the ocean is in the 
other, the blood has its ebbing and flowing like the tide, and as the 
ocean receives its impulse from the moon and the winds, the brain and 
the vital spirits act in like manner upon the heart. Baillet has 
noticed for censure the title of his book in his chapter _Des prejugés 
des Titres des Livres_; it is _Oceanus Macro-Micro-cosmicus_. Peder 
Severinsen carrying into his medical studies a fanciful habit of mind 
which he might better have indulged in his younger days when he was a 
Professor of Poetry, found in the little world of the human body, 
antitypes of every thing in the great world, its mountains and its 
vallies, its rivers and its lakes, its minerals and its vegetables, 
its elements and its spheres. According to him the stars are living 
creatures, subject to the same diseases as ourselves. Ours indeed are 
derived from them by sympathy, or astral influence, and can be 
remedied only by those medicines, the application of which is denoted 
by their apparent qualities, or by the authentic signature of nature.

This fancy concerning the origin of diseases is less intelligible than 
the mythology of those Rosicrucians who held that they were caused by 
evil demons rulers of the respective planets, or by the Spirits of the 
Firmament and the Air. A mythology this may more properly be called 
than a theory; and it would belong rather to the history of Manicheism 
than of medicine, were it not that in all ages fanaticism and 
imposture have, in greater or less degree, connected themselves with 
the art of healing.

But however dignified, or super-celestial the theoretical causes of 
disease, its effect is always the same in bringing home, even to the 
proudest heart, a sense of mortal weakness: whereas the belief which 
places man in relation with the Stars, and links his petty concerns 
and fortunes of a day with the movements of the heavenly bodies, and 
the great chain of events, tends to exalt him in his own conceit. The 
thriftless man in middle or low life who says, in common phrase, that 
he was born under a threepenny planet, and therefore shall never be 
worth a groat, finds some satisfaction in imputing his unprosperity to 
the Stars, and casting upon them the blame which he ought to take upon 
himself. In vain did an old Almanack-maker say to such men of the 
Creator, in a better strain than was often attained by the professors 
of his craft.

  He made the Stars to be an aid unto us,
  Not (as is fondly dream'd) to help undo us;
  Much less without our fault to ruinate
  By doom of irrecoverable Fate.
  And if our best endeavours use we will,
  These glorious Creatures will be helpful still
  In all our honest ways: for they do stand
  To help, not hinder us, in God's command,
  Who doth not only rule them by his powers
  But makes their glory servant unto ours.
  Be wise in Him, and if just cause there be
  The Sun and Moon shall stand and wait on thee.

On the other hand the lucky adventurer proceeds with superstitious 
confidence in his Fortune; and the ambitious in many instances have 
devoted themselves, or been deceived to their own destruction. It is 
found accordingly that the professors of astrology generally in their 
private practice addressed themselves to the cupidity or the vanity of 
those by whom they were employed. Honest professors there were who 
framed their schemes faithfully upon their own rules; but the greater 
number were those who consulted their own advantage only, and these 
men being well acquainted with human nature in its ordinary character, 
always took this course.—Their character has changed as little as 
human nature itself in the course of two thousand years since Ennius 
expressed his contempt for them, in a passage preserved by Cicero.

  _Non habeo denique nauci Marsum augurem,
   Non vicanos haruspices, non de circo astrologos,
   Non Isiacos conjectores, non interpretes somnium.
   Non enim sunt ii aut scientiâ aut arte, divini,
   Sed superstitiosi vates, impudentesque harioli,
   Aut inertes, aut insani, aut quibus egestas imperat:
   Qui sibi semitam non sapiunt, alteri monstrant viam.
   Quibus divitias pollicentur, ab iis drachmam ipsi petunt.
   De his divitiis sibi deducant drachmam, reddant cætera._

Pompey, Crassus, and Cæsar were each assured by the Chaldeans that he 
should die in his own house, in prosperity, and in a good old age. 
Cicero tells us this upon his own knowledge: _Quam multa ego Pompeio, 
quam multa Crasso, quam multa huic ipsi Cæsari à Chaldeis dicta 
memini, neminem eorum nisi senectute, nisi domi, nisi cum claritate 
esse moriturum! ut mihi permirum videatur, quemquam extare, qui etiam 
nunc credat iis, quorum prædicta quotidie videat re et eventis 
refelli._

And before the age of Ennius, Euripides had in the person of Tiresias 
shewn how surely any such profession, if the professor believed in his 
own art, must lead to martyrdom, or falsehood. When the blind old 
Prophet turns away from Creon, he says, in words worthy of Milton's 
favourite poet,

  _Τὰ μὲν παρ᾽ ἡμῶν πάντ᾽ ἔχεις· ἡγοῦ, τέκνον,
   Πρὸς οἶκον· ὅστις δ᾽ ἐμπύρῳ χρῆται τέχνῃ,
   Μάταιος᾽ ἢν μὲν ἐχθρὰ σημήνας τύχῃ,
   Πικρὸς καθέστηχ᾽, οἷς ἂν οἰωνοσκοπῇ,
   Ψευδῆ δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ οἴκτου τοῖσι χρωμένοις λέγων,
   Ἀδικεῖ τὰ τῶν θεῶν. Φοῖβον ἀνθρώποις μόνον
   Χρῆν θεσπιωδεῖν, ὃς δέδοικεν οὐδένα._

The sagacity of the poet will be seen by those who are versed in the 
history of the Old Testament; and for those who are not versed in it, 
the sooner they cease to be ignorant in what so nearly concerns them, 
the better it may be for themselves.

Jeremy Taylor says that he reproves those who practised judicial 
astrology, and pretended to deliver genethliacal predictions, “not 
because their reason is against religion, for certainly, said he, it 
cannot be; but because they have not reason enough in what they say; 
they go upon weak principles which they cannot prove; they reduce them 
to practice by impossible mediums; they argue about things with which 
they have little conversation. Although the art may be very lawful if 
the stars were upon the earth, or the men were in heaven, if they had 
skill in what they profess, and reason in all their pretences, and 
after all that their principles were certain, and that the stars did 
really signify future events, and that those events were not overruled 
by every thing in heaven and in earth, by God, and by our own will and 
wisdom,—yet because here is so little reason and less certainty, and 
nothing but confidence and illusion, therefore it is that religion 
permits them not; and it is not the reason in this art that is against 
religion, but the folly or the knavery of it; and the dangerous and 
horrid consequents which they feel that run a-whoring after such idols 
of imagination.”

In our days most of those persons who can afford to employ the greater 
part of their thoughts upon themselves, fall at a certain age under 
the influence either of a physical or a spiritual director, for 
Protestantism has its _Directeurs_ as well as Popery, less to its 
advantage and as little to its credit. The spiritual professors have 
the most extensive practice, because they like their patients are of 
all grades, and are employed quite as much among the sound as the 
sick. The astrologer no longer contests the ascendancy with either. 
That calling is now followed by none but such low impostors, that they 
are only heard of when one of them is brought before a magistrate for 
defrauding some poor credulous creature in the humblest walks of life. 
So low has that cunning fallen, which in the seventeenth century 
introduced its professors into the cabinets of kings, and more 
powerful ministers. An astrologer was present at the birth of Louis 
XIV, that he might mark with all possible precision the exact moment 
of his nativity. After the massacre of St. Bartholomew's day, 
Catherine de Medici, deep in blood as she was, hesitated about putting 
to death the king of Navarre and the prince of Condé, and the person 
of whom she took counsel was an astrologer,—had she gone to her 
Confessor their death would have been certain. Cosmo Ruggieri was an 
unprincipled adventurer, but on this occasion he made a pious use of 
his craft, and when the Queen enquired of him what the nativities of 
these Princes prognosticated, he assured her that he had calculated 
them with the utmost exactness, and that according to the principles 
of his art, the State had nothing to apprehend from either of them. He 
let them know this as soon as he could, and told them that he had 
given this answer purely from regard for them, not from any result of 
his schemes, the matter being in its nature undiscoverable by 
astrology.

The Imperial astrologers in China excused themselves once for a 
notable failure in their art, with more notable address. The error 
indeed was harmless, except in its probable consequences to 
themselves; they had predicted an eclipse, and no eclipse took place. 
But instead of being abashed at this proof of their incapacity the 
ready rogues complimented the Emperor, and congratulated him upon so 
wonderful and auspicious an event. The eclipse they said portended 
evil, and therefore in regard to him the Gods had put it by.

An Asiatic Emperor who calls himself Brother to the Sun and Moon, 
might well believe that his relations would go a little out of their 
way to oblige him, if the Queen of Navarre could with apparent 
sincerity declare her belief that special revelations are made to the 
Great, as one of the privileges of their high estate, and that her 
mother, that Catherine de Medici, whose name is for ever infamous, was 
thus miraculously forewarned of every remarkable event that befell her 
husband and her children, nor was she herself, without her share in 
this privilege, though her character was not more spotless in one 
point than her mother's in another. _De ces divins advertissemens_, 
she says, _je ne me veux estimer digne, toutesfois pour ne me taire 
comme ingrate des graces que j'ay receües de Dieu, que je dois et veux 
confesser toute ma vie, pour luy en rendre grace, et que chacun le 
loue aux merveilles des effets de sa puissance, bonté, et misericorde, 
qu'il luy a plû faire en moy, j'advoueray n'avoir jamais esté proche 
de quelques signalez accidens, ou sinistres, ou heureux, que j'en aye 
eu quelque advertissement ou en songe, ou autrement; et puis bien dire 
ce vers,_

  _De mon bien ou mon mal, mon esprit m'est oracle._




