CHAPTER CLXXXV.

EVOLVEMENTS. ANALOGIES. ANTICIPATIONS.

          I have heard, how true
  I know not, most physicians as they grow
  Greater in skill, grow less in their religion;
  Attributing so much to natural causes,
  That they have little faith in that they cannot
  Deliver reason for: this Doctor steers
  Another course.

MASSINGER.


I forget what poet it is, who, speaking of old age, says that

  The Soul's dark mansion, battered and decayed,
  Lets in new light through chinks that time has made;

a strange conceit, imputing to the decay of our nature that which 
results from its maturation.

As the ancients found in the butterfly a beautiful emblem of the 
immortality of the Soul, my true philosopher and friend looked, in 
like manner, upon the chrysalis as a type of old age. The gradual 
impairment of the senses and of the bodily powers, and the diminution 
of the whole frame as it shrinks and contracts itself in age, afforded 
analogy enough for a mind like his to work on, which quickly 
apprehended remote similitudes, and delighted in remarking them. The 
sense of flying in our sleep, might probably, he thought, be the 
anticipation or forefeeling of an unevolved power, like an aurelia's 
dream of butterfly motion.

The tadpole has no intermediate state of torpor. This merriest of all 
creatures, if mirth may be measured by motion, puts out legs before it 
discards its tail and commences frog. It was not in our outward frame 
that the Doctor could discern any resemblance to this process; but he 
found it in that expansion of the intellectual faculties, those 
aspirations of the spiritual part, wherein the Soul seems to feel its 
wings and to imp them for future flight.

One has always something for which to look forward, some change for 
the better. The boy in petticoats longs to be drest in the masculine 
gender. Little boys wish to be big ones. In youth we are eager to 
attain manhood, and in manhood matrimony becomes the next natural step 
of our desires. “Days then should speak, and multitude of years should 
teach wisdom;” and teach it they will, if man will but learn, for 
nature brings the heart into a state for receiving it.

_Jucundissima est ætas devexa jam, non tamen præceps; et illam quoque 
in extremâ regulâ stantem, judico habere suas voluptates; aut hoc 
ipsum succedit in locum voluptatum, nullis egere. Quam dulce est, 
cupiditates fatigasse ac reliquisse!_[1] This was not Dr. Dove's 
philosophy: he thought the stage of senescence a happy one, not 
because we outgrow the desires and enjoyments of youth and manhood, 
but because wiser desires, more permanent enjoyments, and holier hopes 
succeed to them,—because time in its course brings us nearer to 
eternity, and as earth recedes, Heaven opens upon our prospect.

[Footnote 1: SENECA.]

“It is the will of God and nature,” says Franklin, “that these mortal 
bodies be laid aside when the soul is to enter into real life. This is 
rather an embryo state, a preparation for living. A man is not 
completely born until he be dead. Why, then, should we grieve that a 
new child is born among the immortals, a new member added to their 
happy society? We are spirits. That bodies should be lent us, while 
they can afford us pleasure, assist us in acquiring knowledge, or in 
doing good to our fellow-creatures, is a kind and benevolent act of 
God. When they become unfit for these purposes, and afford us pain 
instead of pleasure, instead of an aid become an encumbrance, and 
answer none of the intentions for which they were given, it is equally 
kind and benevolent, that a way is provided by which we may get rid of 
them. Death is that way.”

“God,” says Fuller, “sends his servants to bed, when they have done 
their work.”

This is a subject upon which even Sir Richard Blackmore could write 
with a poet's feeling.

  Thou dost, O Death, a peaceful harbour lie
  Upon the margin of Eternity;
  Where the rough waves of Time's impetuous tide
  Their motion lose, and quietly subside:
  Weary, they roll their drousy heads asleep
  At the dark entrance of Duration's deep.
  Hither our vessels in their turn retreat;
  Here still they find a safe untroubled seat,
  When worn with adverse passions, furious strife,
  And the hard passage of tempestuous life.

  Thou dost to man unfeigned compassion show,
  Soothe all his grief, and solace all his woe.
  Thy spiceries with noble drugs abound,
  That every sickness cure and every wound.
  That which anoints the corpse will only prove 
  The sovereign balm our anguish to remove.
  The cooling draught administered by thee,
  O Death! from all our sufferings sets us free.
  Impetuous life is by thy force subdued,
  Life, the most lasting fever of the blood.
  The weary in thy arms lie down to rest,
  No more with breath's laborious task opprest.
  Hear, how the men that long life-ridden lie,
  In constant pain, for thy assistance cry,
  Hear how they beg and pray for leave to die.
  For vagabonds that o'er the country roam,
  Forlorn, unpitied and without a home,
  Thy friendly care provides a lodging-room.
  The comfortless, the naked, and the poor,
  Much pinch'd with cold, with grievous hunger more,
  Thy subterranean hospitals receive,
  Assuage their anguish and their wants relieve.
  Cripples with aches and with age opprest,
  Crawl on their crutches to the Grave for rest.
  Exhausted travellers that have undergone
  The scorching heats of life's intemperate zone,
  Haste for refreshment to their beds beneath
  And stretch themselves in the cool shades of death.
  Poor labourers who their daily task repeat,
  Tired with their still returning toil and sweat,
  Lie down at last; and at the wish'd for close
  Of life's long day, enjoy a sweet repose.

  Thy realms, indulgent Death, have still possest
  Profound tranquillity and unmolested rest.
  No raging tempests, which the living dread,
  Beat on the silent regions of the dead:
  Proud Princes ne'er excite with war's alarms
  Thy subterranean colonies to arms.
  They undisturbed their peaceful mansions keep,
  And earthquakes only rock them in their sleep.

Much has been omitted, which may be found in the original, and one 
couplet removed from its place; but the whole is Blackmore's.




