CHAPTER CXCIII.

MASTER THOMAS MACE, AND THE TWO HISTORIANS OF HIS SCIENCE, SIR JOHN 
HAWKINS AND DR. BURNEY. SOME ACCOUNT OF THE OLD LUTANIST AND OF HIS 
“MUSIC'S MONUMENT.”

  This Man of Music hath more in his head
  Than mere crotchets.

SIR W. DAVENANT.


Thou wast informed, gentle Reader, in the third Volume and at the two 
hundred and sixth page of this much-hereafter-to-be-esteemed Opus, 
that a _Tattle de Moy_ was a new-fashioned thing in the Year of our 
Lord 1676. This was on the authority of the good old Lutanist, whom, I 
then told you, I took leave of but for a while, bethinking me of 
Pope's well known lines,

  But all our praises why should Lords engross?
  Rise, honest Muse! and sing the MAN OF ROSS.

And now gentle reader, seeing that whether with a consciousness of 
second sight or not, Master Mace, praiseworthy as the Man of Ross, has 
so clearly typified my Preludes and Voluntaries, my grave Pavines and 
graver Galliards, my Corantoes and Serabands, my Chichonas, and above 
all my Tattle-de-Moys, am I not bound in gratitude to revive the 
memory of Master Mace; or rather to extend it and make him more fully 
and more generally known than he has been made by the two historians 
of his science Sir John Hawkins and Dr. Burney. It is to the honour of 
both these eminent men, who have rendered such good services to that 
science, and to the literature of their country, that they should have 
relished the peculiarities of this simple-hearted old lutanist. But it 
might have been expected from both; for Dr. Burney was as 
simple-hearted himself, and as earnestly devoted to the art: and Sir 
John who delighted in Ignoramus and in Izaak Walton, could not fail to 
have a liking for Thomas Mace.

“Under whom he was educated,” says Sir John, “or by what means he 
became possessed of so much skill in the science of music, as to be 
able to furnish out matter for a folio volume, he has no where 
informed us; nevertheless his book contains so many particulars 
respecting himself, and so many traits of an original and singular 
character, that a very good judgement may be formed both of his temper 
and ability. With regard to the first, he appears to have been an 
enthusiastic lover of his art; of a very devout and serious turn of 
mind; and cheerful and good humoured under the infirmities of age, and 
the pressure of misfortunes. As to the latter his knowledge of music 
seems to have been confined to the practice of his own instrument; and 
so much of the principles of the science as enabled him to compose for 
it; but for his style in writing he certainly never had his fellow.”

This is not strictly just as relating either to his proficiency in 
music, or his style as an author. Mace says of himself, “having said 
so much concerning the lute, as also taken so much pains in laying 
open all the hidden secrets thereof, it may be thought I am so great a 
lover of it, that I make light esteem of any other instrument besides; 
which truly I do not; but love the viol in a very high degree; yea 
close unto the lute; and have done much more, and made very many more 
good and able proficients upon it, than ever I have done upon the 
lute. And this I shall presume to say, that if I excel in either, it 
is most certainly upon the viol. And as to other instruments, I can as 
truly say, I value every one that is in use, according to its due 
place; as knowing and often saying, that all God's creatures are good; 
and all ingenuities done by man, are signs, tokens, and testimonies of 
the wisdom of God bestowed upon man.”

So also though it is true that Thomas Mace stands distinguished among 
the writers on Music, yet it could be easy to find many fellows for 
him as far as regards peculiarity of style. A humourist who should 
collect odd books might form as numerous a library, as the man of 
fastidious taste who should confine his collection to such works only 
as in their respective languages were esteemed classical. “The 
singularity of his style,” says Sir John, “remarkable for a profusion 
of epithets and words of his own invention, and tautology without end, 
is apt to disgust such as attend less to the matter than manner of his 
book; but in others it has a different effect; as it exhibits, without 
the least reserve all the particulars of the author's character, which 
was not less amiable than singular.”—“The vein of humour that runs 
through it presents a lively portraiture of a good-natured, gossipping 
old man, virtuous and kind-hearted.”—The anxious “precision with which 
he constantly delivers himself, is not more remarkable than his eager 
desire to communicate to others all the knowledge he was possessed of, 
even to the most hidden secrets.”—“The book breathes throughout a 
spirit of devotion; and, agreeable to his sentiments of music is a 
kind of proof that his temper was improved by the exercise of his 
profession.”—There is no pursuit by which, if it be harmless in 
itself, a man may not be improved in his moral as well as in his 
intellectual nature, provided it be followed for its own sake: but 
most assuredly there is none however intrinsically good, or beneficial 
to mankind, from which he can desire any moral improvement, if his 
motive be either worldly ambition, or the love of gain.—_Ἀδύνατον ἐκ 
φαύλης ἀφορμῆς ἐπὶ τὸ τέλος ἐυδραμεῖν._[1]

[Footnote 1: IAMBLICHUS.]

To give an account of “Music's Monument,” which Dr. Burney calls a 
matchless book, not to be forgotten among the curiosities of the 
seventeenth century! will be to give the character of Thomas Mace 
himself, for no author ever more compleatly embodied his own spirit in 
his writings.

It is introduced with an Epistle Dedicatory, which by an easy 
misrepresentation has been made to appear profane.

  To Thee, One-Only-Oneness, I direct
  My weak desires and works.
  Thou only art The Able True Protector;
  Oh be my shield, defender and director,
  Then sure we shall be safe.
  Thou know'st, O Searcher of all hearts how I,
  With right, downright, sincere sincerity,
  Have longed long to do some little good,
  (According to the best I understood)
  With thy rich talent, though by me made poor,
  For which I grieve, and will do so no more,
  By thy good Grace assisting, which I do
  Most humbly beg for. Oh, adjoin it to
  My longing ardent soul; and have respect
  To this my weak endeavour, and accept,
  In thy great mercy, both of it and me,
  Even as we dedicate ourselves to Thee.

An Epistle, in verse, follows “to all Divine Readers, especially those 
of the Dissenting Ministry, or Clergy, who want not only skill, but 
good will to this most excelling part of divine service, viz. singing 
of psalms, hymns and spiritual songs, to the praise of the Almighty, 
in the public Assemblies of his Saints: and yet more particularly, to 
all great and high Persons, Supervisors, Masters, or Governors of the 
Church, (if any such there should be) wanting skill, or good will 
thereunto.”

He says to those “high men of honour,” that

                   Example is the thing;
   There's but one way, which is yourselves to sing.
   This sure will do it; for when the vulgar see
   Such worthy presidents their leaders be,
   Who exercise therein and lead the van,
   They will be brought to't, do they what they can.
   But otherwise for want of such example,
   Tis meanly valued, and on it they trample;
   And by that great defect, so long unsought,
   Our best Church Music's well-nigh brought to nought.
                      Besides,
   No robes adorn high persons like to it;
   No ornaments for pure Divines more fit.

   That Counsel given by the Apostle Paul
   Does certainly extend to Christians all.
   Colossians the third, the sixteenth verse;
   (Turn to the place:) that text will thus rehearse,
   Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously,
   (What follows? Music in its excellency.)
   Admonishing yourselves, in sweet accord,
   In singing psalms with grace unto the Lord,
  _Sed sine arte_, that cannot be done,
  _Et sine arte_, better let alone.

Having thus “fronted this Book with the divine part, and preached his 
little short sermon” upon the last of St. Paul, he says that his first 
and chief design in writing this book was only to discover the occult 
mysteries of the noble lute, and to shew the great worthiness of that 
too much neglected and abused instrument, and his good will to all the 
true lovers of it, in making it plain and easy, giving the true 
reasons why it has been formerly a very hard instrument to play well 
upon, and also why now it is become so easy and familiarly pleasant. 
“And I believe,” says he, “that whosoever will but trouble himself to 
read those reasons,—and join his own reason, with the reasonableness 
of those reasons, will not be able to find the least reason to 
contradict those reasons.”

He professed that by his directions “any person, young or old, should 
be able to perform so much and so well upon it, in so much or so 
little time, towards a full and satisfactory delight and pleasure, 
(yea, if it were but only to play common toys, jigs or tunes,) as upon 
any instrument whatever; yet with this most notable and admirable 
exception, (for the respectable commendation of the lute,) that they 
may, besides such ordinary and common contentments, study and practice 
it all the days of their lives, and yet find new improvements, yea 
doubtless if they should live unto the age of Methusalem, ten times 
over; for there is no limitation to its vast bounds and bravery.” It 
appears that the merit of this book in this respect is not overstated, 
one of his sons attained to great proficiency on this instrument by 
studying the book without any assistance from his father; and Sir John 
Hawkins affirms on his own knowledge that Mr. John Immyns, lutanist to 
the Chapel Royal, has the like experience of it. “This person who had 
practised on sundry instruments for many years, and was able to sing 
his part at sight, at the age of forty took to the lute, and by the 
help of Mace's book alone, became enabled to play thorough base, and 
also easy lessons on it; and by practice had rendered the tablature as 
familiar to him, as the notes of the scale.”

The notation called the tablature is minutely explained in the work. 
It has not the least relation to the musical character; the six 
strings of the lute are represented by as many lines, “and the several 
frets or stops by the letters a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, y (a preference 
to i as being more conspicuous) k; the letter _a_ ever signifying the 
open string in all positions.” Many persons have been good performers 
on the lute, and at the same time totally ignorant of the notes of the 
Gamut. His printer, he said, “had outdone all music work in this kind 
ever before printed in this nation; and was indeed the only fit person 
to do the like, he only having those new materials, the like to which 
was never had made before in England.” They might have been more 
distinct, and more consistent;—five being common English characters, 
the _c_ more resembling the third letter in the Greek alphabet than 
any thing else, the _b_ reversed serving for _g_, and the _d_ in like 
manner for _e_.

The characters for the time of notes he compares to money, as 
supposing that most people would be ready enough to count them the 
better for that. Considering therefore the semi-breve as a groat, the 
minim becomes two pence, the crotchet a penny, the quaver a 
half-penny, and the semi-quaver a farthing. Trouble not yourself for 
the demi-quaver, he says, till you have a quick hand, it being half a 
semi-quaver.

But besides these, there are marks in his notation for the fifteen 
graces which may be used upon the lute, though few or none used them 
all. They are the Shake, the Beat, the Back-fall, the Half-fall, the 
Whole-fall, the Elevation, the Single Relish, the Double Relish, the 
Slur, the Slide, the Spinger, the Sting, the Tutt, the Pause and the 
Soft and Loud Play, “which is as great and good a grace as any other 
whatever.”

“Some,” says Master Mace, “there are, and many I have met with, who 
have such a natural agility in their nerves, and aptitude to that 
performance, that before they could do any thing else to purpose, they 
would make a shake rarely well. And some again can scarcely ever gain 
a good shake, by reason of the unaptness of their nerves to that 
action, but yet otherwise come to play very well. I, for my own part, 
have had occasion to break both my arms; by reason of which, I cannot 
make the nerve-shake well, nor strong; yet by a certain motion of my 
arm, I have gained such a contentive shake, that sometimes my scholars 
will ask me, how they shall do to get the like? I have then no better 
answer for them, than to tell them, they must first break their arm, 
as I have done; and so possibly after that, by practice, they may get 
my manner of Shake.”

Rules are given for all these graces, but observe he says “that 
whatever your grace be, you must in your farewell express the true 
note perfectly, or else your pretended grace, will prove a disgrace.”

“The Spinger is a grace very neat and curious, for some sort of notes, 
and is done thus: After you have hit your note, you must just as you 
intend to part with it, dab one of your rest fingers lightly upon the 
same string, a fret or two frets below, (according to the air,) as if 
you did intend to stop the string, in that place, yet so gently, that 
you do not cause the string to sound, in that stop, so dab'd; but only 
so that it may suddenly take away that sound which you last struck, 
yet give some small tincture of a new note, but not distinctly to be 
heard as a note; which grace, if well done and properly is very taking 
and pleasant.”

The Sting is “another very neat and pretty grace,” it makes the sound 
seem to swell with pretty unexpected humour, and gives much 
contentment upon cases.

The Tut is easily done, and always with the right hand. “When you 
would perform this grace, it is but to strike your letter which you 
intend shall be so graced, with one of your fingers, and immediately 
clap on your next striking finger upon the string which you struck; in 
which doing, you suddenly take away the sound of the letter; and if 
you do it clearly, it will seem to speak the word, _Tut_, so plainly, 
as if it were a living creature, speakable!”

While however the pupil was intent upon exhibiting these graces, the 
zealous master exhorted him not to be unmindful of his own, but to 
regard his postures, for a good posture is comely, creditable and 
praiseworthy, and moreover advantageous as to good performance. “Set 
yourself down against a table, in as becoming a posture, as you would 
choose to do for your best reputation. Sit upright and straight; then 
take up your lute, and lay the body of it in your lap across. Let the 
lower part of it lie upon your right thigh, the head erected against 
your left shoulder and ear; lay your left hand down upon the table, 
and your right arm over the lute, so that you may set your little 
finger down upon the belly of the lute, just under the bridge, against 
the treble, or second string: and then keep your lute stiff, and 
strongly set with its lower edge against the table-edge; and so, 
leaning your breast something hard against its ribs, cause it to stand 
steady and strong, so that a bystander cannot easily draw it from your 
breast, table, and arm. This is the most becoming, steady and 
beneficial posture.”

“Your left hand thus upon the table, your lute firmly fixed, yourself 
and it in your true postures,—bring up your left hand from the table, 
bended, just like the balance of a hook, all excepting your thumb, 
which must stand straight and span'd out; your fingers also, all 
divided out from the other in an equal and handsome order; and in this 
posture, place your thumb under the neck of the lute, a little above 
the fret, just in the midst of the breadth of the neck; all your 
four-fingers in this posture, being held close over the strings on the 
other side, so that each finger may be in a readiness to stop down 
upon any fret. And now in this lively and exact posture, I would have 
your posture drawn, which is the most becoming posture I can direct 
unto for a lutanist.”

“Know that an old lute is better than a new one.” Old instruments 
indeed, are found by experience to be far the best, the reasons for 
which Master Mace could no further dive into than to say, he 
apprehended, “that by extreme age, the wood and those other adjuncts, 
glue, parchment, paper, linings of cloth, (as some used) but above all 
the varnish, are by time very much dried, limped, made gentle, 
rarified, or to say better, even airified; so that that stiffness, 
stubbornness, or _clunguiness_ which is natural to such bodies, are so 
debilitated and made pliable, that the pores of the wood, have a more 
free liberty to move, stir or secretly vibrate; by which means the air 
(which is the life of all things both animate and inanimate) has a 
more free and easy recourse to pass and repass, &c. Whether I have hit 
upon the right cause, I know not, but sure I am that age adds goodness 
to instruments.”

The Venice lutes were commonly good; and the most esteemed maker was 
Laux Malles, whose name was always written in text letters. Mace had 
seen two of his lutes, “pitiful, old, battered, cracked things;” yet 
for one of these, which Mr. Gootiere, the famous lutanist in his time 
showed him, the King paid an hundred pounds. The other belonged to Mr. 
Edward Jones, one of Gootiere's scholars; and he relates this “true 
story” of it; that a merchant bargained with the owner to take it with 
him in his travels, on trial; if he liked it, he was on his return to 
give an hundred pounds for it; otherwise he was to return it safe, and 
pay twenty pounds “for his experience and use of it.”—He had often 
seen lutes of three or four pounds a piece “more illustrious and 
taking to a common eye.”

The best shape was the Pearl mould, both for sound and comeliness, and 
convenience in holding. The best wood for the ribs was what he calls 
air-wood, this was absolutely the best; English maple next. There were 
very good ones however of plum, pear, yew, rosemary-air, and ash. 
Ebony and ivory, though most costly and taking to a common eye were 
the worst. For the belly the finest grained wood was required, free 
from knots or obstructions; cypress was very good, but the best was 
called Cullen's-cliff, being no other than the finest sort of fir, and 
the choicest part of that fir. To try whether the bars within, to 
strengthen and keep it straight and tight, were all fast, you were 
gently to knock the belly all along, round about, and then in the 
midst, with one of your knuckles; “if any thing be either loose in it, 
or about it, you may easily perceive it, by a little fuzzing or 
hizzing; but if all be sound, you shall hear nothing but a tight plump 
and twanking knock.”

Among the aspersions against the lute which Master Mace indignantly 
repelled, one was that it cost as much in keeping as a horse. “I do 
confess,” said he, “that those who will be prodigal and extraordinary 
curious, may spend as much as may maintain two or three horses, and 
men to ride upon them too if they please. But he never charged more 
than ten shillings for first stringing one, and five shillings a 
quarter for maintaining it with strings.”

The strings were of three sorts, minikins, Venice Catlins, and Lyons, 
for the basses; but the very best for the basses were called Pistoy 
Basses; these, which were smooth and well-twisted strings, but hard to 
come by, he supposes to be none others than thick Venice Catlins, and 
commonly dyed of a deep dark red. The red strings however were 
commonly rotten, so were the yellow, the green sometimes very good; 
the clear blue the best. But good strings might be spoilt in a quarter 
of an hour, if they were exposed to any wet, or moist air. Therefore 
they were to be bound close together, and wrapt closely up either in 
an oiled paper, a bladder, or a piece of sere cloth, “such as often 
comes over with them,” and then to be kept in some close box, or 
cupboard, but not amongst linen (for that gives moisture,) and in a 
room where is usually a fire. And when at any time you open them for 
your use, take heed they lie not too long open, nor in a dark window, 
nor moist place; for moisture is the worst enemy to your strings.

“How to choose and find a true string, which is the most curious piece 
of skill in stringing, is both a pretty curiosity to do, and also 
necessary. First, draw out a length, or more; then take the end, and 
measure the length it must be of, within an inch or two, (for it will 
stretch so much at least in the winding up,) and hold that length in 
both hands, extended to reasonable stiffness: then, with one of your 
fingers strike it; giving it so much liberty in slackness as you may 
see it vibrate, or open itself. If it be true, it will appear to the 
eye, just as if they were two strings; but if it shows more than two, 
it is false, and will sound unpleasantly upon your instrument, nor 
will it ever be well in tune, either stopt or open, but snarl.” Sir 
John Hawkins observes that this direction is given by Adrian Le Roy in 
his instructions for the lute, and is adopted both by Mersennus and 
Kircher. Indeed this experiment is the only known test of a true 
string, and for that reason is practised by such as are curious at 
this day.

In his directions for playing, Master Mace says, “take notice that you 
strike not your strings with your nails, as some do, who maintain it 
the best way of play; but I do not; and for this reason; because the 
nail cannot draw so sweet a sound from the lute as the nibble end of 
the flesh can do. I confess in a concert it might do well enough, 
where the mellowness, (which is the most excellent satisfaction from a 
lute) is lost in the crowd; but alone, I could never receive so good 
content from the nail as from the flesh.”

Mace considered it to be absolutely necessary that all persons who 
kept lutes should know how to repair them; for he had known a lute 
“sent fifty or sixty miles to be mended of a very small mischance, 
(scarce worth twelve pence for the mending) which besides the trouble 
and cost of carriage, had been broken all to pieces in the return, and 
so farewell lute and all the cost.” One of the necessary tools for 
this work is “a little working knife, such as are most commonly made 
of pieces of broken good blades, fastened into a pretty thick haft of 
wood or bone, leaving the blade out about two or three inches;” “grind 
it down upon the back,” he says, “to a sharp point, and set to a good 
edge; it will serve you for many good uses, either in cutting, 
carving, making pins, &c.”

His directions for this work are exceedingly minute; but when the lute 
was in order, it was of no slight importance to keep it so, and for 
this also he offers some choice observations. “You shall do well, ever 
when you lay it by in the day-time, to put it into a bed that is 
constantly used, between the rug and blanket, but never between the 
sheets, because they may be moist.” “This is the most absolute and 
best place to keep it in always.” “There are many great commodities in 
so doing; it will save your strings from breaking, it will keep your 
lute in good order, so that you shall have but small trouble in tuning 
it; it will sound more brisk and lively, and give you pleasure in the 
very handling of it; if you have any occasion extraordinary to set up 
your lute at a higher pitch, you may do it safely, which otherwise you 
cannot so well do, without danger to your instrument and strings: it 
will be a great safety to your instrument, in keeping it from decay, 
it will prevent much trouble in keeping the bars from flying loose and 
the belly from sinking: and these six conveniences considered all 
together, must needs create a seventh, which is, that lute-playing 
must certainly be very much facilitated, and made more delightful 
thereby. Only no person must be so inconsiderate as to tumble down 
upon the bed whilst the lute is there, for I have known, said he, 
several good lutes spoilt with such a trick.”

I will not say of the reader, who after the foregoing specimens of 
Music's Monument has no liking for Master Mace and his book that he

  Is fit for treasons, stratagems and spoil,

but I cannot but suspect that he has no taste for caviare, dislikes 
laver, would as willingly drink new hock as old, and more willingly 
the base compound which passes for champagne, than either. Nay I could 
even suspect that he does not love those “three things which persons 
loving, love what they ought,—the whistling of the wind, the dashing 
of the waves, and the rolling of thunder:” and that he comes under the 
commination of this other triad, “let no one love such as dislike the 
scent of cloves, the taste of milk and the song of birds.” My Welsh 
friends shall have the pleasure of reading these true sayings, in 
their own ancient, venerable and rich language.

_Tri dyn o garu tri pheth à garant à ddylaint; gorddyan y gwgnt, boran 
y tònau, ac angerdd y daran._

_Tri pheth ma chared neb a 'u hanghara: rhogleu y meillion, blâs 
llaeth, a chân adar._




