CHAPTER CLXXXVII.

VAN HELMONT'S WORKS, AND CERTAIN SPECIALITIES IN HIS LIFE.

_Voilà, mon conte.—Je ne sçay s'il est vray; mais, je l'ay ainsi ouy 
conter.—Possible que cela est faux, possible que non.—Je m'en rapporte 
à ce qui en est. Il ne sera pas damné qui le croira, ou décroira._

BRANTÔME.


“The works of Van Helmont,” Dr. Aikin says, “are now only consulted as 
curiosities; but with much error and jargon, they contain many shrewd 
remarks, and curious speculations.”

How little would any reader suppose from this account of them, or 
indeed from any thing which Dr. Aikin has said concerning this once 
celebrated person, that Van Helmont might as fitly be classed among 
enthusiasts as among physicians, and with philosophers as with either; 
and that like most enthusiasts it is sometimes not easy to determine 
whether he was deceived himself or intended to deceive others.

He was born at Brussels in the year 1577, and of noble family. In his 
Treatise entitled _Tumulus Pestis_ (to which strange title a 
stranger[1] explanation is annexed) he gives a sketch of his own 
history, saying, “_imitemini, si quid forte boni in eâ occurrerit._” 
He was a devourer of books, and digested into common places for his 
own use, whatever he thought most remarkable in them, so that few 
exceeded him in diligence, but most, he says, in judgement. At the age 
of seventeen, he was appointed by the Professors Thomas Fyenus, Gerard 
de Velleers, and Stornius, to read surgical lectures in the Medical 
College at Louvain. _Eheu_, he exclaims, _præsumsi docere, quæ ipse 
nesciebam!_ and his presumption was increased because the Professors 
of their own accord appointed him to this Lectureship, attended to 
hear him, and were the Censors of what he delivered. The writers from 
whom he compiled his discourses were Holerius, Tagaultius, Guido, 
Vigo, Ægineta, and “the whole tribe of Arabian authors.” But then he 
began, and in good time, to marvel at his own temerity and 
inconsiderateness in thinking that by mere reading, he could be 
qualified to teach what could be learnt only by seeing, and by 
operating, and by long practice, and by careful observation: and this 
distrust in himself was increased when he discovered that the 
Professors could give him no further light than books had done. 
However at the age of twenty-two he was created Doctor of Medicine in 
the same University.

[Footnote 1:

  Lector, titulus quem legis, terror lugubris, foribus affixus,
              intus mortem, mortis genus, et hominum
           nunciat flagrum. Sta, et inquire, quid hoc?
                      Mirare. Quid sibi vult
                     Tumuli Epigraphe Pestis?
      Sub anatome abii, non obii; quamdiu malesuada invidia
                 Momi, et hominum ignara cupido,
                           me fovebunt.
                            Ergo heic
         Non funus, non cadaver, non mors, non sceleton
                   non luctus, non contagium.
                       ÆTERNO DA GLORIAM
    Quod Pestis jam desiit, sub Anatomes proprio supplicio.]


Very soon he began to repent that he, who was by birth noble, should 
have been the first of his family to choose the medical profession, 
and this against the will of his mother, and without the knowledge of 
his other relations. “I lamented, he says, with tears the sin of my 
disobedience, and regretted the time and labour which had been thus 
vainly expended: and often with a sorrowful heart I intreated the Lord 
that he would be pleased to lead me to a vocation not of my own 
choice, but in which I might best perform his will; and I made a vow 
that to whatever way of life he might call me, I would follow it, and 
do my utmost endeavour therein to serve him. Then, as if I had tasted 
of the forbidden fruit, I discovered my own nakedness. I saw that 
there was neither truth nor knowledge in my putative learning; and 
thought it cruel to derive money from the sufferings of others; and 
unfitting that an art founded upon charity, and conferred upon the 
condition of exercising compassion, should be converted into a means 
of lucre.”

These reflections were promoted if not induced by his having caught a 
disorder which as it is not mentionable in polite circles, may be 
described by intimating that the symptom from which it derives its 
name is alleviated by what Johnson defines tearing or rubbing with the 
nails. It was communicated to him by a young lady's glove, into which 
in a evil minute of sportive gallantry he had insinuated his hand. The 
physicians treated him, _secundum artem_, in entire ignorance of the 
disease; they bled him to cool the liver, and they purged him to carry 
off the torrid choler and the salt phlegm, they repeated this 
clearance again and again, till from a hale strong and active man they 
had reduced him to extreme leanness and debility without in the 
slightest degree abating the cutaneous disease. He then persuaded 
himself that the humours which the Galenists were so triumphantly 
expelling from his poor carcase had not preexisted there in that state 
but were produced by the action of their drugs. Some one cured him 
easily by brimstone, and this is said to have made him feelingly 
perceive the inefficiency of the scholastic practice which he had 
hitherto pursued.

In this state of mind he made over his inheritance to a widowed 
sister, who stood in need of it, gave up his profession, and left his 
own country with an intention of never returning to it. The world was 
all before him, and he began his travels with as little fore-knowledge 
whither he was going, and as little fore-thought of what he should do, 
as Adam himself when the gate of Paradise was closed upon him; but he 
went with the hope that God would direct his course by His good 
pleasure to some good end. It so happened that he who had renounced 
the profession of medicine as founded on delusion and imposture was 
thrown into the way of practising it, by falling in company with a man 
who had no learning, but who understood the practical part of 
chemistry, or pyrotechny, as he calls it. The new world which Columbus 
discovered did not open a wider or more alluring field to ambition and 
rapacity than this science presented to Van Helmont's enthusiastic and 
enquiring mind. “Then” says he, “when by means of fire I beheld the 
_penetrale_, the inward or secret part of certain bodies, I 
comprehended the separations of many, which were not then taught in 
books, and some of which are still unknown.” He pursued his 
experiments with increasing ardour, and in the course of two years 
acquired such reputation by the cures which he performed, that because 
of his reputation he was sent for by the Elector of Cologne. Then 
indeed he became more ashamed of his late and learned ignorance, and 
renouncing all books because they sung only the same cuckoo note, 
perceived that he profited more by fire, and by conceptions acquired 
in praying. “And then,” says he, “I clearly knew that I had missed the 
entrance of true philosophy, on all sides obstacles and obscurities 
and difficulties appeared, which neither labour, nor time, nor vigils, 
nor expenditure of money could overcome and disperse, but only the 
mere goodness of God. Neither women, nor social meetings deprived me 
then of even a single hour, but continual labour and watching were the 
thieves of my time; for I willingly cured the poor and those of mean 
estate, being more moved by human compassion, and a moral love of 
giving, than by pure universal charity reflected in the Fountain of 
Life.”




INTERCHAPTER XX.

ST. PANTALEON OF NICOMEDIA IN BITHYNIA—HIS HISTORY, AND SOME FURTHER 
PARTICULARS NOT TO BE FOUND ELSEWHERE.

   _Non dicea le cose senza il quia;
  Che il dritto distingueva dal mancino,
  E dicea pane al pane, e vino al vino._

BERTOLDO.


This Interchapter is dedicated to St. Pantaleon, of Nicomedia in 
Bithynia, student in medicine and practitioner in miracles, whose 
martyrdom is commemorated by the Church of Rome, on the 27th of July.

  _Sancte Pantaleon, ora pro nobis!_

This I say to be on the safe side; though between ourselves reader, 
Nicephorus, and Usuardus, and Vincentius and St. Antoninus 
(notwithstanding his sanctity) have written so many lies concerning 
him, that it is very doubtful whether there ever was such a person, 
and still more doubtful whether there be such a Saint. However the 
body which is venerated under his name, is just as venerable as if it 
had really belonged to him, and works miracles as well.

It is a tradition in Corsica that when St. Pantaleon was beheaded, the 
executioner's sword was converted into a wax taper, and the weapons of 
all his attendants into snuffers, and that the head rose from the 
block and sung. In honour of this miracle the Corsicans as late as the 
year 1775 used to have their swords consecrated, or charmed,—by laying 
them on the altar while a mass was performed to St. Pantaleon.

But what have I, who am writing in January instead of July, and who am 
no papist, and who have the happiness of living in a protestant 
country, and was baptized moreover by a right old English name,—what 
have I to do with St. Pantaleon? Simply this, my new pantaloons are 
just come home, and that they derive their name from the aforesaid 
Saint is as certain,—as that it was high time I should have a new 
pair.

St. Pantaleon though the tutelary Saint of Oporto (which city boasteth 
of his relics) was in more especial fashion at Venice: and so many of 
the grave Venetians were in consequence named after him, that the 
other Italians called them generally Pantaloni in derision,—as an 
Irishman is called Pat, and as Sawney is with us synonymous with 
Scotchman, or Taffy for a son of Cadwallader and votary of St. David 
and his leek. Now the Venetians wore long small clothes; these as 
being the national dress were called Pantaloni also; and when the 
trunk-hose of Elizabeth's days went out of fashion, we received them 
from France, with the name of pantaloons.

Pantaloons then as of Venetian and Magnifico parentage, and under the 
patronage of an eminent Saint, are doubtless an honourable garb. They 
are also of honourable extraction, being clearly of the Braccæ family. 
For it is this part of our dress by which we are more particularly 
distinguished from the Oriental and inferior nations and also from the 
abominable Romans whom our ancestors, Heaven be praised! subdued. 
Under the miserable reign of Honorius and Arcadius, these Lords of the 
World thought proper to expel the Braccarii, or breeches-makers, from 
their capitals, and to prohibit the use of this garment, thinking it a 
thing unworthy that the Romans should wear the habit of 
Barbarians:—and truly it was not fit that so effeminate a race should 
wear the breeches.

The Pantaloons are of this good Gothic family. The fashion having been 
disused for more than a century was re-introduced some five and twenty 
years ago, and still prevails so much—that I who like to go with the 
stream, and am therefore content to have fashions thrust upon me, have 
just received a new pair from London.

The coming of a box from the Great City is an event which is always 
looked to by the juveniles of this family with some degree of 
impatience. In the present case there was especial cause for such 
joyful expectation, for the package was to contain no less a treasure 
than the story of the Lioness and the Exeter Mail, with appropriate 
engravings representing the whole of that remarkable history, and 
those engravings emblazoned in appropriate colours. This adventure had 
excited an extraordinary degree of interest among us when it was 
related in the newspapers: and no sooner had a book upon the subject 
been advertised, than the young ones one and all were in an uproar, 
and tumultuously petitioned that I would send for it,—to which, 
thinking the prayer of the petitioners reasonable, I graciously 
assented. And moreover there was expected among other things _ejusdem 
generis_, one of those very few perquisites which the all-annihilating 
hand of Modern Reform has not retrenched in our public offices,—an 
Almanac or Pocket-Book for the year, curiously bound and gilt, three 
only being made up in this magnificent manner for three magnificent 
personages, from one of whom this was a present to my lawful 
Governess. Poor Mr. Bankes! the very hairs of his wig will stand 
erect,

  Like quills upon the fretful porcupine,

when he reads of this flagrant misapplication of public money; and Mr. 
Whitbread would have founded a motion upon it, had he survived the 
battle of Waterloo.

There are few things in which so many vexatious delays are continually 
occurring, and so many rascally frauds are systematically practised, 
as in the carriage of parcels. It is indeed much to be wished that 
Government could take into its hands the conveyance of goods as well 
as letters, for in this country whatever is done by Government is done 
punctually and honourably;—what corruption there is lies among the 
people themselves, among whom honesty is certainly less general than 
it was half a century ago. Three or four days elapsed on each of which 
the box ought to have arrived. Will it come to day Papa? was the 
morning question: why does not it come? was the complaint at noon; and 
when will it come? was the query at night. But in childhood the delay 
of hope is only the prolongation of enjoyment; and through life 
indeed, hope if it be of the right kind, is the best food of 
happiness. “The House of Hope,” says Hafiz, “is built upon a weak 
foundation.” If it be so, I say, the fault is in the builder: Build it 
upon a Rock, and it will stand.

_Expectata dies_,—long looked for, at length it came. The box was 
brought into the parlour, the ripping-chissel was produced, the nails 
were easily forced, the cover was lifted, and the paper which lay 
beneath it was removed. There's the pantaloons! was the first 
exclamation. The clothes being taken out, there appeared below a paper 
parcel, secured with string. As I never encourage any undue 
impatience, the string was deliberately and carefully untied. Behold, 
the splendid Pocket-Book, and the history of the Lioness and the 
Exeter Mail,—had been forgotten!

O St. Peter! St. Peter!

“Pray, Sir,” says the Reader, “as I perceive you are a person who have 
a reason for every thing you say, may I ask wherefore you call upon 
St. Peter on this occasion.”

You may Sir.

A reason there is and a valid one. But what that reason is, I shall 
leave the commentators to discover; observing only, for the sake of 
lessening their difficulty, that the Peter upon whom I have called is 
not St. Peter of Verona, he having been an Inquisitor, one of the 
Devil's Saints, and therefore in no condition at this time to help any 
body who invokes him.

“Well Papa, you must write about them, and they must come in the next 
parcel,” said the children. Job never behaved better, who was a 
scriptural Epictetus; nor Epictetus who was a heathen Job.

I kissed the little philosophers; and gave them the Bellman's verses, 
which happened to come in the box, with horrific cuts of the Marriage 
at Cana, the Ascension and other portions of gospel history, and the 
Bellman himself,—so it was not altogether a blank. We agreed that the 
disappointment should be an adjourned pleasure, and then I turned to 
inspect the pantaloons.

I cannot approve the colour. It hath too much of the purple; not that 
imperial die by which ranks were discriminated at Constantinople, nor 
the more sober tint which Episcopacy affecteth. Nor is it the bloom of 
the plum;—still less can it be said to resemble the purple light of 
love. No! it is rather a hue brushed from the raven's wing, a black 
purple; not Night and Aurora meeting, which would make the darkness 
blush; but Erebus and Ultramarine.

Doubtless it hath been selected for me because of its alamodality,—a 
good and pregnant word, on the fitness of which some German whose name 
appears to be erroneously as well as uncouthly written Geamoenus, is 
said to have composed a dissertation. Be pleased Mr. Todd to insert it 
in the interleaved copy of your dictionary!

Thankful I am that they are not like Jean de Bart's full dress 
breeches; for when that famous sailor went to court he is said to have 
worn breeches of cloth of gold, most uncomfortably as well as 
splendidly lined with cloth of silver.

He would never have worn them had he read Lampridius, and seen the 
opinion of the Emperor Alexander Severus as by that historian 
recorded: “_in lineâ autem aurum mitti etiam dementiam judicabat, cum 
asperitati adderetur rigor._”

The word breeches has, I am well aware, been deemed ineffable, and 
therefore not to be written—because not to be read. But I am 
encouraged to use it by the high and mighty authority of the 
Anti-Jacobin Review. Mr. Stephens having in his Memoirs of Horne Tooke 
used the word small-clothes is thus reprehended for it by the 
indignant Censor.

“His _breeches_ he calls _small-clothes_;—the first time we have seen 
this bastard term, the offspring of gross ideas and disgusting 
affectation in print, in any thing like a book. It is scandalous to 
see men of education thus employing the most vulgar language, and 
corrupting their native tongue by the introduction of illegitimate 
words. But this is the age of affectation. Even our fishwomen and 
milkmaids affect to blush at the only word which can express this part 
of a man's dress, and lisp _small-clothes_ with as many airs as a 
would-be woman of fashion is accustomed to display. That this folly is 
indebted for its birth to grossness of imagination in those who evince 
it, will not admit of a doubt. From the same source arises the 
ridiculous and too frequent use of a French word for a part of female 
dress; as if the mere change of language could operate a change either 
in the thing expressed, or in the idea annexed to the expression! 
Surely, surely, English women, who are justly celebrated for good 
sense and decorous manners, should rise superior to such pityful, such 
paltry, such low-minded affectation.”

Here I must observe that one of these redoubtable critics is thought 
to have a partiality for breeches of the Dutch make. It is said also 
that he likes to cut them out for himself, and to have pockets of 
capacious size, wide and deep; and a large fob, and a large allowance 
of lining.

The Critic who so very much dislikes the word small-clothes, and 
argues so vehemently in behalf of breeches, uses no doubt that edition 
of the scriptures that is known by the name of the Breeches Bible.[1]

[Footnote 1: The Bible here alluded to was the Genevan one, by Rowland 
Hall, A.D. 1560. It was for many years the most popular one in 
England, and the notes were great favorites with the religious public, 
insomuch so that they were attached to a copy of King James' 
Translation as late as 1715. From the peculiar rendering of Genesis, 
iii. 7, the Editions of this translation have been commonly known by 
the name of “Breeches Bibles.”—See Cotton's Various Editions of the 
Bible, p. 14, and Ames and Herbert, Ed. Dibdin, vol. iv. p. 410.]

I ought to be grateful to the Anti-Jacobin Review. It assists in 
teaching me my duty to my neighbour, and enabling me to live in 
charity with all men. For I might perhaps think that nothing could be 
so wrong-headed as Leigh Hunt, so wrong-hearted as Cobbett, so foolish 
as one, so blackguard as the other, so impudently conceited as 
both,—if it were not for the Anti-Jacobin. I might believe that 
nothing could be so bad as the coarse, bloody and brutal spirit of the 
vulgar Jacobin,—if it were not for the Anti-Jacobin.

Blessings on the man for his love of pure English! It is to be 
expected that he will make great progress in it, through his 
familiarity with fishwomen and milk-maids; for it implies no common 
degree of familiarity with those interesting classes to talk to them 
about breeches, and discover that they prefer to call them 
small-clothes.

But wherefore did he not instruct us by which monosyllable he would 
express the female garment, “which is indeed the sister to a 
shirt,”—as an old poet says, and which he hath left unnamed,—for there 
are two by which it is denominated. Such a discussion would be worthy 
both of his good sense, and his decorous stile.

For my part, instead of expelling the word _chemise_ from use I would 
have it fairly naturalized.

Many plans have been proposed for reducing our orthography to some 
regular system, and improving our language in various ways. Mr. 
Elphinstone, Mr. Pinkerton, and Mr. Spence, the founder of the 
Spensean Philanthropists, have distinguished themselves in these 
useful and patriotic projects, and Mr. Pytches is at present in like 
manner laudably employed,—though that gentleman contents himself with 
reforming what these bolder spirits would revolutionize. I also would 
fain contribute to so desirable an end.

We agree that in spelling words it is proper to discard all reference 
to their etymology. The political reformer would confine the attention 
of the Government exclusively to what are called truly British 
objects; and the philological reformers in like manner are desirous of 
establishing a truly British language.

Upon this principle, I would anglicize the orthography of _chemise_; 
and by improving upon the hint which the word would then offer in its 
English appearance, we might introduce into our language a distinction 
of genders—in which it has hitherto been defective. For example,

  Hemise and Shemise.

Here without the use of an article, or any change of termination we 
have the needful distinction made more perspicuously than by _ó_ and 
_ń_, _hic_ and _hæc_, _le_ and _la_, or other articles serving for no 
other purpose.

Again. In letter-writing, every person knows that male and female 
letters have a distinct sexual character, they should therefore be 
generally distinguished thus,

  Hepistle and Shepistle.

And as there is the same marked difference in the writing of the two 
sexes I would propose

  Penmanship and Penwomanship.

Erroneous opinions in religion being promulgated in this country by 
women as well as men, the teachers of such false doctrines may be 
divided into

  Heresiarchs and Sheresiarchs,

so that we should speak of

  the Heresy of the Quakers
  the Sheresy of Joanna Southcote's people.

The troublesome affection of the diaphragm, which every person has 
experienced, is upon the same principle to be called according to the 
sex of the patient

  Hecups or Shecups,

which upon the principle of making our language truly British is 
better than the more classical form of

  Hiccups and Hæccups.

In its objective use the word becomes

  Hiscups or Hercups,

and in like manner Histerics should be altered into Herterics, the 
complaint never being masculine.

So also instead of making such words as agreeable, comfortable, &c. 
adjectives of one termination, I would propose,

  Masculine agreabeau, Feminine agreabelle
         comfortabeau           comfortabelle
           miserabeau           miserabelle,
                                  &c. &c.

These things are suggested as hints to Mr. Pytches, to be by him 
perpended in his improvement of our Dictionary. I beg leave also to 
point out for his critical notice the remarkable difference in the 
meaning of the word misfortune, as applied to man, woman, or child: a 
peculiarity for which perhaps no parallel is to be found in any other 
language.

But to return from these philological speculations to the Anti-Jacobin 
by whom we have been led to them, how is it that this critic, great 
master as he is of the vulgar tongue, should affirm that breeches is 
the only word by which this part of a man's dress can be expressed. 
Had he forgotten that there was such a word as galligaskins?—to say 
nothing of inexpressibles and dont-mention 'ems. Why also did he 
forget pantaloons?—and thus the Chapter like a rondeau comes round to 
St. Pantaleon with whom it began,

  _Sancte Pantaleon, ora pro nobis!_




“Here is another Chapter without a heading,”—the Compositor would have 
said when he came to this part of the Manuscript, if he had not seen 
at a glance, that in my great consideration I had said it for him.

Yes, Mr. Compositor! Because of the matter whereon it has to treat, we 
must, if you please, entitle this an

  ARCH-CHAPTER.

A Frenchman once, who was not ashamed of appearing ignorant on such a 
subject, asked another who with some reputation for classical 
attainments had not the same rare virtue, what was the difference 
between Dryads and Hamadryads; and the man of erudition gravely 
replied that it was much the same as that between Bishops and 
Archbishops.

I have dignified this Arch-Chapter in its designation, because it 
relates to the King.

Dr. Gooch, you are hereby requested to order this book for his 
Majesty's library,

  _C'est une rare pièce, et digne sur ma foi,
   Qu'on en fasse présent au cabinet d'un roi._[1]

[Footnote 1: MOLIERE.]

Dr. Gooch I have a great respect for you. At the time when there was 
an intention of bringing a bill into Parliament for emancipating the 
Plague from the Quarantine Laws, and allowing to the people of Great 
Britain their long withheld right of having this disease as freely as 
the small pox, measles and any other infectious malady, you wrote a 
paper and published it in the Quarterly Review, against that insane 
intention; proving its insanity so fully by matter of fact, and so 
conclusively by force of reasoning, that your arguments carried 
conviction with them, and put an end, for the time, to that part of 
the emancipating and free trade system.

Dr. Gooch, you have also written a volume of medical treatises of 
which I cannot speak more highly than by saying, sure I am that if the 
excellent subject of these my reminiscences were living, he would, for 
his admiration of those treatises have solicited the pleasure and 
honour of your acquaintance.

Dr. Gooch, comply with this humble request of a sincere, though 
unknown admirer, for the sake of your departed brother-in-physic, who, 
like yourself, brought to the study of the healing art, a fertile 
mind, a searching intellect and a benevolent heart. More, Dr. G. I 
might say, and more I would say, but—

  Should I say more, you well might censure me
  (What yet I never was) a flatterer.[2]

[Footnote 2: BEAUMONT AND FLETCHER.]

When the King (God bless his Majesty!) shall peruse this book and be 
well-pleased therewith, if it should enter into his royal mind to call 
for his Librarian, and ask of him what honour and dignity hath been 
done to the author of it, for having delighted the heart of the King, 
and of so many of his liege subjects, and you shall have replied unto 
his Majesty, “there is nothing done for him;” then Dr. Gooch when the 
King shall take it into consideration how to testify his satisfaction 
with the book, and to manifest his bounty toward the author, you are 
requested to bear in mind my thoughts upon this weighty matter, of 
which I shall now proceed to put you in possession.

Should he generously think of conferring upon me the honour of 
knighthood, or a baronetcy, or a peerage, (Lord Doncaster the title,) 
or a step in the peerage, according to my station in life, of which 
you Dr. Gooch can give him no information; or should he meditate the 
institution of an Order of Merit for men of letters, with an intention 
of nominating me among the original members, worthy as such intentions 
would be of his royal goodness, I should nevertheless, for reasons 
which it is not necessary to explain, deem it prudent to decline any 
of these honours.

Far be it from me, Dr. Gooch, to wish that the royal apparel should be 
brought which the King useth to wear, and the horse that the King 
rideth upon, and the crown royal which is set upon his head; and that 
this apparel and horse should be delivered to the hand of one of the 
King's most noble princes, that he might array me withal; and bring me 
on horseback through the streets of London, and proclaim before me, 
thus shall it be done to the man whom the King delighteth to honour! 
Such an exhibition would neither accord with this age, nor with the 
manners of this nation, nor with my humility.

As little should I desire that his Majesty should give orders for me 
to be clothed in purple, to drink in gold and to sleep upon gold, and 
to ride in a chariot with bridles of gold, and to have an head-tire of 
fine linen, and a chain about my neck, and to eat next the King, 
because of my wisdom, and to be called the King's cousin. For purple 
garments, Dr. Gooch are not among the _propria quæ maribus_ in England 
at this time; it is better to drink in glass than in gold, and to 
sleep upon a feather bed than upon a golden one; the only head-tire 
which I wear is my night-cap, I care not therefore for the fineness of 
its materials; and I dislike for myself chains of any kind.

That his Majesty should think of sending for me to sit next him 
because of my wisdom, is what he in his wisdom will not do, and what, 
if he were to do, would not be agreeable to me, in mine. But should 
the King desire to have me called his Cousin, accompanying that of 
course with such an appanage as would be seemly for its support, and 
should he notify that most gracious intention to you his Librarian, 
and give order that it should be by you inserted in the Gazette,—to 
the end that the secret which assuredly no sagacity can divine, and no 
indiscretion will betray, should incontinently thereupon be 
communicated through you to the royal ear; and that in future editions 
of this work, the name of the thus honoured author should appear with 
the illustrious designation, in golden letters of, “by special command 
of his Majesty,

  COUSIN TO THE KING.”

A gracious mandate of this nature, Dr. Gooch, would require a severe 
sacrifice from my loyal and dutiful obedience. Not that the respectful 
deference which is due to the royal and noble house of Gloucester 
should withhold me from accepting the proffered honour: to that house 
it could be nothing derogatory; the value of their consanguinity would 
rather be the more manifest, when the designation alone, unaccompanied 
with rank, was thus rendered by special command purely and singularly 
honourable. Still less should I be influenced by any apprehension of 
being confounded in cousinship with Olive, calling herself Princess of 
Cumberland. Nevertheless let me say, Dr. Gooch, while I am free to say 
it,—while I am treating of it paulo-post-futuratively, as of a 
possible case, not as a question brought before me for my prompt and 
irrevocable answer,—let me humbly say that I prefer the incognito even 
to this title. It is not necessary, and would not be proper to enter 
into my reasons for that preference; suffice it that it is my humour 
(speaking be it observed respectfully, and using that word in its 
critical and finer sense), that it is the idiosyncrasy of my 
disposition, the familiar way in which it pleases me innocently to 
exercise my privilege of free will. It is not a secret which every 
body knows, which nobody could help knowing and which was the more 
notoriously known because of its presumed secresy. Incognito I am and 
wish to be, and incognoscible it is in my power to remain:

          He deserves small trust,
  Who is not privy councillor to himself,

but my secret, (being my own) is, like my life (if that were needed) 
at the King's service, and at his alone;

  _Τοῖς κυρίοις γὰρ πάντα χρὴ δηλοῦν λόγον._[3]

[Footnote 3: SOPHOCLES.]

Be pleased therefore Dr. Gooch, if his Majesty most graciously and 
most considerately should ask, what may be done for the man (—meaning 
me,—) whom the King delighteth to honour;—be pleased, good Dr. Gooch, 
to represent that the allowance which is usually granted to a retired 
Envoy, would content his wishes, make his fortunes easy, and gladden 
his heart;—(Dr. Gooch you will forgive the liberty thus taken with 
you!)—that “where the word of a King is, there is power,”—that an 
ostensible reason for granting it may easily be found, a sealed 
communication from the unknown being made through your hands;—that 
many Envoys have not deserved it better, and many secret services 
which have been as largely rewarded have not afforded to the King so 
much satisfaction;—finally that this instance of royal bounty will not 
have the effect of directing public suspicion toward the object of 
that bounty, nor be likely to be barked at by Joseph Hume, Colonel 
Davies, and Daniel Whittle Harvey!




