CHAPTER CLXXXVI.

LEONE HEBREO'S DIALOGI DE AMORE.—THE ELIXIR OF LIFE NO OBSTACLE TO 
DEATH.—PARACELSUS.—VAN HELMONT AND JAN MASS.—DR. DOVE'S OPINION OF A 
BIOGRAPHER'S DUTIES.

There's a lean fellow beats all conquerors!

OLD FORTUNATUS.


In Leone Hebreo's Dialogi de Amore, one of the interlocutors says, 
“_Vediamo che gli huomini naturalmente desiano di mai non morire; 
lagual cosa è impossibile, manifesta, e senza speranza._” To which the 
other replies, “_Coloro chel desiano, non credeno interamente che sia 
impossibile, et hanno inteso per le historie legali, che Enoc, et 
Elia, et ancor Santo Giovanni Evangelista sono immortali in corpo, et 
anima: se ben veggono essere stato per miracolo: onde ciascuno pensa 
che à loro Dio potria fare simil miracolo. E però con questa 
possibilita si gionta qualche remota speranza, laquale incita un lento 
desiderio, massimamente per essere la morte horribile, e la 
corruttione propria odiosa à chi si vuole, et il desiderio non è d' 
acquistare cosa nuova, ma di non perdere la vita, che si truova; 
laquale havendosi di presente, è facil cosa ingannarsi l'huomo à 
desiare che non si perda; se ben naturalmente è impossibile: chel 
desiderio di ciò è talmente lento, che può essere di cosa impossibile 
et imaginabile, essendo di tanta importantia al desiderante. Et ancora 
ti dirò chel fondamento di questo desiderio non è vano in se, se bene 
è alquanto ingannoso, però chel desiderio dell' huomo d'essere 
immortale è veramente possibile; perche l'esentia dell' huomu, (come 
rettamente Platon vuole) non è altro che la sua anima intellettiva, 
laquale per la virtu, sapientia, cognitione, et amore divino si fa 
gloriosa et immortale._”

Paracelsus used to boast that he would not die till he thought proper 
so to do, thus wishing it to be understood that he had discovered the 
Elixir of life. He died suddenly, and at a time when he seemed to be 
in full health; and hence arose a report, that he had made a compact 
with the Devil, who enabled him to perform all his cures, but came for 
him as soon as the term of their agreement was up.

Wherefore indeed should he have died by any natural means who so well 
understood the mysteries of life and of death. What, says he, is life? 
_Nihil meherclè vita est aliud, nisi Mumia quædam Balsamita conservans 
mortale corpus à mortalibus vermibus, et eschara cum impressâ liquoris 
salium commisturâ._ What is Death? _Nihil certe aliud quam Balsami 
dominium, Mumiæ interitus, salium ultima materia._ Do you understand 
this, Reader? If you do, I do not.

But he is intelligible when he tells us that Life may be likened to 
Fire, and that all we want is to discover the fuel for keeping it 
up,—the true Lignum Vitæ. It is not against nature, he contends, that 
we should live till the renovation of all things; it is only against 
our knowledge, and beyond it. But there are medicaments for prolonging 
life; and none but the foolish or the ignorant would ask why then is 
it that Princes and Kings who can afford to purchase them, die 
nevertheless like other people. The reason says the great Bombast von 
Hohenheim is that their physicians know less about medicine than the 
very boors, and moreover that Princes and Kings lead dissolute lives. 
And if it be asked why no one except Hermes Trismegistus has used such 
medicaments; he replies that others have used them, but have not let 
it be known.

Van Helmont was once of opinion that no metallic preparation could 
contain in itself the blessing of the Tree of Life, though that the 
Philosopher's stone had been discovered was a fact that consisted with 
his own sure knowledge. This opinion however was in part changed, in 
consequence of some experiments made with an aurific powder, given him 
by a stranger after a single evening's acquaintance; _(vir peregrinus, 
unius vesperi amicus:)_ these experiments convinced him that the stone 
partook of what he calls Zoophyte life, as distinguished both from 
vegetative and sensitive. But the true secret he thought, must be 
derived from the vegetable world, and he sought for it in the Cedar, 
induced, as it seems, by the frequent mention of that tree in the Old 
Testament. He says much concerning the cedar,—among other things, that 
when all other plants were destroyed by the Deluge, and their kinds 
preserved only in their seed, the Cedars of Lebanon remained uninjured 
under the waters. However when he comes to the main point, he makes a 
full stop, saying, _Cætera autem quæ de Cedro sunt, mecum sepelientur: 
nam mundus non capax est._ It is not unlikely that if his mysticism 
had been expressed in the language of intelligible speculation, it 
might have been found to accord with some of Berkeley's theories in 
the _Siris_. But for his reticence upon this subject, as if the world 
were not worthy of his discoveries, he ought to have been deprived of 
his two remaining talents. Five he tells us he had received for his 
portion, but because instead of improving them, he had shown himself 
unworthy of so large a trust, he by whom they were given had taken 
from him three. “_Ago illi gratias, quod cum contulisset in me quinque 
talenta, fecissemque me indignum, et hactenus repudium coram eo factus 
essem, placuit divinæ bonitati, auferre à me tria, et relinquere adhuc 
bina, ut me sic ad meliorem frugem exspectaret. Maluit, inquam, me 
depauperare et tolerare, ut non essem utilis plurimis, modò me 
salvaret ab hujus mundi periculis. Sit ipsi æterna sanctificatio._”

He has however informed posterity of the means by which he prolonged 
the life of a man to extreme old age. This person whose name was Jan 
Mass, was in the service of Martin Rythovius, the first Bishop of 
Ypres, when that prelate, by desire of the illustrious sufferers, 
assisted at the execution of Counts Egmond and Horn. Mass was then in 
the twenty-fifth year of his age. When he was fifty-eight, being poor, 
and having a large family of young children, he came to Van Helmont, 
and entreated him to prolong his life if he could, for the sake of 
these children, who would be left destitute in case of his death, and 
must have to beg their bread from door to door. Van Helmont, then a 
young man, was moved by such an application, and considering what 
might be the likeliest means of sustaining life in its decay, he 
called to mind the fact that wine is preserved from corruption by the 
fumes of burnt brimstone; it then occurred to him that the acid liquor 
of sulphur, _acidum sulfuris stagma_, (it is better so to translate 
his words than to call it the sulphuric acid,) must of necessity 
contain the fumes and odour of sulphur, being, according to his 
chemistry, nothing but those fumes of sulphur, combined with, or 
imbibed in, its mercurial salt. The next step in his reasoning was to 
regard the blood as the wine of life; if this could be kept sound, 
though longevity might not be the necessary consequence, life would at 
least be preserved from the many maladies which arose from its 
corruption, and the sanity, and immunity from such diseases, and from 
the sufferings consequent thereon, must certainly tend to its 
prolongation. He gave Mass therefore a stone bottle of the distilled 
liquor of sulphur, and taught him also how to prepare this oil from 
burnt sulphur. And he ordered him at every meal to take two drops of 
it in his first draught of beer; and not lightly to exceed that; two 
drops, he thought, contained enough of the fumes for a sufficient 
dose. This was in the year 1600; and now, says Helmont, in 1641, the 
old man still walks about the streets of Brussels. And what is still 
better, _(quodque augustius est,)_ in all these forty years, he has 
never been confined by any illness, except that by a fall upon the ice 
he once broke his leg near the knee; and he has constantly been free 
from fever, remaining a slender and lean man, and always poor.

Jan Mass had nearly reached his hundredth year when this was written, 
and it is no wonder that Van Helmont, who upon a fantastic analogy had 
really prescribed an efficient tonic, should have accounted by the 
virtue of his prescription for the health and vigour, which a strong 
constitution had retained to that extraordinary age. There is no 
reason for doubting the truth of his statement; but if Van Helmont 
relied upon his theory, he must have made further experiments; it is 
probable therefore that he either distrusted his own hypothesis, or 
found upon subsequent trials that the result disappointed him.

Van Helmont's works were collected and edited by his son Francis 
Mercurius, who styles himself _Philosophus per Unum in quo Omnia 
Eremita peregrinans_, and who dedicated the collection as a holocaust 
to the ineffable Hebrew Name. The Vita Authoris which he prefixed to 
it relates to his own life, not to his father's, and little can be 
learnt from it, except that he is the more mystical and least 
intelligible of the two. The most curious circumstances concerning the 
father are what he has himself communicated in the treatise entitled 
his Confession, into which the writer of his life in Aikin's Biography 
seems not to have looked, nor indeed into any of his works, the 
articles in that as in our other Biographies, being generally compiled 
from compilations, so as to present the most superficial information, 
with the least possible trouble to the writer and the least possible 
profit to the reader,—skimming for him not the cream of knowledge, but 
the scum.

Dr. Dove used to say that whoever wrote the life of an author without 
carefully perusing his works acted as iniquitously as a Judge who 
should pronounce sentence in a cause without hearing the evidence; nay 
he maintained, the case was even worse, because there was an even 
chance that the Judge might deliver a right sentence, but it was 
impossible that a life so composed should be otherwise than grievously 
imperfect, if not grossly erroneous. For all the ordinary business of 
the medical profession he thought it sufficient that a practitioner 
should thoroughly understand the practice of his art, and proceed 
empirically: God help the patients, he would say, if it were not so! 
and indeed without God's help they would fare badly at the best. But 
he was of opinion that no one could take a lively and at the same time 
a worthy interest in any art or science without as it were identifying 
himself with it, and seeking to make himself well acquainted with its 
history: a Physician therefore, according to his way of thinking ought 
to be as curious concerning the writings of his more eminent 
predecessors, and as well read in the most illustrious of them, as a 
general in the wars of Hannibal, Cæsar, the Black Prince, the Prince 
of Parma, Gustavus Adolphus, and Marlborough. How carefully he had 
perused Van Helmont was shown by the little landmarks whereby after an 
interval of—alas how many years,—I have followed him through the 
volume,—_haud passibus æquis_.




