CHAPTER CXCIX.

CONCERNING THE GREAT HONOURS TO WHICH CERTAIN HORSES HAVE ATTAINED, 
AND THE ROYAL MERITS OF NOBS.

  _Siento para contarlas que me llama
   El á mi, yo á mi pluma, ella á la fama._

BALBUENA.


There have been great and good horses whose merits have been recorded 
in history and in immortal song as they well deserved to be. Who has 
not heard of Bucephalus? of whom Pulteney said that he questioned 
whether Alexander himself had pushed his conquests half so far, if 
Bucephalus had not stooped to take him on his back. Statius hath sung 
of Arion who when he carried Neptune left the winds panting behind 
him, and who was the best horse that ever has been heard of for taking 
the water,

  _Sæpe per Ionium Libycumque natantibus ire
   Interjunctus equis, omnesque assuetus in oras
   Cæruleum deferre patrem._

       *       *       *       *       *

   Tramp, tramp across the land he went,
       Splash, splash across the sea.

But he was a dangerous horse in a gig. Hercules found it difficult to 
hold him in, and Polynices when he attempted to drive him made almost 
as bad a figure as the Taylor upon his ever memorable excursion to 
Brentford.

The virtues of Caligula's horse, whom that Emperor invited to sup with 
him, whom he made a Priest, and whom he intended to make Consul, have 
not been described by those historians who have transmitted to us the 
account of his extraordinary fortune; and when we consider of what 
materials, even in our days, both Priests and Senators are sometimes 
made, we may be allowed to demur at any proposition which might 
include an admission that dignity is to be considered an unequivocal 
mark of desert. More certain it is that Borysthenes was a good horse, 
for the Emperor Adrian erected a monument to his memory, and it was 
recorded in his epitaph that he used to fly over the plains and 
marshes and Etrurian hills, hunting Pannonian boars; he appears by his 
name to have been like Nobs, of Tartaric race.

Bavieca was a holy and happy horse,—I borrow the epithets from the 
Bishop of Chalons's sermon upon the Bells. Gil Diaz deserved to be 
buried in the same grave with him. And there is an anonymous Horse, of 
whom honorable mention is made in the Roman Catholic Breviary, for his 
religious merits, because after a Pope had once ridden him, he never 
would suffer himself to be unhallowed by carrying a woman on his back. 
These latter are both Roman Catholic Houyhnhnms, but among the 
Mahometans also, quadrupedism is not considered an obstacle to a 
certain kind of canonization. Seven of the Emperor of Morocco's horses 
have been Saints, or Marabouts as the Moors would call it; and some 
there were who enjoyed that honour in the year 1721 when Windus was at 
Mequinez. One had been thus distinguished for saving the Emperor's 
life: “and if a man,” says the Traveller, “should kill one of his 
children, and lay hold of this horse, he is safe. This horse has saved 
the lives of some of the captives, and is fed with _cuscuru_ and 
camel's milk. After the Emperor has drank, and the horse after him, 
some of his favourites are suffered to drink out of the same bowl.” 
This was probably the horse who had a Christian slave appointed to 
hold up his tail when he was led abroad, and to carry a vessel and 
towel—“for use unmeet to tell.”

I have discovered only one Houyhnhnm who was a martyr, excepting those 
who are sometimes burnt with the rest of the family by Captain Rock's 
people in Ireland. This was poor Morocco, the learned horse of Queen 
Elizabeth's days: he and his master Banks, having been in some danger 
of being put to death at Orleans, were both burnt alive by the 
Inquisition at Rome, as magicians.—The word martyr is here used in its 
religious acceptation: for the victims of avarice and barbarity who 
are destroyed by hard driving and cruel usage are numerous enough to 
make a frightful account among the sins of this nation.

Fabretti the antiquary had a horse who when he carried his master on 
an antiquarian excursion, assisted him in his researches; for this 
sagacious horse had been so much accustomed to stop where there were 
ruins, and probably had found so much satisfaction in grazing, or 
cropping the boughs among them at his pleasure, that he was become a 
sort of antiquary himself; and sometimes by stopping and as it were 
pointing like a setter, gave his master notice of some curious and 
half-hidden objects which he might otherwise have past by unperceived.

How often has a drunken rider been carried to his own door by a 
sure-footed beast, sensible enough to understand that his master was 
in no condition either to guide him, or to take care of himself. How 
often has a stage coach been brought safely to its inn after the 
coachman had fallen from the box. Nay was there not a mare at Ennis 
races in Ireland (Atalanta was her name) who having thrown her rider, 
kept the course with a perfect understanding of what was expected from 
her, looked back and quickened her speed as the other horses 
approached her, won the race, trotted a few paces beyond the post, 
then wheeled round, and came up to the scale as usual? And did not 
Hurleyburley do the same thing at the Goodwood races?

That Nobs was the best horse in the world I will not affirm. Best is 
indeed a bold word to whatever it be applied, and yet in the 
shopkeeper's vocabulary it is at the bottom of his scale of 
superlatives. A haberdasher in a certain great city is still 
remembered, whose lowest priced gloves were what he called Best, but 
then he had five degrees of optimism; Best, Better than Best, Best of 
all, Better than Best of all, and the Real Best. It may be said of 
Nobs then that he was one of the Real Best: equal to any that Spain 
could have produced to compare with him, though concerning Spanish 
horses, the antiquary and historian Morales, (properly and as it were 
prophetically baptized Ambrosio, because his name ought ever to be in 
ambrosial odour among his countrymen) concerning Spanish horses, I 
say, that judicious author has said, _la estima que agora se hace en 
todo el mundo de un caballo Español es la mas solemne cosa que puede 
haber en animales._

Neither will I assert that there could not have been a better horse 
than Nobs, because I remember how Roger Williams tells us, “one of the 
chiefest Doctors of England was wont to say concerning strawberries, 
that God could have made a better berry, but he never did.” Calling 
this to mind, I venture to say as that chiefest Doctor might, and we 
may believe would have said upon the present occasion, that a better 
horse than Nobs there might have been,—but there never was.

The Duchess of Newcastle tells us that her Lord, than whom no man 
could be a more competent judge, preferred barbs and Spanish to all 
others, for barbs, he said, were like gentlemen in their kind, and 
Spanish horses like Princes. This saying would have pleased the 
Doctor, as coinciding entirely with his own opinions. He was no 
believer in equality either among men or beasts; and he used to say, 
that in a state of nature Nobs would have been the king of his kind.

And why not? if I do not show you sufficient precedents for it call me 
FIMBUL FAMBI.




