CHAPTER CLXXV.

THE DOCTOR FOLLOWS UP HIS MEDITATIONS ON THE LETTER D. AND EXPECTS 
THAT THE READER WILL BE CONVINCED THAT IT IS A DYNAMIC LETTER, AND 
THAT THE HEBREWS DID NOT WITHOUT REASON CALL IT DALETH—THE DOOR—AS 
THOUGH IT WERE THE DOOR OF SPEECH.—THE MYSTIC TRIANGLE.

More authority dear boy, name more; and sweet my child let them be men 
of good repute and carriage.—

LOVE'S LABOUR LOST.


The Doctor as I have said in the last Chapter pronounced with peculiar 
emphasis the christian name of Daniel Defoe. Then taking up the 
auspicious word.—Is there not Daniel the prophet, in honour of whom my 
baptismal name was given, Daniel if not the greatest of the prophets, 
yet for the matter of his prophecies the most important. Daniel the 
French historian, and Daniel the English poet; who reminds me of other 
poets in D not less eminent. Donne, Dodsley, Drayton, Drummond, 
Douglas the Bishop of Dunkeld, Dunbar, Denham, Davenant, Dyer, Durfey, 
Dryden, and Stephen Duck; Democritus the wise Abderite, whom I 
especially honour for finding matter of jest even in the profoundest 
thought, extracting mirth from philosophy, and joining in delightful 
matrimony wit with wisdom. Is there not Dollond the Optician. 
Dalembert and Diderot among those Encyclopedists with whose renown

  all Europe rings from side to side,

Derham the Astro-Physico—and Christo—Theologian, Dillenius the 
botanist, Dion who for his eloquence was called the golden-mouthed; 
Diagoras who boldly despising the false Gods of Greece, blindly and 
audaciously denied the God of Nature. Diocles who invented the 
cissoid, Deodati, Diodorus, and Dion Cassius. Thus rich was the letter 
D even before the birth of Sir Humphrey Davy, and the catastrophe of 
Doctor Dodd: before Daniel Mendoza triumphed over Humphreys in the 
ring, and before Dionysius Lardner, Professor at the St —— 'niversity 
of London, projected the Cabinet Cyclopædia, Daniel O'Connell fought 
Mr. Peel, triumphed over the Duke of Wellington, bullied the British 
Government, and changed the British Constitution.

If we look to the fine arts, he pursued, the names of Douw, and Durer, 
Dolce and Dominichino instantly occur. In my own profession, among the 
ancients, Dioscorides; among the moderns Dippel, whose marvellous oil 
is not more exquisitely curious in preparation than powerful in its 
use; Dover of the powder; Dalby of the Carminative; Daffy of the 
Elixir; Deventer by whom the important art of bringing men into the 
world has been so greatly improved; Douglas who has rendered lithotomy 
so beautiful an operation, that he asserteth in his motto it may be 
done speedily, safely, and pleasantly; Dessault now rising into fame 
among the Continental surgeons, and Dimsdale who is extending the 
blessings of inoculation. Of persons eminent for virtue or sanctity, 
who ever in friendship exceeded Damon the friend of Pythias? Is there 
not St. John Damascenus, Dr. Doddridge, Deborah the Nurse of Rebekah, 
who was buried beneath Beth-el under an Oak, which was called 
Allon-bachuth, the Oak of Weeping, and Deborah the wife of Lapidoth, 
who dwelt under her palm-trees between Ramah and Beth-el in Mount 
Ephraim, where the children of Israel came up to her for judgment, for 
she was a mother in Israel; Demas for whom St. Paul greets the 
Colossians, and whom he calleth his fellow labourer; and Dorcas which 
being interpreted is in Hebrew Tabitha and in English Doe, who was 
full of good works and alms-deeds, whom therefore Peter raised from 
the dead, and whom the Greeks might indeed truly have placed among the 
_Δευτερόποτμοι_; Daniel already named, but never to be remembered too 
often, and Dan the father of his tribe. Grave writers there are, the 
Doctor would say, who hesitate not to affirm that Dan was the first 
King of Denmark more properly called Danmark from his name, and that 
he instituted there the military order of Dannebrog. With the 
pretensions of these Danish Antiquaries he pursued, I meddle not. 
There is surer authority for the merits of this my first namesake. 
“Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel. Dan shall 
be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that biteth the horse's 
heels, so that his rider shall fall backward.” Daniel quoth the 
Doctor, is commonly abbreviated into Dan, from whence doubtless it 
taketh its root; and the Daniel therefore who is not wise as a 
serpent, falsifieth the promise of the patriarch Jacob.

That this should have been the Dan who founded the kingdom of Denmark 
he deemed an idle fancy. King Dans in that country however there have 
been, and among them was King Dan called Mykelati or the Magnificent, 
with whom the Bruna Olld, or age of Combustion, ended in the North, 
and the Hougs Olld or age of barrows began, for he it was who 
introduced the custom of interment. But he considered it as indeed an 
honour to the name, that Death should have been called _Δάνος_ by the 
Macedonians, not as a dialectic or provincial form of _Θάνατος_ but 
from the Hebrew Dan, which signifies, says Jeremy Taylor, a Judge, as 
intimating that Judges are appointed to give sentence upon criminals 
in life and death.

Even if we look at the black side of the shield we still find that the 
D preserves its power: there is Dathan, who with Korah and Abiram went 
down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon them; Dalila by 
whom Sampson was betrayed; Dionysius the acoustical tyrant; Domitian 
who like a true vice-gerent of Beelzebub tormented flies as well as 
men; Decius the fiercest of the persecutors; the inhuman Dunstan, and 
the devilish Dominic, after whom it seems all but an anticlimax to 
name the _ipsissimus_ Diabolus, the Devil himself. And here let us 
remark through how many languages the name of the author of evil 
retains its characteristic initial, _Διάβολος_, Diabolus, Diavolo, 
Diablo, Diabo, Diable, in Dutch Duival, in Welsh Diawl, and though the 
Germans write him Teufel, it is because in their coarser articulation 
the D passes into the cognate sound of T, without offending their 
obtuser organs of hearing. Even in the appellations given him by 
familiar or vulgar irreverence, the same pregnant initial prevails, he 
is the Deuce, and Old Davy and Davy Jones. And it may be noted that in 
the various systems of false religion to which he hath given birth, 
the Delta is still a dominant inchoative. Witness Dagon of the 
Philistines, witness the Daggial of the Mahommedans, and the forgotten 
root from whence the _Διὸς_ of the Greeks is derived. Why should I 
mention the Roman Diespiter, the Syrian Dirceto, Delius with his 
sister Delia, known also as Dictynna and the great Diana of the 
Ephesians. The Sicyonian Dia, Dione of whom Venus was born, Deiphobe 
the Cumæan Sybil who conducted Æneas in his descent to the infernal 
regions. Doris the mother of the Nereids, and Dorus father of the race 
of Pygmies. Why should I name the Dioscuri, Dice and Dionysus, the 
Earth, Mother Demeter, the Demiourgos, gloomy Dis, Demogorgon dread 
and Daphne whom the Gods converted into a Laurel to decorate the brows 
of Heroes and Poets.

Truly he would say it may be called a dynamic letter; and not without 
mystery did the Hebrews call it Daleth, the door, as though it were 
the door of speech. Then its form! how full of mysteries! The wise 
Egyptians represented it by three stars disposed in a triangle: it was 
their hieroglyphic of the Deity. In Greek it is the Delta.

  Δ

In this form were the stupendous Pyramids built, when the sage 
Egyptians are thought to have emblematised the soul of man, which the 
divine Plato supposed to be of this shape. This is the mysterious 
triangle, which the Pythagoreans called Pallas, because they said it 
sprang from the brain of Jupiter, and Tritogeneia, because if three 
right lines were drawn from its angles to meet in the centre, a triple 
birth of triangles was produced, each equal to the other.

[Figure: a tetrahedron]

I pass reverently the diviner mysteries which have been illustrated 
from hence, and may perhaps be typified herein. Nor will I do more 
than touch upon the mechanical powers which we derive from a knowledge 
of the properties of the figures, and upon the science of 
Trigonometry. In its Roman and more familiar form, the Letter hath 
also sublime resemblances or prototypes. The Rainbow resting upon the 
earth describes its form. Yea, the Sky and the Earth represent a grand 
and immeasurable D; for when you stand upon a boundless plain, the 
space behind you and before in infinite longitude is the straight 
line, and the circle of the firmament which bends from infinite 
altitude to meet it, forms the bow.

For himself, he said, it was a never failing source of satisfaction 
when he reflected how richly his own destiny was endowed with Ds. The 
D was the star of his ascendant. There was in the accident of his 
life,—and he desired it to be understood as using the word accident in 
its scholastic acceptations,—a concatenation, a concentration. Yea he 
might venture to call it a constellation of Ds. Dove he was born; 
Daniel he was baptized; Daniel was the name of his father; Dinah of 
his mother, Deborah of his wife; Doctor was his title, Doncaster his 
dwelling place; in the year of his marriage, which next to that of his 
birth was the most important of his life, D was the Dominical letter; 
and in the amorous and pastoral strains wherein he had made his 
passion known in the magazines, he had called himself Damon and his 
mistress Delia.




