


THE DOCTOR, &c.




There is a kind of physiognomy in the titles of books no less than in 
the faces of men, by which a skilful observer will as well know what 
to expect from the one as the other.

BUTLER'S REMAINS.




THE DOCTOR, &c.




[Illustration: a tetrahedron]




VOL. VI.





LONDON:

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS.

1847.




LONDON:

PRINTED BY W. NICOL, PALL-MALL.




PREFACE.

INVENIAS ETIAM DISJECTI MEMBRA POETÆ.


In the distribution of the lamented Southey's literary property, the 
History of the Brazils, his much treasured MS. History of Portugal, 
the Doctor, &c. and the MS. materials for its completion, fell to the 
share of Edith May Warter, his eldest child, and, as he used to call 
her, his right hand,—to whom he addressed the Dedication of the Tale 
of Paraguay, and to whom he commenced a little Poem of which the lines 
following are almost the last, if not the very last, he ever wrote in 
verse.

  O daughter dear, who bear'st no longer now
  Thy Father's name, and for the chalky flats
  Of Sussex hast exchanged thy native land
  Of lakes and mountains,—neither change of place
  Condition, and all circumstantial things,
  Nor new relations, and access of cares
  Unfelt before, have alienated thee
  Nor wean'd thy heart from this beloved spot,
  Thy birth place, and so long thy happy home!

The present Volume is drawn up from the MS. materials alluded to, as 
nearly as possible in the order the Author had intended, and the 
seventh and concluding volume is in the press and will shortly be 
published.

The whole of the MS. sheets, previous to being sent to the press, were 
cautiously examined by his no less amiable and excellent, than highly 
gifted Widow, who, at the time, was staying with us on a visit at 
West-Tarring. Had the lamented Southey continued the work, it was his 
intention, in this volume, to have advanced a step in the story,—and 
the Interchapters, no doubt, would have been enlarged, according to 
custom. His habit was, as he said, “to lay the timbers of them, and to 
jot down, from time to time, remarks serious or jocose, as they 
occurred to him.” Full readily would this holy and humble man of heart 
have acceded to the truth conveyed in these lines from Martin Tupper's 
Proverbial philosophy,—and none the less for their dactylic cadence.

  There is a grave-faced folly, and verily a laughter loving wisdom;
  And what, if surface judges, account it vain frivolity?
  There is indeed an evil in excess, and a field may lie fallow too
    long;
  Yet merriment is often as a froth, that mantleth on the strong mind:
  And note thou this for a verity,—the subtlest thinker when alone,
  From ease of thoughts unbent, will laugh the loudest with his
    fellows:
  And well is the loveliness of wisdom mirrored in a cheerful
    countenance,
  Justly the deepest pools are proved by dimpling eddies;
  For that, a true philosophy commandeth an innocent life,
  And the unguilty spirit is lighter than a linnet's heart;
  Yea, there is no cosmetic like a holy conscience;
  The eye is bright with trust, the cheek bloomed over with affection,
  The brow unwrinkled with a care, and the lip triumphant in its
    gladness.[1]

[Footnote 1: Of Ridicule, 1st Series. On my acquainting Mrs. Southey 
with my intention of quoting these lines, she wrote me word back: 
“That very passage I had noted, as singularly applicable to him _we_ 
knew so well,—whom the world, the children of this generation,—knew so 
little!”]

The only liberty taken with the original MS. is the omission of, now 
and then a name, or even a paragraph, which might have given pain to 
the living. Such passages were thrown off playfully, and were, as Mrs. 
Southey can testify, erased by the author continually. It was no 
custom of Southey to cast “fire-brands, arrows, and death,” and to 
say, “Am I not in sport?” _(Proverbs, xxvi. 18, 19.)_

It only remains to add that the Editor has carefully verified all 
references,—that he is responsible for the headings of the chapters 
(some few excepted,)—for the Mottoes to cc. clxxx. and clxxxi.,—and 
for the casual foot notes.

JOHN WOOD WARTER.

_Vicarage House,_
_West-Tarring, Nov. 25th._




PRELUDE OF MOTTOES.


  Two thyngys owyth every clerk
  To advertysyn, begynnyng a werk,
  If he procedyn wyl ordeneely,
  The fyrste is _what_, the secunde is _why_.
  In wych two wurdys, as it semyth me
  The Foure causys comprehendyd be
  Wych as our philosofyrs us do teche,
  In the begynnyng men owe to seche
  Of every book; and aftyr there entent,
  The fyrst is clepyd cause efficyent:
  The secunde they clepe cause materyal,
  Formal the thrydde; the fourte fynal.
  The efficyent cause is the auctour,
  Wych aftyr hys cunnyng doth hys labour
  To a complyse the begunne matere,
  Wych cause is secunde; and the more clere
  That it may be, the formal cause
  Settyth in dew ordre clause be clause.
  And these thre thyngys, longyn to what,
  Auctour, matere and forme ordinat,
  The fynal cause declaryth pleynly
  Of the werk begunne the cause why;
  That is to seyne what was the entent
  Of the auctour fynally, and what he ment.

OSBERN BOKENAM.


  Look for no splendid painted outside here,
  But for a work devotedly sincere;
  A thing low prized in these too high-flown days:
  Such solid sober works get little praise.
        Yet some there be
      Love true solidity.

  And unto such brave noble souls I write,
  In hopes to do them and the subject right.
  I write it not to please the itching vein
  Of idle-headed fashionists, or gain
        Their fond applause;
      I care for no such noise.

  I write it only for the sober sort,
  Who love right learning, and will labour for't;
  And who will value worth in art, though old,
  And not be weary of the good, though told
        Tis out of fashion
      By nine-tenths of the nation.

  I writ it also out of great good will
  Unto my countrymen; and leave my skill
  Behind me for the sakes of those that may
  Not yet be born; but in some after day
        May make good use
      Of it, without abuse.

  But chiefly I do write it, for to show
  A duty to the Doctor which I owe.

THOMAS MACE.


Physicians are many times forced to leave such methods of curing as 
themselves know to be the fittest, and being overruled by their 
patient's impatiency are fain to try the best they can in taking that 
way of cure, which the cured will yield unto: in like sort, 
considering how the case doth stand with this present age, full of 
tongue and weak of brain, behold we yield to the stream thereof: into 
the causes of goodness we will not make any curious or deep inquiry; 
to touch them now and then it shall be sufficient, when they are so 
near at hand that easily they may be conceived without any far removed 
discourse. That way we are contented to prove, which being the worse 
in itself, is notwithstanding now, by reason of common imbecility, the 
fitter and likelier to be brooked.

HOOKER.


  _Qui lit beaucoup et jamais ne medite,
     Semble à celuy qui mange avidement,
     Et de tous mets surcharge tellement
   Son estomach que rien ne luy profit._

QUATRAINE DE PIBRAC.

thus englished by Sylvester,

  Who readeth much and never meditates,
    Is like a greedy eater of much food,
  Who so surcloys his stomach with his cates
    That commonly they do him little good.


_Je sçay qu'en ce discours l'on me pourra reprendre, que j'ay mis 
beaucoup de particularitez qui sont fort superfluës. Je le crois: 
mais, je sçay, que si elles desplaisent à aucuns, elles plairont aux 
autres: me semblant, que ce n'est pas assez, quand on louë des 
personnes, dire qu'elles sont belles, sages, vertueuses, valeureuses, 
vaillantes, magnanimes, libérales, splendides et très-parfaites. Ce 
sont loüanges et descriptions genérales, et lieux-communs empruntez de 
tout le monde. Il en faut specifier bien le tout, et descrire 
particuliérement les perfections, afin que mieux on les touche au 
doigt: et telle est mon opinion._

BRANTOME.


  _Non sai se l'arte, o il caso abbia fornita
     Cosi bell' opra, o siano entrambi a parte;
   Perocchè l'arte è tal che il caso imita,
     E'l caso è tal che rassomiglia all' arte:
   E questo a quella, e quella a questo unita,
     Quanto può, quanto sa, mesce e comparte.
   Un la materia al bel lavor dispose,
   L'altra meglio adornolla, e poi s'ascose._

METASTASIO.


_Tous ceux qui ont quelquesfois pesé le grand travail et le labeur de 
l'imagination, l'ont jugé pour le plus grand qui se puisse trouver, et 
ont eu raison; d'autant que celuy lequel veut et desire en contenter 
plusieurs, doit aussi chercher des moyens differens, afin que ce qui 
est ennuyeux à l'un, l'autre le trouve doux et agreable; car de le 
donner à tous, il est impossible; veu, qu' entre trois personnes 
seulement que l'on aura conviées, il se trouvera une grande diference 
de gouts, ainsi que l'a dit Horace, luy, dis-je qui l'avoit si bien 
experimenté: par ainsi il n'est pas possible qu'en une si longue 
histoire que celle dont je vay traictant, que je ne donne de la peine 
par la diversité des chapitres. Toutetfois si le jugement s'en faict 
par des personnes privees et libres de toute passion, ils diront que 
c'est le vray moyen d'entretenir les esprits curieux._

L'HISTOIRE DU CHEVALIER DU SOLEIL.


Be rather wise than witty, for much wit hath commonly much froth; and 
'tis hard to jest and not sometimes jeer too; which many times sinks 
deeper than was intended or expected; and what was designed for mirth, 
ends in sadness.

CALEB TRENCHFIELD.
(probably a fictitious name.) RESTITUTA.


In some passages you will observe me very satirical. Writing on such 
subjects I could not be otherwise. I can write nothing without aiming, 
at least, at usefulness. It were beneath my years to do it, and still 
more dishonourable to my religion. I know that a reformation of such 
abuses as I have censured is not to be expected from the efforts of an 
author; but to contemplate the world, its follies, its vices, its 
indifferences to duty, and its strenuous attachment to what is evil, 
and not to reprehend, were to approve it. From this charge, at least, 
I shall be clear; for I have neither tacitly, nor expressly flattered 
either its characters or its customs.

COWPER.


_Nemo eo sapientius desipuisse, nemo stultius sapuisse videtur._

Said of Cardan by I know not who.


_Il y en a qui pensent que les lecteurs reçoivent peu d'instruction, 
quand on leur représente des choses qui n'ont pas esté achevées,  
qu'eux appellent œuvres imparfaites; mais je ne suis pas de leur 
advis; car quand quelque fait est descrit à la verité, et avec ses 
circonstances, encor qu'il ne soit parvenu qu' à mychemin, si peut-on 
tousjours en tirer du fruict._

LA NOUE.


  Authors, you know of greatest fame,
  Thro' modesty suppress their name;
  And would you wish me to reveal
  What these superior wits conceal?
  Forego the search, my curious friend,
  And husband time to better end.
  All my ambition is, I own,
  To profit and to please unknown,
  Like streams supplied from springs below
  Which scatter blessings as they flow.

DR. COTTON.


Thus have I, as well as I could, gathered a posey of observations as 
they grew,—and if some rue and wormwood be found amongst the sweeter 
herbs, their wholesomeness will make amends for their bitterness.

ADAM LITTLETON.


  This worthy work in which of good examples are so many,
  This orchard of Alcinous, in which there wants not any
  Herb, tree, or fruit that may mans use for health or pleasure serve;
  This plenteous horn of Acheloy, which justly doth deserve
  To bear the name of Treasury of Knowledge, I present
  To your good worships once again,—desiring you therefore
  To let your noble courtesy and favour countervail
  My faults, where art or eloquence on my behalf doth fail,
  For sure the mark whereat I shoot is neither wreaths of bay,
  Nor name of author, no, nor meed; but chiefly that it may
  Be liked well of you and all the wise and learned sort;
  And next, that every wight that shall have pleasure for to sport
  Him in this garden, may as well bear wholesome fruit away
  As only on the pleasant flowers his retchless senses stay.

GOLDING.


Doubtless many thoughts have presented, and are still presenting 
themselves to my mind, which once I had no idea of. But these, in I 
believe every instance, are as much the growth of former rooted 
principles, as multiplied branches grow from one and the same main 
stem. Of such an inward vegetation I am always conscious; and I 
equally seem to myself to perceive the novelty of the fresh shoot, and 
its connexion with what had been produced before.

ALEXANDER KNOX.


The extensive argument and miscellaneous nature of the work led him to 
declare his sentiments on a multitude of questions, on which he 
thought differently from other writers, and of course, to censure or 
confute their opinions. Whole bodies of men, as well as individuals of 
the highest reputation, were attacked by him, and his manner was to 
speak his sense of all with freedom and force. So that most writers, 
and even readers, had some ground of complaint against him. Not only 
the free-thinkers and unbelievers, against whom the tenour of his book 
was directed, but the heterodox of every denomination were treated 
without much ceremony, and of the orthodox themselves, some tenet or 
other, which till then they had held sacred, was discussed and 
reprobated by him. Straggling heresies, or embodied systems, made no 
difference with him; as they came in his way, no quarter was given to 
either, “his end and manner of writing,” as Dr. Middleton truly 
observed, “being to pursue truth wherever he found it.”

HURD'S LIFE OF WARBURTON.


Thou art like my rappee, here, a most ridiculous superfluity; but a 
pinch of thee now and then is a more delicious treat.

CLANDESTINE MARRIAGE.


  Yea—but what am I?
  A scholar, or a schoolmaster, or else some youth?
  A lawyer, a student, or else a country clown?
  A brumman, a basket-maker, or a baker of pies?
  A flesh, or a fishmonger, or a sower of lies?
  A louse, or a louser, a leek or a lark,
  A dreamer, a drommell, a fire or a spark?
  A caitiff, a cut-throat, a creeper in corners,
  A hairbrain, a hangman, or a grafter of horners?
  A merchant, a maypole, a man or a mackarel,
  A crab or a crevise, a crane or a cockerell?

APIUS AND VIRGINIA.


  It may appear to some ridiculous
  Thus to talk knave and madman, and sometimes
  Come in with a dried sentence, stuft with sage.

WEBSTER.


_Etsi verò, quæ in isto opere desiderentur, rectiùs forsan quàm quivis 
alius, perspiciam; et si meo planè voto standum fuisset, id, in tantâ, 
quæ hodie est librorum copiâ, vel planè suppressissem, vel in multos 
annos adhuc pressissem; tamen aliquid amicis, aliquid tempori dandum; 
et cum iis qui aliquid fructus ex eo sperant, illud communicandum 
putavi. Hunc itaque meum qualemcunque laborem, Lector candide, boni 
consule; quod te facilè facturum confido, si eum animum ad legendum 
attuleris, quem ego ad scribendum, veritatis nimirum aliisque 
inserviendi cupidum._

SENNERTUS.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER CLXXII.—p. 1.

DESCARTES' NOTION CONCERNING THE PROLONGATION OF LIFE. A SICILIAN 
PROPOSAL FOR BREEDING UP CHILDREN TO BE IMMORTAL. ASGILL'S ARGUMENT 
AGAINST THE NECESSITY OF DYING.

  O harmless Death! whom still the valiant brave,
    The wise expect, the sorrowful invite;
  And all the good embrace, who know the Grave
    A short dark passage to eternal light.

SIR WILLIAM DAVENANT.


