Part i. p. II.

  As I walked through the wilderness of this world.

That in the Apocalypse the wilderness is the symbol of the world, or
rather of the worldly life, Bunyan discovered by the instinct of a
similar genius. The whole Jewish history, indeed, in all its details is
so admirably adapted to, and suggestive of, symbolical use, as to
justify the belief that the spiritual application, the interior and
permanent sense, was in the original intention of the inspiring Spirit,
though it might not have been present, as an object of distinct
consciousness, to the inspired writers.


Ib.

    ... where was a den.

The jail. Mr. Bunyan wrote this precious book in Bedford jail, where he
was confined on account of his religion. The following anecdote is
related of him. A Quaker came to the jail, and thus addressed him:

  "Friend Bunyan, the Lord sent me to seek for thee, and I have been
  through several counties in search of thee, and now I am glad I have
  found thee."

To which Mr. Bunyan replied,

  "Friend, thou dost not speak the truth in saying the Lord sent thee to
  seek me; for the Lord well knows that I have been in this jail for
  some years; and if he had sent thee, he would have sent thee here
  directly."

'Note in Edwards'.

This is a valuable anecdote, for it proves, what might have been
concluded 'a priori', that Bunyan was a man of too much genius to be a
fanatic. No two qualities are more contrary than genius and fanaticism.
Enthusiasm, indeed, [Greek: o theòs en haemin], is almost a synonyme of
genius; the moral life in the intellectual light, the will in the
reason; and without it, says Seneca, nothing truly great was ever
achieved by man.


Ib. p. 12.

  And not being able longer to contain, he brake out with a lamentable
  cry, saying, "What shall I do?"

  Reader, was this ever your case? Did you ever see your sins, and feel
  the burden of them, so as to cry out in the anguish of your soul, What
  must I do to be saved? If not, you will look on this precious book as
  a romance or history, which no way concerns you; you can no more
  understand the meaning of it than if it were wrote in an unknown
  tongue, for you are yet carnal, dead in your sins, lying in the arms
  of the wicked one in false security. But this book is spiritual; it
  can only be understood by spiritually quickened souls who have
  experienced that salvation in the heart, which begins with a sight of
  sin, a sense of sin, a fear of destruction and dread of damnation.
  Such and such only commence Pilgrims from the City of Destruction to
  the heavenly kingdom.

'Note in Edwards'.

Most true. It is one thing to perceive and acknowledge this and that
particular deed to be sinful, that is, contrary to the law of reason or
the commandment of God in Scripture, and another thing to feel sin
within us independent of particular actions, except as the common ground
of them. And it is this latter without which no man can become a
Christian.


Ib. p. 39.

  Now whereas thou sawest that as soon as the first began to sweep, the
  dust did so fly about that the room by him could not be cleansed, but
  that thou wast almost choked therewith; this is to show thee, that the
  Law, instead of cleansing the heart (by its working) from sin, doth
  revive, put strength into, and increase it in the soul, even as it
  doth discover and forbid it; for it doth not give power to subdue.


See Luther's 'Table Talk'. The chapters in that work named "Law and
Gospel," contain the very marrow of divinity. Still, however, there
remains much to be done on this subject; namely, to show how the
discovery of sin by the Law tends to strengthen the sin; and why it must
necessarily have this effect, the mode of its action on the appetites
and impetites through the imagination and understanding; and to
exemplify all this in our actual experience.


Ib. p. 40.

  Then I saw that one came to Passion, and brought him a bag of
  treasure, and poured it down at his feet; the which he took up, and
  rejoiced therein, and withal laughed Patience to scorn; but I beheld
  but awhile, and he had lavished all away, and had nothing left him but
  rags.

One of the not many instances of faulty allegory in 'The Pilgrim's
Progress'; that is, it is no allegory. The beholding "but awhile," and
the change into "nothing but rags," is not legitimately imaginable. A
longer time and more interlinks are requisite. It is a hybrid compost of
usual images and generalized words, like the Nile-born nondescript, with
a head or tail of organized flesh, and a lump of semi-mud for the body.
Yet, perhaps, these very defects are practically excellencies in
relation to the intended readers of 'The Pilgrim's Progress'.


Ib. p. 43.

  The Interpreter answered, "This is Christ, who continually, with the
  oil of his grace, maintains the work already begun in the heart; by
  the means of which, notwithstanding what the Devil can do, the souls
  of his people prove gracious still. And in that thou sawest that the
  man stood behind the wall to maintain the fire, this is to teach thee,
  that it is hard for the tempted to see how this work of grace is
  maintained in the soul."

This is beautiful; yet I cannot but think it would have been still more
appropriate, if the waterpourer had been a Mr. Legality, a prudentialist
offering his calculation of consequences as the moral antidote to guilt
and crime; and if the oil-instillator, out of sight and from within, had
represented the corrupt nature of man, that is, the spiritual will
corrupted by taking up a nature into itself.


Ib.

  What, then, has the sinner who is the subject of grace no hand in
  keeping up the work of grace in the heart? No! It is plain Mr. Bunyan
  was not an Arminian.

'Note in Edwards'.

If by metaphysics we mean those truths of the pure reason which always
transcend, and not seldom appear to contradict, the understanding, or
(in the words of the great Apostle) spiritual verities which can only be
spiritually discerned--and this is the true and legitimate meaning of
metaphysics, [Greek: metà tà physikà]--then I affirm, that this very
controversy between the Arminians and the Calvinists, in which both are
partially right in what they affirm, and both wholly wrong in what they
deny, is a proof that without metaphysics there can be no light of faith.


Ib. p. 45.

  I left off to watch and be sober; I laid the reins upon the neck of my
  lusts

This single paragraph proves, in opposition to the assertion in the
preceding note in Edwards, that in Bunyan's judgment there must be at
least a negative co-operation of the will of man with the divine grace,
an energy of non-resistance to the workings of the Holy Spirit. But the
error of the Calvinists is, that they divide the regenerate will in man
from the will of God, instead of including it.


Ib. p. 49.

  So I saw in my dream, that just as Christian came up with the Cross,
  his burden loosed from off his shoulders, and fell from off his back,
  and began to tumble; and so continued to do, till it came to the mouth
  of the sepulchre, where it fell in, and I saw it no more.

'We know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an
understanding' (or discernment of reason) 'that we may know him that is
true, and we are in him that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ. This
is the true God and eternal life. Little children, keep yourselves from
idols'. 1. John, v. 20, 21.

Alas! how many Protestants make a mental idol of the Cross, scarcely
less injurious to the true faith in the Son of God than the wooden
crosses and crucifixes of the Romanists!--and this, because they have
not been taught that Jesus was both the Christ and the great symbol of
Christ.

Strange, that we can explain spiritually, what to take up the cross of
Christ, to be crucified with Christ, means;--yet never ask what the
Crucifixion itself signifies, but rest satisfied in the historic image.

That one declaration of the Apostle, that by wilful sin we 'crucify the
Son of God afresh', might have roused us to nobler thoughts.


Ib. p. 52.

  And besides, say they, if we get into the way, what matters which way
  we get in? If we are in, we are in. Thou art but in the way, who, as
  we perceive, came in at the gate: and we are also in the way, that
  came tumbling over the wall: wherein now is thy condition better than
  ours?

The allegory is clearly defective, inasmuch as 'the way' represents two
diverse meanings;

1. the outward profession of Christianity, and
2. the inward and spiritual grace.

But it would be very difficult to mend it.

1830.


In this instance (and it is, I believe, the only one in the work,) the
allegory degenerates into a sort of pun, that is, in the two senses of
the word 'way,' and thus supplies Formal and Hypocrite with an argument
which Christian cannot fairly answer, or rather one to which Bunyan
could not make his Christian return the proper answer without
contradicting the allegoric image.

For the obvious and only proper answer is: No! you are not in the same
'way' with me, though you are walking on the same 'road.'

But it has a worse defect, namely, that it leaves the reader uncertain
as to what the writer precisely meant, or wished to be understood, by
the allegory.

Did Bunyan refer to the Quakers as rejecting the outward Sacraments of
Baptism and the Lord's Supper?

If so, it is the only unspiritual passage in the whole beautiful
allegory, the only trait of sectarian narrow-mindedness, and, in
Bunyan's own language, of legality.

But I do not think that this was Bunyan's intention. I rather suppose
that he refers to the Arminians and other Pelagians, who rely on the
coincidence of their actions with the Gospel precepts for their
salvation, whatever the ground or root of their conduct may be; who
place, in short, the saving virtue in the stream, with little or no
reference to the source.

But it is the faith acting in our poor imperfect deeds that alone saves
us; and even this faith is not ours, but the faith of the Son of God in
us.

  'I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but
  Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh I live
  by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me.'

  Gal. ii. 20.

Illustrate this by a simile. Labouring under chronic 'bronchitis', I am
told to inhale chlorine as a specific remedy; but I can do this only by
dissolving a saturated solution of the gas in warm water, and then
breathing the vapour. Now what the aqueous vapour or steam is to the
chlorine, that our deeds, our outward life, [Greek: bíos], is to faith.


Ib. p. 55.

  And the other took directly up the way to Destruction, which led him
  into a wide field, full of dark mountains, where he stumbled and fell,
  and rose no more.

This requires a comment. A wide field full of mountains and of dark
mountains, where Hypocrite stumbled and fell! The images here are
unusually obscure.


Ib. p. 70.

  They showed him Moses' rod, the hammer and nail with which Jael slew
  Sisera.

I question whether it would be possible to instance more strikingly the
power of a predominant idea (that true mental kaleidoscope with
richly-coloured glass) on every object brought before the eye of the
mind through its medium, than this conjunction of Moses' rod with the
hammer of the treacherous assassin Jael, and similar encomiastic
references to the same detestable murder, by Bunyan and men like Bunyan,
good, pious, purely-affectioned disciples of the meek and holy Jesus;
yet the erroneous preconception that whatever is uttered by a Scripture
personage is, in fact, uttered by the infallible Spirit of God, makes
Deborahs of them all.

But what besides ought we to infer from this and similar facts? Surely,
that the faith in the heart overpowers and renders innocent the errors
of the understanding and the delusions of the imagination, and that
sincerely pious men purchase, by inconsistency, exemption from the
practical consequences of particular errors.


Ib. p. 76.

  All this is true, and much more which thou hast left out, &c. This is
  the best way; to own Satan's charges, if they be true; yea, to
  exaggerate them also, to exalt the riches of the grace of Christ above
  all, in pardoning all of them freely.

'Note in Edwards'.

That is, to say what we do not believe to be true! 'Will ye speak
wickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him?' said righteous Job.


Ib. p. 83.

  One thing I would not let slip: I took notice that now poor Christian
  was so confounded, that he did not know his own voice; and thus I
  perceived it: just when he was come over against the mouth of the
  burning pit, one of the wicked ones got behind him, and stepped up
  softly to him, and whisperingly suggested many grievous blasphemies to
  him, which he verily thought had proceeded from his own mind.

There is a very beautiful letter of Archbishop Leighton's to a lady
under a similar distemperature of the imagination. [4] In fact, it can
scarcely not happen under any weakness and consequent irritability of
the nerves to persons continually occupied with spiritual
self-examination. No part of the pastoral duties requires more
discretion, a greater practical psychological science. In this, as in
what not?

Luther is the great model; ever reminding the individual that not he,
but Christ, is to redeem him; and that the way to be redeemed is to
think with will, mind, and affections on Christ, and not on himself. I
am a sin-laden being, and Christ has promised to loose the whole burden
if I but entirely trust in him.

To torment myself with the detail of the noisome contents of the fardel
will but make it stick the closer, first to my imagination and then to
my unwilling will.


Ib.

  For that he perceived God was with them, though in that dark and
  dismal state; and why not, thought he, with me, though by reason of
  the impediment that attends this place, I cannot perceive it? But it
  may be asked, Why doth the Lord suffer his children to walk in such
  darkness? It is for his glory: it tries their faith in him, and
  excites prayer to him: but his love abates not in the least towards
  them, since he lovingly inquires after them, 'Who is there among you
  that feareth the Lord and walketh in darkness, and hath no light?'
  Then he gives most precious advice to them: 'Let him trust in the
  Lord', and 'stay himself upon his God'.

Yes! even in the sincerest believers, being men of reflecting and
inquiring minds, there will sometimes come a wintry season, when the
vital sap of faith retires to the root, that is, to atheism of the will.
'But though he slay me, yet will I cling to him.'


Ib. p. 85.

  And as for the other (Pope), though he be yet alive, he is, by reason
  of age, and also of the many shrewd brushes that he met with in his
  younger days, grown so crazy and stiff in his joints, that he can now
  do little more than sit in his cave's mouth, grinning at pilgrims as
  they go by, and biting his nails because he cannot come at them.

O that Blanco White would write in Spanish the progress of a pilgrim
from the Pope's cave to the Evangelist's wicket-gate and the
Interpreter's house!

1836.


Ib. p. 104.

  And let us assure ourselves that, at the day of doom, men shall be
  judged according to their fruit. It will not be said then, "Did you
  believe?" but "Were you doers or talkers only?" and accordingly shall
  be judged.

All the doctors of the Sorbonne could not have better stated the Gospel
'medium' between Pelagianism and Antinomian-Solifidianism, more properly
named Sterilifidianism. It is, indeed, faith alone that saves us; but it
is such a faith as cannot be alone. Purity and beneficence are the
'epidermis,' faith and love the 'cutis vera' of Christianity. Morality
is the outward cloth, faith the lining; both together form the
wedding-garment given to the true believer in Christ, even his own
garment of righteousness, which, like the loaves and fishes, he
mysteriously multiplies. The images of the sun in the earthly dew-drops
are unsubstantial phantoms; but God's thoughts are things: the images of
God, of the Sun of Righteousness, in the spiritual dew-drops are
substances, imperishable substances.


Ib. p. 154.

  Fine-spun speculations and curious reasonings lead men from simple
  truth and implicit faith into many dangerous and destructive errors.
  The Word records many instances of such for our caution. Be warned to
  study simplicity and godly sincerity.

  'Note in Edwards on Doubting Castle.'

And pray what does implicit faith lead men into? Transubstantiation and
all the abominations of priest-worship. And where is the Scriptural
authority for this implicit faith? Assuredly not in St. John, who tells
us that Christ's life is and manifests itself in us as the light of man;
that he came to bring light as well as immortality. Assuredly not in St.
Paul, who declares all faith imperfect and perilous without insight and
understanding; who prays for us that we may comprehend the deep things
even of God himself. For the Spirit discerned, and the Spirit by which
we discern, are both God; the Spirit of truth through and in Christ from
the Father.

Mournful are the errors into which the zealous but unlearned preachers
among the dissenting Calvinists have fallen respecting absolute
election, and discriminative, yet reasonless, grace:--fearful this
divorcement of the Holy Will, the one only Absolute Good, that,
eternally affirming itself as the I AM, eternally generateth the Word,
the absolute Being, the Supreme Reason, the Being of all Truth, the
Truth of all Being:--fearful the divorcement from the reason; fearful
the doctrine which maketh God a power of darkness, instead of the God of
light, the Father of the light which lighteth every man that cometh into
the world!

This we know and this we are taught by the holy Apostle Paul; that
without will there is no ground or base of sin; that without the law
this ground or base cannot become sin; (hence we do not impute sin to
the wolf or the tiger, as being without or below the law;) but that with
the law cometh light into the will; and by this light the will becometh
a free, and therefore a responsible, will.

Yea! the law is itself light, and the divine light becomes law by its
relation and opposition to the darkness; the will of God revealed in its
opposition to the dark and alien will of the fallen Spirit. This
freedom, then, is the free gift of God; but does it therefore cease to
be freedom?

All the sophistry of the Predestinarians rests on the false notion of
eternity as a sort of time antecedent to time. It is timeless, present
with and in all times.

There is an excellent discourse of the great Hooker's, affixed with two
or three others to his Ecclesiastical Polity, on the final perseverance
of Saints; [5] but yet I am very desirous to meet with some judicious
experimental treatise, in which the doctrine, with the Scriptures on
which it is grounded, is set forth more at large; as likewise the rules
by which it may be applied to the purposes of support and comfort,
without danger of causing presumption and without diminishing the dread
of sin.

Above all, I am anxious to see the subject treated with as little
reference as possible to the divine predestination and foresight; the
argument from the latter being a mere identical proposition followed by
an assertion of God's prescience.

Those who will persevere, will persevere, and God foresees; and as to
the proof from predestination, that is, that he who predestines the end
necessarily predestines the adequate means, I can more readily imagine
logical consequences adverse to the sense of responsibility than
Christian consequences, such as an individual may apply for his own
edification.

And I am persuaded that the doctrine does not need these supports,
according, I mean, to the ordinary notion of predestination. The
predestinative force of a free agent's own will in certain absolute
acts, determinations, or elections, and in respect of which acts it is
one either with the divine or the devilish will; and if the former, the
conclusions to be drawn from God's goodness, faithfulness, and spiritual
presence; these supply grounds of argument of a very different
character, especially where the mind has been prepared by an insight
into the error and hollowness of the antithesis between liberty and
necessity.


Ib. p. 178.

  But how contrary to this is the walk and conduct of some who profess
  to be pilgrims, and yet can wilfully and deliberately go upon the
  Devil's ground, and indulge themselves in carnal pleasures and sinful
  diversions.

  'Note in Edwards on the Enchanted Ground'.

But what pleasures are carnal,--what are sinful diversions,--so I mean
as that I may be able to determine what are not? Shew us the criterion,
the general principle; at least explain whether each individual case is
to be decided for the individual by his own experience of the effects of
the pleasure or the diversion, in dulling or distracting his religious
feelings; or can a list, a complete list, of all such pleasures be made
beforehand?



