NOTES ON FIELD ON THE CHURCH. [1]

  'Fly-leaf.--Hannah Scollock, her book, February 10', 1787.

  This, Hannah Scollock! may have been the case;
  Your writing therefore I will not erase.
  But now this book, once yours, belongs to me,
  The Morning Post's and Courier's S. T. C.;--
  Elsewhere in College, knowledge, wit and scholerage
  To friends and public known, as S. T. Coleridge.
  Witness hereto my hand, on Ashly Green,
  One thousand, twice four hundred, and fourteen
  Year of our Lord--and of the month November,
  The fifteenth day, if right I do remember.


28 March, 1819. [2]

MY DEAR DERWENT,

This one volume, thoroughly understood and appropriated, will place you
in the highest ranks of doctrinal Church of England divines (of such as
now are), and in no mean rank as a true doctrinal Church historian.

Next to this I recommend Baxter's own Life, edited by Sylvester, with my
marginal notes. Here, more than in any of the prelatical and Arminian
divines from Laud to the death of Charles II, you will see the strength
and beauty of the Church of England, that is, its liturgy, homilies, and
articles. By contrasting, too, its present state with that which such
excellent men as Baxter, Calamy, and the so called Presbyterian or
Puritan divines, would have made it, you will bless it as the bulwark of
toleration.

Thirdly, you must read Eichorn's Introduction to the Old and New
Testament, and the Apocrypha, and his comment on the Apocalypse; to all
which my notes and your own previous studies will supply whatever
antidote is wanting;--these will suffice for your Biblical learning, and
teach you to attach no more than the supportable weight to these and
such like outward evidences of our holy and spiritual religion.

So having done, you will be in point of professional knowledge such a
clergyman as will make glad the heart of your loving father,

S. T. COLERIDGE.

N. B.--See Book iv Chap. 7, p. 351, both for a masterly confutation of
the Paleyo-Grotian evidences of the Gospel, and a decisive proof in what
light that system was regarded by the Church of England in its best age.
Like Grotius himself, it is half way between Popery and Socinianism.


B. i. c. 3. p. 5.

  But men desired only to be like unto God in omniscience and the
  general knowledge of all things which may be communicated to a
  creature, as in Christ it is to his human soul.

Surely this is more than doubtful; and even the instance given is
irreconcilable with Christ's own assertion concerning the last day,
which must be understood of his human soul, by all who hold the faith
delivered from the foundation, namely, his deity. Field seems to have
excerpted this incautiously from the Schoolmen, who on this premiss
could justify the communicability of adoration, as in the case of the
saints. Omniscience, it may be proved, implies omnipotence. The fourth
of the arguments in this section, and, as closely connected with it, the
first (only somewhat differently stated) seem the strongest, or rather
the only ones. For the second is a mere anticipation of the fourth, and
all that is true in the third is involved in it.


Ib. c. 5. p. 9.

  And began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them
  utterance.


That is, I humbly apprehend, in other than the Hebrew and Syrochaldaic
languages, which (with rare and reluctant exceptions in favor of the
Greek) were appropriated to public prayer and exhortation, just as the
Latin in the Romish Church. The new converts preached and prayed, each
to his companions in his and their dialect;--they were all Jews, but had
assembled from all the different provinces of the Roman and Parthian
empires, as the Quakers among us to the yearly meeting in London; this
was a sign, not a miracle. The miracle consisted in the visible and
audible descent of the Holy Ghost, and in the fulfilment of the prophecy
of Joel, as explained by St. Peter himself. 'Acts' ii. 15.


Ib. p.10.

  'Aliud est etymologia nominis et aliud significatio nominis.
  Etymologia attenditur secundum id it quo imponitur nomen ad
  significandum: nominis vero significatio secundum id ad quod
  significandum imponitur.'

  This passage from Aquinas would be an apt motto for a critique on
  Horne Tooke's Diversions of Purley. The best service of etymology is,
  when the sense of a word is still unsettled, and especially when two
  words have each two meanings; A=a-b, and B=a-b, instead of A=a and
  B=b. Thus reason and understanding as at present popularly confounded.
  Here the 'etyma,--ratio,' the relative proportion of thoughts and
  things,--and understanding, as the power which substantiates
  'phænomena (substat eis)'--determine the proper sense. But most often
  the 'etyma' being equivalent, we must proceed 'ex arbitrio,' as 'law
  compels,' 'religion obliges;' or take up what had been begun in some
  one derivative. Thus 'fanciful' and 'imaginative,' are
  discriminated;--and this supplies the ground of choice for giving to
  fancy and imagination, each its own sense. Cowley is a fanciful
  writer, Milton an imaginative poet. Then I proceed with the
  distinction, how ill fancy assorts with imagination, as instanced in
  Milton's Limbo. [3]


Ib.

I should rather express the difference between the faithful of the
Synagogue and those of the Church, thus:--That the former hoped
generally by an implicit faith;--"It shall in all things be well with
all that love the Lord; therefore it cannot but be good for us and well
with us to rest with our forefathers." But the Christian hath an assured
hope by an explicit and particular faith, a hope because its object is
future, not because it is uncertain. The one was on the road journeying
toward a friend of his father's, who had promised he would be kind to
him even to the third and fourth generation. He comforts himself on the
road, first, by means of the various places of refreshment, which that
friend had built for travellers and continued to supply; and secondly,
by anticipation of a kind reception at the friend's own mansion-house.
But the other has received an express invitation to a banquet, beholds
the preparations, and has only to wash and put on the proper robes, in
order to sit down.


Ib. p. 11.

  The reason why our translators, in the beginning, did choose rather to
  use the word 'congregation' than 'Church,' was not, as the adversary
  maliciously imagineth, for that they feared the very name of the
  Church; but because as by the name of religion and religious men,
  ordinarily in former times, men understood nothing but _factitias
  religiones_, as Gerson out of Anselme calleth them, that is, the
  professions of monks and friars, so, &c.

For the same reason the word 'religion' for [Greek: Thraeskia] in St.
James [4] ought now to be altered to ceremony or ritual. The whole
version has by change of language become a dangerous mistranslation, and
furnishes a favorite text to our moral preachers, Church Socinians and
other christened pagans now so rife amongst us. What was the substance
of the ceremonial law is but the ceremonial part of the Christian
religion; but it is its solemn ceremonial law, and though not the same,
yet one with it and inseparable, even as form and substance. Such is St.
James's doctrine, destroying at one blow Antinomianism and the Popish
popular doctrine of good works.


Ib. c. 18. p. 27.

  But if the Church of God remains in Corinth, where there were
  'divisions, sects, emulations', &c. ... who dare deny those societies
  to be the Churches of God, wherein the tenth part of these horrible
  evils and abuses is not to be found?


It is rare to meet with sophistry in this sound divine; but here he
seems to border on it. For first the Corinthian Church upon admonition
repented of its negligence; and secondly, the objection of the Puritans
was, that the constitution of the Church precluded discipline.


B. II. c. 2. p. 31.

'Miscreant' is twice used in this page in its original sense of
misbeliever.


Ib. c. 4. p. 35.

'Discourse' is here used for the discursive acts of the understanding,
even as 'discursive, is opposed to 'intuitive' by Milton [5] and others.
Thus understand Shakspeare's "discourse of reason" for those discursions
of mind which are peculiar to rational beings.


B. III. c. 1.p. 53.

  The first publishers of the Gospel of Christ delivered a rule of faith
  to the Christian Churches which they founded, comprehending all those
  articles that are found in that 'epitome' of Christian religion, which
  we call the Apostles' Creed.


This needs proof. I rather believe that the so called Apostles' Creed
was really the Creed of the Roman or Western church, (and possibly in
its present form, the catechismal rather than the baptismal creed),--and
that other churches in the East had Creeds equally ancient, and, from
their being earlier troubled with Anti Trinitarian heresies, more
express on the divinity of Christ than the Roman.


Ib. p. 58.

  Fourthly, that it is no less absurd to say, as the Papists do, that
  our satisfaction is required as a condition, without which Christ's
  satisfaction is not appliable unto us, than to say, Peter hath paid
  the debt of John, and he to whom it was due accepteth of the same
  payment, conditionally if he pay it himself also.

This [6] propriation of a metaphor, namely, forgiveness of sin and
abolition of guilt through the redemptive power of Christ's love and of
his perfect obedience during his voluntary assumption of humanity,
expressed, on account of the sameness of the consequences in both cases,
by the payment of a debt for another, which debt the payer had not
himself incurred,--the propriation of this, I say, by transferring the
sameness from the consequents to the antecedents is the one point of
orthodoxy (so called, I mean) in which I still remain at issue. It seems
to me so evidently a [Greek: metábasis eis allo génos.] A metaphor is an
illustration of something less known by a more or less partial
identification of it with something better understood. Thus St. Paul
illustrates the consequences of the act of redemption by four different
metaphors drawn from things most familiar to those, for whom it was to
be illustrated, namely, sin-offerings or sacrificial expiation;
reconciliation; ransom from slavery; satisfaction of a just creditor by
vicarious payment of the debt. These all refer to the consequences of
redemption.

Now, St. John without any metaphor declares the mode by and in which it
is effected; for he identifies it with a fact, not with a consequence,
and a fact too not better understood in the one case than in the other,
namely, by generation and birth. There remains, therefore, only the
redemptive act itself, and this is transcendant, ineffable, and 'a
fortiori', therefore, inexplicable. Like the act of primal apostasy, it
is in its own nature a mystery, known only through faith in the spirit.

James owes John £100, which (to prevent James's being sent to prison)
Henry pays for him; and John has no longer any claim. But James is cruel
and ungrateful to Mary, his tender mother. Henry, though no relation,
acts the part of a loving and dutiful son to Mary. But will this satisfy
the mother's claims on James, or entitle him to her esteem, approbation,
and blessing? If, indeed, by force of Henry's example or persuasion, or
any more mysterious influence, James repents and becomes himself a good
and dutiful child, then, indeed, Mary is wholly satisfied; but then the
case is no longer a question of debt in that sense in which it can be
paid by another, though the effect, of which alone St. Paul was
speaking, is the same in both cases to James as the debtor, and to James
as the undutiful son. He is in both cases liberated from the burthen,
and in both cases he has to attribute his exoneration to the act of
another; as cause simply in the payment of the debt, or as likewise
'causa causæ' in James's reformation. Such is my present opinion: God
grant me increase of light either to renounce or confirm it.

Perhaps the different terms of the above position may be more clearly
stated thus:

1. 'agens causator'
2. 'actus causativus:'
3. 'effectus causatus:'
4. 'consequentia ab effecto.'

1. The co-eternal Son of the living God, incarnate, tempted, crucified,
resurgent, communicant of his spirit, ascendant, and obtaining for his
church the descent of the Holy Ghost.

2. A spiritual and transcendant mystery.

3. The being born anew, as before in the flesh to the world, so now in
the spirit to Christ: where the differences are, the spirit opposed to
the flesh, and Christ to the world; the 'punctum indifferens', or
combining term, remaining the same in both, namely, a birth.

4. Sanctification from sin and liberation from the consequences of sin,
with all the means and process of sanctification, being the same for the
sinner relatively to God and his own soul, as the satisfaction of a
creditor for a debt, or as the offering of an atoning sacrifice for a
transgressor of the law; as a reconciliation for a rebellious son or a
subject to his alienated parent or offended sovereign; and as a ransom
is for a slave in a heavy captivity.

Now my complaint is that our systematic divines transfer the paragraph 4
to the paragraphs 2 and 3, interpreting 'proprio sensu et ad totum 'what
is affirmed 'sensu metaphorico et ad partem', that is, 'ad consequentia
a regeneratione effecta per actum causativum primi agentis, uempe
[Greek: Logou] redemptoris', and by this interpretation substituting an
identification absolute for an equation proportional.

4th May, 1819.



Ib. p. 62.

  Personality is nothing but the existence of nature itself.

God alone had his nature in himself; that is, God alone contains in
himself the ground of his own existence. But were this definition of
Field's right, we might predicate personality of a worm, or wherever we
find life. Better say,--personality is individuality existing in itself,
but with a nature as its ground.


Ib. p.66.

  Accursing Eutyches as a heretic.

It puzzles me to understand what sense Field gave to the word, heresy.
Surely every slight error, even though persevered in, is not to be held
a heresy, or its asserters accursed. The error ought at least to respect
some point of faith essential to the great ends of the Gospel. Thus the
phrase 'cursing Eutyches,' is to me shockingly unchristian. I could not
dare call even the opinion cursed, till I saw how it injured the faith
in Christ, weakened our confidence in him, or lessened our love and
gratitude.


Ib. p.71.

  'If ye be circumcised ye are fallen from grace, and Christ
can profit you nothing.'

It seems impossible but that these words had a relation to the
particular state of feeling and belief, out of which the anxiety to be
circumcised did in those particular persons proceed, and not absolutely,
and at all times to the act itself, seeing that St. Paul himself
circumcised Timothy from motives of charity and prudence.


Ib. c.3. p.76.

  The things that pertain to the Christian faith and religion are of two
  sorts; for there are some things 'explicite', some things
  'implicite credenda'; that is, there are some things that must be
  particularly and expressly known and believed, as that the Father is
  God, the Son is God and the Holy Ghost God, and yet they are not three
  Gods but one God; and some other, which though all men, at all times,
  be not bound upon the peril of damnation to know and believe
  expressly, yet whosoever will be saved must believe them at least
  'implicite', and in generality, as that Joseph, Mary, and Jesus
  fled into Egypt.

Merciful Heaven! Eternal misery and the immitigable wrath of God, and
the inextinguishable fire of hell amid devils, parricides, and haters of
God and all goodness--this is the verdict which a Protestant divine
passes against the man, who though sincerely believing the whole Nicene
creed and every doctrine and precept taught in the New Testament, and
living accordingly, should yet have convinced himself that the first
chapters of St. Matthew and St. Luke were not parts of the original
Gospels!


Ib. p.77.

  So in the beginning, Nestorius did not err, touching the unity of
  Christ's person in the diversity of the natures of God and man; but
  only disliked that Mary should be called the mother of God: which form
  of speaking when some demonstrated to be very fitting and unavoidable,
  if Christ were God and man in the unity of the same person, he chose
  rather to deny the unity of Christ's person than to acknowledge his
  temerity and rashness in reproving that form of speech, which the use
  of the church had anciently received and allowed.

A false charge grounded on a misconception of the Syriac terms.
Nestorius was perfectly justifiable in his rejection of the epithet
[Greek: theotókos], as applied to the mother of Jesus. The Church was
even then only too ripe for the idolatrous 'hyper-dulia' of the
Virgin. Not less weak is Field's defence of the propriety of the term.
Set aside all reference to this holy mystery, and let me ask, I trust
without offence, whether by the same logic a mule's dam might not be
called [Greek: hippotókos], because the horse and ass were united in one
and the same subject. The difference in the perfect God and perfect man
does not remove the objection: for an epithet, which conceals half of a
truth, the power and special concerningness of which, relatively to our
redemption by Christ, depends on our knowledge of the whole, is a
deceptive and a dangerously deceptive epithet.


Ib. c.20. p.110.

  Thus, then, the Fathers did sometimes, when they had particular
  occasions to remember the Saints, and to speak of them, by way of
  'apostrophe', turn themselves unto them, and use words of
  doubtful compellation, praying them, if they have any sense of these
  inferior things, to be remembrancers to God for them.


The distinct gradations of the process, by which commemoration and
rhetorical apostrophes passed finally into idolatry, supply an analogy
of mighty force against the heretical 'hypothesis 'of the modern
Unitarians. Were it true, they would have been able to have traced the
progress of the Christolatry from the lowest sort of 'Christodulia'
with the same historical distinctness against the universal Church, that
the Protestants have that of hierolatry against the Romanists. The
gentle and soft censures which our divines during the reign of the
Stuarts pass on the Roman Saint worship, or hieroduly, as an
inconvenient superstition, must needs have alarmed the faithful
adherents to the Protestantism of Edward VI. and the surviving exiles of
bloody Queen Mary's times, and their disciples.

Ib. p.111.

  The miracles that God wrought in times past by them made many to
  attribute more to them than was fit, as if they had a generality of
  presence, knowledge, and working; but the wisest and best advised
  never durst attribute any such thing unto them.


To a truly pious mind awfully impressed with the surpassing excellency
of God's ineffable love to fallen man, in the revelation of himself to
the inner man through the reason and conscience by the spiritual light
and substantiality--(for the conscience is to the spirit or reason what
the understanding is to the sense, a substantiative power); this
consequence of miracles is so fearful, that it cannot but redouble his
zeal against that fashion of modern theologists which would convert
miracles from a motive to attention and solicitous examination, and at
best from a negative condition of revelation, into the positive
foundation of Christian faith.

Ib. c.22. p.116.

  But if this be as vile a slander as ever Satanist devised, the Lord
  reward them that have been the authors and advisers of it according
  to their works.

O no! no! this the good man did not utter from his heart, but from his
passion. A vile and wicked slander it was and is. O may God have turned
the hearts of those who uttered it, or may it be among their unknown
sins done in ignorance, for which the infinite merits of Christ may
satisfy! I am most assured that if Dr. Field were now alive, or if any
one had but said this to him, he would have replied--"I thank thee,
brother, for thy Christian admonition. Add thy prayer, and pray God to
forgive me my inconsiderate zeal!"


Ib. c. 23. p. 119.

  For what rectitude is due to the specifical act of hating God? or what
  rectitude is it capable of?


Is this a possible act to any man understanding by the word God what we
mean by God?


Ib. p. 129.

It is this complicated dispute, as to the origin and permission of evil,
which supplies to atheism its most plausible, because its only moral,
arguments; but more especially to that species of atheism which existed
in Greece in the form of polytheism, admitting moral and intelligent
shapers and governors of the world, but denying an intelligent ground,
or self-conscious Creator of the universe; their gods being themselves
the offspring of chaos and necessity, that is, of matter and its
essential laws or properties.

The Leibnitzian distinction of the Eternal Reason, or nature of God,
[Greek: tò theion](the [Greek: nous kaì anágkae] of Timæus Locrus) from
the will or personal attributes of God--([Greek: thélaema kaì
boúlaesis--agathou patròs agathòn boúlaema])--planted the germ of the
only possible solution, or rather perhaps, in words less exceptionable
and more likely to be endured in the schools of modern theology, brought
forward the truth involved in Behmen's too bold distinction of God and
the ground of God;--who yet in this is to be excused, not only for his
good aim and his ignorance of scholastic terms, but likewise because
some of the Fathers expressed themselves no less crudely in the other
extreme; though it is not improbable that the meaning was the same in
both.

At least Behmen constantly makes self-existence a positive act, so as
that by an eternal [Greek: perich_óraesis] or mysterious
intercirculation God wills himself out of the 'ground' ([Greek: tò
theion--tò hèn kaì pan],--'indifferentia absoluta realitatis infinitæ et
infinitæ potentialitatis')--and again by his will, as God existing,
gives being to the ground, [Greek: autogenàes--autophylàes--uhios
heautou]. 'Solus Deus est;--itaque principium, qui ex seipso dedit sibi
ipse principium. Deus ipse sui origo est, suæque causa substantiæ, id
quod est, ex se et in se continens. Ex seipso procreatus ipse se fecit',
&c., of Synesius, Jerome, Hilary, and Lactantius and others involve the
same conception.


Ib. c. 27. p. 140.

  The seventh is the heresy of Sabellius, which he saith was revived by
  Servetus. So it was indeed, that Servetus revived in our time the
  damnable heresy of Sabellius, long since condemned in the first ages
  of the Church. But what is that to us? How little approbation he found
  amongst us, the just and honourable proceeding against him at Geneva
  will witness to all posterity.

Shocking as this act must and ought to be to all Christians at present;
yet this passage and a hundred still stronger from divines and Church
letters contemporary with Calvin, prove Servetus' death not to be
Calvin's guilt especially, but the common 'opprobrium' of all
European Christendom,--of the Romanists whose laws the Senate of Geneva
followed, and from fear of whose reproaches (as if Protestants favoured
heresy) they executed them,--and of the Protestant churches who
applauded the act and returned thanks to Calvin and the Senate for
it. [7]


Ib. c. 30. p. 143.

  The twelfth heresy imputed to us is the heresy of Jovinian, concerning
  whom we must observe, that Augustine ascribeth unto him two opinions
  which Hierome mentioneth not; who yet was not likely to spare him, if
  he might truly have been charged with them. The first, that Mary
  ceased to be a virgin when she had borne Christ; the second, that all
  sins are equal.

Neither this nor that is worthy the name of opinion; it is mere
unscriptural, nay, anti-scriptural gossiping. Are we to blame, or not
rather to praise, the anxiety manifested by the great divines of the
church of England under the Stuarts not to remove further than necessary
from the Romish doctrines? Yet one wishes a bolder method; for example,
as to Mary's private history after the conception and birth of Christ,
we neither know nor care about it.


Ib. c. 31. p. 146.

  For the opinions wherewith Hierome chargeth him, this we briefly
  answer. First, if he absolutely denied that the Saints departed do
  pray for us, as it seemeth he did by Hierome's reprehension, we think
  he erred.

Yet not heretically; and if he meant only that we being wholly ignorant,
whether they do or no, ought to act as if we knew they did not, he is
perfectly right; for whatever ye do, do it in faith. As to the ubiquity
of saints, it is Jerome who is the heretic, nay, idolater, if he reduced
his opinion to practice. It perplexes me, that Field speaks so
doubtingly on a matter so plain as the incommunicability of
omnipresence.


Ib. c. 32. p. 147.

  Touching the second objection, that Bucer and Calvin deny original
  sin, though not generally, as did Zuinglius, yet at least in the
  children of the faithful. If he had said that these men affirm the
  earth doth move, and the heavens stand still, he might have as soon
  justified it against them, as this he now saith.

Very noticeable. A similar passage occurs even so late as in Sir Thomas
Brown, just at the dawn of the Newtonian system, and after Kepler. What
a lesson of diffidence! [8]


Ib. p. 148.

  For we do not deny the distinction of venial and mortal sins; but do
  think, that some sins are rightly said to be mortal and some venial;
  not for that some are worthy of eternal punishment and therefore named
  mortal, others of temporal only, and therefore judged venial as the
  Papists imagine: but for that some exclude grace out of that man in
  which they are found and so leave him in a state wherein he hath
  nothing in himself that can or will procure him pardon: and other,
  which though in themselves considered, and never remitted, they be
  worthy of eternal punishment, yet do not so far prevail as to banish
  grace, the fountain of remission of all misdoings.

Would not the necessary consequence of this be, that there are no
actions that can be pronounced mortal sins by mortals; and that what we
might fancy venial might in individual cases be mortal and 'vice
versa'.


Ib.

  First, because every offence against God may justly be punished by him
  in the strictness of his righteous judgments with eternal death, yea,
  with annihilation; which appeareth to be most true, for that there is
  no punishment so evil, and so much to be avoided, as the least sin
  that may be imagined. So that a man should rather choose eternal
  death, yea, utter annihilation, than commit the least offence in the
  world.


I admit this to be Scriptural; but what is wanted is, clearly to state
the difference between eternal death and annihilation. For who would not
prefer the latter, if the former mean everlasting misery?


Ib. c. 41. p. 62.

  But he will say, Cyprian calleth the Roman Church the principal Church
  whence sacerdotal unity hath her spring; hereunto we answer, that the
  Roman Church, not in power of overruling all, but in order is the
  first and principal; and that therefore while she continueth to hold
  the truth, and encroacheth not upon the right of other Churches, she
  is to have the priority; but that in either of these cases she may be
  forsaken without breach of that unity, which is essentially required
  in the parts of the Church.


This is too large a concession. The real ground of the priority of the
Roman see was that Rome, for the first three or perhaps four centuries,
was the metropolis of the Christian world. Afterwards for the very same
reason the Patriarch of New Rome or Constantinople claimed it; and never
ceased to assert at least a co-equality. Had the Apostolic foundation
been the cause, Jerusalem and Antioch must have had priority; not to add
that the Roman Church was not founded by either Paul or Peter as is
evident from the epistle to the Romans.


Append. B. III. p. 205.

I do not think the attack on Transubstantiation the most successful
point of the orthodox Protestant controversialists. The question is,
what is meant in Scripture, as in 'John' vi. by Christ's body or flesh
and blood. Surely not the visible, tangible, accidental body, that is, a
cycle of images and sensations in the imagination of the beholders; but
his supersensual body, the 'noumenon' of his human nature which was
united to his divine nature.

In this sense I understand the Lutheran ubiquity. But may not the
"oblations" referred to by Field in the old canon of the Mass, have
meant the alms, offerings always given at the Eucharist? If by
"substance" in the enunciation of the article be meant 'id quod vere
est', and if the divine nature be the sole 'ens vere ens', then it is
possible to give a philosophically intelligible sense to Luther's
doctrine of consubstantiation; at least to a doctrine that might bear
the same name;--at all events the mystery is not greater than, if it be
not rather the same as, the assumption of the human by the divine
nature.

Now for the possible conception of this we must accurately discriminate
the 'incompossibile negativum' from the 'incompatibile privativum'. Of
the latter are all positive imperfections, as error, vice, and evil
passions; of the former simple limitation.

Thus if '(per impossible)' human nature could make itself sinless and
perfect, it would become or pass into God; and if God should abstract
from human nature all imperfection, it might without impropriety be
affirmed, even as Scripture doth affirm, that God assumed or took up
into himself the human nature.

Thus, to use a dim similitude and merely as a faint illustration, all
materiality abstracted from a circle, it would become space, and though
not infinite, yet one with infinite space. The mystery of omnipresence
greatly aids this conception; 'totus in omni parte': and in truth this
is the divine character of all the Christian mysteries, that they aid
each other, and many incomprehensibles render each of them, in a certain
qualified sense, less incomprehensible.


Ib. p. 208.

  But first, it is impious to think of destroying Christ in any sort.
  For though it be true, that in sacrificing of Christ on the altar of
  the cross, the destroying and killing of him was implied, and this his
  death was the life of the world, yet all that concurred to the killing
  of him, as the Jews, the Roman soldiers, Pilate, and Judas sinned
  damnably, and so had done, though they had shed his blood with an
  intention and desire, that by it the world might be redeemed.

Is not this going too far? Would it not imply almost that Christ himself
could not righteously sacrifice himself, especially when we consider
that the Romanists would have a right to say, that Christ himself had
commanded it? But Bellarmine's conceit [9] is so absurd that it scarce
deserves the compliment of a serious confutation. For if sacramental
being be opposed to natural or material, as 'noumenon' to 'phænomenon',
place is no attribute or possible accident of it 'in se'; consequently,
no alteration of place relatively to us can affect, much less destroy,
it; and even were it otherwise, yet translocation is not destruction;
for the body of Christ, according to themselves, doth indeed nourish our
souls, even as a fish eaten sustains another fish, but yet with this
essential difference, that it ceases not to be and remain itself, and
instead of being converted converts; so that truly the only things
sacrificed in the strict sense are all the evil qualities or
deficiencies which divide our souls from Christ.


Ib. p. 218.

  That which we do is done in remembrance of that which was then done;
  for he saith, 'Do this in remembrance of me.'

This is a 'metastasis' of Scripture. 'Do this in remembrance of
me', that is, that which Christ was then doing. But Christ was not
then suffering, or dying on the cross.


Ib. p.223.

  That the Saints do pray for us 'in genere', desiring God to be
  merciful to us, and to do unto us whatsoever in any kind he knoweth
  needful for our good, there is no question made by us.

To have placed this question in its true light, so as to have allowed
the full force to the Scriptures asserting the communion of Saints and
the efficacy of their intercession without undue concessions to the
'hierolatria' of the Romish church, would have implied an
acquaintance with the science of transcendental analysis, and an insight
into the philosophy of ideas not to be expected in Field, and which was
then only dawning in the mind of Lord Bacon. The proper reply to Brerely
would be this: the communion and intercession of Saints is an idea, and
must be kept such. But the Romish church has changed it away into the
detail of particular and individual conceptions, and imaginations, into
names and fancies.

N.B. Instead of the 'Roman Catholic' read throughout in this and all
other works, and everywhere and on all occasions, unless where the
duties of formal courtesy forbid, say, the 'Romish anti-Catholic
Church;' Romish--to mark that the corruptions in discipline, doctrine
and practice do for the worst and far larger part owe both their origin
and their perpetuation to the court and local tribunals of the city of
Rome, and are not and never have been the catholic, that is, universal
faith of the Roman empire, or even of the whole Latin or Western church;
and anti-Catholic,--because no other Church acts on so narrow and
excommunicative a principle, or is characterized by such a jealous
spirit of monopoly and particularism, counterfeiting catholicity by a
negative totality and heretical self-circumscription, cutting off, or
cutting herself off from, all the other members of Christ's Body.

12th March, 1824.

It is of the utmost importance, wherever clear and distinct conceptions
are required, to make out in the first instance whether the term in
question, or the main terms of the question in dispute, represents or
represent a fact or class of facts simply, or some self-established and
previously known idea or principle, of which the facts are instances and
realizations, or which is introduced in order to explain and account for
the facts. Now the term 'merits,' as applied to Abraham and the saints,
belongs to the former. It is a mere 'nomen appellativum' of the
facts.


Ib. c. 5. p. 252.

  The Papists and we agree that original sin is the privation of
  original righteousness; but they suppose there was in nature without
  that addition of grace, a power to do good, &c.

Nothing seems wanting to this argument but a previous definition and
explanation of the term, 'nature.' Field appears to have seen the truth,
namely, that nature itself is a peccant (I had almost said an unnatural)
state, or rather no State at all, [Greek: ou stásis all' apóstasis].


Ib. c. 6. p. 269.

  And surely the words of Augustine do not import that she had no sin,
  but that she overcame it, which argueth a conflict; neither doth he
  say he will acknowledge she was without sin, but that he will not move
  any question touching her, in this dispute of sins and sinners.

Why not say at once, that this anti-Scriptural superstition had already
begun? I scarcely know whether to be pleased or grieved with that edging
on toward the Roman creed, that exceeding, almost Scriptural, tenderness
for the divines of the fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries, which
distinguishes the Church of England dignitaries, from Elizabeth
inclusively to our Revolution in 1688, from other Protestants.


Ib. c. 10. p. 279.

Derwent! should this page chance to fall under your eye, for my sake
read, fag, subdue, and take up into your proper mind this chapter 10 of
Free Will.


Ib. p. 281.

  Of these five kinds of liberty, the two first agree only to God, so
  that in the highest degree [Greek: to autexoúsion], that is, freedom
  of will is proper to God only; and in this sense Calvin and Luther
  rightly deny that the will of any creature is or ever was free.


I add, except as in God, and God in us. Now the latter alone is will;
for it alone is 'ens super ens'. And here lies the mystery, which I dare
not openly and promiscuously reveal.


Ib.

  Yet doth not God's working upon the will take from it the power of
  dissenting, and doing the contrary; but so inclineth it, that having
  liberty to do otherwise, yet she will actually determine so.


This will not do. Were it true, then my understanding would be free in a
mathematical proportion; or the whole position amounts only to this,
that the will, though compelled, is still the will. Be it so; yet not a
free will. In short, Luther and Calvin are right so far. A creaturely
will cannot be free; but the will in a rational creature may cease to be
creaturely, and the creature, [Greek: apóstasis], finally cease in
consequence; and this neither Luther nor Calvin seem to have seen. In
short, where omnipotence is on one side, what but utter impotence can
remain for the other? To make freedom possible, the 'antithesis' must be
removed. The removal of this 'antithesis' of the creature to God is the
object of the Redemption, and forms the glorious liberty of the Gospel.
More than this I am not permitted to expose.


Ib. p. 283.

It is not given, nor is it wanting, to all men to have an insight into
the mystery of the human will and its mode of inherence on the will
which is God, as the ineffable 'causa sui'; but this chapter will
suffice to convince you that the doctrines of Calvin were those of
Luther in this point;--that they are intensely metaphysical, and that
they are diverse 'toto genere' from the merely moral and
psychological--tenets of the modern Calvinists. Calvin would have
exclaimed, 'fire and fagots!' before he had gotten through a hundred
pages of Dr. Williams's Modern Calvinism.


Ib. c. 11. p. 296.

  Neither can Vega avoid the evidence of the testimonies of the Fathers,
  and the decree of the Council of Trent, so that he must be forced to
  confess that no man can so collectively fulfil the law as not to sin,
  and consequently, that no man can perform that the law requireth.

The paralogism of Vega as to this perplexing question seems to lurk in
the position that God gives a law which it is impossible we should obey
collectively. But the truth is, that the law which God gave, and which
from the essential holiness of his nature it is impossible he should not
have given, man deprived himself of the ability to obey. And was the law
of God therefore to be annulled? Must the sun cease to shine because the
earth has become a morass, so that even that very glory of the sun hath
become a new cause of its steaming up clouds and vapors that strangle
the rays? God forbid! 'But for the law I had not sinned'. But had I not
been sinful the law would not have occasioned me to sin, but would have
clothed me with righteousness, by the transmission of its splendour.
'Let God be just, and every man a liar'.

B. iv. c. 4. p. 346.

  The Church of God is named the 'Pillar of Truth;' not as if truth did
  depend on the Church, &c.


Field might have strengthened his argument, by mention of the custom of
not only affixing records and testimonials to the pillars, but books, &c.


Ib. c. 7. p. 353.

  Others therefore, to avoid this absurdity, run into that other before
  mentioned, that we believe the things that are divine by the mere and
  absolute command of our will, not finding any sufficient motives and
  reasons of persuasion.

Field, nor Count Mirandula have penetrated to the heart of this most
fundamental question. In all proper faith the will is the prime agent,
but not therefore the choice. You may call it reason if you will, but
then carefully distinguish the speculative from the practical reason,
and the reason itself from the understanding.


Ib. c. 8. p. 356.

  'Illius virtute' (saith he) 'illuminati, jam non aut nostro, aut
  aliorum judicio credimus a Deo esse Scripturam, sed supra humanum
  judicium certo certius constituimus, non secus ac si ipsius Dei numen
  illic intueremur, hominum ministerio ab ipsissimo Dei ore fluxisse.'

Greatly doth this fine passage need explanation, that knowing what it
doth mean, the reader may understand what it doth not mean, nor of
necessity imply. Without this insight, our faith may be terribly shaken
by difficulties and objections. For example; If all the Scripture, then
each component part; thence every faithful Christian infallible, and so
on.


Ib. p. 357.

  In the second the light of divine reason causeth approbation of that
  they believe: in the third sort, the purity of divine understanding
  apprehendeth most certainly the things believed, and causeth a
  foretasting of those things that hereafter more fully shall be enjoyed.

Here too Field distinguishes the understanding from the reason, as
experience following perception of sense. But as perception through the
mere presence of the object perceived, whether to the outward or inner
sense, is not insight which belongs to the 'light of reason,' therefore
Field marks it by 'purity' that is unmixed with fleshly sensations or
the 'idola' of the bodily eye. Though Field is by no means consistent in
his 'epitheta' of the understanding, he seldom confounds the word
itself. In theological Latin, the understanding, as influenced and
combined with the affections and desires, is most frequently expressed
by 'cor', the heart. Doubtless the most convenient form of appropriating
the terms would be to consider the understanding as man's intelligential
faculty, whatever be its object, the sensible or the intelligible world;
while reason is the tri-unity, as it were, of the spiritual eye, light,
and object.


Ib. c. 10. p. 358.

  Of the Papists preferring the Church's authority before the Scripture.


Field, from the nature and special purpose of his controversy, is
reluctant to admit any error in the Fathers,--too much so indeed; and
this is an instance. We all know what we mean by the Scriptures, but how
know we what they mean by the Church, which is neither thing nor person?
But this is a very difficult subject.


Ib. p. 359.

  First, so as if the Church might define contrary to the Scriptures, as
  she may contrary to the writings of particular men, how great soever.

Verbally, the more sober divines of the Church of Rome do not assert
this; but practically and by consequence they do. For if the Church
assign a sense contradictory to the true sense of the Scripture, none
dare gainsay it. [10]


Ib.

  This we deny, and will in due place 'improve' their error herein.

That is, prove against, detect, or confute.


Ib. c. 11. p. 360.

  If the comparison be made between the Church consisting of all the
  believers that are and have been since Christ appeared in the flesh,
  so including the Apostles, and their blessed assistants the
  Evangelists, we deny not but that the Church is of greater authority,
  antiquity, and excellency than the Scriptures of the New Testament, as
  the witness is better than his testimony, and the law-giver greater
  than the laws made by him, as Stapleton allegeth.


The Scriptures may be and are an intelligible and real one, but the
Church on earth can in no sense be such in and through itself, that is,
its component parts, but only by their common adherence to the body of
truth made present in the Scripture. Surely you would not distinguish
the Scripture from its contents?


Ib. c. 12. p. 361.

  For the better understanding whereof we must observe, as Occam fitly
  noteth, that an article of faith is sometimes strictly taken only for
  one of those divine verities, which are contained in the Creed of the
  Apostles: sometimes generally for any catholic verity.

I am persuaded, that this division will not bear to be expanded into all
its legitimate consequences 'sine periculo vel fidei vel charitatis'. I
should substitute the following:

1. The essentials of that saving faith, which having its root and its
proper and primary seat in the moral will, that is, in the heart and
affections, is necessary for each and every individual member of the
church of Christ:--

2. Those truths which are essential and necessary in order to the
logical and rational possibility of the former, and the belief and
assertion of which are indispensable to the Church at large, as those
truths without which the body of believers, the Christian world, could
not have been and cannot be continued, though it be possible that in
this body this or that individual may be saved without the conscious
knowledge of, or an explicit belief in, them.


Ib.

  And therefore before and without such determination, men seeing
  clearly the deduction of things of this nature from the former, and
  refusing to believe them, are condemned of heretical pertinacy.


Rather, I should think, of a nondescript lunacy than of heretical
pravity. A child may explicitly know that 5 + 5 = 10, yet not see that
therefore 10 - 5 = 5; but when he has seen it how he can refrain from
believing the latter as much as the former, I have no conception.


Ib. c. 16. p. 367.

  And the third of jurisdiction; and so they that have supreme power,
  that is, the Bishops assembled in a general Council, may interpret the
  Scriptures, and by their authority suppress all them that shall
  gainsay such interpretations, and subject every man that shall disobey
  such determinations as they consent upon, to excommunication and
  censures of like nature.

This would be satisfactory, if only Field had cleared the point of the
communion in the Lord's Supper; whether taken spiritually, though in
consequence of excommunication not ritually, it yet sufficeth to
salvation. If so, excommunication is merely declarative, and the evil
follows not the declaration but that which is truly declared, as when
Richard says that Francis deserves the gallows, as a robber. The gallows
depends on the fact of the robbery, not on Richard's saying.


Ib. c. 29. p. 391.

  In the 1 Cor. 15. the Greek, that now is, hath in all copies; 'the
  first man was of the earth, earthly; the second man is the Lord from
  heaven'. The latter part of this sentence Tertullian supposeth to have
  been corrupted, and altered by the Marcionites. Instead of that the
  Latin text hath; 'the second man was from heaven, heavenly', as
  Ambrose, Hierome, and many of the Fathers read also.

There ought to be, and with any man of taste there can be, no doubt that
our version is the true one. That of Ambrose and Jerome is worthy of
mere rhetoricians; a flat formal play of 'antithesis' instead of the
weight and solemnity of the other. [11] According to the former the
scales are even, in the latter the scale of Christ drops down at once,
and the other flies to the beam like a feather weighed against a mass of
gold.

Append. Part. I. s. 4. p. 752.

  And again he saith, that every soul, immediately upon the departure
  hence, is in this appointed invisible place, having there either pain,
  or ease and refreshing; that there the rich man is in pain, and the
  poor in a comfortable estate. For, saith he, why should we not think,
  that the souls are tormented, or refreshed in this invisible place,
  appointed for them in expectation of the future judgment?

This may be adduced as an instance, specially, of the evil consequences
of introducing the 'idolon' of time as an 'ens reale' into
spiritual doctrines, thus understanding literally what St. Paul had
expressed by figure and adaptation. Hence the doctrine of a middle
state, and hence Purgatory with all its abominations; and an instance,
generally, of the incalculable possible importance of speculative errors
on the happiness and virtue of man-kind.




[Footnote 1: Folio 1628.--Ed.]


[Footnote 2: The following letter was written on, and addressed with,
the book to the Rev. Derwent Coleridge.--Ed.]


[Footnote 3: 'P. L.' III. 487.--Ed.]


[Footnote 4: i. 27. See 'Aids to Reflection'. 3d edit. p. 17. n.--Ed.]


[Footnote 5:

  ... whence the soul
  Reason receives, and reason is her being,
  Discursive or intuitive.

'P. L.' v. 426.--Ed.]


[Footnote 6: The reader of the 'Aids to Reflection' will recognize in
this note the rough original of the passages p. 313, &c. of the 3d
edition of that work.--Ed.]


[Footnote 7: See 'Table Talk', 2d edit. p. 283. Melancthon's words to
Calvin are:

  'Tuo judicio prorsus assentior. Affirmu etiam vestros magistratus
  juste fecisse, quod hominem blasphemum, re ordine judicata,
  interfecerunt.'

14th Oct. 1554.--Ed.


[Footnote 8:

  "But to circle the earth, 'as the heavenly bodies do',' &c. 'So we may
  see that the opinion of Copernicus touching the rotation of the earth,
  which astronomy itself cannot correct, because it is not repugnant to
  any of the 'phænomena', yet 'natural history may correct'."

  'Advancement of Learning', B. II.--Ed.]


[Footnote 9: That Christ had a twofold being, natural and sacramental;
that the Jews destroyed and sacrificed his natural being, and that
Christian priests destroy and sacrifice in the Mass his sacramental
being.--Ed.]


[Footnote 10:

  'Fides catholica', says Bellarmine, 'docet omnem virtutem esse bonam,
  omne vitium esse malum. Si autem erraret Papa præcipiendo vitia vel
  prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona et
  virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare.'

'De Pont. Roman'. IV. 5.--Ed.]


[Footnote 11: The ordinary Greek text is:

  [Greek: ho deúteros anthropos, ho Kyrios ex ouranou].

The Vulgate is:

  'primus homo de terra, terrenus; secundus homo de coelis,
  coelestis.'--Ed.]





