Part II. s. 74.

  ... To yield not only passive obedience (which is due) but active
  also, &c.


'Which is due.' What in the name of common sense can this mean, that is,
speculatively? Practically, the meaning is clear enough, namely, that we
should do what we can to escape hanging; but the distinction is for
decorum, and so let it pass.


Ib. s. 75.

  This is the venom of this new doctrine, that by making us the King's
  creatures, and in the state of minors or children, to take away all
  our property; which would leave us nothing of our own, and lead us
  (but that God hath given us just and gracious Princes) into slavery.

And yet this just and gracious Prince prompts, sanctions, supports, and
openly rewards this envenomer, in flat contempt of both Houses of
Parliament,--protects and prefers him and others of the same principles
and professions on account of these professions! And the Parliament and
nation were inexcusable, forsooth, in not trusting to Charles's
assurances, or rather the assurances put in his mouth by Hyde, Falkland,
and others, that he had always abhorred these principles.


Ib. s. 136.

  When they saw he was not 'selfish' (it is a word of their own new
  mint), &c.

Singular! From this passage it would seem that our so very common word
'selfish' is no older than the latter part of the reign of Charles I.


Ib. s. 137.

  Their political aphorisms are far more dangerous, that His Majesty is
  not the highest power in his realms; that he hath not absolute
  sovereignty; and that a Parliament sitting is co-ordinate with him in
  it.

Hacket himself repeatedly implies as much; for would he deny that the
King with the Lords and Commons is not more than the King without them?
or that an act of Parliament is not more than a proclamation?


Ib. s.154.

  What a venomous spirit is in that serpent Milton, that black-mouthed
  Zoilus, that blows his viper's breath upon those immortal devotions
  from the beginning to the end! This is he that wrote with all
  irreverence against the Fathers of our Church, and showed as little
  duty to the father that begat him: the same that wrote for the
  Pharisees, that it was lawful for a man to put away his wife for every
  cause,--and against Christ, for not allowing divorces: the same, O
  horrid! that defended the lawfulness of the greatest crime that ever
  was committed, to put our thrice-excellent King to death: a petty
  schoolboy scribbler, that durst grapple in such a cause with the
  prince of the learned men of his age, Salmasius, [Greek: philosophiás
  pásaes aphroditae kaì lyra], as Eunapius says of Ammonius, Plutarch's
  scholar in Egypt, the delight, the music of all knowledge, who would
  have scorned to drop a pen-full of ink against so base an adversary,
  but to maintain the honor of so good a King ... Get thee behind me,
  Milton! Thou savourest not the things that be of truth and loyalty,
  but of pride, bitterness, and falsehood. There will be a time, though
  such a Shimei, a dead dog in Abishai's phrase, escape for a while ...
  It is no marvel if this canker-worm Milton, &c.

A contemporary of Bishop Racket's designates Milton as the author of a
profane and lascivious poem entitled Paradise Lost. The biographer of
our divine bard ought to have made a collection of all such passages. A
German writer of a Life of Salmasius acknowledges that Milton had the
better in the conflict in these words: 'Hans (Jack) von Milton--not to
be compared in learning and genius with the incomparable Salmasius, yet
a shrewd and cunning lawyer,' &c. 'O sana posteritas!'


Ib. s. 178.

  Dare they not trust him that never broke with them? And I have heard
  his nearest servants say, that no man could ever challenge him of the
  least lie.

What! this after the publication of Charles's letters to the Queen! Did
he not within a few months before his death enter into correspondence
with, and sign contradictory offers to, three different parties, not
meaning to keep any one of them; and at length did he not die with
something very like a falsehood in his mouth in allowing himself to be
represented as the author of the Icon Basilike?


Ib. s. 180.

  If an under-sheriff had arrested Harry Martin for debt, and pleaded
  that he did not imprison his membership, but his Martinship, would the
  Committee for privileges be fobbed off with that distinction?


To make this good in analogy, we must suppose that Harry Martin had
notoriously neglected all the duties, while he perverted and abused all
the privileges, of membership: and then I answer, that the Committee of
privileges would have done well and wisely in accepting the
under-sheriff's distinction, and, out of respect for the membership,
consigning the Martinship to the due course of law.


Ib.

  'That every soul should be subject to the higher powers.' The higher
  power under which they lived was the mere power and will of Cæsar,
  bridled in by no law.

False, if meant 'de jure'; and if 'de facto', the plural 'powers' would
apply to the Parliament far better than to the King, and to Cromwell as
well as to Nero. Every even decently good Emperor professed himself the
servant of the Roman Senate. The very term 'Imperator', as Gravina
observes, implies it; for it expresses a delegated and instrumental
power. Before the assumption of the Tribunitial character by Augustus,
by which he became the representative of the majority of the
people,--'majestatem indutus est,--Senatus consulit, Populus jubet,
imperent Consules', was the constitutional language.


Ib. s. 190.

  Yet so much dissonancy there was between his tongue and his heart,
  that he triumphed in the murder of Cæsar, the only Roman that exceeded
  all their race in nobleness, and was next to Tully in eloquence.


There is something so shameless in this self-contradiction as of itself
almost to extinguish the belief that the prelatic royalists were
conscientious in their conclusions. For if the Senate of Rome were not a
lawful power, what could be? And if Cæsar, the thrice perjured traitor,
was neither perjured nor traitor, only because he by his Gaulish troops
turned a republic into a monarchy,--with what face, under what pretext,
could Hacket abuse 'Sultan Cromwell?'



[Footnote 1: By Thomas Plume. Folio, 1676.--Ed.]


[Footnote 2:

  'Ea omnia super Christo Pilatus, et ipse jam pro sua conscientia
  Christianus, Cæsari tum Tiberio nuntiavit.'

Apologet, ii. 624. See the account in Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. ii. 2.--Ed.]


[Footnote 3: See 'M. T. Ciceronis de Republica quæ supersunt. Zell.
Stuttgardt'. 1827.--Ed.]


[Footnote 4: See 'supra'.--Ed].


[Footnote 5: Folio. 1693.--Ed.]


[Footnote 6: See The Church and State.--Ed.]





