The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Literary Remains Of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, by Samuel Taylor Coleridge

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Literary Remains Of Samuel Taylor Coleridge

Author: Samuel Taylor Coleridge

Editor: Henry Nelson Coleridge

Release Date: August 30, 2003 [eBook #8956]
[Most recently updated: November 22, 2022]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Clytie Siddall and Distributed Proofreaders





THE LITERARY REMAINS

OF SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE



VOLUME THE THIRD



COLLECTED AND EDITED BY

HENRY NELSON COLERIDGE.



1838




TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE JOHN HOOKHAM FRERE THE THIRD AND FOURTH VOLUMES
OF COLERIDGE'S REMAINS ARE RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED.




  CONTENTS


  Preface
  Formula Fidei de SS. Trinitate
  Nightly Prayer
  Notes on 'The Book of Common Prayer'
  Notes on Hooker
  Notes on Field
  Notes on Donne
  Notes on Henry More
  Notes on Heinrichs
  Notes on Hacket
  Notes on Jeremy Taylor
  Notes on 'The Pilgrim's Progress'
  Notes on John Smith
  Letter to a Godchild




PREFACE

For a statement of the circumstances under which the collection of Mr.
Coleridge's Literary Remains was undertaken, the Reader is referred to
the Preface to the two preceding Volumes published in 1836. But the
graver character of the general contents of this Volume and of that
which will immediately follow it, seems to justify the Editor in
soliciting particular attention to a few additional remarks.

Although the Author in his will contemplated the publication of some at
least of the numerous notes left by him on the margins and blank spaces
of books and pamphlets, he most certainly wrote the notes themselves
without any purpose beyond that of delivering his mind of the thoughts
and aspirations suggested by the text under perusal. His books, that is,
any person's books--even those from a circulating library--were to him,
whilst reading them, as dear friends; he conversed with them as with
their authors, praising, or censuring, or qualifying, as the open page
seemed to give him cause; little solicitous in so doing to draw
summaries or to strike balances of literary merit, but seeking rather to
detect and appreciate the moving principle or moral life, ever one and
single, of the work in reference to absolute truth. Thus employed he had
few reserves, but in general poured forth, as in a confessional, all his
mind upon every subject,--not keeping back any doubt or conjecture which
at the time and for the purpose seemed worthy of consideration. In
probing another's heart he laid his hand upon his own. He thought pious
frauds the worst of all frauds, and the system of economizing truth too
near akin to the corruption of it to be generally compatible with the
Job-like integrity of a true Christian's conscience. Further, he
distinguished so strongly between that internal faith which lies at the
base of, and supports, the whole moral and religious being of man, and
the belief, as historically true, of several incidents and relations
found or supposed to be found in the text of the Scriptures, that he
habitually exercised a liberty of criticism with respect to the latter,
which will probably seem objectionable to many of his readers in this
country. [1]

His friends have always known this to be the fact; and he vindicated
this so openly that it would be folly to attempt to conceal it: nay, he
pleaded for it so earnestly--as the only middle path of safety and peace
between a godless disregard of the unique and transcendant character of
the Bible taken generally, and that scheme of interpretation, scarcely
less adverse to the pure spirit of Christian wisdom, which wildly arrays
our faith in opposition to our reason, and inculcates the sacrifice of
the latter to the former,--that to suppress this important part of his
solemn convictions would be to misrepresent and betray him. For he threw
up his hands in dismay at the language of some of our modern divinity on
this point;--as if a faith not founded on insight were aught else than a
specious name for wilful positiveness;--as if the Father of Lights could
require, or would accept, from the only one of his creatures whom he had
endowed with reason the sacrifice of fools! Did Coleridge, therefore,
mean that the doctrines revealed in the Scriptures were to be judged
according to their supposed harmony or discrepancy with the evidence of
the senses, or the deductions of the mere understanding from that
evidence? Exactly the reverse: he disdained to argue even against
Transubstantiation on such a ground, well knowing and loudly proclaiming
its utter weakness and instability. But it was a leading principle in
all his moral and intellectual views to assert the existence in all men
equally of a power or faculty superior to, and independent of, the
external senses: in this power or faculty he recognized that image of
God in which man was made; and he could as little understand how faith,
the indivisibly joint act or efflux of our reason and our will, should
be at variance with one of its factors or elements, as how the Author
and Upholder of all truth should be in contradiction to himself. He
trembled at the dreadful dogma which rests God's right to man's
obedience on the fact of his almighty power,--a position falsely
inferred from a misconceived illustration of St. Paul's, and which is
less humbling to the creature than blasphemous of the Creator; and of
the awless doctrine that God might, if he had so pleased, have given to
man a religion which to human intelligence should not be rational, and
exacted his faith in it--Coleridge's whole middle and later life was one
deep and solemn denial. He believed in no God in the very idea of whose
existence absolute truth, perfect goodness, and infinite wisdom, were
not elements essentially necessary and everlastingly copresent.

Thus minded, he sought to justify the ways of God to man in the only way
in which they can be justified to any one who deals honestly with his
conscience, namely, by showing, where possible, their consequence from,
and in all cases their consistency with, the ideas or truths of the pure
reason which is the same in all men. With what success he laboured for
thirty years in this mighty cause of Christian philosophy, the readers
of his other works, especially the Aids to Reflection, will judge: if
measured by the number of resolved points of detail his progress may
seem small; but if tested by the weight and grasp of the principles
which he has established, it may be confidently said that since
Christianity had a name few men have gone so far. If ever we are to find
firm footing in Biblical criticism between the extremes (how often
meeting!) of Socinianism and Popery;--if the indisputable facts of
physical science are not for ever to be left in a sort of admitted
antagonism to the supposed assertions of Scripture;--if ever the
Christian duty of faith in God through Christ is to be reconciled with
the religious service of a being gifted by the same God with reason and
a will, and subjected to a conscience,--it must be effected by the aid,
and in the light, of those truths of deepest philosophy which in all Mr.
Coleridge's works, published or unpublished, present themselves to the
reader with an almost affecting reiteration. But to do justice to those
works and adequately to appreciate the Author's total mind upon any
given point, a cursory perusal is insufficient; study and comprehension
are requisite to an accurate estimate of the relative value of any
particular denial or assertion; and the apparently desultory and
discontinuous form of the observations now presented to the Reader more
especially calls for the exercise of his patience and thoughtful
circumspection.

With this view the Reader is requested to observe the dates which, in
some instances, the Editor has been able to affix to the notes with
certainty. Most of those on Jeremy Taylor belong to the year 1810, and
were especially designed for the perusal of Charles Lamb. Those on Field
were written about 1814; on Racket in 1818; on Donne in 1812 and 1829;
on The Pilgrim's Progress in 1833; and on Hooker and the Book of Common
Prayer between 1820 and 1830. Coleridge's mind was a growing and
accumulating mind to the last, his whole life one of inquiry and
progressive insight, and the dates of his opinions are therefore in some
cases important, and in all interesting.

The Editor is deeply sensible of his responsibility in publishing this
Volume; as to which he can only say, in addition to a reference to the
general authority given by the Author, that to the best of his knowledge
and judgment he has not permitted any thing to appear before the public
which Mr. Coleridge saw reason to retract; and further express his hope
and belief that, with such allowance for defects inherent in the nature
of the work as may rightfully be expected from every really liberal
mind, nothing contained in the following pages can fairly be a ground of
offence to any one.

It only remains to be added that the materials used in the compilation
of this Volume were for the greatest part communicated by Mr. Gillman;
and that the rest were furnished by Mr. Wordsworth, the Rev. Derwent
Coleridge, the Rev. Edward Coleridge, and the Editor.

Lincoln's Inn, March 26, 1838



[Footnote 1: See 'Table Talk', p. 178, 2nd edit.]




FORMULA FIDEI DE SANCTISSIMA TRINITATE.

1830.


THE IDENTITY.

The absolute subjectivity, whose only attribute is the Good; whose only
definition is--that which is essentially causative of all possible true
being; the ground; the absolute will; the adorable [Greek: pr_ópr_oton],
which, whatever is assumed as the first, must be presumed as its
antecedent; [Greek: theòs], without an article, and yet not as an
adjective. See John i. 18. [Greek: theòn oudeìs he_órake p_ópote] as
differenced from ib. 1, [Greek: kai theòs aen o lógos]

But that which is essentially causative of all being must be causative
of its own,--'causa sui', [Greek: autopát_or]. Thence


THE IPSEITY.

The eternally self-affirmant self-affirmed; the "I Am in that I Am," or
the "I shall be that I will to be;" the Father; the relatively
subjective, whose attribute is, the Holy One; whose definition is, the
essential finific in the form of the infinite; 'dat sibi fines'.

But the absolute will, the absolute good, in the eternal act of
self-affirmation, the Good as the Holy One, co-eternally begets


THE ALTERITY.

The supreme being; [Greek: ho ont'os 'on]; the supreme reason; the
Jehovah; the Son; the Word; whose attribute is the True (the truth, the
light, the 'fiat'); and whose definition is, the 'pleroma' of being,
whose essential poles are unity and distinctity; or the essential
infinite in the form of the finite;--lastly, the relatively objective,
'deitas objectiva' in relation to the I Am as the 'deitas subjectiva';
the divine objectivity.

N.B. The distinctities in the 'pleroma' are the eternal ideas, the
subsistential truths; each considered in itself, an infinite in the form
of the finite; but all considered as one with the unity, the eternal
Son, they are the energies of the finific; [Greek: pánta di' autou
egéneto--kaì ek tou plaer'ómatos autou haemeis pántes elábomen.]  John
i. 3 and 16.

But with the relatively subjective and the relatively objective, the
great idea needs only for its completion a co-eternal which is both,
that is, relatively objective to the subjective, relatively subjective
to the objective. Hence


THE COMMUNITY.

The eternal life, which is love; the Spirit; relatively to the Father,
the Spirit of Holiness, the Holy Spirit; relatively to the Son, the
Spirit of truth, whose attribute is Wisdom; 'sancta sophia'; the Good in
the reality of the True, in the form of actual Life. Holy! Holy! Holy!
[Greek: hilásthaetí moi].




A NIGHTLY PRAYER.

1831.

Almighty God, by thy eternal Word my Creator, Redeemer and Preserver!
who hast in thy free communicative goodness glorified me with the
capability of knowing thee, the one only absolute Good, the eternal I
Am, as the author of my being, and of desiring and seeking thee as its
ultimate end;--who, when I fell from thee into the mystery of the false
and evil will, didst not abandon me, poor self-lost creature, but in thy
condescending mercy didst provide an access and a return to thyself,
even to thee the Holy One, in thine only begotten Son, the way and the
truth from everlasting, and who took on himself humanity, yea, became
flesh, even the man Christ Jesus, that for man he might be the life and
the resurrection!--O Giver of all good gifts, who art thyself the one
only absolute Good, from whom I have received whatever good I have,
whatever capability of good there is in me, and from thee good
alone,--from myself and my own corrupted will all evil and the
consequents of evil,--with inward prostration of will, mind, and
affections I adore thy infinite majesty; I aspire to love thy
transcendant goodness!--In a deep sense of my unworthiness, and my
unfitness to present myself before thee, of eyes too pure to behold
iniquity, and whose light, the beatitude of spirits conformed to thy
will, is a consuming fire to all vanity and corruption;--but in the name
of the Lord Jesus, of the dear Son of thy love, in whose perfect
obedience thou deignest to behold as many as have received the seed of
Christ into the body of this death;--I offer this my bounden nightly
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, in humble trust, that the
fragrance of my Saviour's righteousness may remove from it the taint of
my mortal corruption. Thy mercies have followed me through all the hours
and moments of my life; and now I lift up my heart in awe and
thankfulness for the preservation of my life through the past day, for
the alleviation of my bodily sufferings and languors, for the manifold
comforts which thou hast reserved for me, yea, in thy fatherly
compassion hast rescued from the wreck of my own sins or sinful
infirmities;--for the kind and affectionate friends thou hast raised up
for me, especially for those of this household, for the mother and
mistress of this family whose love to me hath been great and faithful,
and for the dear friend, the supporter and sharer of my studies and
researches; but above all, for the heavenly Friend, the crucified
Saviour, the glorified Mediator, Christ Jesus, and for the heavenly
Comforter, source of all abiding comforts, thy Holy Spirit! O grant me
the aid of thy Spirit, that I may with a deeper faith, a more enkindled
love, bless thee, who through thy Son hast privileged me to call thee
Abba, Father! O, thou who hast revealed thyself in thy holy word as a
God that hearest prayer; before whose infinitude all differences cease
of great and small; who like a tender parent foreknowest all our wants,
yet listenest well-pleased to the humble petitions of thy children; who
hast not alone permitted, but taught us, to call on thee in all our
needs,--earnestly I implore the continuance of thy free mercy, of thy
protecting providence, through the coming night. Thou hearest every
prayer offered to thee believingly with a penitent and sincere heart.
For thou in withholding grantest, healest in inflicting the wound, yea,
turnest all to good for as many as truly seek thee through Christ, the
Mediator! Thy will be done! But if it be according to thy wise and
righteous ordinances, O shield me this night from the assaults of
disease, grant me refreshment of sleep unvexed by evil and distempered
dreams; and if the purpose and aspiration of my heart be upright before
thee who alone knowest the heart of man, O in thy mercy vouchsafe me yet
in this my decay of life an interval of ease and strength; if so (thy
grace disposing and assisting) I may make compensation to thy church for
the unused talents thou hast entrusted to me, for the neglected
opportunities, which thy loving-kindness had provided. O let me be found
a labourer in the vineyard, though of the late hour, when the Lord and
Heir of the vintage, Christ Jesus, calleth for his servant.

'Our Father', &c.

To thee, great omnipresent Spirit, whose mercy is over all thy works,
who now beholdest me, who hearest me, who hast framed my heart to seek
and to trust in thee, in the name of my Lord and Saviour Christ Jesus, I
humbly commit and commend my body, soul, and spirit.

Glory be to thee, O God!




NOTES ON THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER.


PRAYER.

A man may pray night and day, and yet deceive himself; but no man can be
assured of his sincerity, who does not pray. Prayer is faith passing
into act; a union of the will and the intellect realizing in an
intellectual act. It is the whole man that prays. Less than this is
wishing, or lip-work; a charm or a mummery. 'Pray always', says the
Apostle;--that is, have the habit of prayer, turning your thoughts into
acts by connecting them with the idea of the redeeming God, and even so
reconverting your actions into thoughts.


THE SACRAMENT OF THE EUCHARIST.

The best preparation for taking this sacrament, better than any or all
of the books or tracts composed for this end, is, to read over and over
again, and often on your knees--at all events, with a kneeling and
praying heart--the Gospel according to St. John, till your mind is
familiarized to the contemplation of Christ, the Redeemer and Mediator
of mankind, yea, and of every creature, as the living and
self-subsisting Word, the very truth of all true being, and the very
being of all enduring truth; the reality, which is the substance and
unity of all reality; 'the light which lighteth every man', so that what
we call reason, is itself a light from that light, 'lumen a luce', as
the Latin more distinctly expresses this fact. But it is not merely
light, but therein is life; and it is the life of Christ, the co-eternal
son of God, that is the only true life-giving light of men. We are
assured, and we believe that Christ is God; God manifested in the flesh.
As God, he must be present entire in every creature;--(for how can God,
or indeed any spirit, exist in parts?)--but he is said to dwell in the
regenerate, to come to them who receive him by faith in his name, that
is, in his power and influence; for this is the meaning of the word
'name' in Scripture when applied to God or his Christ. Where true belief
exists, Christ is not only present with or among us;--for so he is in
every man, even the most wicked;--but to us and for us.

  'That was the true light, which lighteth every man that cometh into
  the world. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the
  world knew him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power
  to become the sons of God, even to them that believe in his name;
  which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
  the will of man, but of God. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt
  among us.'

  John i. 9-14.

Again

  'We will come unto him, and make our abode with him.'

  John xiv. 23.

As truly and as really as your soul resides constitutively in your
living body, so truly, really, personally, and substantially does Christ
dwell in every regenerate man.

After this course of study, you may then take up and peruse sentence by
sentence the communion service, the best of all comments on the
Scriptures appertaining to this mystery. And this is the preparation
which will prove, with God's grace, the surest preventive of, or
antidote against, the freezing poison, the lethargizing hemlock, of the
doctrine of the Sacramentaries, according to whom the Eucharist is a
mere practical metaphor, in which things are employed instead of
articulated sounds for the exclusive purpose of recalling to our minds
the historical fact of our Lord's crucifixion; in short--(the
profaneness is with them, not with me)--just the same as when
Protestants drink a glass of wine to the glorious memory of William III!
True it is, that the remembrance is one end of the sacrament; but it is,
'Do this in remembrance of me',--of all that Christ was and is, hath
done and is still doing for fallen mankind, and of course of his
crucifixion inclusively, but not of his crucifixion alone.

14 December, 1827.


COMPANION TO THE ALTAR.


  First then, that we may come to this heavenly feast holy, and adorned
  with the wedding garment, Matt. xxii. 11, we must search our hearts,
  and examine our consciences, not only till we see our sins, but until
  we hate them.

But what if a man, seeing his sin, earnestly desire to hate it? Shall he
not at the altar offer up at once his desire, and the yet lingering sin,
and seek for strength? Is not this sacrament medicine as well as food?
Is it an end only, and not likewise the means? Is it merely the
triumphal feast; or is it not even more truly a blessed refreshment for
and during the conflict?

  This confession of sins must not be in general terms only, that we are
  sinners with the rest of mankind, but it must be a special declaration
  to God of all our most heinous sins in thought, word, and deed.

Luther was of a different judgment. He would have us feel and groan
under our sinfulness and utter incapability of redeeming ourselves from
the bondage, rather than hazard the pollution of our imaginations by a
recapitulation and renewing of sins and their images in detail. Do not,
he says, stand picking the flaws out one by one, but plunge into the
river, and drown them!--I venture to be of Luther's doctrine.


COMMUNION SERVICE.

In the first Exhortation, before the words 'meritorious Cross and
Passion,' I should propose to insert 'his assumption of humanity, his
incarnation, and.'

Likewise a little lower down, after the word 'sustenance,' I would
insert 'as.'

For not in that sacrament exclusively, but in all the acts of
assimilative faith, of which the Eucharist is a solemn, eminent, and
representative instance, an instance and the symbol, Christ is our
spiritual food and sustenance.


MARRIAGE SERVICE.

Marriage, simply as marriage, is not the means 'for the procreation of
children,' but for the humanization of the offspring procreated.

Therefore in the Declaration at the beginning, after the words,
'procreation of children,' I would insert, 'and as the means for
securing to the children procreated enduring care, and that they may be'
&c.


COMMUNION OF THE SICK.

Third rubric at the end.

  But if a man, either by reason of extremity of sickness, &c.

I think this rubric, in what I conceive to be its true meaning, a
precious document, as fully acquitting our Church of all Romish
superstition, respecting the nature of the Eucharist, in relation to the
whole scheme of man's redemption. But the latter part of it--'he doth
eat and drink the Body and Blood of our Saviour Christ profitably to his
soul's health, although he do not receive the Sacrament with his
mouth'--seems to me very incautiously expressed, and scarcely to be
reconciled with the Church's own definition of a sacrament in general.
For in such a case, where is 'the outward and visible sign of the inward
and spiritual grace given?' [1]


[Footnote 1:

  'Should it occur to any one that the doctrine blamed in the text, is
  but in accordance with that of the Church of England, in her rubric
  concerning spiritual communion, annexed to the Office for Communion of
  the Sick: he may consider, whether that rubric, explained (as if
  possible it must be) in consistency with the definition of a sacrament
  in the Catechism, can be meant for any but rare and extraordinary
  cases: cases as strong in regard of the Eucharist, as that of
  martyrdom, or the premature death of a well-disposed catechumen, in
  regard of Baptism.'

  Keble's Pref. to Hooker, p. 85, n. 70. Ed.]




XI SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY.

Epistle.--1 Cor. xv. 1.

  Brethren, I declare unto you the Gospel which I preached unto you.

Why should the obsolete, though faithful, Saxon translation of [Greek:
euaggélion] be retained? Why not 'good tidings?' Why thus change a most
appropriate and intelligible designation of the matter into a mere
conventional name of a particular book?

Ib.

 ... how that Christ died for our sins.

But the meaning of [Greek: upèr ton hamarti_on haem_on] is, that Christ
died through the sins, and for the sinners. He died through our sins,
and we live through his righteousness.

Gospel, Luke xviii. 14.

  This man went down to his house justified rather than the other.

Not simply justified, observe; but justified rather than the other,
[Greek: ae ekeinos],--that is, less remote from salvation.



XXV. SUNDAY AFTER TRINITY.

Collect.

 ... that they, plenteously bringing forth the fruit of good works, may
 of thee be plenteously rewarded. ...

Rather--"that with that enlarged capacity, which without thee we cannot
acquire, there may likewise be an increase of the gift, which from thee
alone we can wholly receive."



PS. VIII.

v. 2.

  'Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklings hast thou ordained
  strength, because of thine enemies; that thou mightest still the enemy
  and the avenger'.

To the dispensations of the twilight dawn, to the first messengers of
the redeeming word, the yet lisping utterers of light and life, a
strength and a power were given 'because of the enemies', greater and of
more immediate influence, than to the seers and proclaimers of a clearer
day:--even as the first re-appearing crescent of the eclipsed moon
shines for men with a keener brilliance, than the following larger
segments, previously to its total emersion.

Ib. v. 5.

  'Thou madest him lower than the angels, to crown him with glory and
  worship'.

Power + idea = angel.
Idea - power = man, or Prometheus.



PS. LXVIII.

v. 34.

  'Ascribe ye the power to God over Israel: his worship and strength is
  in the clouds'.

The 'clouds' in the symbolical language of the Scriptures mean the
events and course of things, seemingly effects of human will or chance,
but overruled by Providence.



PS. LXXII.

This Psalm admits no other interpretation but of Christ, as the Jehovah
incarnate. In any other sense, it would be a specimen of more than
Persian or Moghul hyperbole and bombast, of which there is no other
instance in Scripture, and which no Christian would dare to attribute to
an inspired writer. We know, too, that the elder Jewish Church ranked it
among the Messianic Psalms. N.B. The Word in St. John, and the Name of
the Most High in the Psalms, are equivalent terms.

v. 1.

  'Give the king thy judgments, O God; and thy righteousness unto the
  king's son'.

God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, the only begotten, the
Son of God and God, King of Kings, and the Son of the King of Kings!



PS. LXXIV.

v. 2.

  'O think upon thy congregation, whom thou hast purchased and redeemed
  of old'.

The Lamb sacrificed from the beginning of the world, the God-Man, the
Judge, the self-promised Redeemer to Adam in the garden!

v. 15.

  'Thou smotest the heads of Leviathan in pieces; and gavest him to be
  meat for the people in the wilderness'.

Does this allude to any real tradition? [1] The Psalm appears to have
been composed shortly before the captivity of Judah.


[Footnote 1: According to Bishop Horne, the allusion is to the
destruction of Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea.--Ed.]



PS. LXXXII. vv. 6-7.

The reference which our Lord made to these mysterious verses, gives them
an especial interest. The first apostasy, the fall of the angels, is,
perhaps, intimated.



PS. LXXXVII.

I would fain understand this Psalm; but first I must collate it word by
word with the original Hebrew. It seems clearly Messianic.


PS. LXXXVIII.

vv. 10--12.

  'Dost than shew wonders among the dead, or shall the dead rise up
  again and praise thee?' &c.

Compare Ezekiel xxxvii.



PS. CIV.

I think the Bible version might with advantage be substituted for this,
which in some parts is scarcely intelligible.

v. 6.

  'the waters stand in the hills.'

No; 'stood above the mountains'. The reference is to the Deluge.



PS. CV.

v. 3.

  'Let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord.'

If even to seek the Lord be joy, what will it be to find him? Seek me, O
Lord, that I may be found by thee!



PS. CX.

v. 2.

  'The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion'; (saying)
  'Rule', &c.

v. 3. Understand:

  'Thy people shall offer themselves willingly in the day of conflict in
  holy clothing, in their best array, in their best arms and
  accoutrements. As the dew from the womb of the morning, in number and
  brightness like dew-drops; so shall be thy youth, or the youth of
  thee, the young volunteer warriors.'

v. 5.

  'He shall shake,'

concuss, 'concutiet reges die iræ suæ,'

v. 6. For

  'smite in sunder, or wound, the heads;'

some word answering to the Latin 'conquassare'.

v. 7. For 'therefore,' translate 'then shall he lift up his head again;'
that is, as a man languid and sinking from thirst and fatigue after
refreshment.

N.B. I see no poetic discrepancy between vv. 1 and 5.



PS. CXVIII.

To be interpreted of Christ's church.



PS. CXXVI.

v. 5.

  'As the rivers in the south.'

Does this allude to the periodical rains? [1]

As a transparency on some night of public rejoicing, seen by common day,
with the lamps from within removed--even such would the Psalms be to me
uninterpreted by the Gospel. O honored Mr. Hurwitz! Could I but make you
feel what grandeur, what magnificence, what an everlasting significance
and import Christianity gives to every fact of your national history--to
every page of your sacred records!


[Footnote 1:  See Horne in loc. note.--Ed.]



ARTICLES OF RELIGION.

XX.

It is mournful to think how many recent writers have criminated our
Church in consequence of their own ignorance and inadvertence in not
knowing, or not noticing, the contra-distinction here meant between
power and authority. Rites and ceremonies the Church may ordain 'jure
proprio': on matters of faith her judgment is to be received with
reverence, and not gainsaid but after repeated inquiries, and on weighty
grounds.

XXXVII.

  It is lawful for Christian men, at the commandment of the magistrate,
  to wear weapons, and to serve in the wars.

This is a very good instance of an unseemly matter neatly wrapped up.
The good men recoiled from the plain words:

  'It is lawful for Christian men at the command of a king to slaughter
  as many Christians as they can!'

Well! I could most sincerely subscribe to all these articles.

September, 1831.




