NOTES ON THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.

I know of no book, the Bible excepted, as above all comparison, which I,
according to my judgment and experience, could so safely recommend as
teaching and enforcing the whole saving truth according to the mind that
was in Christ Jesus, as the Pilgrim's Progress. It is, in my conviction,
incomparably the best 'Summa Theologiæ Evangelicæ' ever produced by
a writer not miraculously inspired.

June 14, 1830.


It disappointed, nay surprised me, to find Robert Southey express
himself so coldly respecting the style and diction of the Pilgrim's
Progress. I can find nothing homely in it but a few phrases and single
words. The conversation between Faithful and Talkative [1] is a model of
unaffected dignity and rhythmical flow.




SOUTHEY'S LIFE OF BUNYAN.

P. xiv.

  "We intended not," says Baxter, "to dig down the banks, or pull up the
  hedge, and lay all waste and common, when we desired the Prelates'
  tyranny might cease." No; for the intention had been under the pretext
  of abating one tyranny to establish a far severer and more galling in
  its stead: in doing this the banks had been thrown down, and the hedge
  destroyed; and while the bestial herd who broke in rejoiced in the
  havoc, Baxter, and other such erring though good men, stood marvelling
  at the mischief, which never could have been effected, if they had not
  mainly assisted in it.

But the question is, would these 'erring good' men have been either
willing or able to assist in this work, if the more erring Lauds and
Sheldons had not run riot in the opposite direction? And as for the
'bestial herd,'--compare the whole body of Parliamentarians, all the
fanatical sects included, with the royal and prelatical party in the
reign of Charles II. These were, indeed, a bestial herd. See Baxter's
unwilling and Burnet's honest description of the moral discipline
throughout the realm under Cromwell.


Ib. p. xv.

  They passed with equal facility from strict Puritanism to the utmost
  license of practical and theoretical impiety, as Antinomians or as
  Atheists, and from extreme profligacy to extreme superstition in any
  of its forms.

'They!' How many? and of these how many that would not have been in
Bedlam, or fit for it, under some other form? A madman falls into love
or religion, and then, forsooth! it is love or religion that drove him
mad.


Ib. p. xxi.

  In an evil hour were the doctrines of the Gospel sophisticated with
  questions which should have been left in the Schools for those who are
  unwise enough to employ themselves in excogitations of useless
  subtlety.

But what, at any rate, had Bunyan to do with the Schools? His
perplexities clearly rose out of the operations of his own active but
unarmed mind on the words of the Apostle. If anything is to be
arraigned, it must be the Bible in English, the reading of which is
imposed (and, in my judgment, well and wisely imposed) as a duty on all
who can read. Though Protestants, we are not ignorant of the occasional
and partial evils of promiscuous Bible-reading; but we see them vanish
when we place them beside the good.


Ib. p. xxiv.

  False notions of that corruption of our nature which it is almost as
  perilous to exaggerate as to dissemble.

I would have said "which it is almost as perilous to misunderstand as to
deny."


Ib. p. xli. &c.

  But the wickedness of the tinker has been greatly over-charged; and it
  is taking the language of self-accusation too literally, to pronounce
  of John Bunyan that he was at any time depraved. The worst of what he
  was in his worst days is to be expressed in a single word ... he had
  been a blackguard, &c.

All this narrative, with the reflections on the facts, is admirable and
worthy of Robert Southey: full of good sense and kind feeling--the
wisdom of love.


Ib. p. lxi.

  But the Sectaries had kept their countrymen from it (the Common Prayer
  Book), while they had the power, and Bunyan himself in his sphere
  laboured to dissuade them from it.

Surely the fault lay in the want, or in the feeble and inconsistent
manner, of determining and supporting the proper powers of the Church.
In fact, the Prelates and leading divines of the Church were not only at
variance with each other, but each with himself.

One party, the more faithful and less modified disciples of the first
Reformers, were afraid of bringing anything into even a semblance of a
co-ordination with the Scriptures; and, with the _terriculum_ of Popery
ever before their eyes, timidly and sparingly allowed to the Church any
even subordinate power beyond that of interpreting the Scriptures; that
is, of finding the ordinances of the Church implicitly contained in the
ordinances of the inspired writers.

But as they did not assume infallibility in their interpretations, it
amounted to nothing for the consciences of such men as Bunyan and a
thousand others.

The opposite party, Laud, Taylor, and the rest, with a sufficient
dislike of the Pope (that is, at Rome) and of the grosser theological
corruptions of the Romish Church, yet in their hearts as much averse to
the sentiments and proceedings of Luther, Calvin, John Knox, Zuinglius,
and their fellows, and proudly conscious of their superior learning,
sought to maintain their ordinances by appeals to the Fathers, to the
recorded traditions and doctrine of the Catholic priesthood during the
first five or six centuries, and contended for so much that virtually
the Scriptures were subordinated to the Church, which yet they did not
dare distinctly to say out.

The result was that the Anti-Prelatists answered them in the gross by
setting at nought their foundation, that is, the worth, authority and
value of the Fathers.

So much for their variance with each other. But each vindicator of our
established Liturgy and Discipline was divided in himself: he minced
this out of fear of being charged with Popery, and that he dared not
affirm for fear of being charged with disloyalty to the King as the head
of the Church.

The distinction between the Church of which the king is the rightful
head, and the Church which hath no head but Christ, never occurred
either to them or to their antagonists; and as little did they succeed
in appropriating to Scripture what belonged to Scripture, and to the
Church what belonged to the Church.

All things in which the temporal is concerned may be reduced to a
pentad, namely, prothesis, thesis, antithesis, mesothesis and synthesis.
So here--


                     'Prothesis'
                   Christ, the Word



   'Thesis'          'Mesothesis'       'Antithesis'
The Scriptures     The Holy Spirit       The Church



                     'Synthesis'
                    The Preacher

[2]


Ib. p. lxiii.

  "But there are two ways of obeying," he observed; "the one to do that
  which I in my conscience do believe that I am bound to do, actively;
  and where I cannot obey actively, there I am willing to lie down, and
  to suffer what they shall do unto me."

Genuine Christianity worthy of John and Paul!


Ib. p. lxv.

I am not conscious of any warping power that could have acted for so
very long a period; but from sixteen to now, sixty years of age, I have
retained the very same convictions respecting the Stuarts and their
adherents. Even to Lord Clarendon I never could quite reconcile myself.

How often the pen becomes the tongue of a systematic dream,--a
somniloquist! The sunshine, that is, the comparative power, the distinct
contra-distinguishing judgment of realities as other than mere thoughts,
is suspended. During this state of continuous, not single-mindedness,
but one-side-mindedness, writing is manual somnambulism; the somnial
magic superinduced on, without suspending, the active powers of the mind.


Ib. p. lxxix.

  "They that will have heaven, they must run for it, because the devil,
  the law, sin, death and hell, follow them. There is never a poor soul
  that is going to heaven, but the devil, the law, sin, death and hell
  make after that soul. 'The devil, your adversary, as a roaring lion,
  goeth about seeking whom he may devour.' And I will assure you the
  devil is nimble; he can run apace; he is light of foot; he hath
  overtaken many; he hath turned up their heels, and hath given them an
  everlasting fall. Also the law! that can shoot a great way: have a
  care thou keep out of the reach of those great guns the Ten
  Commandments! Hell also hath a wide mouth," &c.

It is the fashion of the day to call every man, who in his writings or
discourses gives a prominence to the doctrines on which, beyond all
others, the first Reformers separated from the Romish communion, a
Calvinist. Bunyan may have been one, but I have met with nothing in his
writings (except his Anti-pædobaptism, to which too he assigns no saving
importance) that is not much more characteristically Lutheran; for
instance, this passage is the very echo of the chapter on the Law and
Gospel, in Luther's 'Table Talk'.

It would be interesting, and I doubt not, instructive, to know the
distinction in Bunyan's mind between the devil and hell.


Ib. p. xcvii.

  Bunyan concludes with something like a promise of a third part. There
  appeared one after his death, and it has had the fortune to be
  included in many editions of the original work.

It is remarkable that Southey should not have seen, or having seen, have
forgotten to notice, that this third part is evidently written by some
Romish priest or missionary in disguise.




LIFE OF BUNYAN. [3]

  The early part of his life was an open course of wickedness.

Southey, in the Life prefixed to his edition of the Pilgrim's Progress,
has, in a manner worthy of his head and heart, reduced this oft repeated
charge to its proper value. Bunyan was never, in our received sense of
the word, wicked. He was chaste, sober, honest; but he was a bitter
blackguard; that is, damned his own and his neighbour's eyes on slight
or no occasion, and was fond of a row. In this our excellent Laureate
has performed an important service to morality. For the transmutation of
actual reprobates into saints is doubtless possible; but like the many
recorded facts of corporeal alchemy, it is not supported by modern
experiments.




THE PILGRIM'S PROGRESS.

