NOTES ON JEREMY TAYLOR.

I have not seen the late Bishop Heber's edition of Jeremy Taylor's
'Works'; but I have been informed that he did little more than
contribute the 'Life', and that in all else it is a mere London
booksellers' job. This, if true, is greatly to be regretted. I know no
writer whose works more require, I need not say deserve, the
annotations, aye, and occasional animadversions, of a sound and learned
divine. One thing is especially desirable in reference to that most
important, because (with the exception perhaps of the 'Holy Living and
Dying') the most popular, of Taylor's works, 'The Liberty of
Prophesying'; and this is a careful collation of the different editions,
particularly of the first printed before the Restoration, and the last
published in Taylor's lifetime, and after his promotion to the episcopal
bench. Indeed, I regard this as so nearly concerning Taylor's character
as a man, that if I find that it has not been done in Heber's edition,
and if I find a first edition in the British Museum, or Sion College, or
Dr. Williams's library, I will, God permitting, do it myself. There
seems something cruel in giving the name, Anabaptist, to the English
Anti-pædo-baptists; but still worse in connecting this most innocent
opinion with the mad Jacobin ravings of the poor wretches who were
called Anabaptists, in Munster, as if the latter had ever formed part of
the Baptists' creeds. In short 'The Liberty of Prophesying' is an
admirable work, in many respects, and calculated to produce a much
greater effect on the many than Milton's treatise on the same subject:
on the other hand, Milton's is throughout unmixed truth; and the man who
in reading the two does not feel the contrast between the
single-mindedness of the one, and the 'strabismus' in the other, is--in
the road of preferment.



GENERAL DEDICATION OF THE POLEMICAL DISCOURSES. [1]

Vol. vii. p. ix.

  And the breath of the people is like the voice of an exterminating
  angel, not so killing but so secret.

That is, in such wise. It would be well to note, after what time 'as'
became the requisite correlative to 'so,' and even, as in this instance,
the preferable substitute. We should have written 'as' in both places
probably, but at all events in the latter, transplacing the sentences
'as secret though not so killing;' or 'not so killing, but quite as
secret.' It is not generally true that Taylor's punctuation is
arbitrary, or his periods reducible to the post-Revolutionary standard
of length by turning some of his colons or semi-colons into full stops.
There is a subtle yet just and systematic logic followed in his
pointing, as often as it is permitted by the higher principle, because
the proper and primary purpose, of our stops, and to which alone from
their paucity they are adequate,--that I mean of enabling the reader to
prepare and manage the proportions of his voice and breath. But for the
true scheme of punctuation, [Greek: h_os emoige dokei], see the blank
page over leaf which I will try to disblank into a prize of more worth
than can be got at the E.O.'s and little goes of Lindley Murray. [2]


Ib. p. xv.

  But the most complained that, in my ways to persuade a toleration, I
  helped some men too far, and that I armed the Anabaptists with swords
  instead of shields, with a power to offend us, besides the proper
  defensitives of their own ... But wise men understand the thing and
  are satisfied. But because all men are not of equal strength; I did
  not only in a discourse on purpose demonstrate the true doctrine in
  that question, but I have now in this edition of that book answered
  all their pretensions, &c.

No; in the might of his genius he called up a spirit which he has in
vain endeavored to lay, or exorcise from the conviction.


Ib. p. xvii.

  For episcopacy relies not upon the authority of Fathers and Councils,
  but upon Scripture, upon the institution of Christ, or the institution
  of the Apostles, upon a universal tradition, and a universal practice,
  not upon the words and opinions of the doctors: it hath as great a
  testimony as Scripture itself hath, &c.

We must make allowance for the intoxication of recent triumph and final
victory over a triumphing and victorious enemy; or who but would start
back at the aweless temerity of this assertion? Not to mention the
evasion; for who ever denied the historical fact, or the Scriptural
occurrence of the word expressing the fact, namely, 'episcopi,
episcopatus?'? What was questioned by the opponents was,

1;--Who and what these 'episcopi' were; whether essentially different
from the presbyter, or a presbyter by kind in his own 'ecclesia', and a
president or chairman by accident in a synod of presbyters:

2;--That whatever the 'episcopi' of the Apostolic times were, yet were
they prelates, lordly diocesans; were they such as the Bishops of the
Church of England? Was there Scripture authority for Archbishops?

3;--That the establishment of Bishops by the Apostle Paul being granted
(as who can deny it?)--yet was this done 'jure Apostolico' for the
universal Church in all places and ages; or only as expedient for that
time and under those circumstances; by Paul not as an Apostle, but as
the head and founder of those particular churches, and so entitled to
determine their bye laws?



DEDICATION OF THE SACRED ORDER AND OFFICES OF EPISCOPACY.

Ib. p. xxiii.

  But the interest of the Bishops is conjunct with the prosperity of the
  King, besides the interest of their own security, by the obligation of
  secular advantages. For they who have their livelihood from the King,
  and are in expectance of their fortune from him, are more likely to
  pay a tribute of exacter duty, than others, whose fortunes are not in
  such immediate dependency on His Majesty.

The cat out of the bag! Consult the whole reigns of Charles I. and II.
and the beginning of James II. Jeremy Taylor was at this time
(blamelessly for himself and most honourably for his patrons) ambling on
the high road of preferment; and to men so situated, however sagacious
in other respects, it is not given to read the signs of the times.
Little did Taylor foresee that to indiscreet avowals, like these, on the
part of the court clergy, the exauctorations of the Bishops and the
temporary overthrow of the Church itself would be in no small portion
attributable. But the scanty measure and obscurity (if not rather, for
so bright a luminary, the occultation) of his preferment after the
Restoration is a problem, of which perhaps his virtues present the most
probable solution.


Ib. p. xxv.

  A second return that episcopacy makes to royalty, is that which is the
  duty of all Christians, the paying tributes and impositions.

This is true; and it was an evil hour for the Church,--and led to the
loss of its Convocation, the greatest and, in an enlarged state-policy,
the most impolitic affront ever offered by a government to its own
established Church,--in which the clergy surrendered their right of
taxing themselves.


Ib. p. xxvii.

  I mean the conversion of the kingdom from Paganism by St. Augustine,
  Archbishop of Canterbury; and the Reformation begun and promoted by
  Bishops.

From Paganism in part; but in part from primitive Christianity to
Popery. But neither this nor the following boast will bear narrow
looking into, I suspect.


'In fine.'

Like all Taylor's dedications and dedicatory epistles, this is easy,
dignified, and pregnant. The happiest 'synthesis' of the divine, the
scholar, and the gentleman was perhaps exhibited in him and Bishop
Berkeley.


Introd. p.3.

  In all those accursed machinations, which the device and artifice of
  hell hath invented for the supplanting of the Church, 'inimicus homo,'
  that old superseminator of heresies and crude mischiefs, hath
  endeavoured to be curiously compendious, and, with Tarquin's device,
  'putare summa papaverum.'

  Quoere-spiritualiter papaveratorurn?


Ib.

  His next onset was by Julian, and 'occidere presbyterium,' that was
  his province. To shut up public schools, to force Christians to
  ignorance, to impoverish and disgrace the clergy, to make them vile
  and dishonorable, these are his arts; and he did the devil more
  service in this fineness of undermining, than all the open battery of
  ten great rams of persecution.

What felicity, what vivacity of expression! Many years ago Mr.
Mackintosh gave it as an instance of my perverted taste, that I had
seriously contended that in order to form a style worthy of Englishmen,
Milton and Taylor must be studied instead of Johnson, Gibbon, and
Junius; and now I see by his introductory Lecture given at Lincoln's
Inn, and just published, he is himself imitating Jeremy Taylor, or
rather copying his semi-colon punctuation, as closely as he can. Amusing
it is to observe, how by the time the modern imitators are at the
half-way of the long breathed period, the asthmatic thoughts drop down,
and the rest is,--words! I have always been an obstinate hoper: and even
this is a 'datum' and a symptom of hope to me, that a better, an
ancestral, spirit is forming and will appear in the rising generation.


Ib. p. 5.

  First, because here is a concourse of times; for now after that these
  times have been called the last times for 1600 years together, our
  expectation of the great revelation is very near accomplishing.

Rather a whimsical consequence, that because a certain party had been
deceiving themselves for sixteen centuries they were likely to be in the
right at the beginning of the seventeenth. But indeed I question whether
in all Taylor's voluminous writings there are to be found three other
paragraphs so vague and misty-magnific as this is. It almost reminds me
of the "very cloudy and mighty alarming" in Foote.


S. i. p. 4.

  If there be such a thing as the power of the keys, by Christ
  concredited to his Church, for the binding and loosing delinquents and
  penitents respectively on earth, then there is clearly a court erected
  by Christ in his Church.

We may, without any heretical division of person, economically
distinguish our Lord's character as Jesus, and as Christ, so far that
during his sojourn on earth, from his baptism at least to his
crucifixion, he was in some respects his own Elias, bringing back the
then existing Church to the point at which the Prophets had placed it;
that is, distinguishing the 'ethica' from the 'politica,' what was
binding on the Jews as descendants of Abraham and inheritors of the
patriarchal faith from the statutes obligatory on them as members of the
Jewish state.

Jesus fulfilled the Law, which culminated in a pure religious morality
in principles, affections, and acts; and this he consolidated and
levelled into the ground-stead on which the new temple 'not made with
hands,' wherein Himself, even Christ the Lord, is the Shechinah, was to
rise and be raised.

Thus he taught the spirit of the Mosaic Law, while by his acts,
sufferings, death, resurrection, ascension, and demission of the
Comforter, he created and realized the contents, objects, and materials
of that redemptive faith, the everlasting Gospel, which from the day of
Pentecost his elect disciples, [Greek: t_on mystaeri_ón hierokáerykes],
Were Sent forth to disperse and promulgate with suitable gifts, powers,
and evidences.

In this view, I interpret our Lord's sayings concerning the Church, as
applying wholly to the Synagogue or established Church then existing,
while the binding and loosing refers, immediately and primarily as I
conceive, to the miraculous gifts of healing diseases communicated to
the Apostles; and I am not afraid to avow the conviction, that the first
three Gospels are not the books of the New Testament, in which we should
expect to find the peculiar doctrines of the Christian faith explicitly
delivered, or forming the predominant subject or contents of the
writing.


S. viii. p. 25.

  Imposition of hands for Ordination does indeed give the Holy Ghost,
  but not as he is that promise which is called 'the promise of the
  truth'.

Alas! but in what sense that does not imply some infusion of power or
light, something given and inwardly received, which would not have
existed in and for the recipient without this immission by the means or
act of the imposition of the hands? What sense that does not amount to
more and other than a mere delegation of office, a mere legitimating
acceptance and acknowledgment, with respect to the person, of that which
already is in him, can be attached to the words, 'Receive the Holy
Ghost', without shocking a pious and single-minded candidate? The
miraculous nature of the giving does not depend on the particular kind
or quality of the gift received, much less demand that it should be
confined to the power of working miracles.

For "miraculous nature" read "supernatural character;" and I can
subscribe this pencil note written so many years ago, even at this
present time, 2d March, 1824.


S. xxi. p. 91.

  'Postquam unusquisque eos quos baptizabat suos putabat esse, non
  Christi, et diceretur in populis, Ego sum Pauli, Ego Apollo, Ego autem
  Cephæ, in toto orbe decretum est ut unus de presbyteris electus
  superponeretur cateris, ut schismatum semina tollerentur.'

The natural inference would, methinks, be the contrary. There would be
more persons inclined and more likely to attach an ambition to their
belonging to a single eminent leader and head than to a body,--rather to
Cæsar, Marius, or Pompey, than to the Senate. But I have ever thought
that the best, safest, and at the same time sufficient, argument is,
that by the nature of human affairs and the appointments of God's
ordinary providence every assembly of functionaries will and must have a
president; that the same qualities which recommended the individual to
this dignity would naturally recommend him to the chief executive power
during the intervals of legislation, and at all times in all points
already ruled; that the most solemn acts, Confirmation and Ordination,
would as naturally be confined to the head of the executive in the state
ecclesiastic, as the sign manual and the like to the king in all limited
monarchies; and that in course of time when many presbyteries would
exist in the same district, Archbishops and Patriarchs would arise 'pari
ratione' as Bishops did in the first instance. Now it is admitted that
God's extraordinary appointments never repeal but rather perfect the
laws of his ordinary providence: and it is enough that all we find in
the New Testament tends to confirm and no where forbids, contradicts, or
invalidates the course of government, which the Church, we are certain,
did in fact pursue.


Ib. s. xxxvi. p. 171.

  But those things which Christianity, as it prescinds from the interest
  of the republic, hath introduced, all them, and all the causes
  emergent from them, the Bishop is judge of.... Receiving and disposing
  the patrimony of the Church, and whatsoever is of the same
  consideration according to the fortyfirst canon of the Apostles.
  'Præcipimus ut in potestate sua episcopus ecclesice res habeat'. Let
  the Bishops have the disposing of the goods of the Church; adding this
  reason: 'si enim animte hominum pretiosæ illi sint creditæ, multo
  magis eum oportet curam pecuniarum gerere'. He that is intrusted with
  our precious souls may much more be intrusted with the offertories of
  faithful people.

Let all these belong to the overseer of the Church: to whom else so
properly? but what is the nature of the power by which he is to enforce
his orders? By secular power? Then the Bishop's power is no derivative
from Christ's royalty; for his kingdom is not of the world; but the
monies are Cæsar's; and the 'cura pecuniarum' must be vested where the
donors direct, the law of the land permitting.


Ib.

  Such are the delinquencies of clergymen, who are both clergy and
  subjects too; 'clerus Domini', and 'regis subditi': and for their
  delinquencies, which are 'in materia justiæ', the secular tribunal
  punishes, as being a violation of that right which the state must
  defend; but because done by a person who is a member of the sacred
  hierarchy, and hath also an obligation of special duty to his Bishop,
  therefore the Bishop also may punish him; and when the commonwealth
  hath inflicted a penalty, the Bishop also may impose a censure, for
  every sin of a clergyman is two.

But why of a clergyman only? Is not every sheep of his flock a part of
the Bishop's charge, and of course the possible object of his censure?
The clergy, you say, take the oath of obedience. Aye! but this is the
point in dispute.


Ib. p. 172.

  So that ever since then episcopal jurisdiction hath a double part, an
  external and an internal: this is derived from Christ, that from the
  king, which because it is concurrent in all acts of jurisdiction,
  therefore it is that the king is supreme of the jurisdiction, namely,
  that part of it which is the external compulsory.

If Christ delegated no external compulsory power to the Bishops, how
came it the duty of princes to God to do so? It has been so since---yes!
since the first grand apostasy from Christ to Constantine.


Ib. s. xlviii. p. 248.

  Bishops 'ut sic' are not secular princes, must not seek for it; but
  some secular princes may be Bishops, as in Germany and in other places
  to this day they are. For it is as unlawful for a Bishop to have any
  land, as to have a country; and a single acre is no more due to the
  order than a province; but both these may be conjunct in the same
  person, though still, by virtue of Christ's precept, the functions and
  capacities must be distinguished.

True; but who with more indignant scorn attacked this very distinction
when applied by the Presbyterians to the kingship, when they professed
to fight for the King against Charles? And yet they had on their side
both the spirit of the English constitution and the language of the law.
The King never dies; the King can do no wrong. Elsewhere, too, Taylor
could ridicule the Romish prelate, who fought and slew men as a captain
at the head of his vassals, and then in the character of a Bishop
absolved his other homicidal self. However, whatever St. Peter might
understand by Christ's words, St. Peter's three-crowned successors have
been quite of Taylor's opinion that they are to be paraphrased
thus:--"Simon Peter, as my Apostle, you are to make converts only by
humility, voluntary poverty, and the words of truth and meekness; but if
by your spiritual influence you can induce the Emperor Tiberius to make
you Tetrarch of Galilee or Prefect of Judaea, then
[Greek: katakyríeue]--you may lord it as loftily as you will, and
deliver as Tetrarch or Prefect those stiff-necked miscreants to the
flames for not having been converted by you as an Apostle."


Ib. p. 276.

  I end with the golden rule of Vincentius Lirinensis:--'magnopere
  curandum est ut id teneamus, quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus
  creditum est.'

Alas! this golden rule comes full and round from the mouth; nor do I
deny that it is pure gold: but like too many other golden rules, in
order to make it cover the facts which the orthodox asserter of
episcopacy at least, and the chaplain of Archbishop Laud and King
Charles the Martyr must have held himself bound to bring under it, it
must be made to display another property of the sovereign metal, its
malleableness to wit; and must be beaten out so thin, that the weight of
truth in the portion appertaining to each several article in the
orthodox systems of theology will be so small, that it may better be
called gilt than gold; and if worth having at all, it will be for its
show, not for its substance. For instance, the 'aranea theologica' may
draw out the whole web of the Westminster Catechism from the simple
creed of the beloved Disciple,--'whoever believeth with his heart, and
professeth with his mouth, that Jesus is Lord and Christ,'--shall be
saved. If implicit faith only be required, doubtless certain doctrines,
from which all other articles of faith imposed by the Lutheran, Scotch,
or English Churches, may be deduced, have been believed 'ubique, semper,
et ab omnibus.' But if explicit and conscious belief be intended, I
would rather that the Bishop than I should defend the golden rule
against Semler.




APOLOGY FOR AUTHORIZED AND SET FORMS OF LITURGY.

Preface, s. vi. p. 286.

  Not like women or children when they are affrighted with fire in their
  clothes. We shaked off the coal indeed, but not our garments, lest we
  should have exposed our Churches to that nakedness which the excellent
  men of our sister Churches complained to be among themselves.

O, what convenient things metaphors and similes are, so charmingly
indeterminate! On the general reader the literal sense operates: he
shivers in sympathy with the poor shift-less matron, the Church of
Geneva. To the objector the answer is ready--it was speaking
metaphorically, and only meant that she had no shift on the outside of
her gown, that she made a shift without an over-all. Compare this sixth
section with the manful, senseful, irrebuttable fourth section--a folio
volume in a single paragraph! But Jeremy Taylor would have been too
great for man, had he not occasionally fallen below himself.


Ib. s. x. p. 288.

  And since all that cast off the Roman yoke thought they had title
  enough to be called Reformed, it was hard to have pleased all the
  private interests and peevishness of men that called themselves
  friends; and therefore that only in which the Church of Rome had
  prevaricated against the word of God, or innovated against Apostolical
  tradition, all that was pared away.

Aye! here is the 'ovum,' as Sir Everard Home would say, the
'proto'-parent of the whole race of controversies between Protestant and
Protestant; and each had Gospel on their side. Whatever is not against
the word of God is for it,--thought the founders of the Church of
England. Whatever is not in the word of God is a word of man, a
will-worship presumptuous and usurping,--thought the founders of the
Church of Scotland and Geneva. The one proposed to themselves to be
reformers of the Latin Church, that is, to bring it back to the form
which it had during the first four centuries; the latter to be the
renovators of the Christian religion as it was preached and instituted
by the Apostles and immediate followers of Christ thereunto specially
inspired. Where the premisses are so different, who can wonder at the
difference in the conclusions?


Ib. s. xii. ib.

  It began early to discover its inconvenience; for when certain zealous
  persons fled to Frankfort to avoid the funeral piles kindled by the
  Roman Bishops in Queen Mary's time, as if they had not enemies enough
  abroad, they fell foul with one another, and the quarrel was about the
  Common Prayer Book.

But who began the quarrel? Knox and his recent biographer lay it to
Dr. Cox and the Liturgists.


Ib. s. xiii. p. 289.

  Here therefore it became law, was established by an act of Parliament,
  was made solemn by an appendant penalty against all that on either
  hand did prevaricate a sanction of so long and so prudent
  consideration.

Truly evangelical way of solemnizing a party measure, and sapientizing
Calvin's 'tolerabiles ineptias' by making them 'ineptias usque ad
carcerem et verbera intolerantes!'

Ib. s. xiv. ib.

  But the Common Prayer Book had the fate of St. Paul; for when it had
  scaped the storms of the Roman See, yet a viper sprung out of Queen
  Mary's fires, &c.

As Knox and his friends confined themselves to the inspired word,
whether vipers or no, they were not adders at all events.


Ib. xxvi. p. 296.

  For, if we deny to the people a liberty of reading the Scriptures, may
  they not complain, as Isaac did against the inhabitants of the land,
  that the Philistines had spoiled his well and the fountains of living
  water? If a free use to all of them and of all Scriptures were
  permitted, should not the Church herself have more cause to complain
  of the infinite licentiousness and looseness of interpretations, and
  of the commencement of ten thousand errors, which would certainly be
  consequent to such permission? Reason and religion will chide us in
  the first, reason and experience in the latter ... The Church with
  great wisdom hath first held this torch out; and though for great
  reasons intervening and hindering, it cannot be reduced to practice,
  yet the Church hath shewn her desire to avoid the evil that is on both
  hands, and she hath shewn the way also, if it could have been insisted
  in.

If there were not, at the time this Preface, or this paragraph at least,
was written or published, some design on foot or 'sub lingua' of making
advances to the continental catholicism for the purpose of conciliating
the courts of Austria, France and Spain, in favor of the Cavalier and
Royalist party at home and abroad, this must be considered as a useless
and worse than useless avowal. The Papacy at the height of its influence
never asserted a higher or more anti-Protestant right than this of
dividing the Scriptures into permitted and forbidden portions. If there
be a functionary of divine institution, synodical or unipersonal, who
with the name of the 'Church' has the right, under circumstances of its
own determination, to forbid all but such and such parts of the Bible,
it must possess potentially, and under other circumstances, a right of
withdrawing the whole book from the unlearned, who yet cannot be
altogether unlearned; for the very prohibition supposes them able to do
what, a few centuries before, the majority of the clergy themselves were
not qualified to do, that is, read their Bible throughout. Surely it
would have been politic in the writer to have left out this sentence,
which his Puritan adversaries could not fail to translate into the
Church shewing her teeth though she dared not bite. I bitterly regret
these passages; neither our incomparable Liturgy, nor this full,
masterly, and unanswerable defence of it, requiring them.


Ib. s. xlv, p. 308.

  So that the Church of England, in these manners of dispensing the
  power of the keys, does cut off all disputings and impertinent
  wranglings, whether the priest's power were judicial or declarative;
  for possibly it is both, and it is optative too, and something else
  yet; for it is an emanation from all the parts of his ministry, and he
  never absolves, but he preaches or prays, or administers a sacrament;
  for this power of remission is a transcendent, passing through all the
  parts of the priestly offices. For the keys of the kingdom of heaven
  are the promises and the threatenings of the Scripture, and the
  prayers of the Church, and the Word, and the Sacraments, and all these
  are to be dispensed by the priest, and these keys are committed to his
  ministry, and by the operation of them all he opens and shuts heaven's
  gates ministerially.

No more ingenious way of making nothing of a thing than by making it
every thing. Omnify the disputed point into a transcendant, and you may
defy the opponent to lay hold of it. He might as well attempt to grasp
an 'aura electrica'.


Apology, &c. s. ii. p. 320.

  And it may be when I am a little more used to it, I shall not wonder
  at a synod, in which not one Bishop sits in the capacity of a Bishop,
  though I am most certain this is the first example in England since it
  was first christened.

Is this quite fair? Is it not, at least logically considered and at the
commencement of an argument, too like a 'petitio principii' or
'presumptio rei litigatae'? The Westminster divines were confessedly not
prelates, but many in that assembly were, in all other points, orthodox
and affectionate members of the Establishment, who with Bedell,
Lightfoot, and Usher, held them to be Bishops in the primitive sense of
the term, and who yet had no wish to make any other change in the
hierarchy than that of denominating the existing English prelates
Archbishops. They thought that what at the bottom was little more than a
question of names among Episcopalians, ought not to have occasioned such
a dispute; but yet the evil having taken place, they held a change of
names not too great a sacrifice, if thus the things themselves could be
preserved, and Episcopacy maintained against the Independents and
Presbyterians.


Ib. s. v. p. 321.

It is a thing of no present importance, but as a point of history, it is
worth a question whether there were any divines in the Westminster
Assembly who adopted by anticipation the notions of the Seekers, Quakers
and others 'ejusdem farinœ.' Baxter denies it. I understand the
controversy to have been, whether the examinations at the admission to
the ministry did or not supersede the necessity of any directive models
besides those found in the sacred volumes:--if not necessary, whether
there was any greater expedience in providing by authority forms of
prayer for the minister than forms of sermons. Reading, whether of
prayers or sermons, might be discouraged without encouraging
unpremeditated praying and preaching. But the whole question as between
the prelatists and the Assembly divines has like many others been best
solved by the trial. A vast majority among the Dissenters themselves
consider the antecedents to the sermon, with exception of their
congregational hymns, as the defective part of their public service, and
admit the superiority of our Liturgy.

P.S.--It seems to me, I confess, that the controversy could never have
risen to the height it did, if all the parties had not thrown too far
into the back ground the distinction in nature and object between the
three equally necessary species of worship, that is, public, family, and
private or solitary, devotion. Though the very far larger proportion of
the blame falls on the anti-Liturgists, yet on the other hand, too many
of our Church divines--among others that exemplar' of a Churchman and a
Christian, the every way excellent George Herbert--were scared by the
growing fanaticism of the Geneva malcontents into the neighbourhood of
the opposite extreme; and in their dread of enthusiasm, will-worship,
insubordination, indecency, carried their preference of the established
public forms of prayer almost to superstition by exclusively both using
and requiring them even on their own sick-beds. This most assuredly was
neither the intention nor the wish of the first compilers. However, if
they erred in this, it was an error of filial love excused, and only not
sanctioned, by the love of peace and unity, and their keen sense of 'the
beauty of holiness' displayed in their mother Church. I mention this the
rather, because our Church, having in so incomparable a way provided for
our public devotions, and Taylor having himself enriched us with such
and so many models of private prayer and devotional exercise--(from
which, by the by, it is most desirable that a well arranged collection
should be made; a selection is requisite rather from the opulence, than
the inequality, of the store;)--we have nothing to wish for but a
collection of family and domestic prayers and thanksgivings equally (if
that be not too bold a wish) appropriate to the special object, as the
Common Prayer Book is for a Christian community, and the collection from
Taylor for the Christian in his closet or at his bed side. Here would
our author himself again furnish abundant materials for the work. For
surely, since the Apostolic age, never did the spirit of supplication
move on the deeps of a human soul with a more genial life, or more
profoundly impregnate the rich gifts of a happy nature, than in the
person of Jeremy Taylor! To render the fruits available for all, we need
only a combination of Christian experience with that finer sense of
propriety which we may venture to call devotional taste in the
individual choosing, or chosen, to select, arrange and methodize; and no
less in the dignitaries appointed to revise and sanction the collections.

Perhaps another want is a scheme of Christian psalmody fit for all our
congregations, and which should not exceed 150 or 200 psalms and hymns.
Surely if the Church does not hesitate in the titles of the Psalms and
of the chapters of the Prophets to give the Christian sense and
application, there can be no consistent objection to do the same in its
spiritual songs. The effect on the morals, feelings, and information of
the people at large is not to be calculated. It is this more than any
other single cause that has saved the peasantry of Protestant Germany
from the contagion of infidelity.


Ib. s. xvii. p. 325.

  Thus the Holy Ghost brought to their memory all things which Jesus
  spake and did, and, by that means, we come to know all that the Spirit
  knew to be necessary for us.

Alas! it is one of the sad effects or results of the enslaving Old
Bailey fashion of defending, or, as we may well call it, apologizing
for, Christianity,--introduced by Grotius and followed up by the modern
'Alogi', whose wordless, lifeless, spiritless, scheme of belief it alone
suits,--that we dare not ask, whether the passage here referred to must
necessarily be understood as asserting a miraculous remembrancing,
distinctly sensible by the Apostles; whether the gift had any especial
reference to the composition of the Gospels; whether the assumption is
indispensable to a well grounded and adequate confidence in the veracity
of the narrators or the verity of the narration; if not, whether it does
not unnecessarily entangle the faith of the acute and learned inquirer
in difficulties, which do not affect the credibility of history in its
common meaning--rather indeed confirm our reliance on its authority in
all the points of agreement, that is, in every point which we are in the
least concerned to know,--and expose the simple and unlearned Christian
to objections best fitted to perplex, because easiest to be understood,
and within the capacity of the shallowest infidel to bring forward and
exaggerate; and lastly, whether the Scriptures must not be read in that
faith which comes from higher sources than history, that is, if they are
read to any good and Christian purpose. God forbid that I should become
the advocate of mechanical infusions and possessions, superseding the
reason and responsible will. The light 'a priori', in which, according
to my conviction, the Scriptures must be read and tried, is no other
than the earnest, 'What shall I do to be saved?' with the inward
consciousness,--the gleam or flash let into the inner man through the
rent or cranny of the prison of sense, however produced by earthquake,
or by decay,--as the ground and antecedent of the question; and with a
predisposition towards, and an insight into, the 'a priori' probability
of the Christian dispensation as the necessary consequents. This is the
holy spirit in us praying to the Spirit, without which 'no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord:' a text which of itself seems to me sufficient
to cover the whole scheme of modern Unitarianism with confusion, when
compared with that other,--'I am the Lord (Jehovah): that is my name;
and my glory will I not give to another'. But in the Unitarian's sense
of 'Lord,' and on his scheme of evidence, it might with equal justice be
affirmed, that no man can say that Tiberius was the Emperor but by the
Holy Ghost.


Ib. s. xxix. p. 331.

  And that this is for this reason called 'a gift and grace,' or issue
  of the Spirit, is so evident and notorious, that the speaking of an
  ordinary revealed truth, is called in Scripture, 'a speaking by the
  spirit', 1 Cor. xii. 8. 'No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by
  the Holy Ghost'. For, though the world could not acknowledge Jesus for
  the Lord without a revelation, yet now that we are taught this truth
  by Scripture, and by the preaching of the Apostles, to which they were
  enabled by the Holy Ghost, we need no revelation or enthusiasm to
  confess this truth, which we are taught in our creeds and catechisms,
  &c.

I do not, nay I dare not, hesitate to denounce this assertion as false
in fact and the paralysis of all effective Christianity. A greater
violence offered to Scripture words is scarcely conceivable. St. Paul
asserts that 'no man can.' Nay, says Taylor, every man that knows his
catechism can; but unless some six or seven individuals had said it by
the Holy Ghost some seventeen or eighteen hundred years ago, no man
could say so.


Ib. s. xxxii. p. 334.

  And yet, because the Holy Ghost renewed their memory, improved their
  understanding, supplied to some their want of human learning, and so
  assisted them that they should not commit an error in fact or opinion,
  neither in the narrative nor dogmatical parts, therefore they wrote by
  the spirit.

And where is the proof?--and to what purpose, unless a distinct and
plain diagnostic were given of the divinities and the humanities which
Taylor himself expressly admits in the text of the Scriptures?

And even then what would it avail unless the interpreters and
translators, not to speak of the copyists in the first and second
centuries, were likewise assisted by inspiration?

As to the larger part of the Prophetic books, and the whole of the
Apocalypse, we must receive them as inspired truths, or reject them as
simple inventions or enthusiastic delusions.

But in what other book of Scripture does the writer assign his own work
to a miraculous dictation or infusion? Surely the contrary is implied in
St. Luke's preface. Does the hypothesis rest on one possible
construction of a single passage in St. Paul, 2 'Tim'. iii. 16.?

And that construction resting materially on a [Greek: kai (theópneustos,
kai _ophélimos)] not found in the oldest MSS., when the context would
rather lead us to understand the words as parallel with the other
assertion of the Apostle, that all good works are given from God,--that
is, 'Every divinely inspired writing is profitable, &c'.

Finally, will not the certainty of the competence and single mindedness
of the writers suffice; this too confirmed by the high probability,
bordering on certainty, that God's especial grace worked in them; and
that an especial providence watched over the preservation of writings,
which, we know, both are and have been of such pre-eminent importance to
Christianity, and yet by natural means?

But alas! any thing will be pretended, rather than admit the necessity
of internal evidence, or than acknowledge, among the external proofs,
the convictions and spiritual experiences of believers, though they
should be common to all the faithful in all ages of the Church!

But in all superstition there is a heart of unbelief, and, 'vice versa',
where an individual's belief is but a superficial acquiescence,
credulity is the natural result and accompaniment, if only he be not
required to sink into the depths of his being, where the sensual man can
no longer draw breath. It is not the profession of Socinian tenets, but
the spirit of Socinianism in the Church itself that alarms me. This,
this, is the dry rot in the beams and timbers of the Temple!


Ib. s. li. p. 348.

  So that let the devotion be ever so great, set forms of prayer will be
  expressive enough of any desire, though importunate as extremity
  itself.

This, and much of the same import in this treatise, is far more than
Taylor, mature in experience and softened by afflictions, would have
written. Besides, it is in effect, though not in logic, a deserting of
his own strong and unshaken ground of the means and ends of public
worship.


Ib. s. s. lxix. lxx. pp. 359-60.

These two sections are too much in the vague mythical style of the
Italian and Jesuit divines, and the argument gives to these a greater
advantage against our Church than it gains over the Sectarians in its
support.

We well know who and how many the compilers of our Liturgy were under
Edward VI, and know too well what the weather-cock Parliaments were,
both then and under Elizabeth, by which the compilation was made law.
The argument therefore should be inverted;--not that the Church (A. B.,
C. D., F. L., &c.) compiled it; 'ergo', it is unobjectionable; but (and
truly we may say it) it is so unobjectionable, so far transcending all
we were entitled to expect from a few men in that state of information
and such difficulties, that we are justified in concluding that the
compilers were under the guidance of the Holy Spirit.

But the same order holds good even with regard to the Scriptures. We
cannot rightly affirm they were inspired, and therefore they must be
believed; but they are worthy of belief, because excellent in so
universal a sense to ends commensurate with the whole moral, and
therefore the whole actual, world, that as sure as there is a moral
Governor of the world, they must have been in some sense or other, and
that too an efficient sense, inspired.

Those who deny this, must be prepared to assert, that if they had what
appeared to them good historic evidence of a miracle, in the world of
the senses, they would receive the hideous immoral doctrines of Mahomet
or Brahma, and thus disobey the express commands both of the Old and New
Testament. Though an angel should come from heaven and work all
miracles, yet preach another doctrine, we are to hold him accursed.
'Gal.' i. 8.


Ib. s. lxxv. p. 356.

  When Christ was upon the Mount, he gave it for a pattern, &c.

I cannot thoroughly agree with Taylor in all he says on this point. The
Lord's Prayer is an encyclopedia of prayer, and of all moral and
religious philosophy under the form of prayer. Besides this, that
nothing shall be wanting to its perfection, it is itself singly the best
and most divine of prayers. But had this been the main and primary
purpose, it must have been thenceforward the only prayer permitted to
Christians; and surely some distinct references to it would have been
found in the Apostolic writings.


Ib. s. lxxx. p. 358.

  Now then I demand, whether the prayer of Manasses be so good a prayer
  as the Lord's prayer? Or is the prayer of Judith, or of Tobias, or of
  Judas Maccabeus, or of the son of Sirach, is any of these so good?
  Certainly no man will say they are; and the reason is, because we are
  not sure they are inspired by the Holy Spirit of God.


How inconsistent Taylor often is, the result of the system of
economizing truth! The true reason is the inverse. The prayers of Judith
and the rest are not worthy to be compared with the Lord's Prayer;
therefore neither is the spirit in which they were conceived worthy to
be compared with the spirit from which the Lord's Prayer proceeded: and
therefore with all fulness of satisfaction we receive the latter, as
indeed and in fact our Lord's dictation.

In all men and in all works of great genius the characteristic fault
will be found in the characteristic excellence. Thus in Taylor, fulness,
overflow, superfluity.

His arguments are a procession of all the nobles and magnates of the
land in their grandest, richest, and most splendid 'paraphernalia': but
the total impression is weakened by the multitudes of lacqueys and
ragged intruders running in and out between the ranks.

As far as the Westminster divines were the antagonists to be
answered--and with the exception of these, and those who like Baxter,
Calamy, and Bishop Reynolds, contended for a reformation or correction
only of the Church Liturgy, there were none worth answering,--the
question was, not whether the use of one and the same set of prayers on
all days in all churches was innocent, but whether the exclusive
imposition of the same was comparatively expedient and conducive to
edification?

Let us not too severely arraign the judgment or the intentions of the
good men who determined for the negative. If indeed we confined
ourselves to the comparison between our Liturgy, and any and all of the
proposed substitutes for it, we could not hesitate: but those good men,
in addition to their prejudices, had to compare the lives, the
conversation, and the religious affections and principles of the
prelatic and anti-prelatic parties in general.

And do not we ourselves now do the like? Are we not, and with abundant
reason, thankful that Jacobinism is rendered comparatively feeble and
its deadly venom neutralized, by the profligacy and open irreligion of
the majority of its adherents?

Add the recent cruelties of the Star Chamber under Laud;--(I do not say
the intolerance; for that which was common to both parties, must be
construed as an error in both, rather than a crime in either);--and do
not forget the one great inconvenience to which the prelatic divines
were exposed from the very position which it was the peculiar honor of
the Church of England to have taken and maintained, namely, the golden
mean;--(for in consequence of this their arguments as Churchmen would
often have the appearance of contrasting with their grounds of
controversy as Protestants,)--and we shall find enough to sanction our
charity as brethren, without detracting a tittle from our loyalty as
members of the established Church.

As to this Apology, the victory doubtless remains with Taylor on the
whole; but to have rendered it full and triumphant, it would have been
necessary to do what perhaps could not at that time, and by Jeremy
Taylor, have been done with prudence; namely, not only to disprove in
part, but likewise in part to explain, the alleged difference of the
spiritual fruits in the ministerial labors of the high and low party in
the Church,--(for remember that at this period both parties were in the
Church, even as the Evangelical, Reformed and Pontifical parties before
the establishment of a schism by the actually schismatical Council of
Trent,)--and thus to demonstrate that the differences to the
disadvantage of the established Church, as far as they were real, were
as little attributable to the Liturgy, as the wound in the heel of
Achilles to the shield and breast-plate which his immortal mother had
provided for him from the forge divine.


Ib. s. lxxxvi. p. 361.

  That the Apostles did use the prayer their Lord taught them, I think
  needs not much be questioned.

'Ad contra', see above. But that they did not till the siege of
Jerusalem deviate unnecessarily from the established usage of the
Synagogue is beyond rational doubt. We may therefore safely maintain
that a set form was sanctioned by Apostolic practice; though the form
was probably settled after the converts from Paganism began to be the
majority of Christians.


Ib. s. lxxxvii. p. 361.

  Now that they tied themselves to recitation of the very words of
  Christ's prayer 'pro loco et tempore', I am therefore easy to believe,
  because I find they were strict to a scruple in retaining the
  sacramental words which Christ spake when he instituted the blessed
  Sacrament.

Not a case in point. Besides it assumes the controverted sense of
[Greek: ohut_os] as "in these words" 'versus' "to this purport." Grotius
and Lightfoot, however, have settled this dispute by proving that the
Lord's prayer is a selection of prayers from the Jewish ritual: and a
most happy and valuable inference against novelties obtruded for
novelty's sake does Grotius draw from this fact.

When I consider the manner in which the Jews usually quoted or referred
to particular passages of Scripture, it does not seem altogether
improbable that the several articles of the 'Oratio Dominica' might have
been the initial sentences of several prayers; but I have not the least
doubt that by the loud utterance of the 'My God! my God! why hast thou
forsaken me?' our blessed Redeemer referred to and recalled to John and
Mary that most wonderful and prophetic twenty-second Psalm.

And what a glorious light does not this throw on the whole scene of the
crucifixion, and in what additional loveliness does it not present the
god-like character of the crucified Son of Man!

With the very facts before them, of which the former and larger portion
of the Psalm referred to resembles a detailed history rather than a
prophecy,--with what force, and with what lively consolation and
infusion of stedfast hope and faith, when all human grounds of hope had
sunk from under them, must not the obvious and inevitable inference have
flashed on the convictions of the holy mother and the beloved disciple!

  "If all we now behold was pre-ordained and so distinctly predicted; if
  the one mournful half of the prophecy has been so entirely and
  minutely fulfilled, after so great a lapse of ages, dare we, can we,
  doubt for a moment that the glorious remainder will with equal
  fidelity be accomplished?"

Thus to his very last moments did our Lord (setting as it beseemed the
sun of righteousness to set) manifest with a wider and wider face of
glory his self-oblivious love. In the act he was offering, he himself
was a sacrifice of love for the whole creation; and yet the cup
overflowed into particular streams; first, for his enemies, his
persecutors, and murderers; then for his friends and humanly nearest
relative; 'Woman, behold thy son!' O what a transfer!

Nor does the proposed interpretation preclude any inward and mysterious
sense of the words 'My God! my God!'--though I confess I have never yet
met with a single plausible resolution of the words into any one of the
mysteries of the Trinity, or the Incarnation, or the Passion. Nay, were
there any necessity for supposing such an allusion, which there is not,
the obvious interpretation would, I fear, too dangerously favor the
heresy of those who divided and severed the divinity from the humanity;
so that not the incarnate God, very God of very God, would have atoned
for us on the cross, but the incarnating man; a heresy which either
denies or reduces to an absurdity the whole doctrine of redemption, that
is, Christianity itself, which rests on the two articles of faith;
first, the necessity, and secondly, the reality of a Redeemer--both
articles alike incompatible with redemption by a mere man.


Ib. s. lxxxviii. p. 362.

  And I the rather make the inference from the preceding argument
  because of the cognation one hath with the other; for the Apostles did
  also in the consecration of the Eucharist use the Lord's Prayer; and
  that together with the words of institution was the only form of
  consecration, saith St. Gregory; and St. Jerome affirms, that the
  Apostles, by the command of their Lord, used this prayer in the
  benediction of the elements.

This section is an instance of impolitic management of a cause, into
which Jeremy Taylor was so often seduced by the fertility of his
intellect and the opulence of his erudition. An antagonist by exposing
the improbability of the tradition, (and most improbable it surely is),
and the little credit due to Saint Gregory and Saint Jerome (not
forgetting a Miltonic sneer at their saintship), might draw off the
attention from the unanswerable parts of Taylor's reasoning and leave an
impression of his having been confuted.


Ib. s. lxxxix. p. 362.

  But besides this, when the Apostles had received great measures of the
  spirit, and by their gift of prayer composed more forms for the help
  and comfort of the Church, &c.

Who would not suppose, that the first two lines were an admitted point
of history, instead of a bare conjecture in the form of a bold
assertion? O, dearest man! so excellent a cause did not need such
Bellarminisms.


Ib. p. 363.

  And the Fathers of the Council of Antioch complain against Paulus
  Samosatenus, 'quod Psalmos et cantus, qui ad Domini nostri Jesu
  Christi honorem decantari solent, tanquam recentiores, et a viris
  recentioris memoriœ editos, exploserit.'


This Sam-in-satin-hose, or Paul, the same-as-Satan-is, might, I think,
have found his confutation in Pliny's Letter to Trajan. 'Carmen Christo,
quasi Deo, dicere secum invicem.'


Ib. s. xc. p. 364.

  Which together with the [Greek: tà apomnaemoneúmata t_on propháeton],
  the 'lectionarium' of the Church, the books of the Apostles and
  Prophets spoken of by Justin Martyr, and said to be used in the
  Christian congregations, are the constituent parts of liturgy.


An ingenious but not tenable solution of Justin Martyr's [Greek:
apomnaemoneúmata t_on apostól_on] which were presumably a Gospel not the
same, and yet so nearly the same, as our Matthew, that its history and
character involve one of the hardest problems of Christian antiquity. By
the by, one cause of the small impression--(small in proportion to their
vast superiority in knowledge and genius)--which Jeremy Taylor and his
compeers made on the religious part of the community by their
controversial writings during the life of Charles I is to be found in
their undue predilection for Patristic learning and authority. This
originated in the wish to baffle the Papists at their own weapons; but
it could not escape notice, that the latter, though regularly beaten,
were yet not so beaten, but that they always kept the field: and when
the same mode of warfare was employed against the Puritans, it was
suspected as Papistical.


Ib. s. xci. pp. 364-5.

  For the offices of prose we find but small mention of them in the very
  first time, save only in general terms, and that such there were, and
  that St. James, St. Mark, St. Peter, and others of the Apostles and
  Apostolical men, made Liturgies; and if these which we have at this
  day were not theirs, yet they make probation that these Apostles left
  others, or else they were impudent people that prefixed their names so
  early, and the Churches were very incurious to swallow such a bole, if
  no pretension could have been reasonably made for their justification.

A rash and dangerous argument. 1810.

A many-edged weapon, which might too readily be turned against the
common faith by the common enemy. For if these Liturgies were rightly
attributed to St. James, St. Mark, St. Peter, and others of the Apostles
and Apostolical men, how could they have been superseded? How could the
Church have excluded them from the Canon?

But if falsely, and yet for a time and at so early an age generally
believed to have been composed by St. James and the rest, it is to be
feared that the difference will not stop at the point to which Paul of
Samosata carried it;--a fearful consideration for a Christian of the
Grotian and Paleyan school. It would not, however, shake my nerves, I
confess.

The Epistles of St. Paul, and the Gospel, Epistles, and Apocalypse of
St. John, contain an evidence of their authenticity, which no
uncertainty of ecclesiastic history, no proof of the frequency and
success of forgery or ornamental titles (as the Wisdom of Solomon)
mistaken for matter of fact, can wrest from me; and with these for my
guides and sanctions, what one article of Christian faith could be taken
from me, or even unsettled?

It seems to me, as it did to Luther, incomparably more probable that the
eloquent treatise, entitled an Epistle to the Hebrews, was written by
Apollos than by Paul; and what though it was written by neither? It is
demonstrable that it was composed before the siege of Jerusalem and the
destruction of the Temple; and scarcely less satisfactory is the
internal evidence that it was composed by an Alexandrian.

These two 'data' are sufficient to establish the fact, that the Pauline
doctrine at large was common to all Christians at that early period, and
therefore the faith delivered by Christ. And this is all I want; nor
this for my own assurance, but as arming me with irrefragable arguments
against those psilanthropists who as falsely, as arrogantly, call
themselves Unitarians, on the one hand; and against the infidel fiction,
that Christianity owes its present shape to the genius and rabbinical
'cabala' of Paul on the other: while at the same time it weakens the
more important half of the objection to, or doubt concerning, the
authenticity of St. Peter's Epistles.

To this too I attach a high controversial value (for the beauty and
excellence of the Epistles themselves are not affected by the question);
and I receive them as authentic, for they have all the circumstantial
evidence that I have any right to expect.

But I feel how much more genial my conviction would become, should I
discover, or have pointed out to me, any positive internal evidence
equivalent to that which determines the date of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, or even to that which leaves no doubt on my mind that the
writer was an Alexandrian Jew.

This, my dear Lamb, is one of the advantages which the previous evidence
supplied by the reason and the conscience secures for us. We learn what
in its nature 'passes all understanding', and what belongs to the
understanding, and on which, therefore, the understanding may and ought
to act freely and fearlessly: while those who will admit nothing above
the understanding ([Greek: phrónaema sarkòs]), which in its nature has
no legitimate object but history and outward 'phoenomena', stand in
slavish dread like a child at its house of cards, lest a single card
removed may endanger the whole foundationless edifice. 1819.


Ib. s. xcii. p. 365.

Now here dear Jeremy Taylor begins to be himself again; for with all his
astonishing complexity, yet versatile agility, of powers, he was too
good and of too catholic a spirit to be a good polemic. Hence he so
continually is now breaking, now varying, the thread of the argument:
and hence he is so again and again forgetting that he is reasoning
against an antagonist, and falls into conversation with him as a
friend,--I might almost say, into the literary chit-chat and un with
holding frankness of a rich genius whose sands are seed-pearl. Of his
controversies, those against Popery are the most powerful, because there
he had subtleties and obscure reading to contend against; and his wit,
acuteness, and omnifarious learning found stuff to work on. Those on
Original Sin are the most eloquent.

But in all alike it is the digressions, overgrowths, parenthetic 'obiter
et in transitu' sentences, and, above all, his anthropological
reflections and experiences--(for example, the inimitable account of a
religious dispute, from the first collision to the spark, and from the
spark to the world in flames, in his 'Dissuasive from Popery'),--these
are the costly gems which glitter, loosely set, on the chain armour of
his polemic Pegasus, that expands his wings chiefly to fly off from the
field of battle, the stroke of whose hoof the very rock cannot resist,
but beneath the stroke of which the opening rock sends forth a
Hippocrene. The work in which all his powers are confluent, in which
deep, yet gentle, the full stream of his genius winds onward, and still
forming peninsulas in its winding course--distinct parts that are only
not each a perfect whole--or in less figurative style--(yet what
language that does not partake of poetic eloquence can convey the
characteristics of a poet and an orator?)--the work which I read with
most admiration, but likewise with most apprehension and regret, is the
'Liberty of Prophesying'.

If indeed, like some Thessalian drug, or the strong herb of Anticyra,

                             ... that helps and harms,
  Which life and death have sealed with counter charms--

it could be administered by special prescription, it might do good
service as a narcotic for zealotry, or a solvent for bigotry.


The substance of the preceding tract may be comprised as follows:

1. During the period immediately following our Lord's Ascension, or the
so called Apostolic age, all the gifts of the Spirit, and of course the
gift of prayer, as graces bestowed, not merely or principally for the
benefit of the Apostles and their contemporaries, but likewise and
eminently for the advantage of all after-ages, and as means of
establishing the foundations of Christianity, differed in kind, degree,
mode, and object, from those ordinary graces promised to all true
believers of all times; and possessed a character of extraordinary
partaking of the nature of miracles, to which no believer under the
present and regular dispensations of the Spirit can make pretence
without folly and presumption.

2. Yet it is certain that even the first miraculous gifts and graces
bestowed on the Apostles themselves supervened on, but did not
supersede, their natural faculties and acquired knowledge, nor enable
them to dispense with the ordinary means and instruments of cultivating
the one, and applying the other, by study, reading, past experience, and
whatever else Providence has appointed for all men as the conditions and
efficients of moral and intellectual progression. The capabilities of
deliberating, selecting, and aptly disposing of our thoughts and works
are God's good gifts to man, which the superadded graces of the Spirit,
vouchsafed to Christians, work on and with, call forth and perfect.
Therefore deliberation, selection, and method become duties, inasmuch as
they are the bases and recipients of the Spirit, even as the polished
crystal is of the light.

But if the Prophets and Apostles did not (as Taylor demonstrates that
they did not) find in miraculous aids any such infusions of light as
precluded or rendered superfluous the exertion of their natural
faculties and personal attainments, then 'a fortiori' not the possessors
or legatees of the ordinary graces bequeathed by Christ to his Church as
the usufructuary property of all its members; and he who wilfully lays
aside all premeditation, selection, and ordonnance, that he may enter
unprepared on the highest and most awful function of the soul,--that of
public prayer,--is guilty of no less indecency and irreverence than if,
having to present a petition as the representative of a community before
the throne, he purposely put off his seemly garments in order to enter
into the presence of the monarch naked or in rags: and expects no less
an absurdity than to become a passive 'automaton', in which the Holy
Spirit is to play the ventriloquist.

3. If, then, each congregation is to receive a prepared form of prayer
from its head or minister, why not rather from the collective wisdom of
the Church represented in the assembled heads and spiritual Fathers?

4. This is admitted by implication by the Westminster Assembly. But they
are not contented with the existing form, and therefore substitute for
it a Directory as the fruits of their meditations and counsels. The
whole question, then, is now reduced to the comparative merits and
fitness of the Directory and the book of Common Prayer; and how complete
the victory of the latter, how glaring the defects, how many the
deficiencies, of the former, Jeremy Taylor evinces unanswerably.

Such is the substance of this Tract. What the author proposed to prove
he has satisfactorily proved.

The faults of the work are:

1. The intermixture of weak and strong arguments, and the frequent
interruption of the stream of his logic by doubtful, trifling, and
impolitic interruptions; arguments resting in premisses denied by the
antagonists, and yet taken for granted; in short, appendages that
cumber, accessions that subtract, and confirmations that weaken:--

2. That he commences with a proper division of the subject into two
distinct branches, that is, extempore prayer as opposed to set forms,
and, The Directory, as prescribing a form opposed to the existing
Liturgy; but that in the sequel he blends and confuses and intermingles
one with the other, and presses most and most frequently on the first
point, which a vast majority of the party he is opposing had disowned
and reprobated no less than himself, and which, though easiest to
confute, scarcely required confutation.



DISCOURSE OF THE LIBERTY OF PROPHESYING, WITH ITS JUST LIMITS AND
TEMPER.

Epistle Dedicatory, p. cccciii.

  And first I answer, that whatsoever is against the foundation of faith
  is out of the limits of my question, and does not pretend to
  compliance or toleration.

But as all truths hang together, what error is there which may not be
proved to be against the foundation of faith? An inquisitor might make
the same code of toleration, and in the next moment light the faggots
around a man who had denied the infallibility of Pope and Council.


Ib. p. ccccxxix.

  Indeed if by a heresy we mean that which is against an article of
  creed, and breaks part of the covenant made between God and man by the
  mediation of Jesus Christ, I grant it to be a very grievous crime, a
  calling God's veracity into question, &c.

How can he be said to question God's veracity, whose belief is that God
never declared it,--who perhaps disbelieves it, because he thinks it
opposite to God's honor? For example:--Original sin, in the literal
sense of the article, was held by both Papists and Protestants (with
exception of the Socinians) as the fundamental article of Christianity;
and yet our Jeremy Taylor himself attacked and reprobated it. Why?
because he thought it dishonored God. Why may not another man believe
the same of the Incarnation, and affirm that it is equal to a circle
assuming the essence of a square, and yet remaining a circle? But so it
is; we spoil our cause, because we dare not plead it 'in toto'; and a
half truth serves for a proof of the opposite falsehood. Jeremy Taylor
dared not carry his argument into all its consequences.



LIBERTY OF PROPHESYING.

S. i. p. 443.

  Of the nature of faith, and that its duty is completed in believing
  the articles of the Apostle's creed.

This section is for the most part as beautifully written as it was
charitably conceived; yet how vain the attempt! Jeremy Taylor ought to
have denied that Christian faith is at all intellectual primarily, but
only probably; as, 'coecteris paribus', it is probable that a man with a
pure heart will believe an intelligent Creator. But the faith resides in
the predisposing purity of heart, that is, in the obedience of the will
to the uncorrupted conscience. For take Taylor's instances; and I ask
whether the words or the sense be meant? Surely the latter.

Well then, I understand, and so did the dear Bishop, by these texts the
doctrine of a Redeemer, who by his agonies of death actually altered the
relations of the spirits of all men to their Maker, redeemed them from
sin and death eternal, and brought life and immortality into the world.

But the Socinian uses the same texts; and means only that a good and
gifted teacher of pure morality died a martyr to his opinions, and by
his resurrection proved the possibility of all men rising from the dead.
He did nothing;--he only taught and afforded evidence. Can two more
diverse opinions be conceived? God here; mere man there. Here a redeemer
from guilt and corruption, and a satisfaction for offended holiness;
there a mere declarer that God imputed no guilt wherever, with or
without Christ, the person had repented of it.

What could Jeremy Taylor say for the necessity of his sense (which is
mine) but what might be said for the necessity of the Nicene Creed? And
then as to Rom. x. 9, how can the text mean any thing, unless we know
what St. Paul implied in the words 'the Lord Jesus'. From other parts of
his writings we know that he meant by the word 'Lord' his divinity or at
least essential superhumanity. But the Socinian will not allow this; or,
allowing it, denies St. Paul's authority in matters of speculative
faith. As well then might I say, it is sufficient for you to believe and
repeat the words 'forte miles reddens'; and though one of you mean by it
"Perhaps I may be balloted for the militia," and the other understands
it to mean, that "Reading is forty miles from London," you are still
co-symbolists and believers! While a third person may say, I believe,
but do not comprehend, the words; that is, I believe that the person who
first used them meant something that is true,--what I do not know; that
is, I believe his veracity.

O! had this work been published when Charles I, Archbishop Laud, whose
chaplain Taylor was, and the other Star Chamber inquisitors, were
sentencing Prynne, Bastwick, Leighton, and others, to punishments that
have left a brand-mark on the Church of England, the sophistry might
have been forgiven for the sake of the motive, which would then have
been unquestionable. Or if Jeremy Taylor had not in effect retracted
after the Restoration;--if he had not, as soon as the Church had gained
its power, most basely disclaimed and disavowed the principle of
toleration, and apologized for the publication by declaring it to have
been a 'ruse de guerre', currying pardon for his past liberalism by
charging, and most probably slandering, himself with the guilt of
falsehood, treachery, and hypocrisy, his character as a man would at
least have been stainless. Alas, alas, most dearly do I love Jeremy
Taylor; most religiously do I venerate his memory! But this is too foul
a blotch of leprosy to be forgiven. He who pardons such an act in such a
man partakes of its guilt.


Ib. s. vii. p. 346-7.

  In the pursuance of this great truth, the Apostles, or the holy men,
  their contemporaries and disciples, composed a creed to be a rule of
  faith to all Christians; as appears in Irenæus, Tertullian, St.
  Cyprian, St. Austin, Ruffinus, and divers others; which creed, unless
  it had contained all the entire object of faith, and the foundation of
  religion, &c.

Jeremy Taylor does not appear to have been a critical scholar. His
reading had been oceanic; but he read rather to bring out the growths of
his own fertile and teeming mind than to inform himself respecting the
products of those of other men. Hence his reliance on the broad
assertions of the Fathers; yet it is strange that he should have been
ignorant that the Apostles' Creed was growing piecemeal for several
centuries.


Ib. p. 447.

  All catechumens in the Latin Church coming to baptism were
  interrogated concerning their faith, and gave satisfaction on the
  recitation of this Creed.

I very much doubt this, and rather believe that our present Apostles'
Creed was no more than the first instruction of the catechumens prior to
baptism; and (as I conclude from Eusebius) that at baptism they
professed a more mysterious faith;--the one being the milk, the other
the strong meat. Where is the proof that Tertullian was speaking of this
Creed? Eusebius speaks in as high terms of the 'Symbolum Fidei', and,
defending himself against charges of heresy, says, "Did I not at my
baptism, in the 'Symbolum Fidei', declare my belief in Christ as God and
the co-eternal Word?" The true Creed it was impiety to write down; but
such was never the case with the present or initiating Creed. Strange,
too, that Jeremy Taylor, who has in this very work written so divinely
of tradition, should assume as a certainty that this Creed was in a
proper sense Apostolic. Is then the Creed of greater authority than the
inspired Scriptures? And can words in the Creed be more express than
those of St. Paul to the Colossians, speaking of Christ as the creative
mind of his Father, before all worlds, 'begotten before all things
created?'


Ib. s. x. p. 449.

This paragraph is indeed a complexion, as Taylor might call it, of
sophisms. Thus;--unbelief from want of information or capacity, though
with the disposition of faith, is confounded with disbelief. The
question is not, whether it may not be safe for a man to believe simply
that Christ is his Saviour, but whether it be safe for a man to
disbelieve the article in any sense which supposes an essential
supra-humanity in Christ,--any sense that would not have been equally
applicable to John, had God chosen to raise him instead of his cousin?


Ib. s. xi. p. 450.

  Neither are we obliged to make these Articles more particular and
  minute than the Creed. For since the Apostles, and indeed our blessed
  Lord himself, promised heaven to them who believed him to be the
  Christ that was to come into the world, and that he who believes in
  him should be partaker of the resurrection and life eternal, he will
  be as good as his word. Yet because this article was very general, and
  a complexion rather than a single proposition, the Apostles and others
  our Fathers in Christ did make it more explicit: and though they have
  said no more than what lay entire and ready formed in the bosom of the
  great Article, yet they made their extracts to great purpose and
  absolute sufficiency; and therefore there needs no more deductions or
  remoter consequences from the first great Article than the Creed of
  the Apostles.

Most true; but still the question returns, what was meant by the phrase
'the' Christ? Contraries cannot both be true. 'The Christ' could not be
both mere man and incarnate God. One or the other must believe falsely
on this great key-stone of all the intellectual faith in Christianity.
For so it is; alter it, and everything alters; as is proved in
Trinitarianism and Socinianism. No two religions can be more
different;--I know of no two equally so.


Ib. s. xii. p. 451.

  The Church hath power to intend our faith, but not to extend it; to
  make our belief more evident, but not more large and comprehensive.

This and the preceding pages are scarcely honest. For Jeremy Taylor
begins with admitting that the Creed might have been composed by others.
He has no proof of that most absurd fable of the twelve Apostles
clubbing to make it; yet here all he says assumes its inspiration as a
certain fact.


Ib. p. 454.

  But for the present there is no insecurity in ending there where the
  Apostles ended, in building where they built, in resting where they
  left us, unless the same infallibility which they had had still
  continued, which I think I shall hereafter make evident it did not.


What a tangle of contradictions Taylor thrusts himself into by the
attempt to support a true system, a full third of which he was afraid to
mention, and another third was by the same fear induced to deny--at
least to take for granted the contrary: for example, the absolute
plenary inspiration and infallibility of the Apostles and Evangelists;
and yet that their whole function, as far as the consciences of their
followers were concerned, was to repeat the two or three sentences, that
'Jesus was Christ' (so says one of the Evangelists), 'the Christ of God'
(so says another), 'the Christ the Son of the living God' (so says a
third), that he rose from the dead, and for the remission of sins, to as
many as believed and professed that he was the Christ or the Lord, and
died and rose for the remission of sins. Surely no miraculous
communication of God's infallibility was necessary for this.

But if this infallibility was stamped on all they said and wrote, is it
credible that any part should not be equally binding? I declare I can
make nothing out of this section, but that it is necessary for men to
believe the Apostles' Creed; but what they believe by it is of no
consequence. For instance; what if I chose to understand by the word
'dead' a state of trance or suspended animation;--language furnishing
plenty of analogies--dead in a swoon--dead drunk--and so on;--should I
still be a Christian?

'Born of the Virgin Mary.' What if, as Priestley and others, I
interpreted it as if we should say, 'the former Miss Vincent was his
mother.' I need not say that I disagree with Taylor's premisses only
because they are not broad enough, and with his aim and principal
conclusion only because it does not go far enough. I would have the law
grounded wholly in the present life, religion only on the life to come.
Religion is debased by temporal motives, and law rendered the drudge of
prejudice and passion by pretending to spiritual aims. But putting this
aside, and judging of this work solely as a chain of reasoning, I seem
to find one leading error in it; namely, that Taylor takes the condition
of a first admission into the Church of Christ for the fullness of faith
which was to be gradually there acquired. The simple acknowledgment,
that they accepted Christ as their Lord and King was the first lisping
of the infant believer at which the doors were opened, and he began the
process of growth in the faith.


Ib. s. ii. p. 457.


  The great heresy that troubled them was the doctrine of the necessity
  of keeping the law of Moses, the necessity of circumcision, against
  which doctrine they were therefore zealous, because it was a direct
  overthrow to the very end and excellency of Christ's coming.

The Jewish converts were still bound to the rite of circumcision, not
indeed as under the Law, or by the covenant of works, but as the
descendants of Abraham, and by that especial covenant which St. Paul
rightly contends was a covenant of grace and faith. But the heresy
consisted wholly in the attempt to impose this obligation on the Gentile
converts, in the infatuation of some of the Galatians, who, having no
pretension to be descendants of Abraham, could, as the Apostle urges,
only adopt the rite as binding themselves under the law of works, and
thereby apostatizing from the covenant of faith by free grace. And this
was the decision of the Apostolic Council at Jerusalem. Acts' xv.
Rhenferd, in his Treatise on the Ebionites and other pretended heretics
in Palestine, so grossly and so ignorantly calumniated by Epiphanius,
has written excellently well on this subject. Jeremy Taylor is mistaken
throughout.


Ib. s. iv. p. 459.


  And so it was in this great question of circumcision.

It is really wonderful that a man like Bishop Taylor could have read the
New Testament, and have entertained a doubt as to the decided opinion of
all the Apostles, that every born Jew was bound to be circumcised.
Opinion? The very doubt never suggested itself. When something like this
opinion was slanderously attributed to Paul, observe the almost
ostentatious practical contradiction of the calumny which was adopted by
him at the request and by the advice of the other Apostles. ('Acts',
xxi. 21-26.) The rite of circumcision, I say, was binding on all the
descendants of Abraham through Isaac for all time even to the end of the
world; but the whole law of Moses was binding on the Jewish Christians
till the heaven and the earth--that is, the Jewish priesthood and the
state--had passed away in the destruction of the temple and city; and
the Apostles observed every tittle of the Law.


Ib. s. vi. p. 460.

  The heresy of the Nicolaitans.

Heresy is not a proper term for a plainly anti-Christian sect.
Nicolaitans is the literal Greek translation of Balaamites; destroyers
of the people. 'Rev'. ii. 14, 15.


Ib. s. viii. p. 461.

  For heresy is not an error of the understanding, but an error of the
  will.


Most excellent. To this Taylor should have adhered, and to its converse.
Faith is not an accuracy of logic, but a rectitude of heart.


Ib. p. 462.

  It was the heresy of the Gnostics, that it was no matter how men
  lived, so they did but believe aright.

I regard the extinction of all the writings of the Gnostics among the
heaviest losses of Ecclesiastical literature. We have only the account
of their inveterate enemies. Individual madmen there have been in all
ages, but I do not believe that any sect of Gnostics ever held this
opinion in the sense here supposed.


Ib.

  And, indeed, if we remember that St. Paul reckons heresy amongst the
  works of the flesh, and ranks it with all manner of practical
  impieties, we shall easily perceive that if a man mingles not a vice
  with his opinion,--if he be innocent in his life, though deceived in
  his doctrine,--his error is his misery not his crime; it makes him an
  argument of weakness and an object of pity, but not a person sealed up
  to ruin and reprobation.


O admirable! How could Taylor, after this, preach and publish his Sermon
in defence of persecution, at least against toleration!


Ib. s. xxii. p. 479.

  Ebion, Manes.


No such man as Ebion ever, as I can see, existed; [3] and Manes is
rather a doubtful 'ens'.


Ib. s. xxxi. p. 487.

  But I shall observe this, that although the Nicene Fathers in that
  case, at that time, and in that conjuncture of circumstances, did
  well, &c.

What Bull and Waterland have urged in defence of the Nicene Fathers is
(like every thing else from such men) most worthy of all attention. They
contend that no other term but [Greek: homoousía] could secure the
Christian faith against both the two contrary errors, Tritheism with
subversion of the unity of the Godhead on the one hand, and
creature-worship on the other. For, to use Waterland's mode of argument,
[4] either Eusebius of Nicomedia with the four other dissenters at Nice
were right or wrong in their assertion, that Christ could not be of the
[Greek: ousía] of the self-originated First by derivation, as a son from
a father:--if they were right, they either must have discovered some
third distinct and intelligible form of origination in addition to
'begotten' and 'created', or they had not and could not. Now the latter
was notoriously the fact. Therefore to deny the [Greek: homoousía] was
implicitly to deny the generation of the second Person, and thus to
assert his creation. But if he was a creature, he could not be adorable
without idolatry. Nor did the chain of inevitable consequences stop
here. His characteristic functions of Redeemer, Mediator, King, and
final Judge, must all cease to be attributable to Christ; and the
conclusion is, that between the Homoousian scheme and mere
Psilanthropism there is no intelligible 'medium'. If this, then, be not
a fundamental article of faith, what can be?

To this reasoning I really can discern no fair reply within the sphere
of conceptual logic, if it can be made evident that the term [Greek:
homooúsios] is really capable of achieving the end here set forth. One
objection to the term is, that it was not translatable into the language
of the Western Church. Consubstantial is not the translation:
'substantia' answers to [Greek: hypóstasis], not to [Greek: ousía]; and
hence, when [Greek: hypóstasis] was used by the Nicene Fathers in
distinction from [Greek: ousía], the Latin Church was obliged to render
it by some other word, and thus introduced that most unhappy and
improper term 'persona'. Would you know my own inward judgment on this
question, it is this: first, that this pregnant idea, the root and form
of all ideas, is not within the sphere of conceptual logic,--that is, of
the understanding,--and is therefore of necessity inexpressible; for no
idea can be adequately represented in words:--secondly, that I agree
with Bull and Waterland against Bishop Taylor, that there was need of a
public and solemn decision on this point:--but, lastly, that I am more
than doubtful respecting the fitness or expediency of the term [Greek:
homooúsios], and hold that the decision ought to have been negative. For
at first all parties agreed in the positive point, namely, that Christ
was the Son of God, and that the Son of God was truly God, "or very God
of very God." All that was necessary to be added was, that the only
begotten Son of God was not created nor begotten in time. More than this
might be possible, and subject of insight; but it was not determinable
by words, and was therefore to be left among the rewards of the Spirit
to the pure in heart in inward vision and silent contemplation.


Ib. s. xl. p. 495.

All that is necessary to give a full and satistory import to this
excellent paragraph, and to secure it from all inconvenient
consequences, is to understand the distinction between the objective and
general revelation, by which the whole Church is walled around and kept
together ('principium totalitatis et cohæsionis'), and the subjective
revelation, the light from the life ('John' i. 4.), by which the
individual believers, each according to the grace given, grow in faith.
For the former, the Apostles' Creed, in its present form, is more than
enough; for the latter, it might be truly said in the words of the
fourth Gospel, that all the books which the world could contain would
not suffice to set forth explicitly that mystery in which all treasures
of knowledge are hidden, 'reconduntur'.

From the Apostles' Creed, nevertheless, if regarded in the former point
of view, several clauses must be struck out, not as false, but as not
necessary. "I believe that Jesus of Nazareth, who was crucified under
Pontius Pilate, rose from the dead on the third day; and I receive him
as the Christ, the Son of the living God, who died for the remission of
the sins of as many as believe in the Father through him, in whom we
have the promise of life everlasting." This is the sufficient creed.
More than this belongs to the Catechism, and then to the study of the
Scriptures.


Ib. s. vi. p. 506.

  So did the ancient Papias understand Christ's millenary reign upon
  earth, and so depressed the hopes of Christianity and their desires to
  the longing and expectation of temporal pleasures and satisfactions.
  And he was followed by Justin Martyr, Irenæus, Tertullian, Lactantius,
  and indeed, the whole Church generally, till St. Austin and St.
  Jerome's time, who, first of any whose works are extant, did reprove
  the error.

Bishop Taylor is, I think, mistaken in two points; first, that the
Catholic Millenaries looked forward to carnal pleasures in the kingdom
of Christ;--for even the Jewish Rabbis of any note represented the
'Millenium' as the preparative and transitional state to perfect
spiritualization:--second, that the doctrine of Christ's reign upon
earth rested wholly or principally on the twentieth chapter of the
Revelations, which actually, in my judgment, opposes it.

I more than suspect that Austin's and Jerome's strongest ground for
rejecting the second coming of our Lord in his kingly character, was,
that they were tired of waiting for it. How can we otherwise interpret
the third and fourth clauses of the Lord's Prayer, or, perhaps, the
[Greek: en toi kairoi toútoi], 'in hoc seculo', (x. 30) of St. Mark? If
the first three Gospels, joined with the unbroken faith and tradition of
the Church for nearly three centuries, can decide the question, the
Millenarians have the best of the argument.


Vol. viii. s. ix. p. 22.

  One thing only I observe (and we shall find it true in most writings,
  whose authority is urged in questions of theology), that the authority
  of the tradition is not it which moves the assent, but the nature of
  the thing; and because such a canon is delivered, they do not
  therefore believe the sanction or proposition so delivered, but
  disbelieve the tradition if they do not like the matter, and so do not
  judge of the matter by the tradition, but of the tradition by the
  matter.

This just and acute remark is, in fact, no less applicable to Scripture
in all doctrinal points, and if infidelity is not to overspread England
as well as France, the same criterion (that is, the internal evidence)
must be extended to all points, to the narratives no less than to the
precept. The written words must be tried by the Word from the beginning,
in which is life, and that life the light of men. Reduce it to the
noetic pentad, or universal form of contemplation, except where all the
terms are absolute, and consequently there is no 'punctum indifferens,--in
divinis tetras, in omnibus aliis pentas,' and the form stands thus.
[5]


Ib. s. iii. p. 36.

  So that it cannot make it divine and necessary to be heartily
  believed. It may make it lawful, not make it true; that is, it may
  possibly, by such means, become a law, but not a truth.

This is a sophism which so evident a truth did not need. Apply the
reasoning to an act of Parliament previously to the royal sanction. Will
it hold good to say, if it was law after the sanction, it was law
before? The assertion of the Papal theologians is, that the divine
providence may possibly permit even the majority of a legally convened
Council to err; but by force of a divine promise cannot permit both a
majority and the Pope to err on the same point. The flaw in this is,
that the Romish divines rely on a conditional promise unconditionally.
To Taylor's next argument the Romish respondent would say, that an
exception, grounded on a specific evident necessity, does not invalidate
the rule in the absence of any equally evident necessity.

Taylor's argument is a [Greek: metábasis eis allo génos]. It is not the
truth, but the sign or mark, by which the Church at large may know that
it is truth, which is here provided for; that is, not the truth simply,
but the obligation of receiving it as such. Ten thousand may apprehend
the latter, only ten of whom might be capable of determining the former.


Ib. 5.

  So that now (that we may apply this) there are seven general Councils,
  which by the Church of Rome are condemned of error ... The council of
  Ariminum, consisting of six hundred Bishops.

It is the mark of a faction that it never hesitates to sacrifice a
greater good common to them and to their opponents to a lesser advantage
obtained over those opponents. Never was there a stranger instance of
imprudence, at least, than the act of the Athanasian party in condemning
so roundly the great Council of Ariminum as heretical, and for little
more than the charitable wish of the many hundred Bishops there
assembled to avoid a word that had set all Christendom by the ears. They
declared that [Greek: ho agénnaetos patàer, kaì ho achron_os gennaetòs
uhiòs, kaì tò pneuma ekporeuómenon] were substantially (hypostatik_os)
distinct, but nevertheless, one God; and though there might be some
incautious phrases used by them, the good Bishops declared that if their
decree was indeed Arian, or introduced aught to the derogation of the
Son's absolute divinity, it was against their knowledge and intention,
and that they renounced it.


Ib. s. x. p. 46.

  Gratian says, that the Council means by a concubine a wife married
  'sine dote et solennitate'; but this is daubing with untempered
  mortar.

Here I think Taylor wrong and Gratian right; for not a hundred years ago
the very same decree was passed by the Lutheran clergy in Prussia,
determining that left-hand marriages were to be discouraged, but did not
exclude from communion. These marriages were invented for the sake of
poor nobles: they could have but that one wife, and the children
followed the rank and title of the mother, not of the father.


Ib. s. vii. p. 56.

  Thirdly; for 'pasce oves', there is little in that allegation besides
  the boldness of the objectors.

I have ever thought that the derivation of the Papal monarchy from the
thrice repeated command, 'pasce oves', the most brazen of all the Pope's
bulls. It was because Peter had given too good proof that he was more
disposed to draw the sword for Christ than to perform the humble duties
of a shepherd, that our Lord here strongly, though tenderly, reminds him
of his besetting temptation. The words are most manifestly a reproof and
a warning, not a commission. In like manner the very letter of the
famous paronomastic text proves that Peter's confession, not Peter
himself, was the rock. His name was, perhaps, not so much stone as
stoner; not so much rock as rockman; and Jesus hearing this unexpected
confession of his mysterious Sonship (for this is one of the very few
cases in which the internal evidence decides for the superior fidelity
of the first Gospel), and recognizing in it an immediate revelation from
heaven, exclaims, "Well, art thou the man of the rock; 'and upon this
rock will I build my church,'" not on this man. Add too, that the law
revealed to Moses and the confession of the divine attributes, are named
the rock, both in the Pentateuch and in the Psalms.

Mark has simply, 'Thou art the Christ'; Luke, 'The Christ of God'; [6]
but that Jesus was the Messiah had long been known by the Apostles, at
all events conjectured. Had not John so declared him at the baptism?
Besides, it was included among the opinions concerning our Lord which
led to his question, the aim of which was not simply as to the
Messiahship, but that the Messiah, instead of a mere descendant of
David, destined to reestablish and possess David's throne, was the
Jehovah himself, 'the Son of the living God; God manifested in the
flesh'. 1 'Tim'. iii. 16.


Ib. s. viii. p. 62.

  And yet again, another degree of uncertainty is, to whom the Bishops
  of Rome do succeed. For St. Paul was as much Bishop of Rome as St.
  Peter was; there he presided, there he preached, and he it was that
  was the doctor of the uncircumcision and of the Gentiles, St. Peter of
  the circumcision and of the Jews only; and therefore the converted
  Jews at Rome might with better reason claim the privilege of St.
  Peter, than the Romans and the Churches in her communion, who do not
  derive from Jewish parents.

I wonder that Taylor should have introduced so very strong an argument
merely 'obiter'. If St. Peter ever was at Rome, it must have been for
the Jewish converts or _convertendi_ exclusively, and on what do the
earliest Fathers rest the fact of Peter's being at Rome? Do they appeal
to any document? No; but to their own arbitrary and most improbable
interpretation of the word Babylon in St. Peter's first epistle. [7] I
am too deeply impressed with the general difficulty arising out of the
strange eclipse of all historic documents, of all particular events,
from the arrival of St. Paul at Rome as related by St. Luke and the time
when Justin Martyr begins to shed a scanty light, to press any
particular instance of it. Yet, if Peter really did arrive at Rome, and
was among those destroyed by Nero, it is strange that the Bishop and
Church of Rome should have preserved no record of the particulars.


Ib. s. xv. p. 71.

  But what shall we think of that decretal of Gregory the Third, who
  wrote to Boniface his legate in Germany, 'quod illi, quorum uxores
  infirmitate aliqua morbida debitum reddere noluerunt, aliis poterant
  nubere.'


Supposing the 'noluerunt' to mean 'nequeunt', or at least any state of
mind and feeling that does not exclude moral attachment, I, as a
Protestant, abominate this decree of Gregory III; for I place the moral,
social, and spiritual helps and comforts as the proper and essential
ends of Christian marriage, and regard the begetting of children as a
contingent consequence. But on the contrary tenet of the Romish Church,
I do not see how Gregory could consistently decree otherwise.


Ib. s. iii. p. 82.

  Nor that Origen taught the pains of hell not to have an eternal
  duration.

And yet there can be no doubt that Taylor himself held with Origen on
this point. But, 'non licebat dogmatizare oppositum, quia determinatum
fuerat.'


Ib. p. 84.

  And except it be in the Apostles' Creed and articles of such nature,
  there is nothing which may with any color be called a consent, much
  less tradition universal.

It may be well to remember, whenever Taylor speaks of the Apostles'
Creed, that Pearson's work on that Creed was not then published. Nothing
is more suspicious than copies of creeds in the early Fathers; it was so
notoriously the custom of the transcribers to make them square with
those in use in their own time.


Ib. s. iv.

  Such as makes no invasion upon their great reputation, which I desire
  should be preserved as sacred as it ought.

The vision of the mitre dawned on Taylor; and his recollection of Laud
came to the assistance of the Fathers; of many of whom in his heart
Taylor, I think, entertained a very mean opinion. How could such a man
do otherwise? I could forgive them their nonsense and even their
economical falsehoods; but their insatiable appetite for making
heresies, and thus occasioning the neglect or destruction of so many
valuable works, Origen's for instance, this I cannot forgive or forget.


Ib. s. i. p. 88.

  Of the incompetency of the Church, in its diffusive capacity, to be
  judge of controversies; and the impertinency of that pretence of the
  Spirit.

Now here begin my serious differences with Jeremy Taylor, which may be
characterized in one sentence; ideas 'versus' conceptions and images. I
contend that the Church in the Christian sense is an idea;--not
therefore a chimera, or a fancy, but a real being and a most powerful
reality. Suppose the present state of science in this country, with this
only difference that the Royal and other scientific societies were not
founded: might I not speak of a scientific public, and its influence on
the community at large? Or should I be talking of a chimera, a shadow,
or a non-entity? Or when we speak with honest pride of the public spirit
of this country as the power which supported the nation through the
gigantic conflict with France, do we speak of nothing, because we cannot
say,--"It is in this place or in that catalogue of names?" At the same
time I most readily admit that no rule can be grounded formally on the
supposed assent of this ideal Church, the members of which are recorded
only in the book of life at any one moment. In Taylor's use and
application of the term, Church, the visible Christendom, and in reply
to the Romish divines, his arguments are irrefragable.


Ib. s. ii. p. 93,

  So that if they read, study, pray, search records, and use all the
  means of art and industry in the pursuit of truth, it is not with a
  resolution to follow that which shall seem truth to them, but to
  confirm what before they did believe.


Alas, if Protestant and Papist were named by individuals answering or
not answering to this description, what a vast accession would not the
Pope's muster-roll receive! In the instance of the Council of Trent, the
iniquity of the Emperor and the Kings of France and Spain consisted in
their knowledge that the assembly at Trent had no pretence to be a
general Council, that is, a body representative of the Catholic or even
of the Latin Church. It may be, and in fact it is, very questionable
whether any Council, however large and fairly chosen, is not an
absurdity except under the universal faith that the Holy Ghost
miraculously dictates all the decrees: and this is irrational, where the
same superseding Spirit does not afford evidence of its presence by
producing unanimity. I know nothing, if I may so say, more ludicrous
than the supposition of the Holy Ghost contenting himself with a
majority, in questions respecting faith, or decrees binding men to
inward belief, which again binds a Christian to outward profession.
Matters of discipline and ceremony, having peace and temporal order for
their objects, are proper enough for a Council; but these do not need
any miraculous interference. Still if any Council is admitted in matters
of doctrine, those who have appealed to it must abide by the
determination of the majority, however they might prefer the opinion of
the minority, just as in acts of Parliament.


Ib. s. xi. p. 98.

  Of some causes of error in the exercise of reason, which are inculpate
  in themselves.

It is a lamentable misuse of the term, reason,--thus to call by that
name the mere faculty of guessing and babbling. The making reason a
faculty, instead of a light, and using the term as a mere synonyme of
the understanding, and the consequent ignorance of the true nature of
ideas, and that none but ideas are objects of faith--are the grounds of
all Jeremy Taylor's important errors.


Ib.

  But men may understand what they please, especially when they are to
  expound oracles.

If this sentence had occurred in Hume or Voltaire!


Ib. s. iii. p. 103.

  And then if ever truth be afflicted, she shall also be destroyed.


Here and in many other passages of his other works Jeremy Taylor very
unfairly states this argument of the anti-prelatic party. It was not
that the Church of England was afflicted (the Puritans themselves had
been much more afflicted by the prelates); but that having appealed to
the decision of the sword, the cause was determined against it. But in
fact it is false that the Puritans ever did argue as Taylor represents
them. Laud and his confederates had begun by incarcerating, scourging,
and inhumanly mutilating their fellow Christians for not acceding to
their fancies, and proceeded to goad and drive the King to levy or at
least maintain war against his Parliament: and the Parliamentary party
very naturally cited their defeat and the overthrow of the prelacy as a
judgment on their blood-thirstiness, not as a proof of their error in
questions of theology.


Ib. s. iv. p. 105.

  All that I shall say, &c. 'ad finem'.

An admirable paragraph. Taylor is never more himself, never appears
greater, or wiser, than when he enters on this topic, namely, the many
and various causes beside truth which occasion men to hold an opinion
for truth.


Ib. s. vii. p. 111.

  Of such men as these it was said by St. Austin: 'Cæteram turbam non
  intelligendi vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas tutissimam facit.'


Such charity is indeed notable policy: salvation made easy for the
benefit of obedient dupes.


Ib. s. ii. p. 119.

  I deny not but certain and known idolatry, or any other sort of
  practical impiety with its principiant doctrine, may be punished
  corporally, because it is no other but matter of fact.


In the Jewish theocracy, I admit; because the fact of idolatry was a
crime, namely, 'crimen læsæ majestatis', an overt act subversive of the
fundamental law of the state, and breaking asunder the 'vinculum et
copulam unitatis et cohæsionis'. But in making the position general,
Taylor commits the 'sophisma omissi essentialis'; he omits the essential
of the predicate, namely, criminal;--not its being a fact rendering it
punishable, but its being a criminal fact.

Ib. s. iii.

Oh that this great and good man, who saw and has expressed so large a
portion of the truth,--(if by the Creed I might understand the true
Apostles', that is, the Baptismal Creed, free from the additions of the
first five centuries, I might indeed say the whole truth),--had but
brought it back to the great original end and purpose of historical
Christianity, and of the Church visible, as its exponent, not as a
'hortus siccus' of past revelations,--but an ever enlarging inclosed
'area' of the opportunity of individual conversion to, and reception of,
the spirit of truth! Then, instead of using this one truth to inspire a
despair of all truth, a reckless scepticism within, and a boundless
compliance without, he would have directed the believer to seek for
light where there was a certainty of finding it, as far as it was
profitable for him, that is, as far as it actually was light for him.
The visible Church would be a walled Academy, a pleasure garden, in
which the intrants having presented their 'symbolum portae', or
admission-contract, walk at large, each seeking private audience of the
invisible teacher,--alone now, now in groups,--meditating or
conversing,--gladly listening to some elder disciple, through whom (as
ascertained by his intelligibility to me) I feel that the common Master
is speaking to me,--or lovingly communing with a class-fellow, who, I
have discovered, has received the same lesson from the inward teaching
with myself,--while the only public concerns in which all, as a common
weal, exercised control and vigilance over each, are order, peace,
mutual courtesy and reverence, kindness, charity, love, and the fealty
and devotion of all and each to the common Master and Benefactor!


Ib. s. viii. p. 124.

It is characteristic of the man and the age, Taylor's high-strained
reverential epithets to the names of the Fathers, and as rare and naked
mention of Luther, Melancthon, Calvin--the least of whom was not
inferior to St. Augustin, and worth a brigade of the Cyprians,
Firmilians, and the like. And observe, always 'Saint' Cyprian!


Ib. s. xii. p. 128-9.

Gibbon's enumeration of the causes, not miraculous, of the spread of
Christianity during the first three centuries is far from complete.
This, however, is not the greatest defect of this celebrated chapter.
The proportions of importance are not truly assigned; nay, the most
effective causes are only not omitted--mentioned, indeed, but 'quasi in
transitu', not developed or distinctly brought out: for example, the
zealous despotism of the Cæsars, with the consequent exclusion of men of
all ranks from the great interests of the public weal, otherwise than as
servile instruments; in short, the direct contrary of that state and
character of men's minds, feelings, hopes and fancies, which elections,
Parliaments, Parliamentary reports, and newspapers produce in England;
and this extinction of patriotism aided by the melting down of states
and nations in the one vast yet heterogeneous Empire;--the number and
variety of the parts acting only to make each insignificant in its own
eyes, and yet sufficient to preclude all living interest in the peculiar
institutions and religious forms of Rome; which beginning in a petty
district, had, no less than the Greek republics, its mythology and
[Greek: thraeskeia] intimately connected with localities and local
events. The mere habit of staring or laughing at nine religions must
necessarily end in laughing at the tenth, that is, the religion of the
man's own birth-place. The first of these causes, that is, the
detachment of all love and hope from the things of the visible world,
and from temporal objects not merely selfish, must have produced in
thousands a tendency to, and a craving after, an internal religion,
while the latter occasioned an absolute necessity of a mundane as
opposed to a national or local religion. I am far from denying or
doubting the influence of the excellence of the Christian faith in the
propagation of the Christian Church or the power of its evidences; but
still I am persuaded that the necessity of some religion, and the
untenable nature and obsolete superannuated character of all the others,
occasioned the conversion of the largest though not the worthiest part
of the new-made Christians. Here, though exploded in physics, we have
recourse to the 'horror vacui' as an efficient cause. This view of the
subject can offend or startle those only who, in their passion for
wonderment, virtually exclude the agency of Providence from any share in
the realizing of its own benignant scheme; as if the disposition of
events by which the whole world of human history, from north and south,
east and west, directed their march to one central point, the
establishment of Christendom, were not the most stupendous of miracles!
It is a yet sadder consideration, that the same men who can find God's
presence and agency only in sensuous miracles, wholly misconceive the
characteristic purpose and proper objects of historic Christianity and
of the outward and visible Church, of which historic Christianity is the
ground and the indispensable condition; but this is a subject delicate
and dangerous, at all events requiring a less scanty space than the
margins of these honestly printed pages.


Ib. s. iv. p. 133.

  The death of Ananias and Sapphira, and the blindness of Elymas the
  sorcerer, amount not to this, for they were miraculous inflictions.

One great difficulty respecting, not the historic truth (of which there
can be no rational doubt), but the miraculous nature, of the sudden
deaths of Ananias and Sapphira is derived from the measure which gave
occasion to it, namely, the sale of their property by the new converts
of Palestine, in order to establish that community of goods, which,
according to a Rabbinical tradition, existed before the Deluge, and was
to be restored by the children of Seth (one of the names which the
Jewish Christians assumed) before the coming of the Son of Man. Now this
was a very gross and carnal, not to say fanatical, misunderstanding of
our Lord's words, and had the effect of reducing the Churches of the
Circumcision to beggary, and of making them an unnecessary burthen on
the new Churches in Greece and elsewhere. See Rhenferd as to this.

The fact of Elymas, however, concludes the miraculous nature of the
deaths of Ananias and Sapphira, which, taken of themselves, would indeed
have always been supposed, but could scarcely have been proved, the
result of a miraculous or superhuman power. There are for me, I confess,
great difficulties in this incident, especially when it is compared with
our Lord's reply to the Apostles' proposal of calling down fire from
heaven. 'The Son of Man is not come to destroy', &c. At all events it is
a subject that demands and deserves deep consideration.


Ib. s. i. p. 141.

  The religion of Jesus Christ is 'the form of sound doctrine and
  wholesome words', which is set down in Scripture indefinitely,
  actually conveyed to us by plain places, and separated as for the
  question of necessary or not necessary by the Symbol of the Apostles.

I cannot refrain from again expressing my surprise at the frequency and
the undoubting positiveness of this assertion in so great a scholar, so
profound a Patrician, as Jeremy Taylor was. He appears 'bona fide' to
have believed the absurd fable of this Creed having been a pic-nic to
which each of the twelve Apostles contributed his 'symbolum'. Had Jeremy
Taylor taken it for granted so completely and at so early an age, that
he read without attending to the various passages in the Fathers and
ecclesiastical historians, which shew the gradual formation of this
Creed? It is certainly possible, and I see no other solution of the
problem.


Ib. s. ix. p. 153.

'Judge not, that ye be not judged'. The dread of these words is, I fear,
more influential on my spirit than either the duty of charity or my
sense of Taylor's high merits, in enabling me to struggle against the
strong inclination to pass the sentence of dishonesty on the reasoning
in this paragraph. Had I met the passage in Richard Baxter or in Bishop
Hall, it would have made no such unfavourable impression. But Taylor was
so acute a logician, and had made himself so completely master of the
subject, that it is hard to conceive him blind to sophistry so glaring.
I am myself friendly to Infant Baptism, but for that reason feel more
impatience of any unfairness in its defenders.


Ib. Ad. iii. and xiii. p. 178.

  But then, that God is not as much before hand with Christian as with
  Jewish infants is a thing which can never be believed by them who
  understand that in the Gospel God opened all his treasures of mercies,
  and unsealed the fountain itself; whereas, before, he poured forth
  only rivulets of mercy and comfort.

This is mere sophistry; and I doubt whether Taylor himself believed it a
sufficient reply to his own argument. There is no doubt that the primary
purpose of Circumcision was to peculiarize the Jews by an indelible
visible sign; and it was as necessary that Jewish infants should be
known to be Jews as Jewish men. Then humanity and mere safety determined
that the bloody rite should be performed in earliest infancy, as soon as
the babe might be supposed to have gotten over the fever of his birth.
This is clear; for women had no correspondent rite, but the same result
was obtained by the various severe laws concerning their marriage with
aliens and other actions.


Ib. p. 180.

  And as those persons who could not be circumcised (I mean the
  females), yet were baptized, as is notorious in the Jews' books and
  story.

Yes, but by no command of God, but only their own fancies.


Ib. Ad. iv. p. 181.

  'Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child,
  shall not enter therein': receive it as a little child receives it,
  that is, with innocence, and without any let or hinderance.

Is it not evident that Christ here converted negatives into positives?
As a babe is without malice negatively, so you must be positively and by
actuation, that is, full of love and meekness; as the babe is
unresisting, so must you be docile, and so on.


Ib. Ad. v.

And yet, notwithstanding this terrible paragraph, Taylor believed that
infants were not a whit the worse off for not being baptized. Strange
contradiction! They are born in sin, and Baptism is the only way of
deliverance; and yet it is not. For the infant is 'de se' of the kingdom
of heaven. Christ blessed them, not in order to make them so, but
because they already were so. So that this argument seems more than all
others demonstrative for the Anabaptist, and to prove that Baptism
derives all its force if it be celestial magic, or all its meaning if it
be only a sacrament and symbol, from the presumption of actual sin in
the person baptized.


Ib. Ad. xv. p. 186.

  And he that hath without difference commanded that all nations should
  be baptized, hath without difference commanded all sorts of persons.

Even so our Lord commanded all men to repent, did he therefore include
babes of a month old? [8] Yes, when they became capable of repentance.
And even so babes are included in the general command of Baptism, that
is, as soon as they are baptizable. But Baptism supposed both repentance
and a promise; babes are not capable of either, and therefore not of
Baptism. For the physical element was surely only the sign and seal of a
promise by a counter promise and covenant. The rite of Circumcision is
wholly inapplicable; for there a covenant was between Abraham and God,
not between God and the infant. "Do so and so to all your male children,
and I will favor them. Mark them before the world as a peculiar and
separate race, and I will then consider them as my chosen people." But
Baptism is personal, and the baptized a subject not an object; not a
thing, but a person; that is, having reason, or actually and not merely
potentially. Besides, Jeremy Taylor was too sound a student of Erasmus
and Grotius not to know the danger of screwing up St. Paul's
accommodations of Jewish rites, meant doubtless as inducements of
rhetoric and innocent compliances with innocent and invincible
prejudices, into articles of faith. The conclusions are always true; but
all the arguments are not and were never intended to be reducible into
syllogisms demonstrative.


Ib. Ad. xviii. p. 191.

  But let us hear the answer. First, it is said, that Baptism and the
  Spirit signify the same thing; for by water is meant the effect of the
  Spirit.

By the 'effect,' the Anabaptist clearly means the 'causa causans', the
'act of the Spirit.' As well might Taylor say that a thought is not
thinking, because it is the effect of thinking. Had Taylor been right,
the water to be an apt sign ought to have been dirty water; for that
would be the 'res effecta'. But it is pure water, therefore 'res agens'.


Ib. p. 192.

  For it is certain and evident, that regeneration or new birth is here
  enjoined to all as of absolute and indispensable necessity.


Yet Taylor himself has denied it over and over again in his tracts on
Original Sin; and how is it in harmony with the words of Christ--'Of
such are the kingdom of heaven'? Are we not regenerated back to a state
of spiritual infancy? Yet for such Anti-pædobaptists as hold the dogma
of original guilt it is doubtless a fair argument; but Taylor ought not
to have used it as certain and evident in itself, and not merely 'ad
hominem et per accidens'. As making a bow is in England the understood
conventional mark or visible language of reverence, so in the East was
Baptism the understood outward and visible mark of conversion and
initiation. So much for the visible act: then for the particular meaning
affixed to it by Christ. This was [Greek: metánoia], an adoption of a
new principle of action and consequent reform of conduct; a cleansing,
but especially a cleansing away of the carnal film from the mind's eye.
Hence the primitive Church called baptism [Greek: ph_os], light, and the
Eucharist [Greek: z_oàe], life. Baptism, therefore, was properly the
sign, the 'precursor', or rather the first act, the 'initium', of that
regeneration of which the whole spiritual life of a Christian is the
complete process; the Eucharist indicating the means, namely, the
continued assimilation of and to the Divine Humanity. Hence the
Eucharist was called the continuation of the Incarnation.


Ib.

  And yet it does not follow that they should all be baptized with the
  Holy Ghost and with fire. But it is meant only that that glorious
  effect should be to them a sign of Christ's eminency above him; they
  should see from him a Baptism greater than that of John.

This is exactly of a piece with that gloss of the Socinians in evasion
of St. Paul's words concerning Christ's emptying himself of the form of
God, and becoming a servant, which all the world of Christians had
interpreted of the Incarnation. But no! it only referred to the miracle
of his transfiguration!

      ... 'credat Judæus Apella!
  Non ego'.

St. John could not mean this, unless he denied the distinct personality
of the Holy Ghost. For it was the Holy Ghost that then descended 'as the
substitute of Christ; nor does St. Luke even hint that it was understood
to be a Baptism, even if we suppose the 'tongues of fire' to be anything
visual, and not as we say, Victory sate on his helmet like an eagle. The
spirit of eloquence descended into them like a tongue of fire, and that
they spoke different languages is, I conceive, no where said; but only
that being rustic Galileans they yet spake a dialect intelligible to all
the Jews from the most different provinces. For it is clear they were
all Jews, and, as Jews, had doubtless a 'lingua communis' which all
understood when spoken, though persons of education only could speak it.
Even so a German boor understands, but yet cannot talk in, High German,
that is, the language of his Bible and Hymn-book. So it is with the
Scotch of Aberdeen with regard to pure English. In short Taylor's
arguments press on the Anabaptists, only as far as the Anabaptists
baptize at all; they are in fact attacks on Baptism; and it would only
follow from them that the Baptist is more rational than the Pædobaptist,
but that the Quaker is more consistent than either. To pull off your hat
is in Europe a mark of respect. What, if a parent in his last will
should command his children and posterity to pull off their hats to
their superiors,--and in course of time these children or descendants
emigrated to China, or some place, where the same ceremony either meant
nothing, or an insult. Should we not laugh at them if they did not
interpret the words into, Pay reverence to your superiors. Even so
Baptism was the Jewish custom, and natural to those countries; but with
us it would be a more significant rite if applied as penance for excess
of zeal and acts of bigotry, especially as sprinkling.


Ib. p. 196.

  But farther yet I demand, can infants receive Christ in the Eucharist?

Surely the wafer and the tea-spoonful of wine might be swallowed by an
infant, as well as water be sprinkled upon him. But if the former is not
the Eucharist because without faith and repentance, so cannot the
latter, it would seem, be Baptism. For they are declared equal adjuncts
of both Sacraments. The argument therefore is a mere 'petitio principii
sub lite'.


Ib. Ad. ix. p. 197.

  The promise of the Holy Ghost is made to all, to us and to our
  children: and if the Holy Ghost belongs to them, then Baptism belongs
  to them also.

If this be not rank enthusiasm I know not what is. The Spirit is
promised to them, first, as protection and providence, and as internal
operation when those faculties are developed, in and by which the Spirit
co-operates. Can Taylor shew an instance in Scripture in which the Holy
Spirit is said to operate simply, and without the co-operation of the
subject?


Ib. Ad. xix. p. 199.

  And when the boys in the street sang Hosanna to the Son of David, our
  blessed Lord said that if they had held their peace, the stones of the
  street would have cried out Hosanna.


By the same argument I could defend the sprinkling of mules and asses
with holy water, as is done yearly at Rome on St. Antony's day, I
believe. For they are capable of health and sickness, of restiveness and
of good temper, and these are all emanations from their Creator. Besides
in the great form of Baptism the words are not [Greek: en onómati], but
[Greek: eis tò onoma], and many learned men have shewn that they may
mean 'into the power or influence' of the Father, the Son, and the
Spirit. But spiritual influences suppose capability in act of receiving
them; and we must either pretend to believe that the soul of the babe,
that is, his consciousness, is acted on without his consciousness, or
that the instrumental cause is antecedent by years to its effect, which
would be a conjunction disjunctive with a vengeance. Again, Baptism is
nothing except as followed by the Spirit; but it is irrational to say,
that the Spirit acts on the mere potentialities of an infant. For
wherein is the Spirit, as used in Scripture in appropriation to
Christians, different from God's universal providence and goodness, but
that the latter like the sun may shine on the wicked and on the good, on
the passive and on those who by exercise increase its effect; whereas
the former always implies a co-operant subject, that is, a developed
reason. When God gave his Spirit miraculously to the young child,
Daniel, he at the same time miraculously hastened the development of his
understanding.


Ib. Ad. xxviii. p. 205.

  But we see also that although Christ required faith of them who came
  to be healed, yet when any were brought, or came in behalf of others,
  he only required faith of them who came, and their faith did benefit
  to others....

  But this instance is so certain a reproof of this objection of theirs,
  which is their principal, which is their all, that it is a wonder to
  me they should not all be convinced at the reading and observing of
  it.

So far from certainty, I find no strength at all in this reproof.
Doubtless Christ at a believer's request might heal his child's or his
servant's bodily sickness; for this was an act of power, requiring only
an object. But is it any where said, that at a believer's request he
gave the Spirit and the graces of faith to an unbeliever without any
mental act, or moral co-operation of the latter? This would have been a
proof indeed; but Taylor's instance is a mere 'ad aliud'.


Ib. Ad. xxxi. p. 207.

  And although there are some effects of the Holy Spirit which require
  natural capacities to be their foundation; yet those are the [Greek:
  energáemata] or powers of working: but the [Greek: charísmata], and
  the inheritance and the title to the promises require nothing on our
  part, but that we can receive them.

The Bishop flutters about and about, but never fairly answers the
question, What does Baptism do? The Baptist says it attests forgiveness
of sins, as the reward of faith and repentance. This is intelligible;
but as to the [Greek: charísmata]--the children of believers, if so
taught and educated, are surely entitled to the promises; and what
analogy is there in this to any one act of power and gift of powers
mentioned as [Greek: charísmata], when the word is really used in
contradistinction from [Greek: energáemata] Baptism is spoken of many
times by St. Paul properly as well as metaphorically, and in the former
sense it is never described as a [Greek: chárisma] on a passive
recipient, while in the latter sense it always respects an  [Greek:
enérgaema] of the Spirit of God, and a [Greek: synérgaema] in the spirit
of the recipient. All that Taylor can make out is, that Baptism effects
a potentiality in a potentiality, or a chalking of chalk to make white
white.


Ib. p. 210.

  And if it be questioned by wise men whether the want of it do not
  occasion their eternal loss, and it is not questioned whether Baptism
  does them any hurt or no, then certainly to baptize them is the surer
  way without all peradventure.

Now this is the strongest argument of all against Infant Baptism, and
that which alone weighed at one time with me, namely, that it supposes
and most certainly encourages a belief concerning God, the most
blasphemous and intolerable; and no human wit can express this more
forcibly and affectingly than Taylor himself has done in his Letter to a
Lady on Original Sin. It is too plain to be denied that the belief of
the strict necessity of Infant Baptism, and the absolute universality of
the practice did not commence till the dogma of original guilt had begun
to despotize in the Church: while that remained uncertain and sporadic,
Infant Baptism was so too; some did it, many did not. But as soon as
Original Sin in the sense of actual guilt became the popular creed, then
all did it. [9]


Ib. s. xvi. p. 224.

  And although they have done violence to all philosophy and the reason
  of man, and undone and cancelled the principles of two or three
  sciences, to bring in this article; yet they have a divine revelation,
  whose literal and grammatical sense, if that sense were intended,
  would warrant them to do violence to all the sciences in the circle.
  And indeed that Transubstantiation is openly and violently against
  natural reason is no argument to make them disbelieve it, who believe
  the mystery of the Trinity in all those niceties of explication which
  are in the School (and which now-a-days pass for the doctrine of the
  Church), with as much violence to the principles of natural and
  supernatural philosophy as can be imagined to be in the point of
  Transubstantiation.

This is one of the many passages in Taylor's works which lead me to
think that his private opinions were favorable to Socinianism. Observe,
to the views of Socinus, not to modern Unitarianism, as taught by
Priestley and Belsham. And doubtless Socinianism would much more easily
bear a doubt, whether the difference between it and the orthodox faith
was not more in words than in the things meant, than the Arian
hypothesis. A mere conceptualist, at least, might plausibly ask whether
either party, the Athanasian or the Socinian, had a sufficiently
distinct conception of what the one meant by the hypostatical union of
the Divine Logos with the man Jesus; or the other of his plenary, total,
perpetual, and continuous inspiration, to have any well-grounded
assurance, that they do not mean the same thing.

Moreover, no one knew better than Jeremy Taylor that this apparent soar
of the hooded falcon, faith, to the very empyrean of bibliolatry
amounted in fact to a truism of which the following syllogism is a fair
illustration. All stones are men: all men think: 'ergo', all stones
think. The 'major' is taken for granted, the minor no one denies; and
then the conclusion is good logic, though a very foolish untruth. Or, if
an oval were demonstrated by Euclid to be a circle, it would be a
circle; and if it were a demonstrable circle, it would be a circle,
though the strait lines drawable from the centre to the circumference
are unequal. If we were quite certain that an omniscient Being,
incapable of deceiving, or being deceived, had assured us that 5 X 5 = 6
X 3, and that the two sides of a certain triangle were together less
than the third, then we should be warranted in setting at nought the
science of arithmetic and geometry. On another occasion, as when it was
the good Bishop's object to expose the impudent assertions of the Romish
Church since the eleventh century, he would have been the first to have
replied by a counter syllogism.

If we are quite certain that any writing pretending to divine origin
contains gross contradictions to demonstrable truths 'in eodem
genere', or commands that outrage the clearest principles of right
and wrong; then we may be equally certain that the pretence is a
blasphemous falsehood, inasmuch as the compatibility of a document with
the conclusions of self-evident reason, and with the laws of conscience,
is a condition 'a priori' of any evidence adequate to the proof of
its having been revealed by God.

This principle is clearly laid down both by Moses and by St. Paul. If a
man pretended to be a prophet, he was to predict some definite event
that should take place at some definite time, at no unreasonable
distance: and if it were not fulfilled, he was to be punished as an
impostor. But if he accompanied his prophecy with any doctrine
subversive of the exclusive Deity and adorability of the one God of
heaven and earth, or any seduction to a breach of God's commandments, he
was to be put to death at once, all other proof of his guilt and
imposture being superfluous. [10] So St. Paul. If any man preach another
Gospel, though he should work all miracles, though he had the appearance
and evinced the superhuman powers of an angel from heaven--he was at
once, in contempt of all imaginable sensuous miracles, to be holden
accursed. [11]


Ib. s. xviii. p. 225.

  And now for any danger to men's persons for suffering such a doctrine,
  this I shall say, that if they who do it are not formally guilty of
  idolatry, there is no danger that they whom they persuade to it,
  should be guilty ... When they believe it to be no idolatry, then
  their so believing it is sufficient security from that crime, which
  hath so great a tincture and residency in the will, that from thence
  only it hath its being criminal.


Will not this argument justify all idolaters? For surely they believe
themselves worshippers either of the Supreme Being under a permitted
form, or of some son of God (as Apollo) to whom he has delegated such
and such powers. If this be the case, there is no such crime as
idolatry: yet the second commandment expressly makes the worshipping of
God in or before a visual image of him not only idolatry, but the most
hateful species of it. Now do they not worship God in the visible form
of bread, and prostrate themselves before pictures of the Trinity? Are
we so mad as to suppose that the pious heathens thought the statue of
Jupiter, Jove himself? No; and yet these heathens were idolaters. But
there was no such being as Jupiter. No! Was there no King of Kings and
Lord of Lords; and does the name Jove instead of Jehovah (perhaps the
same word too) make the difference? Were Marcus Antoninus and Epictetus
idolaters?




UNUM NECESSARIUM; OR THE DOCTRINE AND PRACTICE OF REPENTANCE.

1. The first great divines among the Reformers, Luther, Calvin, and
their compeers and successors, had thrown the darkness of storms on an
awful fact of human nature, which in itself had only the darkness of
negations. What was certain, but incomprehensible, they rendered
contradictory and absurd by a vain attempt at explication. It was a
fundamental fact, and of course could not be comprehended; for to
comprehend, and thence to explain, is the same as to perceive, and
thence to point out, a something before the given fact, and Standing to
it in the relation of cause to effect. Thus they perverted original sin
into hereditary guilt, and made God act in the spirit of the cruellest
laws of jealous governments towards their enemies, upon the principle of
treason in the blood. This was brought in to explain their own
explanation of God's ways, and then too often God's alleged way in this
case was adduced to justify the cruel state law of treason in the blood.

2. In process of time, good men and of active minds were shocked at
this; but, instead of passing back to the incomprehensible fact, with a
vault over the unhappy idol forged for its comprehension, they
identified the two in name; and while in truth their arguments applied
only to a false theory, they rejected the fact for the sake of the
mis-solution, and fell into far worse errors. For the mistaken theorist
had built upon a foundation, though but a superstructure of chaff and
straw; but the opponents built on nothing. Aghast at the superstructure,
these latter ran away from that which is the sole foundation of all
human religion.

3. Then came the persecutions of the Arminians in Holland; then the
struggle in England against the Arminian Laud and all his
party--terrible persecutors in their turn of the Calvinists and
systematic divines; then the Civil War and the persecutions of the
Church by the Puritans in their turn; and just in this state of heated
feelings did Taylor write these Works, which contain dogmas subversive
of true Christian faith, namely, his 'Unum Necessarium', or Doctrine and
Practice of Repentance, which reduces the cross of Christ to nothing,
especially in the seventh chapter of the same, and the after defences of
it in his Letters on Original Sin to a Lady, and to the Bishop of
Rochester; and the Liberty of Prophesying, which, putting toleration on
a false ground, has left no ground at all for right or wrong in matters
of Christian faith.

In the marginal notes, which I have written in these several treatises
on Repentance, I appear to myself to have demonstrated that Taylor's
system has no one advantage over the Lutheran in respect of God's
attributes; that it is 'bona fide' Pelagianism (though he denies
it; for let him define that grace which Pelagius would not accept,
because incompatible with free will and merit, and profess his belief in
it thus defined, and every one of his arguments against absolute decrees
tell against himself); and lastly, that its inevitable logical
consequences are Socinianism and 'quæ sequuntur'. In Tillotson the
face of Arminianism looked out fuller, and Christianity is represented
as a mere arbitrary contrivance of God, yet one without reason. Let not
the surpassing eloquence of Taylor dazzle you, nor his scholastic
retiary versatility of logic illaqueate your good sense. Above all do
not dwell too much on the apparent absurdity or horror of the dogma he
opposes, but examine what he puts in its place, and receive candidly the
few hints which I have admarginated for your assistance, being in the
love of truth and of Christ,

Your Brother.


I have omitted one remark, probably from over fullness of intention to
have inserted it.

1. The good man and eloquent expresses his conjectural belief that, if
Adam had not fallen, Christ would still have been necessary, though not
perhaps by Incarnation. Now, in the first place, this is only a play
thought of himself, and Scotus, and perhaps two or three others in the
Schools; no article of faith or of general presumption; consequently it
has little serious effect even on the guessers themselves. In the next
place, if it were granted, yet it would be a necessity wholly 'ex parte
Dei', not at all 'ex parte Hominis':--for what does it amount to but
this--that God having destined a creature for two states, the earthly
rational, and the heavenly spiritual, and having chosen to give him, in
the first instance, faculties sufficient only for the first state, must
afterwards superinduce those sufficient for the second state, or else
God would at once and the same time destine and not destine. This
therefore is a mere fancy, a theory, but not a binding religion; no
covenant.

2. But the Incarnation, even after the fall of Adam, he clearly makes to
be specifically of no necessity. It was only not to take away peevishly
the estate of grace from the poor innocent children, because of the
father,--according to the good Bishop, a poor ignorant, who before he
ate the apple of knowledge did not know what right and wrong was; and
Christ's Incarnation would have been no more necessary then than it was
before, according to Taylor's belief. Here again the Incarnation is
wholly a contrivance 'ex parte Dei', and no way resulting from any
default of man.

3. Consequently Taylor neither saw nor admitted any 'a priori' necessity
of the Incarnation from the nature of man, and which, being felt by man
in his own nature, is itself the greatest of proofs for the admission of
it, and the strongest pre-disposing cause of the admission of all proof
positive. Not having this, he was to seek 'ab extra' for proofs in
facts, in historical evidence in the world of sense. The same causes
produce the same effects. Hence Grotius, Taylor, and Baxter (then, as
appears in his Life, in a state of uneasy doubt), were the first three
writers of evidences of the Christian religion, such as have been since
followed up by hundreds,--nine-tenths of them Socinians or
Semi-Socinians, and which, taking head and tail, I call the
Grotio-Paleyan way.

4. Hence the good man was ever craving for some morsel out of the
almsbasket of all external events, in order to prove to himself his own
immortality; and, with grief and shame I tell it, became evidence and
authority in Irish stories of ghosts, and apparitions, and witches. Let
those who are astonished refer to Glanville on Witches, and they will be
more astonished still. The fact now stated at once explains and
justifies my anxiety in detecting the errors of this great and excellent
genius at their fountain head,--the question of Original Sin: for how
important must that error be which ended in bringing Bishop Jeremy
Taylor forward as an examiner, judge, and witness in an Irish apparition
case!


Ib. s. xxxviii. p. 278.

  Although God exacts not an impossible law under eternal and
  insufferable pains, yet he imposes great holiness in unlimited and
  indefinite measures, with a design to give excellent proportions of
  reward answerable to the greatness of our endeavour. Hell is not the
  end of them that fail in the greatest measures of perfection; but
  great degrees of heaven shall be their portion who do all that they
  can always, and offend in the fewest instances.

It is not to be denied that one if not more of the parables appears to
sanction this, but the same parables would by consequence seem to favour
a state of Purgatory. From John, Paul, and the philosophy of the
doctrine, I should gather a different faith, and find a sanction for
this too in one of the parables, namely, that of the labourer at the
eleventh hour. Heaven, bliss, union with God through Christ, do not seem
to me comparative terms, or conceptions susceptible of degree. But it is
a difficult question. The first Fathers of the Reformation, and the
early Fathers of the primitive Church, present different systems, and in
a very different spirit.


Ib. p. 324-328.

  Descriptions of repentance taken from the Holy Scriptures.

This is a beautiful collection of texts. Still the pious but unconverted
Jew (a Moses Mendelsohn, for instance), has a right to ask, What then
did Christ teach or do, such and of such additional moment as to be
rightfully entitled the founder of a new law, instead of being, like
Isaiah and others, an enforcer and explainer of the old? If
Christianity, or the 'opus operans' of Redemption, was synchronous with
the Fall of man, then the same answer must be returned to the passages
here given from the Old Testament as to those from the New; namely, that
Sanctification is the result of Redemption, not its efficient cause or
previous condition. Assuredly [Greek: metanóaesis] and Sanctification
differ only as the plant and the growth or growing of the plant. But the
words of the Apostle (it will be said) are exhortative and dehortative.
Doubtless! and so would be the words of a wise physician addressed to a
convalescent. Would this prove that the patient's revalescence had been
independent of the medicines given him? The texts are addressed to the
free will, and therefore concerning possible objects of free will. No
doubt! Should that process, the end and virtue of which is to free the
will, destroy the free will? But I cannot make it out to my
understanding, how the two are compatible.--Answer; the spirit knows the
things of the spirit. Here lies the sole true ground of
Latitudinarianism, Arminian, or Socinian; and this is the sole and
sufficient confutation; 'spiritualia spiritus cognoscit'. Would you
understand with your ears instead of hearing with your understanding?
Now, as the ears to the understanding, so is the understanding to the
spirit. This Plato knew; and art thou a master in Israel, and knowest it
not?


Ib. p. 330.

  'Who hath trodden under foot the Son of God, and hath counted the
  blood of the covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing,
  and hath done despite unto the Spirit of grace'.

By this passage we must interpret the words "sin wilfully," in reference
to an unpardonable sin, in the preceding sentence.

  Of the moral capacity of sinful habits.


Ib. s. ii. p. 432.

Probably from the holiness of his own life, Taylor has but just
fluttered about a bad habit, not fully described it. He has omitted, or
rather described contradictorily, the case of those with whom the
objections to sin are all strengthened, the dismal consequences more
glaring and always present to them as an avenging fury, the sin loathed,
detested, hated; and yet, spite of all this, nay, the more for all this,
perpetrated. Both lust and intemperance would furnish too many instances
of these most miserable victims.


Ib. s. xxxix. p. 456.

  For every vicious habit being radicated in the will, and being a
  strong love, inclination and adhesion to sin, unless the natural being
  of this love be taken off, the enmity against God remains.

But the most important question is as to those vicious habits in which
there is no love to sin, but only a dread and recoiling from intolerable
pain, as in the case of the miserable drunkard! I trust that these
epileptic agonies are rather the punishments than the augumenters of his
guilt. The annihilation of the wicked is a fearful thought, yet it would
solve many difficulties both in natural religion and in Scripture. And
Taylor in his Arminian dread of Calvinism is always too shy of this
"grace of God:" he never denies, yet never admits, it any separate
operancy 'per se'. And this, I fancy, is the true distinction of
Arminianisrn and Calvinism in their moral effects. Arminianism is cruel
to individuals, for fear of damaging the race by false hopes and
improper confidences; while Calvinism is horrible for the race, but full
of consolation to the suffering individual.

The next section is, taken together, one of the many instances that
confirm my opinion that Calvinism (Archbishop Leighton's for example),
compared with Taylor's Arminianism, is as the lamb in the wolf's skin to
the wolf in the lamb's skin: the one is cruel in the phrases, the other
in the doctrine.


Ib. s. lvi. p. 469.

  But if a single act of contrition cannot procure pardon of sins that
  are habitual, then a wicked man that returns not till it be too late
  to root out vicious habits, must despair of salvation. I answer, &c.

Would not Taylor's purposes have been sufficiently attained by pressing
the contrast between attrition and contrition with faith, and the utter
improbability that the latter (which alone can be efficient), shall be
vouchsafed to a sinner who has continued in his sins in the flattery of
a death-bed repentance; a blasphemy that seems too near that against the
Holy Ghost? My objection to Taylor is, that he seems to reduce the death
of Christ almost to a cypher; a contrivance rather to reconcile the
attributes of God, than an act of infinite love to save sinners. But the
truth is, that this is the peccant part of Arminianism, and Tillotson is
yet more open than Taylor. Forbid me, common goodness, that I should
think Tillotson conscious of Socinianism! but that his tenets involved
it, I more than suspect. See his Discourses on Transubstantiation, and
those near it in the same volume.


Ib. lxiv. p. 478.

  Now there is no peradventure, but new-converted persons, heathens
  newly giving up their names to Christ and being baptized, if they die
  in an hour, and were baptized half an hour after they believe in
  Christ, are heirs of salvation.


This granted, I should little doubt of confuting all the foregoing, as
far as I object to it. I would rather be 'durus pater infantum', like
Austin, than 'durus pater ægrotantium'. Taylor considers all Christians
who are so called.


Ib. s. lxvi. p. 481.

All this paragraph is as just as it is fine and lively, but far from
confirming Taylor's doctrine. The case is as between one individual and
a general rule. I know God's mercy and Christ's merits; but whether your
heart has true faith in them, I cannot know. 'Be it unto thee according
to thy faith', said Christ: so should his ministers say. All these
passages, however, are utterly irreconcilable with the Roman doctrine,
that the priest's absolution is operant, and not simply declarative. As
to the decisions of Paulinus and Asterius, it is to be feared that they
had the mortmain bequests and compensations in view more than the words
of St. Paul, or the manifest purposes of redemption by faith. Yea,
Taylor himself has his 'redime peccata eleemosynis'.

By the by, I know of few subjects that have been more handled and less
rationally treated than this of alms-giving. Every thing a rich man
purchases beyond absolute necessaries, ought to be purchased in the
spirit of alms, that is, as the most truly beneficial way of disparsing
that wealth, of which he is the steward, not owner.


Ib.

  St. Paul taught us this secret, that sins are properly made habitual
  upon the stock of impunity. 'Sin taking occasion by the law wrought in
  me all concupiscence'; [Greek: 'aphormàen labousa'], 'apprehending
  impunity,' [Greek: 'dià taes entolaes'], 'by occasion of the
  commandment,' that is, so expressed and established as it was; because
  in the commandment forbidding to lust or covet, there was no penalty
  annexed or threatened in the sanction or in the explication. Murder
  was death, and so was adultery and rebellion. Theft was punished
  severely too; and so other things in their proportion; but the desires
  God left under a bare restraint, and affixed no penalty in the law.
  Now sin, that is, men that had a mind to sin, taking occasion hence,
  &c.

This is a very ingenious and very plausible exposition of St. Paul's
words; but surely, surely, it is not the right one. I find both the
meaning and the truth of the Apostle's words in the vividness and
consequently attractive and ad-(or in-)sorbent power given to an image
or thought by the sense of its danger, by the consciousness of its being
forbidden,--which, in an unregenerate and unassisted will, struggling
with, or even exciting, the ever ready inclination of corrupted nature,
produces a perplexity and confusion which again increase the person's
susceptibility of the soliciting image or fancy so intensified. Guilt
and despair add a stimulus and sting to lust. See Iago in Shakspeare.


Ib. s. xi. p. 500.

  It was not well with thee when thou didst first enter into the suburbs
  of hell by single actions of sin, &c.

Aye! this is excellent indeed, and worthy of a guardian angel of the
Church. When Jeremy Taylor escapes from the Mononomian Romaism, which
netted him in his too eager recoil from the Antinomian boar, brought
forth and foddered (as he imagined) in Calvin's stye; when from this
wiry net he escapes into the devotional and the dietetic, as into a
green meadow-land, with springs, and rivulets, and sheltering groves,
where he leads his flock like a shepherd;--then it is that he is most
himself,--then only he is all himself, the whole Jeremy Taylor; or if
there be one other subject graced by the same total heautophany, it is
in the pouring forth of his profound common sense on the ways and
weaknesses of men and conflicting sects, as for instance, in the
admirable birth, parentage, growth, and consummation of a religious
controversy in his 'Dissuasive from Popery'.


Ib. s. xiii. p. 502.

  Let every old man that repents of the sins of his evil life be very
  diligent in the search of the particulars; that by drawing them into a
  heap, and spreading them before his eyes, he may be mightily ashamed
  at their number and burthen.


I dare not condemn, but I am doubtful of this as a universal rule. If
there be a true hatred of sin, the precious time and the spiritual
'nisus' will, I think, be more profitably employed in enkindling
meditation on holiness, and thirstings after the mind of Christ.


Ib. ss. xxxi-xxxv. pp..517, 518.

Scarce a word in all this but for form's sake concerning the merits and
sacrifice of the Incarnate God! Surely Luther would not have given this
advice to a dying penitent, but have directed him rather to employ his
little time in agony of prayer to Christ, or in earnest meditations on
the astounding mystery of his death. In Taylor man is to do every thing.


Vol. IX. s. xi. p. 5.

  For God was so exasperated with mankind, that being angry he would
  still continue that punishment even to the lesser sins and sinners,
  which he only had first threatened to Adam; and so Adam brought it
  upon them.

And such a phrase as this used by a man in a refutation of Original Sin,
on the ground of its incompatibility with God's attributes!
"Exasperated" with those whom Taylor declares to have been innocent and
most unfortunate, the two things that most conciliate love and pity!


Ib. p. 6.

If the sequel of the paragraph, comparing God to David in one of his
worst actions, be not blasphemy, the reason is that the good man meant
it not as such. 'In facto est, sed non' in agents.


Ib. ss. xvi. xvii. pp. 8, 9.

  For the further explication of which it is observable that the word
  'sinner' and 'sin' in Scripture is used for any person, that hath a
  fault or a legal impurky, a debt, a vitiosity, defect, or imposition,
  &c.


These facts, instead of explaining away Original Sin, are
unintelligible, nay, absurd and immoral, except as shadows, types, and
symbols of it, and of the Redemption from it. Observe, too, that Taylor
never dares explain what he means by "Adam was mortal of himself and we
are mortal from him:" he did not dare affirm that soul and body are
alike material and perishable, even as the lute and the potentiality of
music in the lute. And yet if he believed the contrary, then, in his
construction of the doctrine of Original Sin, what has Christ done? St.
John died in the same sense as Abel died: and in the sense of the Church
of England neither died, but only slept in the Lord.

This same system forced Taylor into the same error which Warburton
afterwards dressed up with such trappings and trammels of erudition, in
direct contempt of the plain meaning of the Church's article; and he
takes it for granted, in many places, that the Jews under Moses knew
only of temporal life and the death of the body. Lastly, he greatly
degrades the mind of man by causelessly representing death as an evil in
itself, which, if it be considered as a crisis, or phenomenal change,
incident to a progressive being, ought as little to be thought so, as
the casting of the caterpillar's skin to make room for the wings of the
butterfly. It is the unveiling of the Psyche.

I do not affirm this as an article of Christian faith; but I say that no
candid writer ought to hide himself in double meanings. Either he should
have used the term 'death' ('ex Adamo') as loss of body, or as
change of mode of being and of its circumstances; and again this latter
as either evil for all, or as evil or good according to the moral habits
of each individual.

Observe, however, once for all, that I do not pretend to account for
Original Sin. I declare it to be an unaccountable fact. How can we
explain a 'species', when we are wholly in the dark as to the
'genus'? Now guilt itself, as well as all other immediate facts of
free will, is absolutely inexplicable; of course original guilt. If we
will perversely confound the intelligible with the sensible world,
misapply the logic appropriate to _phænomena_ and the categories, or
forms, which are empty except as substantialized in facts of experience,
in order to use them as the Procrustes' bed of faith respecting noumena:
if in short, we will strive to understand that of which we can only know
[Greek: hoti estì], we may and must make as wild work with reason, will,
conscience, guilt, and virtue, as with Original Sin and Redemption. On
every subject first ask, Is it among the [Greek: aisthaetà], or the
[Greek: noúmena]?


Ib. s. xxiii. p. 12.

  It could not make us heirs of damnation. This I shall the less need to
  insist upon, because, of itself, it seems so horrid to impute to the
  goodness and justice of God to be author of so great calamity to
  innocents, &c.

Never was there a more hazardous way of reasoning, or rather of placing
human ignorance in the judgment seat over God's wisdom. The whole might
be closely parodied in support of Atheism: rather, this is but a
paraphrase of the old atheistic arguments. Either God could not, or
would not, prevent the moral and physical evils of the universe,
including the everlasting anguish of myriads of millions: therefore he
is either not all-powerful or not all-good: but a being deficient in
power or goodness is not God:--_Ergo, &c._


Ib. s. xxv. p. 13.

  I deny not but all persons naturally are so, that they cannot arrive
  at heaven; but unless some other principle be put into them, or some
  great grace done for them, must for ever stand separate from seeing
  the face of God.

But this is but accidentally occasioned by the sin of Adam. Just so
might I say, that without the great grace of air done for them no living
beings could live. If it mean more, pray where was the grace in creating
a being, who without an especial grace must pass into utter misery? If
Taylor reply; but the grace was added in Christ: why so say the
Calvinists. According to Taylor there is no fall of man; but only an act
and punishment of a man, which punishment consisted in his living in the
kitchen garden, instead of the flower garden and orchard: and Cain was
as likely to have murdered Abel before, as after, the eating of the
forbidden fruit. But the very name of the fruit confutes Taylor. Adam
altered his nature by it. Cain did not. What Adam did, I doubt not, we
all do. Time is not with things of spirit.


Ib. s. xxvii. p. 14.

  Is hell so easy a pain, or are the souls of children of so cheap, so
  contemptible a price, that God should so easily throw them into hell?

This is an argument against the 'sine qua non' of Baptism, not against
Original Sin.


Ib. s. lxvii. p. 49.

  Origen said enough to be mistaken in the question.  [Greek: Hharà tò
  Adàm koinàe pánt'on esti. Kaì tà katà taes gynaikòs, ouk esti kath aes
  ou légetai.] 'Adam's curse is common to all. And there is not a woman
  on earth, to whom may not be said those things which were spoken to
  this woman.'

Origen's words ought to have prevented all mistake, for he plainly
enough overthrows the phantom of hereditary guilt; and as to guilt from
a corruption of nature, it is just such guilt as the carnivorous
appetites of a weaned lion, or the instinct of a brood of ducklings to
run to water. What then is it? It is an evil, and therefore seated in
the will; common to all men, the beginning of which no man can determine
in himself or in others. How comes this? It is a mystery, as the will
itself. Deeds are in time and space, therefore have a beginning. Pure
action, that is, the will, is a 'noumenon', and irreferable to time.
Thus Origen calls it neither hereditary nor original, but universal sin.
The curse of Adam is common to all men, because what Adam did, we all
do: and thus of Eve. You may substitute any woman in her place, and the
same words apply. This is the true solution of this unfortunate
question. The [Greek: pr'oton pseudos] is in the dividing the will from
the acts of the will. The will is 'ego-agens'.


Ib. s. lxxxii. p. 52.

This paragraph, though very characteristic of the Author, is fitter for
a comedy than for a grave discourse. It puts one in mind of the
play--"More sacks in the mill! Heap, boys, heap!"


Ib. s. lxxxiv. p. 56.

  'Præposterum est' (said Paulus the lawyer) 'ante nos locupletes dici
  quam acquisiverimus'. We cannot be said to lose what we never had; and
  our fathers' goods were not to descend upon us, unless they were his
  at his death.

Take away from me the knowledge that he was my father, dear Bishop, and
this will be true. But as it stands, the whole is, "says Paulus the
Lawyer;" and, "Well said, Lawyer!" say I.


Ib. p. 57.

  Which though it was natural, yet from Adam it began to be a curse;
  just as the motion of a serpent upon his belly, which was concreated
  with him, yet upon this story was changed into a malediction and an
  evil adjunct.

How? I should really like to understand this.


Ib. ch. vii. p. 73 'in initio'.

In this most eloquent treatise we may detect sundry logical lapses,
sometimes in the statement, sometimes in the instances, and once or
twice in the conclusions. But the main and pervading error lies in the
treatment of the subject 'in genere' by the forms and rules of
conceptual logic; which deriving all its material from the senses, and
borrowing its forms from the sense ([Greek: aisthaesis katharà]) or
intuitive faculty, is necessarily inapplicable to spiritual mysteries,
the very definition or contra-distinguishing character of which is that
they transcend the sense, and therefore the understanding, the faculty,
as Archbishop Leighton and Immanuel Kant excellently define it, which
judges according to sense. In the Aids to Reflection, [12] I have shewn
that the proper function of the understanding or mediate faculty is to
collect individual or sensible concretes into kinds and sorts ('genera
et species') by means of their common characters ('notæ communes'); and
to fix and distinguish these conceptions (that is, generalized
perceptions) by words. Words are the only immediate objects of the
understanding. Spiritual verities, or truths of reason 'respective ad
realia', and herein distinguished from the merely formal, or so called
universal truths, are differenced from the conceptions of the
understanding by the immediatcy of the knowledge, and from the immediate
truths of sense,--that is, from both pure and mixed intuitions,--by not
being sensible, that is, not representable by figure, measurement or
weight; nor connected with any affection of our sensibility, such as
color, taste, odors, and the like. And such knowledges we, when we speak
correctly, name ideas.

Now Original Sin, that is, sin that has its origin in itself, or in the
will of the sinner, but yet in a state or condition of the will not
peculiar to the individual agent, but common to the human race, is an
idea: and one diagnostic or contra-distinguishing mark appertaining to
all ideas, is, that they are not adequately expressible by words. An
idea can only be expressed (more correctly suggested) by two
contradictory positions; as for example; the soul is all in every
part;--nature is a sphere, the centre of which is everywhere, and its
circumference no where, and the like.

Hence many of Bishop Taylor's objections, grounded on his expositions of
the doctrine, prove nothing more than that the doctrine concerns an
idea. But besides this, Taylor everywhere assumes the consequences of
Original Sin as superinduced on a pre-existing nature, in no essential
respect differing from our present nature;--for instance, on a material
body, with its inherent appetites and its passivity to material
agents;--in short, on an animal nature in man. But this very nature, as
the antagonist of the spirit or supernatural principle in man, is in
fact the Original Sin,--the product of the will indivisible from the act
producing it; just as in pure geometry the mental construction is
indivisible from the constructive act of the intuitive faculty. Original
Sin, as the product, is a fact concerning which we know by the light of
the idea itself, that it must originate in a self-determination of a
will. That which we do not know is how it originates, and this we cannot
explain; first, from the necessity of the subject, namely, the will; and
secondly, because it is an idea, and all ideas are inconceivable. It is
an idea, because it is not a conception.


Ib. s. ii. p. 74, 75.

  And they are injurious to Christ, who think that from Adam we might
  have inherited immortality. Christ was the giver and preacher of it;
  'he brought life and immortality to light through the gospel'. It is a
  singular benefit given by God to mankind through Jesus Christ.

And none inherit it but those who are born of Christ; 'ergo', bad men
and infidels are not immortal. Immortality is one thing, a happy
immortality another. St. Paul meant the latter: Taylor either the
former, or his words have no meaning at all; for no man ever thought or
dreamed that we inherited heaven from Adam, but that as sons of Adam,
that is, as men, we have souls that do not perish with the body. I often
suspect that Taylor, in 'abditis fidei' [Greek: es_oterikaes], inclined
to the belief that there is no other immortality but heaven, and that
hell is a 'pæna damni negativa, haud privativa'. I own myself strongly
inclined to it;--but so many texts against it! I am confident that the
doctrine would be a far stronger motive than the present; for no man
will believe eternal misery of himself, but millions would admit, that
if they did not amend their lives they would be undeserving of living
for ever.


Ib. s. vi. p. 77.

  [Greek: hina màe plaemmúra tòn en haemin katapontísae logismòn eis
  tòn taes hamartiás buthón.]

"Lest the tumultuous crowd throw the reason within us over bridge into
the gulf of sin." What a vivid figure! It is enough to make any man set
to work to read Chrysostom.


Ib.

  ... 'peccantes mente sub una.'

Note Prudentius's use of 'mente sub una' for 'in one person.'


Ib. p. 78.

  For even now we see, by a sad experience, that the afflicted and the
  miserable are not only apt to anger and envy, but have many more
  desires and more weaknesses, and consequently more aptnesses to sin in
  many instances than those who are less troubled. And this is that
  which was said by Arnobius; 'proni ad culpas, et ad libidinis varios
  appetitos vitio sumus infirmitatis ingenitæ'.

No. Arnobius never said so good and wise a thing in his lifetime. His
quoted words have no such profound meaning.


Ib. s. vii. p. 78.

  That which remained was a reasonable soul, fitted for the actions of
  life and reason, but not of anything that was supernatural.

What Taylor calls reason I call understanding, and give the name reason
to that which Taylor would have called spirit.


Ib. s. xii. p. 84.

  And all that evil which is upon us, being not by any positive
  infliction, but by privative, or the taking away gifts, and blessings,
  and graces from us, which God, not having promised to give, was
  neither naturally, nor by covenant, obliged to give,--it is certain he
  could not be obliged to continue that to the sons of a sinning father,
  which to an innocent father he was not obliged to give.

Oh! certainly not, if hell were not attached to acts and omissions,
which without these very graces it is morally impossible for men to
avoid. Why will not Taylor speak out?


Ib. s. xiv. p. 85.

  The doctrine of the ancient Fathers was that free will remained in us
  after the Fall.

Yea! as the locomotive faculty in a man in a strait waistcoat. Neither
St. Augustine nor Calvin denied the remanence of the will in the fallen
spirit; but they, and Luther as well as they, objected to the flattering
epithet 'free' will. In the only Scriptural sense, as concerning the
unregenerate, it is implied in the word will, and in this sense,
therefore, it is superfluous and tautologic; and, in any other sense, it
is the fruit and final end of Redemption,--the glorious liberty of the
Gospel.


Ib. s. xvi. p. 92.

  For my part I believe this only as certain, that nature alone cannot
  bring them to heaven, and that Adam left us in a state in which we
  could not hope for it.

This is likewise my belief, and that man must have had a Christ, even if
Adam had continued in Paradise--if indeed the history of Adam be not a
'mythos'; as, but for passages in St. Paul, we should most of us
believe; the serpent speaking, the names of the trees, and so on; and
the whole account of the creation in the first chapter of Genesis seems
to me clearly to say:--"The literal fact you could not comprehend if it
were related to you; but you may conceive of it as if it had taken place
thus and thus."


Ib. s. 1. p. 166.

  That in some things our nature is cross to the divine commandment, is
  not always imputable to us, because our natures were before the
  commandment.

This is what I most complain of in Jeremy Taylor's ethics; namely, that
he constantly refers us to the deeds or 'phenomena' in time, the
effluents from the source, or like the 'species' of Epicurus; while the
corrupt nature is declared guiltless and irresponsible; and this too on
the pretext that it was prior in time to the commandment, and therefore
not against it. But time is no more predicable of eternal reason than of
will; but not of will; for if a will be at all, it must be 'ens
spirituale'; and this is the first negative definition of
spiritual--whatever having true being is not contemplable in the forms
of time and space. Now the necessary consequence of Taylor's scheme is a
conscience-worrying, casuistical, monkish work-holiness. Deeply do I
feel the difficulty and danger that besets the opposite scheme; and
never would I preach it, except under such provisos as would render it
perfectly compatible with the positions previously established by Taylor
in this chapter, s. xliv. p. 158. 'Lastly; the regenerate not only hath
received the Spirit of God, but is wholly led by him,' &c.


Ib.

If this Treatise of Repentance contain Bishop Taylor's habitual and
final convictions, I am persuaded that in some form or other he believed
in a Purgatory. In fact, dreams and apparitions may have been the
pretexts, and the immense addition of power and wealth which the belief
entailed on the priesthood, may have been their motives for patronizing
it; but the efficient cause of its reception by the churches is to be
found in the preceding Judaic legality and monk-moral of the Church,
according to which the fewer only could hope for the peace of heaven as
their next immediate state. The holiness that sufficed for this would
evince itself (it was believed) by the power of working miracles.


Ib. s. lii. p. 208.

  'It shall not be pardoned in this world nor in the world to come';
  that is, neither to the Jews nor to the Gentiles. For 'sæculum hoc',
  this world, in Scripture, is the period of the Jews' synagogue, and
  [Greek: mellon aion], the world to come, is taken for the Gospel, or
  the age of the Messias, frequently among the Jews.


This is, I think, a great and grievous mistake. The Rabbis of best name
divide into two or three periods, the difference being wholly in the
words; for the dividers by three meant the same as those by two.

The first was the 'dies expectationis', or 'hoc sæculum,' [Greek: en
touto kairo]: the second 'dies Messiæ', the time of the Messiah, that
is, the 'millenium': the third the 'sæculum futurum', or future state,
which last was absolutely spiritual and celestial.

But many Rabbis made the 'dies Messiæ' part, that is, the consummation
of this world, the conclusive Sabbath of the great week, in which they
supposed the duration of the earth or world of the senses to be
comprised; but all agreed that the 'dies', or thousand years, of the
Messiah was a transitional state, during which the elect were gradually
defecated of body, and ripened for the final or spiritual state.

During the 'millenium' the will of God will be done on earth, no less,
though in a lower glory, than it will be done hereafter in heaven.

Now it is to be carefully observed that the Jewish doctors or Rabbis
(all such at least as remained unconverted) had no conception or belief
of a suffering Messiah, or of a period after the birth of the Messiah,
previous to the kingdom, and of course included in the time of
expectation.

The appearance of the Messiah and his assumption of the throne of David
were to be contemporaneous. The Christian doctrine of a suffering
Messiah, or of Christ as the high priest and intercessor, has of course
introduced a modification of the Jewish scheme.

But though there is a seeming discrepance in different texts in the
first three Gospels, yet the Lord's Prayer appears to determine the
question in favour of the elder and present Rabbinical belief; that is,
it does not date the 'dies Messiae,' or kingdom of the Lord, from his
Incarnation, but from a second coming in power and glory, and hence we
are taught to pray for it as an event yet future.

Nay, our Lord himself repeatedly speaks of the Son of Man in the third
person, as yet to come. Assuredly our Lord ascended the throne and
became a King on his final departure from his disciples. But it was the
throne of his Father, and he an invisible King, the sovereign Providence
to whom all power was committed.

And this celestial kingdom cannot be identified with that under which
the divine will will be done on earth as it is in heaven; that is, when
on this earth the Church militant shall be one in holiness with the
triumphant Church.

The difficulties, I confess, are great; and for those who believe the
first Gospel (and this in its present state) to have been composed by
the Apostle Matthew, or at worst to be a literal and faithful
translation from a Hebrew (Syro-Chaldaic) Gospel written by him, and who
furthermore contend for its having been word by word dictated by an
infallible Spirit, the necessary duty of reconciling the different
passages in the first Gospel with each other, and with others in St.
Luke's, is, 'me saltern judice', a most Herculean one.

The most consistent and rational scheme is, I am persuaded, that which
is adopted in the Apocalypse. The new creation, commencing with our
Lord's resurrection, and measured as the creation of this world ('hujus
sæculi', [Greek: toutou ai_onos]) was by the doctors of the Jewish
church--namely, as a week--divided into two principal epochs,--the six
sevenths or working days, during which the Gospel was gradually to be
preached in all the world, and the number of the elect filled up,--and
the seventh, the Sabbath of the Messiah, or the kingdom of Christ on
earth in a new Jerusalem.

But as the Jewish doctors made the day (or one thousand years) of
Messiah, a part, because the consummation, of this world, [Greek: toutou
aionos toutou kairou], so the first Christians reversely made the
kingdom commence on the first (symbolical) day of the sacred week, the
last or seventh day of which was to be the complete and glorious
manifestation of this kingdom. If any one contends that the kingdom of
the Son of Man, and the re-descent of our Lord with his angels in the
clouds, are to be interpreted spiritually,

I have no objection; only you cannot pretend that this was the
interpretation of the disciples. It may be the right, but it was not the
Apostolic belief.


Ib. s. 1. p. 257.

  For this was giving them pardon, by virtue of those words of Christ,
  'Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted;' that is, if ye, who are the
  stewards of my family, shall admit any one to the kingdom of Christ on
  earth, they shall be admitted to the participation of Christ's kingdom
  in heaven; and what ye bind here shall be bound there; that is, if
  they be unworthy to partake of Christ here, they shall be accounted
  unworthy to partake of Christ hereafter.

Then without such a gift of reading the hearts of men, as priests do not
now pretend to, this text means almost nothing. A wicked shall not, but
a good man shall, be admitted to heaven; for if you have with good
reason rejected any one here, I will reject him hereafter, amounts to no
more than the rejection or admission of men according to their moral
fitness or unfitness, the truth or unsoundness of their faith and
repentance. I rather think that the promise, like the miraculous insight
which it implies, was given to the Apostles and first disciples
exclusively, and that it referred almost wholly to the admission of
professed converts to the Church of Christ.


'In fine'.

I have written but few marginal notes to this long Treatise, for the
whole is to my feeling and apprehension so Romish, so anti-Pauline, so
unctionless, that it makes my very heart as dry as the desert sands,
when I read it. Instead of partial animadversions, I prescribe the
chapter on the Law and the Gospel, in Luther's 'Table Talk', as the
general antidote. [13]



VINDICATION OF THE GLORY OF THE DIVINE ATTRIBUTES IN THE QUESTION OF
ORIGINAL SIN.


Ib. Obj. iv. p. 346.

  But if Original Sin be not a sin properly, why are children baptized?
  And what benefit comes to them by Baptism? I answer, as much as they
  need, and are capable of.

The eloquent man has plucked just prickles enough out of the dogma of
Original Sin to make a thick and ample crown of thorns for his
opponents; and yet left enough to tear his own clothes off his back, and
pierce through the leather jerkin of his closeliest wrought logic. In
this answer to this objection he reminds me of the renowned squire, who
first scratched out his eyes in a quickset hedge, and then leaped back
and scratched them in again. So Jeremy Taylor first pulls out the very
eyes of the doctrine, leaves it blind and blank, and then leaps back
into it and scratches them in again, but with a most opulent squint that
looks a hundred ways at once, and no one can tell which it really looks
at.


Ib.

  By Baptism children are made partakers of the Holy Ghost and of the
  grace of God; which I desire to be observed in opposition to the
  Pelagian heresy, who did suppose nature to be so perfect, that the
  grace of God was not necessary, and that by nature alone, they could
  go to heaven; which because I affirm to be impossible, and that
  Baptism is therefore necessary, because nature is insufficient and
  Baptism is the great channel of grace, &c.

What then of the poor heathens, that is, of five-sixths of all mankind.
Would more go to hell by nature alone? If so: where is God's justice in
Taylor's plan more than in Calvin's?


Ib. Obj. v. p. 355.

  Although I have shewn the great excess and abundance of grace by
  Christ over the evil that did descend by Adam; yet the proportion and
  comparison lies in the main emanation of death from one, and life from
  the other.

Does Jeremy Taylor then believe that the sentence of death on Adam and
his sons extended to the soul; that death was to be absolute cessation
of being! Scarcely I hope. But if bodily only, where is the difference
between 'ante' and 'post Christum?'


Ib. p. 356.

  Not that God could be the author of a sin to any, but that he
  appointed the evil which is the consequent of sin, to be upon their
  heads who descended from the sinner.

Rare justice! and this too in a tract written to rescue God's justice
from the Supra- and Sub-lapsarians! How quickly would Taylor have
detected in an adversary the absurd realization contained in this and
the following passages of the abstract notion, sin, from the sinner: as
if sin were any thing but a man sinning, or a man who has sinned! As
well might a sin committed in Sirius or the planet Saturn justify the
infliction of conflagration on the earth and hell-fire on all its
rational inhabitants. Sin! the word sin! for abstracted from the sinner
it is no more: and if not abstracted from him, it remains separate from
all others.


Ib. p. 358.

  The consequent of this discourse must needs at least be this; that it
  is impossible that the greatest part of mankind should be left in the
  eternal bonds of hell by Adam; for then quite contrary to the
  discourse of the Apostle, there had been abundance of sin, but a
  scarcity of grace.

And yet Jeremy Taylor will not be called a Pelagian. Why? Because
without grace superadded by Christ no man could be saved: that is, all
men must go to hell, and this not for any sin, but from a calamity, the
consequences of another man's sin, of which they were even ignorant. God
would not condemn them the sons of Adam for sin, but only inflicted on
them an evil, the necessary effect of which was that they should all
troop to the devil! And this is Jeremy Taylor's defence of God's
justice! The truth is Taylor was a Pelagian, believed that without
Christ thousands, Jews and heathens, lived wisely and holily, and went
to heaven; but this he did not dare say out, probably not even to
himself; and hence it is that he flounders backward and forward, now
upping and now downing.

In truth, this eloquent Treatise may be compared to a statue of Janus,
with one face fixed on certain opponents, full of life and force, a
witty scorn on the lip, a brow at once bright and weighty with
satisfying reason: the other looking at the something instead of that
which had been confuted, maimed, noseless, and weather-bitten into a
sort of visionary confusion and indistinctness. [14] It looks like
this--aye and very like that--but how like it is, too, such another
thing!



AN ANSWER TO A LETTER WRITTEN BY THE RIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP OF
ROCHESTER, CONCERNING THE CHAPTER OF ORIGINAL SIN, IN THE "UNUM
NECESSARIUM."


Ib. p. 367.

  And they who are born eunuchs should be less infected by Adam's
  pollution, by having less of concupiscence in the great instance of
  desires.

The fact happens to be false: and then the vulgarity, most unworthy of
our dear Jeremy Taylor, of taking the mode of the manifestation of the
disobedience of the will to the reason, for the disobedience itself. St.
James would have taught him that he who offendeth against one, offendeth
against all; and that there is some truth in the Stoic paradox that all
crimes are equal. Equal is indeed a false phrase; and therein consists
the paradox, which in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred is the same as
the falsehood. The truth is they are all the same in kind; but unequal
in degree. They are all alike, though not equally, against the
conscience.


Ib. p. 369.

  So that there is no necessity of a third place; but it concludes only
  that in the state of separation from God's presence there is great
  variety of degrees and kinds of evil, and every one is not the
  extreme.

What is this? If hell be a state, and not a mere place, and a particular
state, its meaning must in common sense be a state of the worst sort. If
then there be a mere 'pæna damni', that is, the not being so blest as
some others may be; this is a different state 'in genere' from the 'pæna
sensus': 'ergo', not hell; 'ergo' rather a third state; or else heaven.
For every angel must be in it, than whom another angel is happier; that
is negatively damned, though positively very happy.


Ib. p. 370-1.

  Just so it is in infants: hell was not made for man, but for devils;
  and therefore it must be something besides mere nature that can bear
  any man thither: mere nature goes neither to heaven or hell.

And how came the devils there? If it be hard to explain how Adam fell;
how much more hard to solve how purely spiritual beings could fall? And
nature! What? so much of nature, and no kind of attempt at a definition
of the word? Pray what is nature?


Ib. p. 371.

  I do not say that we, by that sin (original) deserved that death,
  neither can death be properly a punishment of us, till we superadd
  some evil of our own; yet Adam's sin deserved it, so that it was
  justly left to fall upon us, we, as a consequent and punishment of his
  sin, being reduced to our natural portion.

How? What is this but flying to the old Supra-lapsarian blasphemy of a
right of property in God over all his creatures, and destroying that
sacred distinction between person and thing which is the light and the
life of all law human and divine? Mercy on us! Is not agony, is not the
stone, is not blindness, is not ignorance, are not headstrong, inherent,
innate, and connate, passions driving us to sin when reason is least
able to withhold us,--are not all these punishments, grievous
punishments, and are they not inflicted on the innocent babe? Is not
this the result infused into the 'milk not mingled' of St. Peter; [15]
spotting the immaculate begotten, souring and curdling the innocence
'without sin or malice'? [16] And if this be just, and compatible with
God's goodness, why all this outcry against St. Austin and the
Calvinists and the Lutherans, whose whole addition is a lame attempt to
believe guilt, where they cannot find it, in order to justify a
punishment which they do find?


Ib. p. 379.

  But then for the evil of punishment, that may pass further than the
  action. If it passes upon the innocent, it is not a punishment to
  them, but an evil inflicted by right of dominion; but yet by reason of
  the relation of the afflicted to him that sinned, to him it is a
  punishment.

Here the snake peeps out, and now takes its tail into its mouth. Right
of dominion! Nonsense! Things are not objects of right or wrong. Power
of dominion I understand, and right of judgment I understand; but right
of dominion can have no immediate, but only a relative, sense. I have a
right of dominion over this estate, that is, relatively to all other
persons. But if there be a 'jus dominandi' over rational and free
agents, then why blame Calvin? For all attributes are then merged in
blind power: and God and fate are the same:

  [Greek: Zeùs kaì Moira kaì aeerophoitis Erinnús]

Strange Trinity! God, Necessity, and the Devil. But Taylor's scheme has
far worse consequences than Calvin's: for it makes the whole scheme of
Redemption a theatrical scenery. Just restore our bodies and corporeal
passions to a perfect 'equilibrium' and fortunate instinct, and, there
being no guilt or defect in the soul, the Son of God, the Logos, and
Supreme Reason, might have remained unincarnate, uncrucified. In short,
Socinianism is as inevitable a deduction from Taylor's scheme as Deism
or Atheism is from Socinianism.


'In fine'.

The whole of Taylor's confusion originated in this;--first, that he and
his adversaries confound original with hereditary sin; but chiefly that
neither he nor his adversaries had considered that guilt must be a
'noumenon'; but that our images, remembrances, and consciousnesses of
our actions are 'phænomena'. Now the 'phænomenon' is in time, and an
effect: but the 'noumenon' is not in time any more than it is in space.
The guilt has been before we are even conscious of the action; therefore
an original sin (that is, a sin universal and essential to man as man,
and yet guilt, and yet choice, and yet amenable to punishment), may be
at once true and yet in direct contradiction to all our reasonings
derived from 'phænomena', that is, facts of time and space. But we ought
not to apply the categories of appearance to the [Greek: ontos onta] of
the intelligible or causative world. This (I should say of Original Sin)
is mystery! We do not so properly believe it, as we know it. What is
actual must be possible. But if we will confound actuals with reals, and
apply the rules of the latter to cases of the former, we must blame
ourselves for the clouds and darkness and storms of opposing winds,
which the error will not fail to raise. By the same process an Atheist
may demonstrate the contradictory nature of eternity, of a being at once
infinite and of resistless causality, and yet intelligent. Jeremy Taylor
additionally puzzled himself with Adam, instead of looking into the fact
in himself.

How came it that Taylor did not apply the same process to the congeneric
question of the freedom of the will? In half a dozen syllogisms he must
have gyved and hand-cuffed himself into blank necessity and mechanic
motions. All hangs together. Deny Original Sin, and you will soon deny
free will;--then virtue and vice;--and God becomes 'Abracadabra'; a
sound, nothing else.



SECOND LETTER TO THE BISHOP OF ROCHESTER.


Ib. p. 390-1.

  To this it is answered as you see, there is a double guilt; a guilt of
  person, and of nature. That is taken away, this is not: for sacraments
  are given to persons, not to natures.

I need no other passage but this to convince me that Jeremy Taylor, the
angle in which the two 'apices' of logic and rhetoric meet,
consummate in both, was yet no metaphysician. Learning, fancy,
discursive intellect, 'tria juncta in uno', and of each enough to
have alone immortalized a man, he had; but yet [Greek:  ouden metà
physin]. Images, conceptions, notions, such as leave him but one rival,
Shakspeare, there were; but no ideas. Taylor was a Gassendist. O! that
he had but meditated in the silence of his spirit on the mystery of an
'I AM'! He would have seen that a person, 'quoad' person, can
have nothing common or generic; and that where this finds place, the
person is corrupted by introsusception of a nature, which becomes evil
thereby, and on this relation only is an evil nature. The nature itself,
like all other works of God, is good, and so is the person in a yet
higher sense of the word, good, like all offsprings of the Most High.
But the combination is evil, and this not the work of God; and one of
the main ends and results of the doctrine of Original Sin is to silence
and confute the blasphemy that makes God the author of sin, without
avoiding it by fleeing to the almost equal blasphemy against the
conscience, that sin in the sense of guilt does not exist.



THE REAL PRESENCE AND SPIRITUAL OF CHRIST IN THE BLESSED SACRAMENT,
PROVED AGAINST THE DOCTRINE OF TRANSUBSTANTIATION.

Perhaps the most wonderful of all Taylor's works. He seems, if I may so
say, to have transubstantiated his vast imagination and fancy into
subtlety not to be evaded, acuteness to which nothing remains
unpierceable, and indefatigable agility of argumentation. Add to these
an exhaustive erudition, and that all these are employed in the service
of reason and common sense; whereas in some of his Tracts he seems to
wield all sorts of wisdom and wit in defence of all sorts of folly and
stupidity. But these were 'ad popellum', and by virtue of the 'falsitas
dispensativa', which he allowed himself.


Epist. dedicatory.

  The question of transubstantiation.

I have no doubt that if the Pythagorean bond had successfully
established itself, and become a powerful secular hierarchy, there would
have been no lack of furious partizans to assert, yea, and to damn and
burn such as dared deny, that one was the same as two; two being two in
the same sense as one is one; that consequently 2+2=2 and 1+1=4. But I
should most vehemently doubt that this was the intention of Pythagoras,
or the sense in which the mysterious dogma was understood by the
thinking part of his disciples, who nevertheless were its professed
believers. I should be prepared to find that the true import and purport
of the article was no more than this;--that the one in order to its
manifestation must appear in and as two; that the act of re-union was
simultaneous with that of the self-production, (in the geometrical use
of the word 'produce,' as when a point produces, or evolves, itself on
each side into a bipolar line), and that the Triad is therefore the
necessary form of the Monad.

Even so is the dispute concerning Transubstantiation. I can easily
believe that a thousand monks and friars would pretend, as Taylor says,
to 'disbelieve their eyes and ears, and defy their own reason,' and to
receive the dogma in the sense, or rather in the nonsense, here ascribed
to it by him, namely, that the phenomenal bread and wine were the
phenomenal flesh and blood. But I likewise know that the respectable
Roman Catholic theologians state the article free from a contradiction
in terms at least; namely, that in the consecrated elements the
'noumena' of the phenomenal bread and wine are the same with that which
was the 'noumenon' of the phenomenal flesh and blood of Christ when on
earth.

Let M represent a slab or plane of mahogany,
and m its ordinary supporter or under-prop; and
let S represent a slab or plane of silver,
and s its supporter.

Now to affirm that M = S is a contradiction,
or that m = s;

but it is no contradiction to say, that on certain occasions
(S having been removed)
s is substituted for m,
and that what was M/m,
is by the command of the common master changed into M/s.

It may be false in fact, but it is not a self-contradiction in the
terms.

The mode in which s subsists in M/s may be inconceivable,
but not more so than the mode in which m  subsists in M/m,
or that in which s subsisted in S/s.


I honestly confess that I should confine my grounds of opposition to the
article thus stated to its unnecessariness, to the want of sufficient
proofs from Scripture that I am bound to believe or trouble my head with
it. I am sure that Bishop Bull, who really did believe the Trinity,
without either Tritheism or Sabellianism, could not consistently have
used the argument of Taylor or of Tillotson in proof of the absurdity of
Transubstantiation.


Ib. p. ccccxvi.

  But for our dear afflicted mother, she is under the portion of a child
  in the state of discipline, her government indeed hindered, but her
  worshippings the same, the articles as true, and those of the church
  of Rome as false as ever.

O how much there is in these few words,--the sweet and comely
sophistry, not of Taylor, but of human nature. Mother! child! state of
discipline! government hindered! that is to say, in how many instances,
scourgings hindered, dungeoning in dens foul as those of hell,
mutilation of ears and noses, and flattering the King mad with
assertions of his divine right to govern without a Parliament, hindered.
The best apology for Laud, Sheldon, and their fellows will ever be that
those whom they persecuted were as great persecutors as themselves, and
much less excusable.


Ib. s. ii. p. 422.

  'In Synaxi Transubstantiationem sero definivit Ecclesia; diu satis
  erat credere, sive sub pane consecrate, sive quocunque modo adesse
  verum corpus Christi;' so said the great Erasmus.

'Verum corpus,' that is, 'res ipsissima,' or the thing in its actual
self, opposed [Greek: to phainomen'o].


Ib. s. vi. p. 425.

  Now that the spiritual is also a real presence, and that they are
  hugely consistent, is easily credible to them that believe the gifts
  of the Holy Ghost are real graces, and a spirit is a proper substance.

But how the body of Christ, as opposed to his Spirit and to his Godhead,
can be taken spiritually, 'hic labor, hoc opus est.' Plotinus says,
[Greek: kai hae hylae as'ómatos]; so we must say here [Greek: kaì tò
s'oma as'ómaton].


Ib. s. vii. p. 426.

  So we may say of the blessed Sacrament; Christ is more truly and
  really present in spiritual presence than in corporal; in the heavenly
  effect than in the natural being.

But the presence of Christ is not in question, but the presence of
Christ's body and blood. Now that Christ effected much for us by coming
in the body, which could not or would not have been effected had he not
assumed the body, we all, Socinians excepted, believe; but that his body
effected it, other than as Christ in the body, where shall we find? how
can we understand?


Ib. p. 427.

  So when it is said, 'Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of
  God,' that is, corruption shall not inherit; and in the resurrection,
  our bodies are said to be spiritual, that is, not in substance, but in
  effect and operation.

This is, in the first place, a wilful interpretation, and secondly, it
is absurd; for what sort of flesh and blood would incorruptible flesh
and blood be? As well might we speak of marble flesh and blood. But in
Taylor's mind, as seen throughout, the logician was predominant over the
philosopher, and the fancy outbustled the pure intuitive imagination. In
the sense of St. Paul, as of Plato and all other dynamic philosophers,
flesh and blood is 'ipso facto' corruption, that is, the spirit of life
in the mid or balancing state between fixation and reviviscence. 'Who
shall deliver me from the body of this death?' is a Hebraism for 'this
death which the body is.' For matter itself is but 'spiritus in
coagulo,' and organized matter the coagulum in the act of being
restored; it is then repotentiating. Stop its self-destruction as
matter, and you stop its self-reproduction as a vital organ. In short,
Taylor seems to fall into the very fault he reproves in Bellarmine, and
with this additional evil, that his reasoning looks more like tricking
or explaining away a mystery. For wherein does the Sacrament of the
Eucharist differ from that of Baptism, nay, even of grace before meat,
when performed fervently and in faith? Here too Christ is present in the
hearts of the faithful by blessing and grace. I see at present no other
way of interpreting the text so as not to make the Sacrament a mere
arbitrary 'memento,' but by an implied negative. In propriety, the word
is confined to no portion of corporality in particular. "This (the bread
and wine) are as truly my flesh and blood as the 'phænomena' which you
now behold and name as such."


Ib. s. ix. p. 429.

From this paragraph I conclude, though not without some perplexity, that
by 'the body and blood verily and indeed taken,' we are not to
understand body and blood in their limited sense, as contradistinguished
from the soul or Godhead of Christ, but as a 'periphrasis' for Christ
himself, or at least Christ's humanity. Taylor, however, has
misconstrued Phavorinus' meaning though not his words. 'Spiritualia
eterna quoad spiritum.' But this is the very depth of the purified
Platonic philosophy.


Ib. s. x. p. 430.

  But because the words do perfectly declare our sense, and are owned
  publicly in our doctrine and manner of speaking, it will be in vain to
  object against us those words of the Fathers, which use the same
  expressions: for if by virtue of those words 'really,'
  'substantially,' 'corporally,' 'verily and indeed,' and 'Christ's body
  and blood,' the Fathers shall be supposed to speak for
  Transubstantiation, they may as well suppose it to be our doctrine
  too; for we use the same words, and therefore those authorities must
  signify nothing against us, unless these words can be proved in them
  to signify more than our sense of them does import; and by this truth,
  many, very many of their pretences are evacuated.

A sophism, dearest Jeremy. We use the words because these early Fathers
used them, and have forced our own definitions on them. But should we
have chosen these words to express our opinion by, if there had been no
controversy on the subject? But the Fathers chose and selected these
words as the most obvious and natural.


Ib. s. xi. p. 431.

  It is much insisted upou that it be inquired whether, when we say we
  believe Christ's body to be really in the Sacrament, we mean 'that
  body, that flesh, that was born of the Virgin Mary, that was
  crucified, dead, and buried?' I answer, that I know none else that he
  had or hath: there is but one body of Christ natural and glorified.

This may be true, or at least intelligible, of Christ's humanity or
personal identity as [Greek: nóaeton ti], but applied to the phenomenal
flesh and blood, it is nonsense. For if every atom of the human frame be
changed by succession in eleven or twelve years, the body born of the
Virgin could not be the body crucified, much less the body crucified be
the body glorified, spiritual and incorruptible. I construe the words of
Clement of Alexandria, quoted by Taylor below, [17] literally, and they
perfectly express my opinion; namely, that Christ, both in the
institution of the Eucharist and in the sixth chapter of John, spoke of
his humanity as a 'noumenon,' not of the specific flesh and blood which
were its 'phænomena' at the last supper and on the cross. But Jeremy
Taylor was a semi-materialist, and though no man better managed the
logic of substance and accidents, he seems to have formed no clear
metaphysical notion of their actual meaning. Taken notionally, they are
mere interchangeable relations, as in concentric circles the outmost
circumference is the substance, the other circles its accidents; but if
I begin with the second and exclude the first from my thoughts, then
this is substance and the interior ones accidents, and so on; but taken
really, we mean the complex action of co-agents on our senses, and
accident as only an agent acting on us. Thus we say, the beer has turned
sour: sour is the accident of the substance beer. But, in fact, a new
agent, oxygen, has united itself with other agents in the joint
composition, the essence of which new comer is to be sour: at all
events, Taylor's construction is a mere assertion, meaning no more than
'in this sense only can I subscribe to the words of Bertram, Jerome, and
Clement.'

If a re-union of the Lutheran and English Churches with the Roman were
desirable and practicable, the best way, [Greek: h_os emoige dokei,]
would be, that any remarkable number should offer union on a given
profession of faith chiefly negative, as we protest against the
authority of the Church in temporals; that the words agreed to by Beza
and Espencoeus, on the part of the Reformers and Romanists respectively,
at Poissy, used with implicit faith, shall suffice. 'Credimus in usu
coentæ Dominicæ vere, reipsa, substantialiter, seu in substantia, verum
corpus et sanguinem Christi spirituali et ineffabili modo esse,
exhiberi, sumi a fidelibus communicantibus.'


Ib. s. in. p. 434.

  The other Schoolman I am to reckon in this account, is Gabriel Biel.

Taylor should have informed the reader that Gabriel Biel is but the echo
of Occam, and that both were ante-Lutheran Protestants in heart, and as
far as they dared, in word likewise.


Ib. s. vi. p. 436.

  So that if, according to the Casuists, especially of the Jesuits'
  order, it be lawful to follow the opinion of any one probable doctor,
  here we have five good men and true, besides Occam, Bassolis, and
  Mechior Camus, to acquit us from our search after this question in
  Scripture.

Taylor might have added Erasmus, who, in one of his letters, speaking of
Oecolampadius's writings on the Eucharist, says '"ut seduci posse
videantur etiam electi,"' and adds, that he should have embraced his
interpretations, '"nisi obstaret consensus Ecclesiæ;"' that is,
Oecolampadius has convinced me, and I should avow my conviction, but for
motives of personal prudence and regard for the public peace.




OF THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF ST. JOHN'S GOSPEL.

Ib. p. 436.

I cannot but think that the same mysterious truth, whatever it be, is
referred to in the Eucharist and in this chapter of St. John; and I
wonder that Taylor, who makes the Eucharist a spiritual sumption of
Christ, should object to it. A = C and B = C, therefore A = B. [18]


Ib. s. iv. p. 440.

The error on both sides, Roman and Protestant, originates in the
confusion of sign or figure with symbol, which latter is always an
essential part of that, of the whole of which it is the representative.
Not seeing this, and therefore seeing no 'medium' between the whole
thing and the mere metaphor of the thing, the Romanists took the former
or positive pole of the error, the Protestants the latter or negative
pole. The Eucharist is a symbolic, or solemnizing and 'totum in parte'
acting of an act, which in a true member of Christ's body is supposed to
be perpetual. Thus the husband and wife exercise the duties of their
marriage contract of love, protection, obedience, and the like, all the
year long, and yet solemnize it by a more deliberate and reflecting act
of the same love on the anniversary of their marriage.


Ib. s. ix p. 447-8.

  That which neither can feel or be felt, see or be seen, move or be
  moved, change or be changed, neither do or suffer corporally, cannot
  certainly be eaten corporally; but so they affirm concerning the body
  of our blessed Lord; it cannot do or suffer corporally in the
  Sacrament, therefore it cannot be eaten corporally, any more than a
  man can chew a spirit, or eat a meditation, or swallow a syllogism
  into his belly.

Absurd as the doctrine of Transubstantiation may thus be made, yet
Taylor here evidently confounds a spirit, 'ens realissimum,' with a mere
notion or 'ens logicum.' On this ground of the spirituality of all
powers [Greek: donámeis], it would not be difficult to evade many of
Taylor's most plausible arguments. Enough, however, and more than enough
would be left in their full force.


Ib. p. 448.

  Besides this, I say this corporal union of our bodies to the body of
  God incarnate, which these great and witty dreamers dream of, would
  make man to be God.

But yet not God, nor absolutely. 'I am in my Father, even so ye are in
me.'


Ib. s. xxii. p. 456.

  By this time I hope I may conclude, that Transubstantiation is not
  taught by our blessed Lord in the sixth chapter of St. John: 'Johannes
  de tertia et Eucharistica cæna nihil quidem scribit, eo quod cæteri
  tres Evangelistæ ante ilium eam plene descripsissent.' They are the
  words of Stapleton and are good evidence against them.

I cannot satisfy my mind with this reason, though the one commonly
assigned both before and since Stapleton: and yet ignorant, when, why,
and for whom John wrote his Gospel, I cannot substitute a better or more
probable one. That John believed the command of the Eucharist to have
ceased with the destruction of the Jewish state, and the obligation of
the cup of blessing among the Jews,--or that he wrote it for the Greeks,
unacquainted with the Jewish custom,--would be not improbable, did we
not know that the Eastern Church, that of Ephesus included, not only
continued this Sacrament, but rivalled the Western Church in the
superstition thereof.


Ib. s. i. p. 503.

  Now I argue thus: if we eat Christ's natural body, we eat it either
  naturally or spiritually: if it be eaten only spiritually, then it is
  spiritually digested, &c.

What an absurdity in the word 'it' in this passage and throughout!


Vol. X. s. iii. p. 3.

  The accidents, proper to a substance, are for the manifestation, a
  notice of the substance, not of themselves; for as the man feels, but
  the means by which he feels is the sensitive faculty, so that which is
  felt, is the substance, and the means by which it is felt is the
  accident.

This is the language of common sense, rightly so called, that is, truth
without regard or reference to error; thus only differing from the
language of genuine philosophy, which is truth intentionally guarded
against error. But then in order to have supported it against an acute
antagonist, Taylor must, I suspect, have renounced his Gassendis and
other Christian 'Epicuri.' His antagonist would tell him; when a man
strikes me with a stick, I feel the stick, and infer the man; but 'pari
ratione,' I feel the blow, and infer the stick; and this is tantamount
to,--I feel, and by a mechanism of my thinking organ attribute causation
to precedent or co-existent images; and this no less in states in which
you call the images unreal, that is, in dreams, than when they are
asserted by you to have an outward reality.


Ib. p. 4.

  But when a man, by the ministry of the senses, is led into the
  apprehension of a wrong object, or the belief of a false proposition,
  then he is made to believe a lie, &c.

There are no means by which a man without chemical knowledge could
distinguish two similarly shaped lumps, one of sugar and another of
sugar of lead. Well! a lump of sugar of lead lies among other artefacts
on the shelf of a collector; and with it a label, "Take care! this is
not sugar, though it looks so, but crystallized oxide of lead, and it is
a deadly poison." A man reads this label, and yet takes and swallows the
lump. Would Taylor assert that the man was made to swallow a poison? Now
this (would the Romanist say) is precisely the case of the consecrated
elements, only putting food and antidote for poison; that is, as far as
this argument of Jeremy Taylor is concerned.


Ib. p. 5.

  Just upon this account it is, that St. John's argument had been just
  nothing in behalf of the whole religion: for that God was incarnate,
  that Jesus Christ did such miracles, that he was crucified, that he
  arose again, and ascended into heaven, that he preached these sermons,
  that he gave such commandments, he was made to believe by sounds, by
  shapes, by figures, by motions, by likenesses, and appearances, of all
  the proper accidents.

A Socinian might turn this argument with equal force at least, but I
think with far greater, against the Incarnation. But it is a sophism,
that actually did lead, to Socinianism: for surely bread and wine are
less disparate from flesh and blood, than a human body from the
Omnipresent Spirit. The disciples would, according to Taylor, Tillotson,
and the other Latitudinarian common sense divines, have been justified
in answering: "All our senses tell us you are only a man: how should, we
believe you when you say the contrary? If we are not to believe all our
senses, much less can we believe that we actually hear you."

And Taylor in my humble judgment gives a force and extension to the
words of St. John, quoted before,--'That which was from the beginning,
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have beheld, and our hands
have handled of the word of life' (1 Ep.1.),--far greater than they
either can, or were meant to, bear. It is beyond all doubt, that the
words refer to, and were intended to confute, the heresy which was soon
after a prominent doctrine of the Gnostics; namely, that the body of
Christ was a phantom. To this St. John replies: I have myself had every
proof to the contrary: first, the proof of the senses; secondly,
Christ's own assurance. Now this was unanswerable by the Gnostics,
without one or the other of two pretences; either that St. John and the
other known and appointed Apostles and delegates of the Word were liars;
or that the Epistle was spurious. The first was too intolerable:
therefore they adopted the second. Observe, the heretics, whom St. John
confutes, did not deny the actual presence of the Word with the
appearance of a human body, much less the truth of the wonders performed
by the Word in this super-human and unearthly 'vice-corpus,' or 'quasi
corpus:' least of all, would they assert either that the assurances of
the Word were false in themselves, or that the sense of hearing might
have been permitted to deceive the beloved Apostle, (which would have
been virtual falsehood and a subornation of falsehood), however liable
to deception the senses might be generally, and as sole and primary
proofs unsupported by antecedent grounds, 'præcognitis vel
preconcessis.' And that St. John never thought of advancing the senses
to any such dignity and self-sufficiency as proofs, it would be easy to
shew from twenty passages of his Gospel. I say, again and again, that I
myself greatly prefer the general doctrine of our own Church respecting
the Eucharist,--'rem credimus, modum nescimus,'--to either Tran- (or
Con-) substantiation, on the one hand, or to the mere 'signum memoriæ
causa' of the Sacramentaries. But nevertheless, I think that the
Protestant divines laid too much stress on the abjuration of the
metaphysical part of the Roman article; as if, even with the admission
of Transubstantiation, the adoration was not forbidden and made
idolatrous by the second commandment.


Ib. s. vi. p. 9.

  And yet no sense can be deceived in that which it always perceives
  alike: 'The touch can never be deceived.'

Every common juggler falsifies this assertion when he makes the pressure
from a shilling seem the shilling itself. "Are you sure you feel it?"
"Yes." "Then open your hand. Presto! 'Tis gone." From this I gather that
neither Taylor nor Aristotle ever had the nightmare.


Ib. p.10.

  The purpose of which discourse is this: that no notices are more
  evident and more certain than the notices of sense; but if we conclude
  contrary to the true dictate of senses, the fault is in the
  understanding, collecting false conclusions from right premises. It
  follows, therefore, that in the matter of the Eucharist we ought to
  judge that which our senses tell us.

Very unusually lax reasoning for Jeremy Taylor, whose logic is commonly
legitimate even where his metaphysic is unsatisfactory. What Romanist
ever asserted that a communicant's palate deceived him, when it reported
the taste of bread or of wine in the elements?


Ib. s. i. p. 16.

  When we discourse of mysteries of faith and articles of religion, it
  is certain that the greatest reason in the world, to which all other
  reasons must yield, is this--'God hath said it, therefore it is true.'

Doubtless: it is a syllogism demonstrative. All that God says is truth,
is necessarily true. But God hath said this; 'ergo,' &c. But how is the
'minor' to be proved, that God hath said this? By reason? But it is
against reason. By the senses? But it is against the senses.


Ib. s. xii. p. 27.

  First; for Christ's body, his natural body, is changed into a
  spiritual body, and it is not now a natural body, but a spiritual, and
  therefore cannot be now in the Sacrament after a natural manner,
  because it is so no where, and therefore not there: 'It is sown a
  natural body, it is raised a spiritual body.'

But mercy on me! was this said of the resurgent body of Jesus? a
spiritual body, of which Jesus said it was not a spirit. If tangible by
Thomas's fingers, why not by his teeth, that is, manducable?


Ib. s. xxviii. p. 44.

  So that if there were a plain revelation of Transubstantiation, then
  this argument were good ... when there are so many seeming
  impossibilities brought against the Holy Trinity ... And therefore we
  have found difficulties, and shall for ever, till, in this article,
  the Church returns to her ancient simplicity of expression.

Taylor should have said, it would have very greatly increased the
difficulty of proving that it was really revealed, but supposing that
certain, then doubtless it must be believed as far as nonsense can be
believed, that is, negatively. From the Apostles' Creed it may be
possible to deduce the Catholic doctrine of the Trinity; but assuredly
it is not fully expressed therein: and what can Taylor mean by the
Church returning to her first simplicity in this article? What less
could she say if she taught the doctrine at all, than that the Word and
the Spirit are spoken of every where in Scripture as individuals, each
distinct from the other, and both from the Father: that of both all the
divine attributes are predicated, except self-origination; that the
Spirit is God, and the Word is God, and that they with the Father are
the one God? And what more does she say now? But Taylor, like Swift, had
a strong tendency to Sabellianism.

It is most dangerous, and, in its distant consequences, subversive of
all Christianity to admit, as Taylor does, that the doctrine of the
Trinity is at all against, or even above, human reason in any other
sense, than as eternity and Deity itself are above it. In the former, as
well as the latter, we can prove that so it must be, and form clear
notions by negatives and oppositions.


Ib. s. xxix. p. 45.

  Now concerning this, it is certain it implies a contradiction, that
  two bodies should be in one place, or possess the place of another,
  till that be cast forth.

So far from it that I believe the contrary; and it would puzzle Taylor
to explain a thousand 'phænomena' in chemistry on his certainty.
But Taylor assumed matter to be wholly quantitative, which granted, his
opinion would become certain.


Ib. s. xxxii. p. 49.

  The door might be made to yield to his Creator as easily as water,
  which is fluid, be made firm under his feet; for consistence or
  lability are not essential to wood and water.

Here the common basis of water, ice, vapour, steam, 'aqua crystallina',
and (possibly) water-gas is called water, and confounded with the
species water, that is, the common base 'plus' a given proportion of
caloric. To the species water continuity and lability are essential.


Ib. p. 50.

  The words in the text are [Greek: kekleismén_on t_on thyr_on] in the
  past tense, the gates or doors having been shut; but that they were
  shut in the instant of Christ's entry, it says not: they might of
  course, if Christ had so pleased, have been insensibly opened, and
  shut in like manner again; and, if the words be observed, it will
  appear that St. John mentioned the shutting the doors in relation to
  the Apostles' fear, not to Christ's entering: he intended not (so far
  as appears) to declare a miracle.

Thank God! Here comes common sense.


Ib. ss. xvi-xvii. pp. 71-73.

All most excellent; but O! that Taylor's stupendous wit, subtlety,
acuteness, learning and inexhaustible copiousness of argumentation would
but tell us what he himself, Dr. Jeremy Taylor, means by eating Christ's
body by faith: his body, not his soul or Godhead. Eat a body by faith!




A DISSUASIVE FROM POPERY.

