NOTES ON DONNE. [1]

There have been many, and those illustrious, divines in our Church from
Elizabeth to the present day, who, overvaluing the accident of
antiquity, and arbitrarily determining the appropriation of the words
'ancient,' 'primitive,' and the like to a certain date, as for example,
to all before the fourth, fifth, or sixth century, were resolute
protesters against the corruptions and tyranny of the Romish hierarch,
and yet lagged behind Luther and the Reformers of the first generation.
Hence I have long seen the necessity or expedience of a threefold
division of divines. There are many, whom God forbid that I should call
Papistic, or, like Laud, Montague, Heylyn, and others, longing for a
Pope at Lambeth, whom yet I dare not name Apostolic. Therefore I divide
our theologians into,

1. Apostolic or Pauline:
2. Patristic:
3. Papal.

Even in Donne, and still more in Bishops Andrews and Hackett, there is a
strong Patristic leaven. In Jeremy Taylor this taste for the Fathers and
all the Saints and Schoolmen before the Reformation amounted to a
dislike of the divines of the continental Protestant Churches, Lutheran
or Calvinistic. But this must, in part at least, be attributed to
Taylor's keen feelings as a Carlist, and a sufferer by the Puritan
anti-prelatic party.

I would thus class the pentad of operative Christianity:--


                     'Prothesis'
                   Christ, the Word



   'Thesis'          'Mesothesis'       'Antithesis'
The Scriptures     The Holy Spirit       The Church



                     'Synthesis'
                    The Preacher


The Papacy elevated the Church to the virtual exclusion or suppression
of the Scriptures: the modern Church of England, since Chillingworth,
has so raised up the Scriptures as to annul the Church; both alike have
quenched the Holy Spirit, as the 'mesothesis' of the two, and
substituted an alien compound for the genuine Preacher, who should be
the 'synthesis' of the Scriptures and the Church, and the sensible voice
of the Holy Spirit.


Serm. I. Coloss. i. 19, 20. p. 1.
Ib. E.

  What could God pay for me? What could God suffer? God himself could
  not; and therefore God hath taken a body that could.

God forgive me,--or those who first set abroad this strange [Greek:
metábasis eis allo génos], this debtor and creditor scheme of expounding
the mystery of Redemption, or both! But I never can read the words, 'God
himself could not; and therefore took a body that could'--without being
reminded of the monkey that took the cat's paw to take the chestnuts out
of the fire, and claimed the merit of puss's sufferings. I am sure,
however, that the ludicrous images, under which this gloss of the
Calvinists embodies itself to my fancy, never disturb my recollections
of the adorable mystery itself. It is clear that a body, remaining a
body, can only suffer as a body: for no faith can enable us to believe
that the same thing can be at once A. and not A. Now that the body of
our Lord was not transelemented or transnatured by the 'pleroma'
indwelling, we are positively assured by Scripture. Therefore it would
follow from this most unscriptural doctrine, that the divine justice had
satisfaction made to it by the suffering of a body which had been
brought into existence for this special purpose, in lieu of the debt of
eternal misery due from, and leviable on, the bodies and souls of all
mankind! It is to this gross perversion of the sublime idea of the
Redemption by the cross, that we must attribute the rejection of the
doctrine of redemption by the Unitarian, and of the Gospel 'in toto' by
the more consequent Deist.

Ib. p. 2. C.

  And yet, even this dwelling fullness, even in this person Christ
  Jesus, by no title of merit in himself, but only 'quia complacuit',
  because it pleased the Father it should be so.

This, in the intention of the preacher, may have been sound, but was it
safe, divinity? In order to the latter, methinks, a less equivocal word
than 'person' ought to have been adopted; as 'the body and soul of the
man Jesus, considered abstractedly from the divine Logos, who in it took
up humanity into deity, and was Christ Jesus.' Dare we say that there
was no self-subsistent, though we admit no self-originated, merit in the
Christ? It seems plain to me, that in this and sundry other passages of
St. Paul, 'the Father' means the total triune Godhead.

It appears to me, that dividing the Church of England into two æras--the
first from Ridley to Field, or from Edward VI. to the commencement of
the latter third of the reign of James I, and the second ending with
Bull and Stillingfleet, we might characterize their comparative
excellences thus: That the divines of the first æra had a deeper, more
genial, and a more practical insight into the mystery of Redemption, in
the relation of man toward both the act and the author, namely, in all
the inchoative states, the regeneration and the operations of saving
grace generally;--while those of the second æra possessed clearer and
distincter views concerning the nature and necessity of Redemption, in
the relation of God toward man, and concerning the connection of
Redemption with the article of Tri-unity; and above all, that they
surpassed their predecessors in a more safe and determinate scheme of
the divine economy of the three persons in the one undivided Godhead.
This indeed, was mainly owing to Bishop Bull's masterly work 'De Fide
Nicæna', [2] which in the next generation Waterland so admirably
maintained, on the one hand, against the philosophy of the Arians,--the
combat ending in the death and burial of Arianism, and its descent and
'metempsychosis' into Socinianism, and thence again into modern
Unitarianism,--and on the other extreme, against the oscillatory creed
of Sherlock, now swinging to Tritheism in the recoil from Sabellianism,
and again to Sabellianism in the recoil from Tritheism.


Ib.

  First, we are to consider this fullness to have been in Christ, and
  then, from this fullness arose his merits; we can consider no merit in
  Christ himself before, whereby he should merit this fullness; for this
  fullness was in him before he merited any thing; and but for this
  fullness he had not so merited. 'Ille homo, ut in unitatem filii Dei
  assumeretur, unde meruit'? How did that man (says St. Augustine,
  speaking of Christ, as of the son of man), how did that man merit to
  be united in one person with the eternal Son of God? 'Quid egit ante?
  Quid credidit'? What had he done? Nay, what had he believed? Had he
  either faith or works before that union of both natures?

Dr. Donne and St. Augustine said this without offence; but I much
question whether the same would be endured now. That it is, however, in
the spirit of Paul and of the Gospel, I doubt not to affirm, and that
this great truth is obscured by what in my judgment is the
post-Apostolic 'Christopædia', I am inclined to think.


Ib.

  What canst thou imagine he could foresee in thee? a propensness, a
  disposition to goodness, when his grace should come? Either there is
  no such propensness, no such disposition in thee, or, if there be,
  even that propensness and disposition to the good use of grace, is
  grace; it is an effect of former grace, and his grace wrought before
  he saw any such propensness, any such disposition; grace was first,
  and his grace is his, it is none of thine.

One of many instances in dogmatic theology, in which the half of a
divine truth has passed into a fearful error by being mistaken for the
whole truth.


Ib. p. 6. D.

  God's justice required blood, but that blood is not spilt, but poured
  from that head to our hearts, into the veins and wounds of our own
  souls: there was blood shed, but no blood lost.


It is affecting to observe how this great man's mind sways and
oscillates between his reason, which demands in the word 'blood' a
symbolic meaning, a spiritual interpretation, and the habitual awe for
the letter; so that he himself seems uncertain whether he means the
physical lymph, 'serum,' and globules that trickled from the wounds
of the nails and thorns down the sides and face of Jesus, or the blood
of the Son of Man, which he who drinketh not cannot live. Yea, it is
most affecting to see the struggles of so great a mind to preserve its
inborn fealty to the reason under the servitude to an accepted article
of belief, which was, alas! confounded with the high obligations of
faith;--faith the co-adunation of the finite individual will with the
universal reason, by the submission of the former to the latter. To
reconcile redemption by the material blood of Jesus with the mind of the
spirit, he seeks to spiritualize the material blood itself in all men!
And a deep truth lies hidden even in this. Indeed the whole is a
profound subject, the true solution of which may best, God's grace
assisting, be sought for in the collation of Paul with John, and
specially in St. Paul's assertion that we are baptized into the death of
Christ, that we may be partakers of his resurrection and life. [3] It
was not on the visible cross, it was not directing attention to the
blood-drops on his temples and sides, that our blessed Redeemer said,
'This is my body', and 'this is my blood!


Ib. p. 9. A.

  But if we consider those who are in heaven, and have been so from the
  first minute of their creation, angels, why have they, or how have
  they any reconciliation? &c.

The history and successive meanings of the term 'angels' in the Old and
New Testaments, and the idea that shall reconcile all as so many several
forms, and as it were perspectives, of one and the same truth--this is
still a 'desideratum' in Christian theology.


Ib. C.

  For, at the general resurrection, (which is rooted in the resurrection
  of Christ, and so hath relation to him) the creature 'shall be
  delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of
  the children of God; for which the whole creation groans, and travails
  in pain yet'. (Rom. viii. 21.) This deliverance then from this
  bondage the whole creature hath by Christ, and that is their
  reconciliation. And then are we reconciled by the blood of his cross,
  when having crucified ourselves by a true repentance, we receive the
  real reconciliation in his blood in the sacrament. But the most proper
  and most literal sense of these words, is, that all things in heaven
  and earth be reconciled to God (that is, to his glory, to a fitter
  disposition to glorify him) by being reconciled to another in Christ;
  that in him, as head of the church, they in heaven, and we upon earth,
  be united together as one body in the communion of saints.

A very meagre and inadequate interpretation of this sublime text. The
philosophy of life, which will be the 'corona et finis coronans' of the
sciences of comparative anatomy and zoology, will hereafter supply a
fuller and nobler comment.


Ib. p. 9. A. and B.

  The blood of the sacrifices was brought by the high priest 'in sanctum
  sanctorum', into the place of greatest holiness; but it was brought
  but once, 'in festo expiationis', in the feast of expiation; but in
  the other parts of the temple it was sprinkled every day. The blood of
  the cross of Christ Jesus hath had this effect 'in sancto sanctorum',
  &c. ... '(to)' Christ Jesus.

A truly excellent and beautiful paragraph.


Ib. C.

  If you will mingle a true religion, and a false religion, there is no
  reconciling of God and Belial in this text. For the adhering of
  persons born within the Church of Rome to the Church of Rome, our law
  says nothing to them if they come; but for reconciling to the Church
  of Rome, for persons born within the allegiance of the king, or for
  persuading of men to be so reconciled, our law hath called by an
  infamous and capital name of treason, and yet every tavern and
  ordinary is full of such traitors, &c.

A strange transition from the Gospel to the English statute-book! But I
may observe, that if this statement could be truly made under James I,
there was abundantly ampler ground for it in the following reign. And
yet with what bitter spleen does Heylyn, Laud's creature, arraign the
Parliamentarians for making the same complaint!


Serm. II. Isaiah vii. 14. p. 11.

The fear of giving offence, especially to good men, of whose faith in
all essential points we are partakers, may reasonably induce us to be
slow and cautious in making up our minds finally on a religious
question, and may, and ought to, influence us to submit our conviction
to repeated revisals and rehearings. But there may arrive a time of such
perfect clearness of view respecting the particular point, as to
supersede all fear of man by the higher duty of declaring the whole
truth in Jesus. Therefore, having now overpassed six-sevenths of the
ordinary period allotted to human life,--resting my whole and sole hope
of salvation and immortality on the divinity of Christ, and the
redemption by his cross and passion, and holding the doctrine of the
Triune God as the very ground and foundation of the Gospel faith,--I
feel myself enforced by conscience to declare and avow, that, in my
deliberate judgment, the 'Christopædia' prefixed to the third Gospel and
concorporated with the first, but, according to my belief, in its
present form the latest of the four, was unknown to, or not recognized
by, the Apostles Paul and John; and that, instead of supporting the
doctrine of the Trinity, and the Filial Godhead of the Incarnate Word,
as set forth by John i 1, and by Paul, it, if not altogether
irreconcilable with this faith, doth yet greatly weaken and bedim its
evidence; and that, by the too palpable contradictions between the
narrative in the first Gospel and that in the third, it has been a
fruitful magazine of doubts respecting the historic character of the
Gospels themselves. I have read most of the criticisms on this text, and
my impression is, that no learned Jew can be expected to receive the
common interpretation as the true primary sense of the words. The
severely literal Aquila renders the Hebrew word [Greek: neanis]. But
were it asked of me: Do you then believe our Lord to have been the Son
of Mary by Joseph? I reply: It is a point of religion with me to have no
belief one way or the other. I am in this way like St. Paul, more than
content not to know Christ himself [Greek: katà sárka]. It is enough for
me to know that the Son of God 'became flesh', [Greek: sàrx egéneto
genómenos ek gynaikòs] [4] and more than this, it appears to me, was
unknown to the Apostles, or, if known, not taught by them as
appertaining to a saving faith in Christ.

October 1831.


Note the affinity in sound of 'son' and 'sun', 'Sohn' and 'Sonne', which
is not confined to the Saxon and German, or the Gothic dialects
generally. And observe 'conciliare versöhnen=confiliare, facere esse cum
filio', one with the Son.


Ib. p. 17. B.

  It is a singular testimony, how acceptable to God that state of
  virginity is. He does not dishonor physic that magnifies health; nor
  does he dishonor marriage, that praises virginity; let them embrace
  that state that can, &c.

One of the sad relics of Patristic super-moralization, aggravated by
Papal ambition, which clung to too many divines, especially to those of
the second or third generation after Luther. Luther himself was too
spiritual, of too heroic faith, to be thus blinded by the declamations
of the Fathers, whom, with the exception of Augustine, he held in very
low esteem.


Ib. D.


  And Helvidius said, she had children after.


'Annon Scriptura ipsa'? And a 'heresy,' too! I think I might safely put
the question to any serious, spiritual-minded, Christian: What one
inference tending to edification, in the discipline of will, mind, or
affections, he can draw from the speculations of the last two or three
pages of this Sermon respecting Mary's pregnancy and parturition?
_Can_--I write it emphatically--_can_ such points appertain to our faith
as Christians, which every parent would decline speaking of before a
family, and which, if the questions were propounded by another in the
presence of my daughter, aye, or even of my, no less, in mind and
imagination, innocent wife, I should resent as an indecency?


Serm. III. Gal. iv. 4, 5. p. 20.

  'God sent forth his Son made of a woman'.


I never can admit that [Greek: genómenon] and [Greek: egéneto] in St.
Paul and St. John are adequately, or even rightly, rendered by the
English 'made.'


Ib. p. 21, A.

  What miserable revolutions and changes, what downfalls, what
  break-necks and precipitations may we justly think ourselves ordained
  to, if we consider, that in our coming into this world out of our
  mothers' womb, we do not make account that a child comes right, except
  it come with the head forward, and thereby prefigure that headlong
  falling into calamities which it must suffer after?


The taste for these forced and fantastic analogies, Donne, with the
greater number of the learned prelatic divines from James I. to the
Restoration, acquired from that too great partiality for the Fathers,
from Irenæus to Bernard, by which they sought to distinguish themselves
from the Puritans.


Ib. C.

  That now they (the Jews,) express a kind of conditional acknowledgment
  of it, by this barbarous and inhuman custom of theirs, that they
  always keep in readiness the blood of some Christian, with which they
  anoint the body of any that dies amongst them, with these words; "If
  Jesus Christ were the Messias, then may the blood of this Christian
  avail thee to salvation!"

Is it possible that Donne could have given credit to this absurd legend!
It was, I am aware, not an age of critical 'acumen'; grit, bran,
and flour, were swallowed in the unsifted mass of their erudition. Still
that a man like Donne should have imposed on himself such a set of idle
tales, as he has collected in the next paragraph for facts of history,
is scarcely credible; that he should have attempted to impose them on
others, is most melancholy.


Ib. p. 22. D. E.

  He takes the name of the son of a woman, and 'wanes' the miraculous
  name of the son of a virgin.--Christ 'waned' the glorious name of Son
  of God, and the miraculous name of Son of a virgin too; which is not
  omitted to draw into doubt the perpetual virginity of the blessed
  virgin, the mother of Christ, &c.

Very ingenious; but likewise very presumptuous, this arbitrary
attribution of St. Paul's silence, and presumable ignorance of the
virginity of Mary, to Christ's own determination to have the fact passed
over.

N.B. Is 'wane' a misprint for 'wave' or 'waive?' It occurs so often, as
to render its being an 'erratum' improbable; yet I do not remember
to have met elsewhere 'wane' used for 'decline' as a verb active.


Ib. p. 23. A.

  If there were reason for it, it were no miracle.

The announcement of the first comet, that had ever been observed, might
excite doubt in the mind of an astronomer, to whom, from the place where
he lived, it had not been visible. But his reason could have been no
objection to it. Had God pleased, all women might have conceived,
[Greek: aneu tou andròs], as many of the 'polypi' and 'planariæ' do. Not
on any such ground do I suspend myself on this as an article of faith;
but because I doubt the evidence.


Ib. p. 25. A--E.

  Though we may think thus in the law of reason, yet, &c.

It is, and has been, a misfortune, a grievous and manifold loss and
hindrance for the interests of moral and spiritual truth, that even our
best and most vigorous theologians and philosophers of the age from
Edward VI. to James II. so generally confound the terms, and so too
often confound the subjects themselves, reason and understanding; yet
the diversity, the difference in kind, was known to, and clearly
admitted by, many of them,--by Hooker for instance, and it is implied in
the whole of Bacon's 'Novum Organum'. Instead of the 'law of reason,'
Donne meant, and ought to have said, 'judging according to the ordinary
presumptions of the understanding,' that is, the faculty which,
generalizing particular experiences, judges of the future by analogy to
the past.

Taking the words, however, in their vulgar sense, I most deliberately
protest against all the paragraphs in this page, from A to E, and should
cite them, with a host of others, as sad effects of the confusion of the
reason and the understanding, and of the consequent abdication of the
former, instead of the bounden submission of the latter to a higher
light. Faith itself is but an act of the will, assenting to the reason
on its own evidence without, and even against, the understanding. This
indeed is, I fully agree, to be brought into captivity to the faith. [5]


Ib. p. 26. A. B.

  And therefore to be 'under the Law,' signifies here thus much; to be a
  debtor to the law of nature, to have a testimony in our hearts and
  consciences, that there lies a law upon us, which we have no power in
  ourselves to perform, &c.


This exposition of the term 'law' in the epistles of St. Paul is most
just and important. The whole should be adopted among the notes to the
epistle to the Romans, in every Bible printed with notes.


Ib. p. 27. A.

  And this was his first work, 'to redeem,' to vindicate them from the
  usurper, to deliver them from the intruder, to emancipate them from
  the tyrant, to cancel the covenant between hell and them, and restore
  them so far to their liberty, as that they might come to their first
  master, if they would; this was 'redeeming.'

There is an absurdity in the notion of a finite divided from, and
superaddible to, the infinite,--of a particular 'quantum' of power
separated from, not included in, omnipotence, or all-power. But, alas!
we too generally use the terms that are meant to express the absolute,
as mere comparatives taken superlatively. In one thing only are we
permitted and bound to assert a diversity, namely, in God and 'Hades',
the good and the evil will. This awful mystery, this truth, at once
certain and incomprehensible, is at the bottom of all religion; and to
exhibit this truth free from the dark phantom of the Manicheans, or the
two co-eternal and co-ordinate principles of good and evil, is the glory
of the Christian religion.

But this mysterious dividuity of the good and the evil will, the will of
the spirit and the will of the flesh, must not be carried beyond the
terms 'good' and 'evil.' There can be but one good will--the spirit in
all;--and even so, all evil wills are one evil will, the devil or evil
spirit. But then the One exists for us as finite intelligences,
necessarily in a two-fold relation, universal and particular. The same
Spirit within us pleads to the Spirit as without us; and in like manner
is every evil mind in communion with the evil spirit. But, O comfort!
the good alone is the actual, the evil essentially potential. Hence the
devil is most appropriately named the 'tempter,' and the evil hath its
essence in the will: it cannot pass out of it. Deeds are called evil in
reference to the individual will expressed in them; but in the great
scheme of Providence they are, only as far as they are good, coerced
under the conditions of all true being; and the devil is the drudge of
the All-good.


Serm. IV. Luke ii. 29, 30. p. 29.
Ib. p. 30. B.

  We shall consider that that preparation, and disposition, and
  acquiescence, which Simeon had in his epiphany, in his visible seeing
  of Christ then, is offered to us in this epiphany, in this
  manifestation and application of Christ in the sacrament; and that
  therefore every penitent, and devout, and reverent, and worthy
  receiver hath had in that holy action his 'now'; there are all things
  accomplished to him; and his 'for, for his eyes have seen his
  salvation'; and so may be content, nay glad, 'to depart in peace'.


O! would that Donne, or rather that Luther before him, had carried out
this just conception to its legitimate consequences;--that as the
sacrament of the Eucharist is the epiphany for as many as receive it in
faith, so the crucifixion, resurrection, and ascension of Christ himself
in the flesh, were the epiphanies, the sacramental acts and 'phænomena'
of the 'Deus patiens', the visible words of the invisible Word that was
in the beginning, symbols in time and historic fact of the redemptive
functions, passions, and procedures of the Lamb crucified from the
foundation of the world;--the incarnation, cross, and passion,--in
short, the whole life of Christ in the flesh, dwelling a man among men,
being essential and substantive parts of the process, the total of which
they represented; and on this account proper symbols of the acts and
passions of the Christ dwelling in man, as the Spirit of truth, and for
as many as in faith have received him, in Seth and Abraham no less
effectually than in John and Paul! For this is the true definition of a
symbol, as distinguished from the thing, on the one hand, and from a
mere metaphor, or conventional exponent of a thing, on the other. Had
Luther mastered this great idea, this master-truth, he would never have
entangled himself in that most mischievous Sacramentary controversy, or
had to seek a murky hiding-hole in the figment of Consubstantiation.


Ib. B. C.

  In the first part, then ... More he asks not, less he takes not for
  any man, upon any pretence of any unconditional decree.

A beautiful paragraph, well worth extracting, aye, and re-preaching.


Ib. p. 34. E.

  When thou comest to this seal of thy peace, the sacrament, pray that
  God will give thee that light that may direct and establish thee in
  necessary and fundamental things; that is, the light of faith to see
  that the Body and Blood of Christ is applied to thee in that action;
  but for the manner, how the Body and Blood of Christ is there, wait
  his leisure, if he have not yet manifested that to thee: grieve not at
  that, wonder not at that, press not for that; for he hath not
  manifested that, not the way, not the manner of his presence in the
  Sacrament to the Church.


O! I have ever felt, and for many years thought that this 'rem credimus,
modum nescimus,' is but a poor evasion. It seems to me an attempt so to
admit an irrational proposition as to have the credit of denying it, or
to separate an irrational proposition from its irrationality. I admit 2
+ 2 = 5; how I do not pretend to know, but in some way not in
contradiction to the multiplication table. To spiritual operations the
very term 'mode' is perhaps inapplicable, for these are immediate. To
the linking of this with that, of A. with Z. by 'intermedia,' the term
'mode,'--the question 'how?' is properly applied. The assimilation of
the spirit of a man to the Son of God, to God as the Divine
Humanity,--this spiritual transubstantiation, like every other process
of operative grace, is necessarily modeless. The whole question is
concerning the transmutation of the sensible elements. Deny this, and to
what does the 'modum nescimus' refer? We cannot ask how that is done,
which we declare not done at all. Admit this transmutation, and you
necessarily admit by implication the Romish dogma, of the separation of
a sensible thing from the sensible accidents which constitute all we
ever meant by the thing. To rationalize this figment of his church,
Bossuet has recourse to Spinosism, and dares make God the substance and
sole 'ens reale' of all body, and by this very 'hypothesis' baffles his
own end, and does away all miracle in the particular instance.


Ib. p. 35. B.

  When I pray in my chamber, I build a temple there that hour; and that
  minute, when I cast out a prayer in the street, I build a temple
  there; and when my soul prays without any voice, my very body is then
  a temple.

Good; but it would be better to regard solitary, family, and templar
devotion as distinctions in sort, rather than differences in degree. All
three are necessary.


Ib. E.

  And that more fearful occasion of coming, when they came only to elude
  the law, and proceeding in their treacherous and traitorous religion
  in their heart, and yet communicating with us, draw God himself into
  their conspiracies; and to mock us, make a mock of God, and his
  religion too.

What, then, was their guilt, who by terror and legal penalties tempted
their fellow Christians to this treacherous mockery? Donne should have
asked himself that question.


Serm. V. Exod. iv. 13. p. 39.

Ib. p. 39. C. D.

  It hath been doubted, and disputed, and denied too, that this text,
  'O my Lord, send I pray thee by the hand of him whom thou wilt
  send', hath any relation to the sending of the Messiah, to the
  coming of Christ, to Christmas day; yet we forbear not to wait upon
  the ancient Fathers, and as they said, to say, that Moses 'at
  last' determines all in this, 'O my Lord', &c. It is a work,
  next to the great work of the redemption of the whole world, to redeem
  Israel out of Egypt; and therefore do both works at once, put both
  into one hand, and 'mitte quem missurus es, Send him whom I know
  thou wilt send'; him, whom, pursuing thine own decree, 'thou
  shouldest send'; send Christ, send him now, to redeem Israel from
  Egypt.

This is one of the happier accommodations of the 'gnosis', that is,
the science of detecting the mysteries of faith in the simplest texts of
the Old Testament history, to the contempt or neglect of the literal and
contextual sense. It was, I conceive, in part at least, this
'gnosis', and not knowledge, as our translation has it, that St.
Paul warns against, and most wisely, as puffing up, inflating the heart
with self-conceit, and the head with idle fancies.


Ib. E.

  But as a thoughtful man, a pensive, a considerative man, that stands
  still for a while with his eyes fixed upon the ground before his feet,
  when he casts up his head, hath presently, instantly the sun or the
  heavens for his object; he sees not a tree, nor a house, nor a steeple
  by the way, but as soon as his eye is departed from the earth where it
  was long fixed, the next thing he sees is the sun or the heavens;--so
  when Moses had fixed himself long upon the consideration of his own
  insufficiency for this service, when he took his eye from that low
  piece of ground, himself, considered as he was then, he fell upon no
  tree, no house, no steeple, no such consideration as this--God may
  endow me, improve me, exalt me, enable me, qualify me with faculties
  fit for this service, but his first object was that which presented an
  infallibility with it, Christ Jesus himself, the Messias himself, &c.

Beautifully imagined, and happily applied.


Ib. p. 40. B.

  That 'germen Jehovæ', as the prophet Esay calls Christ, that offspring
  of Jehova, that bud, that blossom, that fruit of God himself, the Son
  of God, the Messiah, the Redeemer, Christ Jesus, grows upon every tree
  in this paradise, the Scripture; for Christ was the occasion before,
  and is the consummation after, of all Scripture.


If this were meant to the exclusion or neglect of the primary sense,--if
we are required to believe that the sacred writers themselves had such
thoughts present to their minds,--it would, doubtless, throw the doors
wide open to every variety of folly and fanaticism. But it may admit of
a safe, sound, and profitable use, if we consider the Bible as one work,
intended by the Holy Spirit for the edification of the Church in all
ages, and having, as such, all its parts synoptically interpreted, the
eldest by the latest, the last by the first, and the middle by both.
Moses, or David, or Jeremiah (we might in this view affirm) meant so and
so, according to the context, and the light under which, and the
immediate or proximate purposes for which, he wrote: but we, who command
the whole scheme of the great dispensation, may see a higher and deeper
sense, of which the literal meaning was a symbol or type; and this we
may justifiably call the sense of the spirit.


Ib. p. 41. B.

  So in our liturgy 'we stand up at the profession of the creed'
  thereby to declare to God and his Church our readiness to stand to,
  and our readiness to proceed in, that profession.


Another Church might sit down, thereby denoting a resolve to abide in
this profession. These things are indifferent; but charity, love of
peace, and on indifferent points to prefer another's liking to our own,
and to observe an order once established for order's sake,--these are
not indifferent.


Ib. p. 42. C.

This paragraph is excellent. Alas! how painfully applicable it is to
some of our day!


Ib. p. 46. C.

  Howsoever all intend that this is a name that denotes essence, being:
  Being is the name of God, and of God only.

Rather, I should say, 'the eternal antecedent of being;' 'I that shall
be in that I will to be'; the absolute will; the ground of being; the
self-affirming 'actus purissimus'.


Serm. VI. Isaiah liii. 1. p. 52.

A noble sermon in thought and diction.


Ib. p. 59. E.

  Therefore we have a clearer light than this; 'firmiorem propheticum
  sermonem', says St. Peter; 'we have a more sure word of the prophets';
  that is, as St. Augustine reads that place, 'clariorem', a more
  manifest, a more evident, declaration in the prophets, than in nature,
  of the will of God towards man, &c.


The sense of this text, as explained by the context, seems to me
this;--that, in consequence of the fulfilment of so large a proportion
of the oracles, the Christian Church has not only the additional light
given by the teaching and miracles of Christ, but even the light
vouchsafed to the old Church (the prophetic) stronger and clearer.


Ib. p. 60. A.

  He spake personally, and he spake aloud, in the declaration of
  miracles; but 'quis credidit auditui Filii?' Who believed even his
  report? Did they not call his preaching sedition, and call his
  miracles conjuring? Therefore, we have a clearer, that is, a nearer
  light than the written Gospel, that is, the Church.

True; yet he who should now venture to assert this truth, or even
contend for a co-ordinateness of the Church and the Written Word, must
bear to be thought a semi-Papist, an 'ultra' high-Churchman. Still the
truth is the truth.


Serm. VII. John x. 10. p. 62.

Since the Revolution in 1688 our Church has been chilled and starved too
generally by preachers and reasoners Stoic or Epicurean;--first, a sort
of pagan morality was substituted for the righteousness by faith, and
latterly, prudence or Paleyanism has been substituted even for morality.
A Christian preacher ought to preach Christ alone, and all things in him
and by him. If he find a dearth in this, if it seem to him a
circumscription, he does not know Christ, as the 'pleroma', the
fullness. It is not possible that there should be aught true, or seemly,
or beautiful, in thought, will, or deed, speculative or practical, which
may not, and which ought not to, be evolved out of Christ and the faith
in Christ;--no folly, no error, no evil to be exposed, or warred
against, which may not, and should not, be convicted and denounced from
its contrariancy and enmity to Christ. To the Christian preacher Christ
should be in all things, and all things in Christ: he should abjure
every argument that is not a link in the chain, of which Christ is the
staple and staple ring.


Ib. p. 64.

In this page Donne passes into rhetorical extravagance, after the manner
of too many of the Fathers from Tertullian to Bernard.


Ib. p. 66. A.

  Some of the later authors in the Roman Church ... have noted ('in
  several of the Fathers') some inclinations towards that opinion, that
  the devil retaining still his faculty of free-will, is therefore
  capable of repentance, and so of benefit by this coming of Christ.

If this be assumed,--namely, the free-will of the devil,--as a
consequence would indeed follow his capability of repenting, and the
possibility that he may repent. But then he is no longer what we mean by
the devil; he is no longer the evil spirit, but simply a wicked soul.


Ib. p. 68. C.

  As though God had said 'Qui sum', my name is 'I am'; yet in truth it
  is 'Qui ero', my name is 'I shall be'.

Nay, 'I will or shall be in that I will to be'. I am that only one who
is self-originant, 'causa sui', whose will must be contemplated as
antecedent in idea to or deeper than his own co-eternal being. But
'antecedent,' 'deeper,' &c. are mere 'vocabula impropria', words of
accommodation, that may suggest the idea to a mind purified from the
intrusive phantoms of space and time, but falsify and extinguish the
truth, if taken as adequate exponents.

Ib. p. 69. C.

  We affirm that it is not only as impious and irreligious a thing, but
  as senseless and as absurd a thing, to deny that the Son of God hath
  redeemed the world, as to deny that God hath created the world.

A bold but a true saying. The man who, cannot see the redemptive agency
in the creation has but a dim apprehension of the creative power.


Ib. D. E. p. 70. A.

These paragraphs exhibit a noble instance of giving importance to the
single words of a text, each word by itself a pregnant text. Here, too,
lies the excellence, the imitable, but alas! unimitated, excellence of
our divines from Elizabeth to William III.


Ib. D.

O, that our clergy did but know and see that their tithes and glebes
belong to them as officers and functionaries of the nationalty,--as
clerks, and not exclusively as theologians, and not at all as ministers
of the Gospel;--but that they are likewise ministers of the Church of
Christ, and that their claims and the powers of that Church are no more
alienated or affected by their being at the same time the established
clergy, than they are by the common coincidence of being justices of the
peace, or heirs to an estate, or stockholders! [6] The Romish divines
placed the Church above the Scriptures; our present divines give it no
place at all.

But Donne and his great contemporaries had not yet learnt to be afraid
of announcing and enforcing the claims of the Church, distinct from, and
coordinate with, the Scriptures. This is one evil consequence, though
most un-necessarily so, of the union of the Church of Christ with the
national Church, and of the claims of the Christian pastor and preacher
with the legal and constitutional rights and revenues of the officers of
the national clerisy. Our clergymen in thinking of their legal rights,
forget those rights of theirs which depend on no human law at all.


Ib. p. 71. A.

  This is the difference between God's mercy and his judgments, that
  sometimes his judgments may he plural, complicated, enwrapped in one
  another; but his mercies are always so, and cannot be otherwise.

A just sentiment beautifully expressed.


Ib. C.

  Whereas the Christian religion is, as Gregory Nazianzen says,
  'simplex et nuda, nisi prave in artem difficillimam
  converteretur': it is a plain, an easy, a perspicuous truth.

A religion of ideas, spiritual truths, or truth-powers,--not of notions
and conceptions, the manufacture of the understanding,--is therefore
'simplex et nuda', that is, immediate; like the clear blue heaven of
Italy, deep and transparent, an ocean unfathomable in its depth, and yet
ground all the way. Still as meditation soars upwards, it meets the
arched firmament with all its suspended lamps of light. O, let not the
'simplex et nuda' of Gregory be perverted to the Socinian, 'plain and
easy for the meanest understandings!' The truth in Christ, like the
peace of Christ, passeth all understanding. If ever there was a
mischievous misuse of words, the confusion of the terms, 'reason' and
'understanding,' 'ideas' and 'notions,' or 'conceptions,' is most
mischievous; a Surinam toad with a swarm of toadlings sprouting out of
its back and sides.


Serm. VIII. Mat. v. 16. p. 77.

Ib. C.

  Either of the names of this day were text enough for a sermon,
  Purification or Candlemas. Join we them together, and raise we only
  this one note from both, that all true purification is in the light,
  &c.


The illustration of the name of the day contained in the first two or
three paragraphs of this sermon would be censured as quaint by our
modern critics. Would to heaven we had but even a few preachers capable
of such quaintnesses!


Ib. D.

  Every good work hath faith for the root; but every faith hath not good
  works for the fruit thereof.

Faith, that is, fidelity--the fealty of the finite will and
understanding to the reason, 'the light that lighteth every man that
cometh into the world', as one with, and representative of, the absolute
will, and to the ideas or truths of the pure reason, the supersensuous
truths, which in relation to the finite will, and as meant to determine
the will, are moral laws, the voice and dictates of the
conscience;--this faith is properly a state and disposition of the will,
or rather of the whole man, the I, or finite will, self-affirmed. It is
therefore the ground, the root, of which the actions, the works, the
believings, as acts of the will in the understanding, are the trunk and
the branches. But these must be in the light. The disposition to see
must have organs, objects, direction, and an outward light. The three
latter of these our Lord gives to his disciples in this blessed sermon
on the Mount, preparatorily, and, as Donne rightly goes on to observe,
presupposing faith as the ground and root. Indeed the whole of this and
the next page affords a noble specimen, how a minister of the Church of
England should preach the doctrine of good works, purified from the
poison of the practical Romish doctrine of works, as the mandioc is
evenomated by fire, and rendered safe, nutritious, a bread of life. To
Donne's exposition the heroic Solifidian, Martin Luther himself, would
have subscribed, hand and heart.


Ib. p. 78. C.

  And therefore our latter men of the Reformation are not to be blamed,
  who for the most, pursuing St. Cyril's interpretation, interpret this
  universal 'light that lighteneth every man' to be the light of
  nature.


The error here, and it is a grievous error, consists in the word
'nature.' There is, there can be, no light of nature: there may be a
light in or upon nature; but this is the light that shineth down into
the darkness, that is, the nature, and the darkness comprehendeth it
not. All ideas, or spiritual truths, are supernatural.


Ib. p. 79.

Throughout this page, Donne rather too much plays the rhetorician. If
the faith worketh the works, what is true of the former must be equally
affirmed of the latter;--'causa causæ causa causati'. Besides, he falls
into something like a confusion of faith with belief, taken as a
conviction or assent of the judgment. The faith and the righteousness of
a Christian are both alike his, and not his--the faith of Christ in him,
the righteousness in and for him. 'I am crucified with Christ:
nevertheless I live; yet, not I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life
which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me'. [7]

Donne was a truly great man; but, after all, he did not possess that
full, steady, deep, and yet comprehensive, insight into the nature of
faith and works which was vouchsafed to Martin Luther. Donne had not
attained to the reconciling of distinctity with unity,--ours, yet God's;
God's, yet ours.


Ib. D.

  'Velle et nolle nostrum est', to assent, or to dis-assent, is our own.

Is not this, even with the saving afterwards, too nakedly expressed?


Ib.

  And certainly our works are more ours than our faith is; and man
  concurs otherwise in the acting and perpetration of a good work, than
  he doth in the reception and admission of faith.

Why? Because Donne confounds the act of faith with the assent of the
fancy and understanding to certain words and conceptions. Indeed, with
all my reverence for Dr. Donne, I must warn against the contents of this
page, as scarcely tenable in logic, unsound in metaphysics, and unsafe,
slippery divinity; and principally in that he confounds faith--
essentially an act, the fundamental work of the Spirit--with belief,
which is then only good when it is the effect and accompaniment of faith.


Ib. p. 80. D.

  Because things good in their institution may he depraved in their
  practice--'ergone nihil ceremoniarum rudioribus dabitur, ad juvandam
  eorum imperitiam?'


Some ceremonies may be for the conservation of order and civility, or to
prevent confusion and unseemliness; others are the natural or
conventional language of our feelings, as bending the knees, or bowing
the head; and to neither of these two sorts do I object. But as to the
'adjuvandam rudiorum imperitiam', I protest against all such ceremonies,
and the pretexts for them, 'in toto'. What? Can any ceremony be more
instructive than the words required to explain the ceremony? I make but
two exceptions, and those where the truths signified are so vital, so
momentous, that the very occasion and necessity of explaining the sign
are of the highest spiritual value. Yet, alas! to what gross and
calamitous superstitions have not even the visible signs in Baptism and
the Eucharist given occasion!


Ib. p. 81. E.

  Blessed St. Augustine reports, (if that epistle be St. Augustine's)
  that when himself was writing to St. Hierome, to know his opinion of
  the measure and quality of the joy and glory of heaven, suddenly in
  his chamber there appeared 'ineffabile lumen', says he, an
  unspeakable, an unexpressible light, ... and out of that light issued
  this voice, 'Hieronymi anima sum', &c.

The grave recital of this ridiculous legend is one instance of what I
have called the Patristic leaven in Donne, who assuredly had no belief
himself in the authenticity of this letter. But yet it served a purpose.
As to Master Conradus, just above, who could read at night by the light
at his fingers' ends, he must of course have very recently been shaking
hands with Lucifer.


Ib. p. 83. D.

  Eve's recognition upon the birth of her first son, 'Cain I have
  gotten, I possess a man from the Lord.'

'I have gotten the Jehovah-man', is, I believe, the true rendering
and sense of the Hebrew words. Eve, full of the promise, supposed her
first-born, the first-born on earth, to be the promised deliverer.


                                   Ib. p. 84. D. E.
                                   Serm. IX. Rom. xiii. 7. p. 86,
Admirable passages.                Ib. p. 90. A.

                                      That soul that is accustomed, &c.

                                   Ib. p. 94. A. B.



Serm. XII. Mat. v. 2. p. 112.
Ib. B. C. D.

The disposition of our Church divines, under James I, to bring back the
stream of the Reformation to the channel and within the banks formed in
the first six centuries of the Church, and their alienation from the
great patriarchs of Protestantism, Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, and
others, who held the Fathers of the 'ante'-Papal Church, with
exception of Augustine, in light esteem, this disposition betrays itself
here and in many other parts of Donne. For here Donne plays the Jesuit,
disguising the truth, that even as early as the third century the Church
had begun to Paganize Christianity, under the pretext, and no doubt in
the hope, of Christianizing Paganism. The mountain would not go to
Mahomet, and therefore Mahomet went to the mountain.


Ib. p. 115. A.

An excellent passage.


Ib. p. 117. E.

  And therefore when the prophet says, 'Quis sapiens, et intelliget hæc?
  Who is so wise as to find out this way'? he places this cleanness
  which we inquire after in wisdom. What is wisdom?

The primitive Church appropriated the name to the third 'hypostasis' of
the Trinity; hence 'Sancta Sophia' became the distinctive name of the
Holy Ghost; and the temple at Constantinople, dedicated by Justinian to
the Holy Ghost, is called the Church--alas! now the mosque--of Santa
Sophia. Now this suggests, or rather implies, a far better and more
precise definition of wisdom than Donne's. The distinctive title of the
Father, as the Supreme Will, is the Good; that of the only-begotten
Word, as the Supreme Reason, ('Ens Realissimum', [Greek: Ho_O N], the
Being) is the True; and the Spirit proceeding from the Good through the
True is the Wisdom. Goodness in the form of truth is wisdom. Wisdom is
the pure will, realizing itself intelligently, or the good manifesting
itself as the truth, and realized in the act. Wisdom, life, love,
beauty, the beauty of holiness, are all 'synonyma' of the Holy Spirit.

6, December, 1831.


Ib. p. 121. A.

  The Arians' opinion, that God the Father only was invisible, but the
  Son 'and the Holy Ghost' might be seen.

Here we have an instance, one of many, of the inconveniences and
contradictions that arise out of the assumed contrary essences of body
and soul; both substances, and independent of each other, yet so
absolutely diverse as that the one is to be defined by the negation of
the other.


Serm. XIII. Job xvi. 17, 18, 19. p. 127.
Ib. p. 129. A. B. C.
Ib. pp. 134. 135.

Truly excellent.


Serm. XV. 1 Cor. xv. 26. p. 144.
Ib. D.

  Who, then, is this enemy? an enemy that may thus far think himself
  equal to God, that as no man ever saw God, and lived; so no man ever
  saw this enemy, and lived; for it is death.

This borders rather too closely on the Irish Franciscan's conclusion to
his sermon of thanksgiving: "Above all, brethren, let us thankfully laud
and extol God's transcendant mercy in putting death at the end of life,
and thereby giving us all time for repentance!"

Dr. Donne was an eminently witty man in a very witty age; but to the
honour of his judgment let it be said, that though his great wit is
evinced in numberless passages, in a few only is it shown off. This
paragraph is one of those rare exceptions.

N. B. Nothing in Scripture, nothing in reason, commands or authorizes us
to assume or suppose any bodiless creature. It is the incommunicable
attribute of God. But all bodies are not flesh, nor need we suppose that
all bodies are corruptible. 'There are bodies celestial'. In the three
following paragraphs of this sermon, we trace wild fantastic positions
grounded on the arbitrary notion of man as a mixture of heterogeneous
components, which Des Cartes shortly afterwards carried into its
extremes. On this doctrine the man is a mere phenomenal result, a sort
of brandy-sop or toddy-punch. It is a doctrine unsanctioned by, and
indeed inconsistent with, the Scriptures. It is not true that body
'plus' soul makes man. Man is not the 'syntheton' or composition of body
and soul, as the two component units. No; man is the unit, the
'prothesis', and body and soul are the two poles, the positive and
negative, the 'thesis' and 'antithesis' of the man; even as attraction
and repulsion are the two poles in and by which one and the same magnet
manifests itself.


Ib. p. 146. B.

  For it is not so great a depopulation to translate a city from
  merchants to husbandmen, from shops to ploughs, as it is from many
  husbandmen to one shepherd; and yet that hath been often done.

For example, in the Highlands of Scotland in our own day.


Ib. p. 148. A.

  The ashes of an oak in the chimney are no epitaph of that oak, to tell
  me how high or how large that was. It tells me not what flocks it
  sheltered while it stood, nor what men it hurt when it fell. The dust
  of great persons' graves is speechless too, it says nothing, it
  distinguishes nothing. As soon the dust of a wretch whom thou wouldst
  not, as of a prince whom thou couldst not, look upon, will trouble
  thine eyes, if the wind blow it thither; and when a whirlwind hath
  blown the dust of the churchyard unto the church, and the man sweeps
  out the dust of the church into the church-yard, who will undertake to
  sift those dusts again, and to pronounce;--this is the patrician, this
  is the noble, flour, and this the yeomanly, this the plebeian, bran.
  [8]


Very beautiful indeed.


Ib. p. 149. C.

  But when I lie under the hands of that enemy, that hath reserved
  himself to the last, to my last bed; then when I shall be able to stir
  no limb in any other measure than a fever or a palsy shall shake them;
  when everlasting darkness shall have an inchoation in the present
  dimness of mine eyes, and the everlasting gnashing in the present
  chattering of my teeth, and the everlasting worm in the present
  gnawing of the agonies of my body and anguishes of my mind; when the
  last enemy shall watch my remediless body, and my disconsolate soul
  there,--there, where not the physician in his way, perchance not the
  priest in his, shall be able to give any assistance; and when he hath
  sported himself with my misery, &c.

This is powerful; but is too much in the style of the monkish preachers:
'Papam redolet'. Contrast with this Job's description of death, [9] and
St. Paul's 'sleep in the Lord'.


Ib. p. 150. A.

  Neither doth Calvin carry those emphatical words which are so often
  cited for a proof of the last resurrection,--'that he knows his
  Redeemer lives, that he knows he shall stand the last man upon earth,
  that though his body be destroyed, yet in his flesh and with his eyes
  shall he see God'--to any higher sense than so, that how low soever he
  be brought, to what desperate state soever he be reduced in the eyes
  of the world, yet he assures himself of a resurrection, a reparation,
  a restitution to his former bodily health, and worldly fortune which
  he had before. And such a resurrection we all know Job had.

I incline to Calvin's opinion, but am not decided. 'After my skin', must
be rendered 'according to, or as far as my skin is concerned.' 'Though
the flies and maggots in my ulcers have destroyed my skin, yet still,
and in my flesh, I shall see God as my Redeemer'. Now St. Paul says,
that flesh and blood cannot ([Greek: sàrx kaì aima--ou dynantai])
inherit the kingdom of heaven, that is, the spiritual world. Besides how
is the passage, as commonly interpreted, consistent with the numerous
expressions of doubt and even of despondency in Job's speeches? [10]


Ib. B. C. (Ezekiel's vision xxxvii.)

I cannot but think that Dr. Donne, by thus antedating the distinct
belief of the Jews in the resurrection, "which you all know already,"
destroys in great measure the force and sublimity of this vision.
Besides, it does not seem, in the common people at least, to have been
much more than a mongrel Egyptian-catacomb sort of faith, or rather
superstition.

_In fine_. This is one of Donne's least estimable discourses; the worst
sermon on the best text. Yet what a Donne-like passage is this that
follows!


P. 146. A.

  Let the whole world be in thy consideration as one house; and then
  consider in that, in the peaceful harmony of creatures, in the
  peaceful succession, and connexion of causes and effects, the peace of
  nature. Let this kingdom, where God hath blessed thee with a being, be
  the gallery, the best room of that house, and consider in the two
  walls of that gallery, the Church and the state, the peace of a royal
  and religious wisdom. Let thine own family be a cabinet in this
  gallery, and find in all the boxes thereof, in the several duties of
  wife and children, and servants, the peace of virtue, and of the
  father and mother of all virtues, active discretion, passive
  obedience; and then lastly, let thine own bosom be the secret box and
  reserve in this cabinet, and then the gallery of the best home that
  can be had, peace with the creature, peace in the Church, peace in the
  state, peace in thy house, peace in thy heart, is a fair model, and a
  lovely design even of the heavenly Jerusalem, which is _visio pacis_,
  where there is no object but peace.


Serm. XVI. John xi. 35. p. 153.
Ib. C.

  The Masorites (the Masorites are the critics upon the Hebrew Bible,
  the Old Testament) cannot tell us, who divided the chapters of the Old
  Testament into verses: neither can any other tell, who did it in the
  New Testament. [11]

How should the Masorites, when the Hebrew Scriptures were not as far as
we know divided into verses at all in their time? The Jews seem to have
adopted the invention from the Christians, who were led to it in the
construction of Concordances.


Ib. p. 154. E.

  If they killed Lazarus, had not Christ done enough to let them see
  that he could raise him again?


Malice, above all party-malice, is indeed a blind passion, but one can
scarcely conceive the chief priests such dolts as to think that Christ
could raise Lazarus again. Their malice blinded them as to the nature of
the incident, made them suppose a conspiracy between Jesus and the
family of Lazarus, a mock burial, in short; and this may be one, though
it is not, I think, the principal, reason for this greatest miracle
being omitted in the other Gospels.


Ib. p. 155. B.

  Christ might ungirt himself, and give more scope and liberty to his
  passions than any other man; both because he had no original sin
  within to drive him, &c.

How then is he said to have 'condemned sin in the flesh'? Without guilt,
without actual sin, assuredly he was; but [Greek: egéneto sàrx], and
what can we mean by original sin relatively to the flesh, but that man
is born with an animal life and a material organism that render him
temptible to evil, and which tends to dispose the life of the will to
contradict the light of the reason? Did St. Paul by [Greek: homoi_ómati
sarkòs hamartiás] mean a deceptive resemblance? [12]


Ib. D.

I can see no possible edification that can arise from these
_ultra_-Scriptural speculations respecting our Lord.


Ib. p. 157. A.

  Though the Godhead never departed from the carcase ... yet because the
  human soul was departed from it, he was no man.

Donne was a poor metaphysician; that is, he never closely questioned
himself as to the absolute meaning of his words. What did he mean by the
'soul?' what by the 'body?' [13]


Ib. D.

  And I know that there are authors of a middle nature, above the
  philosophers, and below the Scriptures, the Apocryphal books.

A whimsical instance of the disposition in the mind for every pair of
opposites to find an intermediate,--a 'mesothesis' for every 'thesis'
and 'antithesis'. Thus Scripture may be opposed to philosophy; and then
the Apocryphal books will be philosophy relatively to Scripture, and
Scripture relatively to philosophy.


Ib. p. 159. B.

  And therefore the same author (Epiphanius) says, that because they
  thought it an uncomely thing for Christ to weep for any temporal
  thing, some men have expunged and removed that verse out of St. Luke's
  Gospel, that 'Jesus, when he saw that city, wept'. [14]


This, by the by, rather indiscreetly lets out the liberties, which the
early Christians took with their sacred writings. Origen, who, in answer
to Celsus's reproach on this ground, confines the practice to the
heretics, furnishes proofs of the contrary himself in his own comments.


Ib. p. 161. D.

  That world, which finds itself in an authumn in itself, finds itself
  in a spring in our imaginations.

Worthy almost of Shakspeare!


Serm. XVII. Matt. xix. 17. p. 163.
Ib. E.

  The words are part of a dialogue, of a conference, between Christ and
  a man who proposed a question to him; to whom Christ makes an answer
  by way of another question, 'Why callest thou me good?' &c. In the
  words, and by occasion of them, we consider the text, the context, and
  the pretext; not as three equal parts of the building; but the
  context, as the situation and prospect of the house, the pretext, as
  the access and entrance into the house, and then the text itself, as
  the house itself, as the body of the building: in a word, in the text
  the words; in the context the occasion of the words; in the pretext
  the purpose, the disposition of him who gave the occasion.

What a happy example of elegant division of a subject! And so also the
'compendium' of Christianity in the preceding paragraph (D). Our great
divines were not ashamed of the learned discipline to which they had
submitted their minds under Aristotle and Tully, but brought the
purified products as sacrificial gifts to Christ. They baptized the
logic and manly rhetoric of ancient Greece.


Ib. p. 164. A. B.

Excellent illustration of fragmentary morality, in which each man takes
his choice of his virtues and vices.


Ib. D.

  Men perish with whispering sins, nay, with silent sins, sins that
  never tell the conscience they are sins, as often as with crying sins.


Yea, I almost doubt whether the truth here so boldly asserted is not of
more general necessity for ordinary congregations, than the denunciation
of the large sins that cannot remain 'in incognito'.


Ib. p. 165. A.

  'Venit procurrens, he came running'. Nicodemus came not so, Nicodemus
  durst not avow his coming, and therefore he came creeping, and he came
  softly, and he came seldom, and he came by night.


Ah! but we trust in God that he did in fact come. The adhesion, the
thankfulness, the love which arise and live after the having come,
whether from spontaneous liking, or from a beckoning hope, or from a
compelling good, are the truest 'criteria' of the man's Christianity.

Ib. B.

  When I have just reason to think my superiors would have it thus, this
  is music to my soul; when I hear them say they would have it thus,
  this is rhetoric to my soul; when I see their laws enjoin it to be
  thus, this is logic to my soul; but when I see them actually, really,
  clearly, constantly do thus, this is a demonstration to my soul, and
  demonstration is the powerfullest proof. The eloquence of inferiors is
  in words, the eloquence of superiors is in action.

A just representation, I doubt not, of the general feeling and principle
at the time Donne wrote. Men regarded the gradations of society as God's
ordinances, and had the elevation of a self-approving conscience in
every feeling and exhibition of respect for those of ranks superior to
their own. What a contrast with the present times! Is not the last
sentence beautiful? "The eloquence of inferiors is in words, the
eloquence of superiors is in action."


Ib. B. and C.

  He came to Christ, he ran to him; and when he was come, as St. Mark
  relates it, 'he fell upon his knees to Christ'. He stood not then
  Pharisaically upon his own legs, his own merits, though he had been a
  diligent observer of the commandments before, &c.


All this paragraph is an independent truth; but I doubt whether in his
desire to make every particle exemplary, to draw some Christian moral
from it, Donne has not injudiciously attributed, _quasi per prolepsin_,
merits inconsistent with the finale of a wealthy would-be proselyte. At
all events, a more natural and, perhaps, not less instructive
interpretation might be made of the sundry movements of this religiously
earnest and zealous admirer of Christ, and worshipper of Mammon. O, I
have myself known such!


Ib. D.

  He was no ignorant man, and yet he acknowledged that he had somewhat
  more to learn of Christ than he knew yet. Blessed are they that
  inanimate all their knowledge, consummate all in Christ Jesus, &c.

The whole paragraph is pure gold. Without being aware of this passage in
Donne, I expressed the same conviction, or rather declared the same
experience, in the appendix [15] to the Statesman's Manual. O! if only one
day in a week, Christians would consent to have the Bible as the only
book, and their minister's labour to make them find all substantial good
of all other books in their Bibles!


Ib. E.

  I remember one of the Panegyrics celebrates and magnifies one of the
  Roman emperors for this, that he would marry when he was young; that
  he would so soon confine and limit his pleasures, so soon determine
  his affections in one person.

It is surely some proof of the moral effect which Christianity has
produced, that in all Protestant countries, at least, a writer would be
ashamed to assign this as a ground of panegyric; as if promiscuous
intercourse with those of the other sex had been a natural good, a
privilege, which there was a great merit in foregoing! O! what do not
women owe to Christianity! As Christians only it is that they do, or
ordinarily can, cease to be things for men, instead of co-persons in one
spiritual union.


Ib. p. 166. A.

  But such is often the corrupt inordinateness of greatness, that it
  only carries them so much beyond other men, but not so much nearer to
  God.

Like a balloon, away from earth, but not a whit nearer the arch of
heaven. There is a praiseworthy relativeness and life in the morality of
our best old divines. It is not a cold law in brass or stone; but "this
I may and should think of my neighbour, this of a great man," &c.


Ib. p. 167. A.

  Christ was pleased to redeem this man from this error, and bring him
  to know truly what he was, that he was God. Christ therefore doth not
  rebuke this man, by any denying that he himself was good; for Christ
  doth assume that addition to himself, 'I am the good shepherd'.
  Neither doth God forbid that those good parts which are in men should
  be celebrated with condign praise. We see that God, as soon as he saw
  that any thing was good, he said so, he uttered it, he declared it,
  first of the light, and then of other creatures. God would be no
  author, no example of smothering the due praise of good actions. For
  surely that man hath no zeal to goodness in himself, that affords no
  praise to goodness in other men.


Very fine. But I think another--not, however, a different--view might be
taken respecting our Lord's intention in these words. The young noble,
who came to him, had many praiseworthy traits of character; but he
failed in the ultimate end and aim. What ought only to have been valued
by him as means, was loved, and had a worth given to it, as an end in
itself. Our Lord, who knew the hearts of men, instantly in the first
words applies himself to this, and takes the occasion of an ordinary
phrase of courtesy addressed to himself, to make the young man aware of
the difference between a mere relative good and that which is absolutely
good; that which may be called good, when regarded as a mean to good,
but which must not be mistaken for, or confounded with, that which is
good, and itself the end.


Ib. B. C. D.

All excellent, and D. most so. Thus, thus our old divines showed the
depth of their love and appreciation of the Scriptures, and thus led
their congregations to feel and see the same. Here is Donne's authority
(_Deus non est ens_, &c.) for what I have so earnestly endeavored to
show, that _Deus est ens super ens_, the ground of all being, but
therein likewise absolute Being, in that he is the eternal
self-affirmant, the I Am in that I Am; and that the key of this mystery
is given to us in the pure idea of the will, as the alone _Causa Sui_.

O! compare this manhood of our Church divinity with the feeble dotage of
the Paleyan school, the 'natural' theology, or watchmaking scheme, that
knows nothing of the maker but what can be proved out of the watch, the
unknown nominative case of the verb impersonal _fit--et natura est_; the
'it,' in short, in 'it rains,' 'it snows,' 'it is cold,' and the
like. When, after reading the biographies of Walton and his
contemporaries, I reflect on the crowded congregations, on the
thousands, who with intense interest came to their hour and two hour
long sermons, I cannot but doubt the fact of any true progression, moral
or intellectual, in the mind of the many. The tone, the matter, the
anticipated sympathies in the sermons of an age form the best moral
criterion of the character of that age.


Ib. E.

  His name of Jehova we admire with a reverence.

Say, rather, Jehova, his name. It is not so properly a name of God, as
God the Name,--God's name and God.


Ib. p. 169. A.

  Land, and money, and honour must be called goods, though but of
  fortune, &c.

We should distinguish between the conditions of our possessing goods and
the goods themselves. Health, for instance, is ordinarily a condition of
that working and rejoicing for and in God, which are goods in the end,
and of themselves. Health, competent fortune, and the like are good as
the negations of the preventives of good; as clear glass is good in
relation to the light, which it does not exclude. Health and ease
without the love of God are plate glass in the darkness.


Ib. p. 170.

Much of this page consists of play on words; as, that which is useful as
rain, and that which is of use as rain on a garden after drouth. There
is also much sophistry in it. Pain is not necessarily an ultimate evil.
As the mean of ultimate good, it may be a relative good; but surely that
which makes pain, anguish, heaviness necessary in order to good, must be
evil. And so the Scripture determines. They are the _wages of sin_; but
God's infinite mercy raises them into sacraments, means of grace. Sin is
the only absolute evil; God the only absolute good. But as myriads of
things are good relatively through participation of God, so are many
things evil as the fruits of evil. What is the apostasy, or fall of
spirits? That that which from the essential perfection of the Absolute
Good could not but be possible, that is, have a potential being, but
never ought to have been actual, did nevertheless strive to be
actual?--But this involved an impossibility; and it actualized only its
own potentiality.

What is the consequence of the apostasy? That no philosophy is possible
of man and nature but by assuming at once a zenith and a nadir, God and
'Hades'; and an ascension from the one through and with a condescension
from the other; that is, redemption by prevenient and then auxiliary
grace.


Ib. p. 171. B.

  So says St. Augustine, 'Audeo dicere', though it be boldly said, yet I
  must say it, 'utile esse cadere in aliquod manifestum peccatum', &c.

No doubt, a sound sense may be forced into these words: but why use
words, into which a sound sense must be forced? Besides, the subject is
too deep and too subtle for a sermon. In the two following paragraphs,
especially, Dr. Donne is too deep, and not deep enough. He treads
waters, and dangerous waters. N. B. The Familists.


Serm. XVIII. Acts, ii. 36. p. 175.
Ib. B.

I would paraphrase, or rather lead the way to this text, something as
follows:--

Truth is a common interest; it is every man's duty to convey it to his
brother, if only it be a truth that concerns or may profit him, and he
be competent to receive it. For we are not bound to say the truth, where
we know that we cannot convey it, but very probably may impart a
falsehood instead; no falsehoods being more dangerous than truths
misunderstood, nay, the most mischievous errors on record having been
half-truths taken as the whole.

But let it be supposed that the matter to be communicated is a fact of
general concernment, a truth of deep and universal interest, a momentous
truth involved in a most awe-striking fact, which all responsible
creatures are competent to understand, and of which no man can safely
remain in ignorance. Now this is the case with the matter, on which I am
about to speak; 'therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly,
that God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord
and Christ!'


Ib. p. 176. A. B. C.

True Christian love not only permits, but enjoins, courtesy. God
himself, says Donne, gave us the example.


Ib. p. 177. A. C. E.

All excellent, and E. of deeper worth. All that is wanting here is to
determine the true sense of 'knowing God,'--that sense in which it is
revealed that to know God is life ever-lasting.


Ib p. 178. A.

  Now the universality of this mercy hath God enlarged and extended very
  far, in that he proposes it even to our knowledge; 'sciant', let all
  know it. It is not only 'credant', let all believe it; for the
  infusing of faith is not in our power; but God hath put it in our
  power to satisfy their reason, &c.

A question is here affirmatively started of highest importance and of
deepest interest, that is, faith so distinguished from reason, 'credat'
from 'sciat', that the former is an infused grace 'not in our power;'
the latter an inherent quality or faculty, on which we are able to
calculate as man with man. I know not what to say to this. Faith seems
to me the coadunation of the individual will with the reason, enforcing
adherence alike of thought, act, and affection to the Universal Will,
whether revealed in the conscience, or by the light of reason, however
the same may contravene, or apparently contradict, the will and mind of
the flesh, the presumed experience of the senses and of the
understanding, as the faculty, or intelligential yet animal instinct, by
which we generalize the notices of the senses, and substantiate their
'spectra' or 'phænomena'. In this sense, therefore, and in this only, I
agree with Donne.

'No man cometh to Christ unless the' 'Father lead him'. The corrupt will
cannot, without prevenient as well as auxiliary grace, be unitively
subordinated to the reason, and again, without this union of the moral
will, the reason itself is latent. Nevertheless, I see no advantage in
not saying the 'will,' or in substituting the term 'faith' for it. But
the sad non-distinction of the reason and the understanding throughout
Donne, and the confusion of ideas and conceptions under the same term,
painfully inturbidates his theology. Till this distinction of the
[Greek: nous] and the [Greek: phrónaema sarkòs] be seen, nothing can be
seen aright. Till this great truth be mastered, and with the sight that
is insight, other truths may casually take possession of the mind, but
the mind cannot possess them. If you know not this, you know nothing;
for if you know not the diversity of reason from the understanding, you
know not reason; and reason alone is knowledge.

All that follows in B. is admirable, worthy of a divine of the Church of
England, the National and the Christian, and indeed proves that Donne
was at least possessed by the truth which I have always labored to
enforce, namely, that faith is the 'apotheosis' of the reason in
man, the complement of reason, the will in the form of the reason. As
the basin-water to the fountain shaft, such is will to reason in faith.
The whole will shapes itself in the image of God wherein it had been
created, and shoots on high toward, and in the glories of, Heaven!


Ib. D.

  If we could have been in Paradise, and seen God take a clod of red
  earth, and make that wretched clod of contemptible earth such a body
  as should be fit to receive his breath, &c.

A sort of pun on the Hebrew word 'Adam' or red earth, common in Donne's
age, but unworthy of Donne, who was worthy to have seen deeper into the
Scriptural sense of the 'ground,' the Hades, the multeity, the many
'absque numero el infra numerum', that which is below, as God is that
which transcends, intellect.


Ib. p. 179. B.

  We place in the School, for the most part, the infinite merit of
  Christ Jesus ... rather 'in pacto' than 'in persona', rather that this
  contract was thus made between the Father and the Son, than that
  whatsoever that person, thus consisting of God and Man, should do,
  should, only in respect of the person, be of an infinite value and
  extension to that purpose, &c.

O, this is sad misty divinity! far too scholastical for the pulpit, far
too vague and unphilosophic for the study.


Ib. p. 180. A.

  'Quis nisi infidelis negaverit apud inferos fuisse Christum?' says St.
  Augustine.

Where? [16] Pearson expressly asserts and proves that the clause was in
none of the ancient creeds or confessions. And even now the sense of
these words, 'He descended into hell', is in no Reformed Church
determined as an article of faith.


Ib. p. 182. D.

  'Audacter dicam', says St. Hierome, 'cum omnia posset Deus, suscitare
  virginem post ruinam non potest.'

One instance among hundreds of the wantonness of phrase and fancy in the
Fathers. What did Jerome mean? 'quod Deus membranam hymenis luniformem
reproducere nequit?' No; that were too absurd. What then?--that God
cannot make what has been not to have been? Well then, why not say that,
since that is all you can mean?


Serm. XIX. Rev. xx. 6. p. 183.

The exposition of the text in this sermon is a lively instance how much
excellent good sense a wise man, like Donne, can bring forth on a
passage which he does not understand. For to say that it may mean either
X, or Y, or Z, is to confess he knows not what it means; but that if it
be X. then, &c.; if Y. then, &c.; and lastly if it be Z. then, &c.; that
is to say, that he understands X, Y, and Z; but does not understand the
text itself.


Ib. p. 185. B.

  Seas of blood and yet but brooks, tuns of blood and yet but basons,
  compared with the sacrifices, the sacrifices of the blood of men, in
  the persecutions of the primitive Church. For every ox of the Jew, the
  Christian spent a man; and for every sheep and lamb, a mother and her
  child, &c.


Whoo! Had the other nine so called persecutions been equal to the tenth,
that of Diocletian, Donne's assertion here would be extravagant.


Serra. XXXIV. Rom. viii. 16. p. 332.
Ib. p. 335. A.

  But by what manner comes He from them? By proceeding.

If this mystery be considered as words, or rather sounds vibrating on
some certain ears, to which the belief of the hearers assigned a
supernatural cause, well and good! What else can be said? Such were the
sounds: what their meaning is, we know not; but such sounds not being in
the ordinary course of nature, we of course attribute them to something
extra-natural.

But if God made man in his own image, therein as in a mirror, misty no
doubt at best, and now cracked by peculiar and in-herited defects--yet
still our only mirror--to contemplate all we can of God, this word
'proceeding' may admit of an easy sense.

For if a man first used it to express as well as he could a notion found
in himself as man 'in genere', we have to look into ourselves, and there
we shall find that two facts of vital intelligence may be conceived; the
first, a necessary and eternal outgoing of intelligence ([Greek: nous])
from being ([Greek:tò on]), with the will as an accompaniment, but not
from it as a cause,--in order, though not necessarily in time,
precedent. This is true filiation.

The second is an act of the will and the reason, in their purity strict
identities, and therefore not begotten or filiated, but proceeding from
intelligent essence and essential intelligence combining in the act,
necessarily and coeternally.

For the coexistence of absolute spontaneity with absolute necessity is
involved in the very idea of God, one of whose intellectual definitions
is, the 'synthesis, generative ad extra, et annihilative, etsi
inclusive, quoad se,' of all conceivable 'antitheses;' even as the best
moral definition--(and, O! how much more godlike to us in this state of
antithetic intellect is the moral beyond the intellectual!)--is, God is
love.

This is to us the high prerogative of the moral, that all its dictates
immediately reveal the truths of intelligence, whereas the strictly
intellectual only by more distant and cold deductions carries us towards
the moral.

For what is love? Union with the desire of union. God therefore is the
cohesion and the oneness of all things; and dark and dim is that system
of ethics, which does not take oneness as the root of all virtue.

Being, Mind, Love in action, are ideas distinguishable though not
divisible; but Will is incapable of distinction or division: it is
equally implied in vital action, in essential intelligence, and in
effluent love or holy action.

Now will is the true principle of identity, of selfness, even in our
common language. The will, therefore, being indistinguishably one, but
the possessive powers triply distinguishable, do perforce involve the
notion expressed by a Trinity of three Persons and one God.

There are three Persons eternally coexisting, in whom the one Will is
totally all in each; the truth of which mystery we may know in our own
minds, but can understand by no analogy.

For "the wind ministrant to divers at the same moment"--thence, to aid
the fancy--borrows or rather steals from the mind the idea of 'total 'in
omni parte',' which alone furnishes the analogy; but that both it and by
it a myriad of other material images do enwrap themselves 'in hac veste
non sua,' and would be even no objects of conception if they did not;
yea, that even the very words, 'conception,' 'comprehension,' and all in
all languages that answer to them, suppose this trans-impression from
the mind, is an argument better than all analogy.


Serm. XXXV. Mat. xii. 31. p. 341.
Ib. p. 342. B.

  First then, for the first term, 'sin,' we use to ask in the
  school, whether any action of man's can have 'rationem demeriti;'
  whether it can be said to offend God, or to deserve ill of God? for
  whatsoever does so, must have some proportion with God.

This appears to me to furnish an interesting example of the bad
consequences in reasoning, as well as in morals, of the 'cui bono? cui
malo?' system of ethics,--that system which places the good and evil
of actions in their painful or pleasurable effects on the sensuous or
passive nature of sentient beings, not in the will, the pure act itself.

For, according to this system, God must be either a passible and
dependent being,--that is, not God,--or else he must have no interest,
arid therefore no motive or impulse, to reward virtue or punish vice.

The veil which the Epicureans threw over their atheism was itself an
implicit atheism. Nay, the world itself could not have existed; and as
it does exist, the origin of evil (for if evil means no more than pain
'in genere', evil has a true being in the order of things) is not
only a difficulty of impossible solution, but is a fact necessarily
implying the non-existence of an omnipotent and infinite goodness,--that
is, of God.

For to say that I believe in a God, but not that he is omnipotent,
omniscient, and all-good, is as mere a contradiction in terms as to say,
I believe in a circle, but not that all the rays from its centre to its
circumference are equal.

I cannot read the profound truth so clearly expressed by Donne in the
next paragraph--"it does not only want that rectitude, but it should
have that rectitude, and therefore hath a sinful want"--without an
uneasy wonder at its incongruity with the preceding dogmas.


Serm. LXXI. Mat. iv. 18, 19, 20. p. 717.
Ib. p.725. A.

  But still consider, that they did but leave their nets, they did not
  burn them. And consider, too, that they left but nets, those things
  which might entangle them, and retard them in their following of
  Christ, &c.

An excellent paragraph grounded on a mere pun. Such was the taste of the
age; and it is an awful joy to observe, that not great learning, great
wit, great talent, not even (as far as without great virtue that can be)
great genius, were effectual to preserve the man from the contagion, but
only the deep and wise enthusiasm of moral feeling. Compare in this
light Donne's theological prose even with that of the honest Knox; and,
above all, compare Cowley with Milton.


Serm. LXXII. Mat. iv. 18, 19, 20. p. 726.
Ib. p.727. A.-E.

It is amusing to see the use which the Christian divines make of the
very facts in favour of their own religion, with which they triumphantly
battered that of the heathens; namely, the gross and sinful
anthropomorphitism of their representations of the Deity; and yet the
heathen philosophers and priests--Plutarch for instance--tell us as
plainly as Donne or Aquinas can do, that these are only accommodations
to human modes of conception,--the divine nature being in itself
impassible;--how otherwise could it be the prime agent?

Paganism needs a true philosophical judge. Condemned it will be,
perhaps, more heavily than by the present judges, but not from the same
statutes, nor on the same evidence.


'In fine.'

If our old divines, in their homiletic expositions of Scripture,
wire-drew their text, in the anxiety to evolve out of the words the
fulness of the meaning expressed, implied, or suggested, our modern
preachers have erred more dangerously in the opposite extreme, by making
their text a mere theme, or 'motto', for their discourse. Both err in
degree; the old divines, especially the Puritans, by excess, the modern
by defect. But there is this difference to the disfavor of the latter,
that the defect in degree alters the kind. It was on God's holy word
that our Hookers, Donnes, Andrewses preached; it was Scripture bread
that they divided, according to the needs and seasons. The preacher of
our days expounds, or appears to expound, his own sentiments and
conclusions, and thinks himself evangelic enough if he can make the
Scripture seem in conformity with them.

Above all, there is something to my mind at once elevating and soothing
in the idea of an order of learned men reading the many works of the
wise and great, in many languages, for the purpose of making one book
contain the life and virtue of all others, for their brethren's use who
have but that one to read. What, then, if that one book be such, that
the increase of learning is shown by more and more enabling the mind to
find them all in it! But such, according to my experience--hard as I am
on threescore--the Bible is, as far as all moral, spiritual, and
prudential,--all private, domestic, yea, even political, truths arid
interests are concerned. The astronomer, chemist, mineralogist, must go
elsewhere; but the Bible is the book for the man.



[Footnote 1: The LXXX Sermons, fol. 1640.--Ed.]


[Footnote 2:

  "Mr. Coleridge's admiration of Bull and Waterland as high theologians
  was very great. Bull he used to read in the Latin 'Defensio Fidei
  Nicoenoe', using the Jesuit Zola's edition of 1784, which, I think,
  he bought at Rome. He told me once, that when he was reading a
  Protestant English Bishop's work on the Trinity, in a copy edited by
  an Italian Jesuit in Italy, he felt proud of the Church of England,
  and in good humour with the Church of Rome."

'Table Talk,' 2d edit. p. 41.--Ed.]


[Footnote 3: Rom. vi. 3, 4, 5.--Ed.]


[Footnote 4: John i 14. Gal. iv 4. Ed.]


[Footnote 5: See the whole argument on the difference of the reason and
the understanding, in the 'Aids to Reflection', 3d edit. pp. 206-227.
Ed.]


[Footnote 6: See the author's entire argument upon this subject in the
'Church and State'.--Ed.]


[Footnote 7: Galat. ii 20.--Ed.]


[Footnote 8: Compare 'Hamlet', Act V. sc. 1. This sermon was preached,
March 8, 1628-9.--Ed.]


[Footnote 9: C. iii. 13, &c.--Ed.]


[Footnote 10: See, however, the author's expressions at, I believe, a
rather later period.

  "I now think, after many doubts, that the passage; 'I know that my
  Redeemer liveth', &c. may fairly be taken as a burst of determination,
  a 'quasi' prophecy. I know not how this can be; but in spite of all my
  difficulties, this I do know, that I shall be recompensed!"

'Table Talk', 2d edit. p. 80.--Ed.]


[Footnote 11: How so? Is it not admitted that Robert Stephens first
divided the New Testament into verses in 1551? See the testimony to that
effect of Henry Stephens, his son, in the Preface to his
Concordance.--Ed. ]


[Footnote 12: 'Rom'. viii. 3. Mr. C. afterwards expressed himself to the
same effect:

  "Christ's body, as mere body, or rather carcase (for body is an
  associated word), was no more capable of sin or righteousness than
  mine or yours; that his humanity had a capacity of sin, follows from
  its own essence. He was of like passions as we, and was tempted. How
  could he be tempted, if he had no formal capacity of being seduced?"

'Table Talk', 2d edit. p. 261.--Ed.]


[Footnote 13: See Hooker's admirable declaration of the doctrine:--

  "These natures from the moment of their first combination have been
  and are for ever inseparable. For even when his soul forsook the
  tabernacle of his body, his Deity forsook neither body nor soul. If it
  had, then could we not truly hold either that the person of Christ was
  buried, or that the person of Christ did raise up itself from the
  dead. For the body separated from the Word can in no true sense be
  termed the person of Christ; nor is it true to say that the Son of God
  in raising up that body did raise up himself, if the body were not
  both with him and of him even during the time it lay in the sepulchre.
  The like is also to be said of the soul, otherwise we are plainly and
  inevitably Nestorians. The very person of Christ therefore for ever
  one and the self-same, was only touching bodily substance concluded
  within the grave, his soul only from thence severed, but by personal
  union his Deity still unseparably joined with both."

E. P. V. 52. 4.--'Keble's edit'. Ed. ]


[Footnote 14: xix. 41.--Ed. ]


[Footnote 15: (C.) which should be (B.)

  "The object of the preceding discourse was to recommend the Bible as
  the end and centre of our reading and meditation. I can truly affirm
  of myself, that my studies have been profitable and availing to me
  only so far, as I have endeavored to use all my other knowledge as a
  glass enabling me to receive more light in a wider field of vision
  from the Word of God."

Ed.]


[Footnote 16: Ep. 99. See Pearson, Art. v.--Ed. ]







HENRY MORE'S THEOLOGICAL WORKS. [1]


There are three principal causes to which the imperfections and errors
in the theological schemes and works of our elder divines, the glories
of our Church,--men of almost unparalleled learning and genius, the rich
and robust intellects from the reign of Elizabeth to the death of
Charles II,--may, I think, be reasonably attributed. And striking,
unusually striking, instances of all three abound in this volume; and in
the works of no other divine are they more worthy of being regretted:
for hence has arisen a depreciation of Henry More's theological
writings, which yet contain more original, enlarged, and elevating views
of the Christian dispensation than I have met with in any other single
volume. For More had both the philosophic and the poetic genius,
supported by immense erudition. But unfortunately the two did not
amalgamate. It was not his good fortune to discover, as in the preceding
generation William Shakspeare discovered, a mordaunt' or common base of
both, and in which both the poetic and the philosophical power blended
in one.

These causes are,--

First, and foremost,--the want of that logical [Greek: propaidéia
dokimastikàe], that critique of the human intellect, which, previously
to the weighing and measuring of this or that, begins by assaying the
weights, measures, and scales themselves; that fulfilment of the
heaven-descended 'nosce teipsum', in respect to the intellective part of
man, which was commenced in a sort of tentative broadcast way by Lord
Bacon in his 'Novum Organum', and brought to a systematic completion by
Immanuel Kant in his 'Kritik der reinen Vernunft, der Urtheilskrajt, und
der metaphysiche Anfangsgründe der Naturwissenschaft'.

From the want of this searching logic, there is a perpetual confusion of
the subjective with the objective in the arguments of our divines,
together with a childish or anile overrating of human testimony, and an
ignorance in the art of sifting it, which necessarily engendered
credulity.

Second,--the ignorance of natural science, their physiography scant in
fact, and stuffed out with fables; their physiology imbrangled with an
inapplicable logic and a misgrowth of 'entia rationalia', that is,
substantiated abstractions; and their physiogony a blank or dreams of
tradition, and such "intentional colours" as occupy space but cannot
fill it. Yet if Christianity is to be the religion of the world, if
Christ be that Logos or Word that 'was in the beginning', by whom all
things 'became'; if it was the same Christ who said, 'Let there be
light'; who in and by the creation commenced that great redemptive
process, the history of life which begins in its detachment from nature,
and is to end in its union with God;--if this be true, so true must it
be that the book of nature and the book of revelation, with the whole
history of man as the intermediate link, must be the integral and
coherent parts of one great work: and the conclusion is, that a scheme
of the Christian faith which does not arise out of, and shoot its beams
downward into, the scheme of nature, but stands aloof as an insulated
afterthought, must be false or distorted in all its particulars. In
confirmation of this position, I may challenge any opponent to adduce a
single instance in which the now exploded falsities of physical science,
through all its revolutions from the second to the seventeenth century
of the Christian æra, did not produce some corresponding warps in the
theological systems and dogmas of the several periods.

The third and last cause, and especially operative in the writings of
this author, is the presence and regnancy of a false and fantastic
philosophy, yet shot through with refracted light from the not risen but
rising truth,--a scheme of physics and physiology compounded of
Cartesian mechanics and empiricism (for it was the credulous childhood
of experimentalism), and a corrupt, mystical, theurgical,
pseudo-Platonism, which infected the rarest minds under the Stuart
dynasty. The only not universal belief in witchcraft and apparitions,
and the vindication of such monster follies by such men as Sir M. Hale,
Glanville, Baxter, Henry More, and a host of others, are melancholy
proofs of my position. Hence, in the first chapters of this volume, the
most idle inventions of the ancients are sought to be made credible by
the most fantastic hypotheses and analogies.

To the man who has habitually contemplated Christianity as interesting
all rational finite beings, as the very 'spirit of truth', the
application of the prophecies as so many fortune-tellings and
soothsayings to particular events and persons, must needs be felt as
childish--like faces seen in the moon, or the sediments of a teacup. But
reverse this, and a Pope and a Buonaparte can never be wanting,--the
molehill becomes an Andes. On the other hand, there are few writers
whose works could be so easily defecated as More's. Mere omission would
suffice; and perhaps one half (an unusually large proportion) would come
forth from the furnace pure gold; if but a fourth, how great a gain!


EXPLANATION OF THE GRAND MYSTERY OF GODLINESS.

Dedication. 'Servorum illius omnium indignissimus.'

'Servus indignissimus,' or 'omnino indignus', or any other positive
self-abasement before God, I can understand; but how an express avowal
of unworthiness, comparatively superlative, can consist with the
Job-like integrity and sincerity of profession especially required in a
solemn address to Him, to whom all hearts are open, this I do not
understand in the case of such men as Henry More, Jeremy Taylor, Richard
Baxter were, and by comparison at least with the multitude of evil
doers, must have believed themselves to be.


Ib. V. c.14. s.3.

  This makes me not so much wonder at that passage of Providence, which
  allowed so much virtue to the bones of the martyr Babylas, once bishop
  of Antioch, as to stop the mouth of Apollo Daphneus when Julian would
  have enticed him to open it by many a fat sacrifice. To say nothing of
  several other memorable miracles that were done by the reliques of
  saints and martyrs in those times.

Strange lingering of childish credulity in the most learned and in many
respects enlightened divines of the Protestant episcopal church even to
the time of James II! The Popish controversy at that time made a great
clearance.


Ib. s. 9.

At one time Professor Eichorn had persuaded me that the Apocalypse was
authentic; that is, a Danielitic dramatic poem written by the Apostle
and Evangelist John, and not merely under his name. But the repeated
perusal of the vision has sadly unsettled my conclusion. The entire
absence of all spirituality perplexes me, as forming so strong a
contrast with the Gospel and Epistles of John; and then the too great
appearance of an allusion to the fable of Nero's return to life and
empire, to Simon Magus and Apollonius of Tyana on the one hand (that is
the Eichornian hypothesis), and the insurmountable difficulties of
Joseph Mede and others on to Bicheno and Faber on the other. In short, I
feel just as both Luther and Calvin felt,--that is, I know not what to
make of it, and so leave it alone.

It is much to be regretted that we have no contemporary history of
Apollonius, or of the reports concerning him, and the popular notions in
his own time. For from the romance of Philostratus we cannot be sure as
to the fact of the lies themselves. It may be a lie, that there ever was
such or such a lie in circulation.


Ib. c. 15. s. 2.

  Fourthly. The 'little horn', Dan. vii, that rules 'for a time and
  times and half a time', it is evident that it is not Antiochus
  Epiphanes, because this 'little horn' is part of the fourth
  beast--namely, the Roman.

Is it quite clear that the Macedonian was not the fourth empire;

1. the Assyrian;
2. the Median;
3. the Persian;
4. the Macedonian?

However, what a strange prophecy, that, 'e confesso' having been
fulfilled, remains as obscure as before!

Ib. s. 6

  'And ye shall have the tribulation of ten days',--that is, the utmost
  extent of tribulation; beyond which there is nothing further, as there
  is no number beyond ten.

It means, I think, the very contrary. 'Decent dierum' is used even in
Terence for a very short time. [2] In the same way we say, a nine days'
wonder.


Ib. c. 16. s. 1.

  But for further conviction of the excellency of Mr. Mede's way above
  that of Grotius, I shall compare some of their main interpretations.

Hard to say which of the two, Mede's or Grotius', is the more
improbable. Beyond doubt, however, the Cherubim are meant as the scenic
ornature borrowed from the Temple.


Ib. s. 2.

  That this 'rider of the white horse' is Christ, they both agree
  in.

The 'white horse' is, I conceive, Victory or Triumph--that is, of the
Roman power--followed by Slaughter, Famine, and Pestilence. All this is
plain enough. The difficulty commences after the writer is deserted by
his historical facts, that is, after the sacking of Jerusalem.


Ib. s. 5.

It would be no easy matter to decide, whether Mede plus More was at a
greater distance from the meaning, or Grotius from the poetry, of this
eleventh chapter of the Revelations; whether Mede was more wild, or
Grotius more tame, flat, and prosaic.


Ib. c. 17. s. 8.

  The Old and New Testament, which by a 'prosopopoeia' are here called
  the 'two witnesses.'

Where is the probability of this so long before the existence of the
collection since called the New Testament?


Ib. vi. c. l. s. 2.

We may draw from this passage (1 'Thess'. iv. 16, 17.) the strongest
support of the fact of the ascension of Christ, or at least of St.
Paul's (and of course of the first generation of Christians') belief of
it. For had they not believed his ascent, whence could they have derived
the universal expectation of his descent,--his bodily, personal descent?
The only scruple is, that all these circumstances were parts of the
Jewish 'cabala' or idea of the Messiah by the spiritualists before the
Christian æra, and therefore taken for granted with respect to Jesus as
soon as he was admitted to be the Messiah.


Ib. s. 6.

  But light-minded men, whose hearts are made dark with infidelity, care
  not what antic distortions they make in interpreting Scripture, so
  they bring it to any show of compliance with their own fancy and
  incredulity.

Why so very harsh a censure? What moral or spiritual, or even what
physical, difference can be inferred from all men's dying, this of one
thing, that of another, a third, like the martyrs, burnt alive, or all
in the same way? In any case they all die, and all pass to judgment.


Ib. c. 15.

With his 'semi'-Cartesian, 'semi'-Platonic, 'semi'-Christian notions,
Henry More makes a sad jumble in his assertion of chronochorhistorical
Christianity. One decisive reference to the ascension of the visible and
tangible Jesus from the surface of the earth upward through the clouds,
pointed out in the writings of St. Paul or in the Gospel, beginning as
it certainly did, and as in the copy according to Mark it now does, with
the baptism of John, or in the writings of the Apostle John, would have
been more effective in flooring Old Nic of Amsterdam [3] and his
familiars, than volumes of such "maybe's," "perhapses," and "should be
rendered," as these.


Ib. viii. c. 2. c. 6.

  I must confess our Saviour compiled no books, it being a piece of
  pedantry below so noble and divine a person, &c.


Alas! all this is woefully beneath the dignity of Henry More, and
shockingly against the majesty of the High and Holy One, so very
unnecessarily compared with Hendrick Nicholas, of Amsterdam, mercer!


Ib. x. c. 13. s. 5, 6.

A new sect naturally attracts to itself a portion of the madmen of the
time, and sets another portion into activity as alarmists and
oppugnants. I cannot therefore pretend to say what More might not have
found in the writings, or heard from the mouth, of some lunatic who
called himself a Quaker. But I do not recollect, in any work of an
acknowledged Friend, a denial of the facts narrated by the Evangelists,
as having really taken place in the same sense as any other facts of
history. If they were symbols of spiritual acts and processes, as Fox
and Penn contended, they must have been, or happened;--else how could
they be symbols?

It is too true, however, that the positive creed of the Quakers is and
ever has been extremely vague and misty. The deification of the
conscience, under the name of the Spirit, seems the main article of
their faith; and of the rest they form no opinion at all, considering it
neither necessary nor desirable. I speak of Quakers in general. But what
a lesson of experience does not this thirteenth chapter of so great and
good a man as H. More afford to us, who know what the Quakers really
are! Had the followers of George Fox, or any number of them
collectively, acknowledged the mad notions of this Hendrick Nicholas? If
not----



INQUIRY INTO THE MYSTERY OF INIQUITY.

