Part I.

Ib. s. ii. p. 137.

  The sentence of the Fathers in the third general Council, that at
  Ephesus;--'that it should not be lawful for any man to publish or
  compose another faith or creed than that which was defined by the
  Nicene Council.'

Upon what ground then does the Church of England reconcile with this
decree its reception of the so called Athanasian creed?


Ib. s. iv. p. 145.

  We consider that the doctrines upon which it (Purgatory) is pretended
  reasonable, are all dubious, and disputable at the very best. Such are
  ... that the taking away the guilt of sins does not suppose the taking
  away the obligation to punishment; that is, that when a man's sin is
  pardoned, he may be punished without the guilt of that sin as justly
  as with it.

The taking away the guilt does not, however, imply of necessity the
natural removal of the consequences of sin. And in this sense, I
suppose, the subtler Romanists would defend this accursed doctrine. A
man may have bitterly repented and thoroughly reformed the sin of
drunkenness, and by this genuine 'metanoia' and faith in Christ
crucified have obtained forgiveness of the guilt, and yet continue to
suffer a heavy punishment in a schirrous liver or incurable dyspepsy.
But who authorized the Popes to extend this to the soul?


Ib. p. 153.

  St. Ambrose saith that 'death is a haven of rest.'

Consider the strange and oftentimes awful dreams accompanying the
presence of irritating matter in the lower abdomen, and the seeming
appropriation of particular sorts of dream images and incidents to
affections of particular organs and 'viscera.' Do the material causes
act positively, so that with the removal of the body by death the total
cause is removed, and of course the effects? Or only negatively and
indirectly, by lessening and suspending that continuous texture of
organic sensation, which, by drawing outward the attention of the soul,
sheaths her from her own state and its corresponding activities?--A
fearful question, which I too often agitate, and which agitates me even
in my dreams, when most commonly I am in one of Swedenborg's hells,
doubtful whether I am once more to be awaked, and thinking our dreams to
be the true state of the soul disembodied when not united with Christ.
On awaking from such dreams, I never fail to find some local pain,
'circa-' or 'infra-'umbilical, with kidney affections, and at the base
of the bladder.


PART II.--INTRODUCTION.


P. 227.

  But yet because I will humour J.S. for this once; even here also 'The
  Dissuasive' relies upon a first and self-evident principle as any is
  in Christianity, and that is, 'Quod primum verum.'

I am surprised to meet such an assertion in so acute a logician and so
prudent an advocate as Jeremy Taylor. If the 'quod primum verum' mean
the first preaching or first institution of Christianity by its divine
Founder, it is doubtless an evident inference from the assumed truth of
Christianity, or, if you please, evidently implied therein; but surely
the truth of the Christian system, composed of historical narrations,
doctrines, precepts, and arguments, is no self-evident position, still
less, if there be any tenable distinction between the words, a primary
truth. How then can an inference from a particular, a variously
proveable and proof-requiring, position be itself a universal and
self-evident one?

But if 'quod primum verum' means 'quod prius verius,' this again is far
from being of universal application, much less self-evident. Astrology
was prior to astronomy; the Ptolemaic to the Newtonian scheme. It must
therefore be confined to history: yet even thus, it is not for any
practicable purpose necessarily or always true. Increase in other
knowledge, physical, anthropological, and psychological, may enable an
historian of A.D. 1800 to give a much truer account of certain events
and characters than the contemporary chroniclers had given, who lived in
an age of ignorance and superstition.

But confine the position within yet narrower bounds, namely, to
Christian antiquity. In addition to all other objections, it has this
great defect; that it takes for granted the very point in dispute,
whether Christianity was an 'opus simul et in toto perfectum,' or
whether the great foundations only were laid by Christ while on earth,
and by the Apostles, and the superstructure or progression of the work
entrusted to the successors of the Apostles; and whether for that
purpose Christ had not promised that his Spirit should be always with
the Church.

Now this growth of truth, not only in each individual Christian who is
indeed a Christian, but likewise in the Church of Christ, from age to
age, has been affirmed and defended by sundry Latitudinarian, Grotian
and Sociman divines even among Protestants: the contrary, therefore, and
an inference from the supposition of the contrary, can never be
pronounced self-evident or primary.

Jeremy Taylor had nothing to do with these mock axioms, but to ridicule
them, as in other instances he has so effectually done. It was
sufficient and easy to shew, that, true or false, the position was
utterly inapplicable to the facts of the Roman Church; that, instead of
passing, like the science of the material heaven, from dim to clear,
from guess to demonstration, from mischievous fancies to guiding,
profitable and powerful truths, it had overbuilt the divinest truths by
the silliest and not seldom wicked forgeries, usurpations and
superstitions. J.S.'s very notion of proving a mass of histories by
simple logic, he would have found exposed to his hand with exquisite
truth and humour by Lucian.

1810.


In the preceding note I think I took Taylor's words in too literal a
sense; the remarks, however, on the common maxim, 'In rebus fidei, quod
prius verius,' seem to me just and valuable. 2. March, 1824.


Ib. p. 297.

  When he talks of being infallible, if the notion be applied to his
  Church, then he means an infallibility antecedent, absolute,
  unconditionate, such as will not permit the Church ever to err.

Taylor himself was infected with the spirit of casuistry, by which
saving faith is placed in the understanding, and the moral act in the
outward deed. How infinitely safer the true Lutheran doctrine: God
cannot be mocked; neither will truth, as a mere conviction of the
understanding, save, nor error condemn;--to love truth sincerely is
spiritually to have truth; and an error becomes a personal error, not by
its aberration from logic or history, but so far as the causes of such
error are in the heart, or may be traced back to some antecedent
un-Christian wish or habit;--to watch over the secret movements of the
heart, remembering ever how deceitful a thing it is, and that God cannot
be mocked, though we may easily dupe ourselves: these, as the
ground-work with prayer, study of the Scriptures, and tenderness to all
around us, as the consequents, are the Christian's rule, and supersede
all books of casuistry, which latter serve only to harden our feelings
and pollute the imagination. To judge from the Roman casuists, nay, I
ought to say, from Taylor's own 'Ductor Dubitantium,' one would suppose
that a man's points of belief and smallest determinations of outward
conduct,--however pure and charitable his intentions, and however holy
or blameless the inward source of those intentions or convictions in his
past and present state of moral being,--were like the performance of an
electrical experiment, and would blow a man's salvation into atoms from
a mere unconscious mistake in the arrangement and management of the
apparatus.

See Livy's account of Tullus Hostilius's unfortunate experiment with one
of Numa's sacrificial ceremonies. The trick not being performed
'secundum artem,' Jupiter enraged shot him dead.[A] Before God our
deeds, which for him can have no value, gain acceptance in proportion as
they are evolutions of our spiritual life. He beholds our deeds in our
principles. For men our deeds have value as efficient causes, worth as
symptoms. They infer our principles from our deeds. Now, as religion or
the love of God cannot subsist apart from charity or the love of our
neighbour, our conduct must be conformable to both.


Ib. p. 305.

  Only for their comfort this they might have also observed in that
  book,--that there is not half so much excuse for the Papists as there
  is for the Anabaptists; and yet it was but an excuse at the best, as
  appears in those full answers I have given to all their arguments, in
  the last edition of that book, among the polemical discourses in
  folio.

Nay, dear Bishop! but such an excuse, as compared with your after
attempt to evacuate it, resembles a coat of mail of your own forging,
which you boil, in order to melt it away into invisibility. You only
hide it by foam and bubbles, by wavelets and steam-clouds, of ebullient
rhetoric: I speak of the Anabaptists as Anti-pædobaptists.


Ib. s. i. p. 337.

  'Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knoweth not what
  his Lord doth; but I have called you friends, for all things I have
  heard from the Father I have made known to you.'

I never thought of this text before, but it seems to me a stronger
passage in favour of Psilanthropism, or modern Socinianism,--a doctrine
which of all heresies I deem the most fundamental and the worst (the
impurities of madmen out of the question),--than I have ever seen, and
far stronger than that concerning the day of judgment, which in its
apparent sense is clearly high Arianism, or teaching the
super-angelical, yet infra-divine, nature of Christ. We must interpret
it [Greek: kat' analogían píste_os], not as 'all things' absolutely, but
as 'all things' concerning your interests, 'all things' that it behoves
you to know. Else it would contradict Christ's words, 'None knoweth the
Father but the Son,' that is, truly and totally. For Christ does not
promise in this life to give us the same degree of knowledge as he
himself possessed, but only a 'quantum sufficit' of the kind. This is
clear by St. John's 'all things,' which assuredly did not include either
the discoveries of Newton or of Davy.

14 August, 1811.


Ib. s. iii. p. 348.

  The Churches have troubled themselves with infinite variety of
  questions, and divided their precious unity, and destroyed charity,
  and instead of contending against the devil and all his crafty
  methods, they have contended against one another, and excommunicated
  one another, and anathematized and damned one another; and no man is
  the better after all, but most men are very much the worse; and the
  Churches are in the world still divided about questions that commenced
  twelve or thirteen ages since, and they are like to be so for ever,
  till Elias come, &c.

I remember no passages of the Fathers nearer to inspired Scripture than
this and similar ones of Jeremy Taylor, in which, quitting the acute
logician, he combines his heart with his head, and utters general, and
inclusive, and reconciling truths of charity and of common sense. All
amounts but to this:--what is binding on all must be possible to all.
But conformity of intellectual conclusions is not possible. Faith
therefore cannot reside totally in the understanding. But to do what we
believe we ought to do is possible to all, therefore binding on all;
therefore the 'unum necessarium' of Christian faith. Talk not of bad
conscience; it is like bad sense, that is, no sense; and we all know
that we may wilfully lie till we involuntarily believe the lie as truth;
but 'causa causæ est causa vera causati.'


Ib. p. 347.

  But if you mean the Catholic Church, then, if you mean her, an
  abstracted separate being from all particulars, you pursue a cloud,
  and fall in love with an idea and a child of fancy.

Here Taylor uses 'idea' as opposed to image or distinct phantasm; and
this is with few exceptions his general sense, and even the exceptions
are only metaphors from the general sense, that is, images so faint,
indefinite and fluctuating as to be almost no images, that is, ideas; as
we say of a very thin body, it is a ghost or spirit, the lowest degree
of one kind being expressed by the opposite kind.


Ib. p. 380.

  'Miracles' were, in the beginning of Christianity, a note of true
  believers: Christ told us so. And he also taught us that Anti-Christ
  should be revealed in lying signs and wonders, and commanded us, by
  that token, to take heed of them.

An excellent distinction between a note or mark by which a thing already
proved may be known, and the proofs of the thing. Thus the poisonous
qualities of the nightshade are established by the proper proofs, and
the marks by which a plant may be known to be the nightshade, are the
number, position, colour, and so on, of its filaments, petals, and the
rest.


Ib.

  The 'spirit of prophecy' is also a pretty sure note of the true
  Church, and yet...I deny not but there have been some prophets in the
  Church of Rome: Johannes de Rupe Scissa, Anselmus, Marsicanus, Robert
  Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, St. Hildegardis, Abbot Joachim, whose
  prophecies and pictures prophetical were published by Theophrastus
  Paracelsus, and John Adrasder, and by Paschalinus Regiselmus, at
  Venice, 1589; but (as Ahab said concerning Micaiah) these do not
  prophesy good concerning Rome, but evil, &c.


This paragraph is an exquisite specimen of grave and dignified irony,
'telum quod cedere simulat retorquentis'. In contrast with this stands
the paragraph on note 15, (p. 381.) which is a coarse though not
unmerited sneer, or, as a German would have expressed himself, 'an
of-Jeremy-Taylor-unworthy,though a-not-of-the-Roman-Catholic-Papicolar-
polemics-unmerited, sneer.'


Ib. p. 381.

  ... excepting only some Popes have been remarked by their own
  histories for funest and direful deaths.

In the adoption of this word 'funest' into the English language by
'apocope' of the final 'us', Taylor is supported by 'honest' and
'modest;' but then the necessity of pronouncing funest should have
excluded it, the superlative final being an objection to all of them,
though outweighed in the others. A common reader would pronounce it
'funest,' and perhaps mistake it for 'funniest.'


Ib. p. 382.

  ... sacraments, 'which to be seven', is with them an article of faith.

The fastidious exclusion of this and similar idioms in modern writing
occasions unnecessary embarrassment for the writer, both in narration
and argumenting, and contributes to the monotony of our style.


Ib.

  The Fathers and Schoolmen differ greatly in the definition of a
  Sacrament.


Had it been in other respects advisable, it would, I think, have been
theologically convenient, if our Reformers had contra-distinguished
Baptism and the Lord's Supper by the term Mysteries, and allowed the
name of Sacrament to Ordination, Confirmation, and Marriage.


Ib. s. iii. p. 388.

  And he did so to the Jews ... tradition was not relied upon; it was
  not trusted with any law of faith or manners.

This all the later Jews deny, affirming an oral communication from Moses
to the Seventy, on as lame pretences as the Roman Catholics, and for the
same vile purposes as reproved by Christ, who, if he had believed the
story, would not have condemned traditions of men generally without
exception, and would not have proved the immortality of the Patriarchs
by a text which seems to have had no such primary intention, though it
may contain the deduction 'potentialiter'.

But Taylor's 1st and 7th arguments following are, the former weak and
incorrect, the latter 'dictum et vulgatum, sed non probatum, ne dicam
improbatum'. Who doubts that all that is indispensable to the salvation
of each and every one is contained in the New Testament?

But is it not contained in the first chapter of St. John's Gospel? Is it
not contained in the eleventh of the Acts, and in a score other
separable portions? Necessary, indispensable, and the like, are
multivocal terms. Dogs have survived (and without any noticeable injury)
the excision of the spleen.

Dare we conclude from this fact that the spleen is not necessary to the
continuance of the canine race? What is not indispensable for even the
majority of individual believers may be necessary for the Church.

Instead, therefore, of these terms, put 'true,' 'important,' and
'constitutive,' that is, appertaining to the chain ('ad catenam auream')
of truths interdependent and rendered mutually intelligible, which
constitute the system of the Christian religion, including not alone the
faith and morals of individuals, but the 'organismus' likewise of the
Church, as a body spiritual, yet outward and historical; and this again
not as an aggregate or sum total, like a corn-sheaf, but a unity.

Let the question, I say, be thus restated, and then let the cause come
to trial between the Romish and the Protestant divines.


N. B. As a running comment on all these marginal notes, let it be
understood that I hold the far greater part--the only not all of what
our great Author urges, to apply with irrefutable force against the
doctrine and practice of the Romish Church, as it in fact exists, and no
less against the Familists and 'istius farinæ enthusiastas'.

I contend only, that he himself, in several assertions, lies open to
attack from the supporters of a scheme of faith, as unlike either the
Romish or the Fanatical, as Taylor's own, and which scheme, namely, the
co-ordinate authority of the Word, the Spirit and the Church, I believe
to be the true Apostolic and Catholic doctrine, and that to this scheme
his objections do not apply.

When I can bring myself to believe that from the mere perusal of the New
Testament a man might have sketched out by anticipation the
constitution, discipline, creeds, and sacramental ritual of the
Episcopal Reformed Church of England; or that it is not a true and
orthodox Church, because this is incredible; then I may perhaps be
inclined to echo Chillingworth.

As I cannot think that it detracts from a dial that in order to tell the
time the sun must shine upon it; so neither does it detract from the
Scriptures, that though the best and holiest they are yet Scripture, and
require a pure heart and the consequent assistances of God's
enlightening grace in order to understand them to edification.

1812.


I still agree with the preceding note, and add that Jeremy Taylor should
have cited the Arians and Socinians on the other side. But the Romish
Papal hierarchy cannot for shame say, or only from want of shame can
pretend to say, what a Catholic would be entitled to urge on the triple
link of the Scripture, the Spirit, and the Church.

27 April, 1826.


Ib. s. vi. p. 392.

  From this principle, as it is promoted by the Fanatics, they derive a
  wandering, unsettled, and a dissolute religion, &c.

The evils of the Fanatic persuasion here so powerfully, so exquisitely,
stated and enforced by our all-eloquent Bishop, supply no proof or even
presumption against the tenet of the Spirit rightly expressed. For
catholicity is the distinctive mark, the 'conditio sine qua non', of a
spiritual teaching; and if men that dream with their eyes open mistake
for this the very contrary, that is, their own particular fancies, or
perhaps sensations, who can help it?


Ib. s. vii. p. 394.

  They affirm that the Scriptures are full, that they are a perfect
  rule, that they contain all things necessary to salvation; and from
  hence they confuted all heresies.

Yes, the heretics were so confuted, I grant; because these would not
acknowledge any other authority but that of the Scriptures, and these
too forged or corrupted by themselves; but by the Scriptures that
remained unaltered the early Fathers of the Church both demonstrated the
omissions and interpolations of the heretical canons and the false
doctrines of the heresy itself. But so far from following the same rule
to the members of the true Church, they made the applicability of this
way of proof the criterion of a heretic.


Ib. p. 394.

  'Which truly they then preached, but afterwards by the will of God
  delivered to us in the Scriptures, which was to be the pillar and
  ground to our faith.'

Lessing has shown this to be a false and even ungrammatical rendering of
Irenæus's words. The 'columen et fundamentum fidei', are the Creed, or
economy of salvation.


Ib. vii. p. 395. Extracts from Clement's 'Stromata'.

It would require a volume to shew the qualifications with which these
'excerpta' must be read. There is no one source of error and endless
controversy more fruitful than this custom of quoting detached
sentences. I would pledge myself in the course of a single morning to
bring an equal number of passages from the same (Ante-Nicene) Fathers in
proof of the Roman Catholic theory. One palpable cheat in these
transcripts is the neglect of appreciating the words, 'inspired,' 'a
'Spiritu dicta'', and the like, in the Patristic use; as if the Fathers
did not frequently apply the same terms to the discourses of the
Bishops, their contemporaries, and to writings not canonical. It is
wonderful how so acute and learned a man as Taylor could have read
Tertullian, Irenæus and Clemens Alexandrinus, and not have seen that the
passages are all against him so far as they all make the Scriptures
subsidiary only to the Spirit in the Church and the Baptismal creed, the
[Greek: kan_òn píste_os], 'regula fidei', or 'æconomia salutis'.


Ib. p. 396.

  ... that the tradition ecclesiastical, that is, the whole doctrine
  taught by the Church of God, and preached to all men, is in the
  Scripture.

It is only by the whole context and purpose of the work, and this too
interpreted by the known doctrine of the age, that the intent of the
sentences here quoted can be determined, relatively to the point in
question. But even as they stand here, they do not assert that the
'Traditio Ecclesiastica' was grounded on, or had been deduced from, the
Scriptures; nor that by Scripture Clemens meant principally the New
Testament; and that the Scriptures contain the Tradition Ecclesiastical
or Catholic Faith the Romish divines admit and contend.


Ib. p. 399. Extract from Origen.

  As our Saviour imposed silence upon the Sadducees by the word of his
  doctrine, and faithfully convinced that false opinion which they
  thought to be truth; so also shall the followers of Christ do, by the
  examples of Scripture, by which according to sound doctrine every
  voice of Pharaoh ought to be silent.

Does not this prove too much; namely, that nothing exists in the New
which does not likewise exist in the Old Testament?

One objection to Jeremy Taylor's argument here must, I think, strike
every reflecting mind; namely, that in order to a fair and full view of
the sentiments of the Fathers of the first four centuries, all they
declare of the Church, and her powers and prerogatives, ought to have
been likewise given.

As soon as I receive any writing as inspired by the Spirit of Truth, of
course I must believe it on its own authority. But how am I assured that
it is an inspired work? Now do not these Fathers reply, By the Church?
To the Church it belongs to declare what books are Holy Scriptures, and
to interpret their right sense. Is not this the common doctrine among
the Fathers? And how was the Church to judge?

First, by the same spirit surviving in her; and secondly by the
accordance of the Book itself with the canon of faith, that is the
Baptismal Creed. And what was this? 'Traditio Ecclesiastica'. As to
myself, I agree with Taylor against the Romanists, that the Bible is for
us the only rule of faith; but I do not adopt his mode of proving it.

In the earliest period of Christianity the Scriptures of the New
Testament and the Ecclesiastical Tradition were reciprocally tests of
each other; but for the Christians of the second century the Scriptures
were tried by the Ecclesiastical Tradition, while for us the order is
reversed, and we must try the Ecclesiastical Tradition by the
Scriptures. Therefore I do not expect to find the proofs of the
supremacy of Scripture in the early Fathers, nor do we need their
authority. Our proofs are stronger without it.


Ib. p. 403.

  Which words I the rather remark, because this article of the
  consubstantiality of Christ with the Father is brought as an instance
  (by the Romanists) of the necessity of tradition, to make up the
  insufficiency of Scripture.

How shall I make this rhyme to Taylor's own assertion, in the last
paragraph of sect. xix. of his Episcopacy Asserted, [20] in which he
clearly refers to this very question as relying on tradition for its
clearness? Jeremy Taylor was a true Father of the Church, and would
furnish as fine a subject for a 'concordantia discordantiarum' as St.
Austin himself. For the exoteric and esoteric he was a very Pythagoras.


Ib. p. 406.

  ... for one or two of them say, Theophilus spake against Origen, for
  broaching fopperies of his own, and particularly, that Christ's flesh
  was consubstantial with the Godhead.

Origen doubtless meant the 'caro noumenon', and was quite right. But
never was a great man so misunderstood as Origen.


Ib. p. 408. n.

  'Sed et alia, quoe absque auctoritate et testimoniis Scripturarum,
  quasi traditione Apostolica, sponte reperiunt atque contingunt,
  percutit gladius Dei'.

  "Those things which they make and find, as it were, by Apostolical
  tradition, without the authority and testimonies of Scripture, the
  word of God smites."

Is it clear that 'Scripturarum' depends on 'auctoritate'? It may well
mean they who without the authority of the Church, or Scriptural
testimony pretend to an Apostolical Tradition.


Ib. p. 411.

  But lastly, if in the plain words of Scripture be contained all that
  is simply necessary to all, then it is clear, by Bellarmine's
  confession, that St. Austin affirmed that the plain places of
  Scripture are sufficient to all laics and all idiots, or private
  persons, and then it is very ill done to keep them from the knowledge
  and use of the Scriptures, which contain all their duty both of faith
  and good life; so it is very unnecessary to trouble them with any
  thing else, there being in the world no such treasure and repository
  of faith and manners, and that so plain, that it was intended for all
  men, and for all such men is sufficient. "Read the Holy Scriptures
  wherein you shall find some things to be holden, and some to be
  avoided."

And yet in the preface to his Apology for authorized and set forms of
Liturgy, [21] Taylor regrets that the Church of England was not able to
confine the laity to such selections of Holy Writ as are in her Liturgy.
But Laud was then alive: and Taylor partook of his 'trepidatiunculæ'
towards the Church of Rome.


Ib. p. 412.

  And all these are nothing else, but a full subscription to, and an
  excellent commentary upon, those words of St. Paul, 'Let no man
  pretend to be wise above what is written.'

Had St. Paul anything beyond the Law and the Prophets in his mind?


Ib. p. 416.

  St. Paul's way of teaching us to expound Scripture is, that he that
  prophesies should do it [Greek: kat' analogían píste_os], according to
  the analogy of faith.

Yet in his Liberty of Prophesying [22] Taylor turns this way into mere
ridicule. I love thee, Jeremy! but an arrant theological barrister that
thou wast, though thy only fees were thy desires of doing good in
'questionibus singulis'.


Ib. s. iii. p. 419.

  Only, because we are sure there was some false dealing in this matter,
  and we know there might be much more than we have discovered, we have
  no reason to rely upon any tradition for any part of our faith, any
  more than we could do upon Scripture, if one book or chapter of it
  should be detected to be imposture.

What says Jeremy Taylor then to the story of the woman taken in
adultery, ('John, c. viii. 3-11'.) which Chrysostom disdains to comment
on? If true, how could it be omitted in so many, and these the most
authentic, copies? And if this for fear of scandal, why not others? And
who does not know that falsehood may be effected as well by omissions as
by interpolations? But if false,--then--but Taylor draws the consequence
himself.


Ib. p. 427.

  So that the tradition concerning the Scriptures being extrinsical to
  Scripture is also extrinsical to the question: this tradition cannot
  be an objection against the sufficiency of Scripture to salvation, but
  must go before this question. For no man inquires whether the
  Scriptures contain all things necessary to salvation, unless he
  believe that there are Scriptures, that these are they, and that they
  are the word of God. All this comes to us by tradition, that is, by
  universal undeniable testimony.

Very just, and yet this idle argument is the favourite, both shield and
sword, of the Romanists: as if I should pretend to learn the Roman
history from tradition, because by tradition I know such histories to
have been written by Livy, Sallust, and Tacitus!


Ib. p. 435.

  The more natural consequence is that their proposition is either
  mistaken or uncertain, or not an article of faith (which is rather to
  be hoped, lest we condemn all the Greek Churches as infidels or
  perverse heretics), or else that it can be derived from Scripture,
  which last is indeed the most probable, and pursuant to the doctrine
  of those wiser Latins who examined things by reason and not by
  prejudice.

It is remarkable that both Stillingfleet and Taylor favoured the Greek
opinion. But Bull's 'Defensio Fidei Nicænæ' was not yet published. It is
to me evident that if the Holy Ghost does not proceed through and from
the Son as well as from the Father, then the Son is not the adequate
substantial idea of the Father. But according to St. Paul, he is--'ergo,
&c'. N.B. These "'ergos, &c'." in legitimate syllogisms, where the
'major' and 'minor' have been conceded, are binding on all human beings,
with the single anomaly of the Quakers. For with them nothing is more
common than to admit both 'major' and 'minor', and, when you add the
inevitable consequence, to say "Nay! I do not think so, Friend! Thou art
worldly wise, Friend!" For example: 'major', it is agreed on both sides
that we ought not to withhold from a man what he has a just right to:
'minor', property in land being the creature of law, a just right in
respect of landed property is determined by the law of the
land:--"agreed, such is the fact:" 'ergo:' the clergyman has a just
right to the tithe. "Nay, nay; this is vanity, and tithes an abomination
of Judaism!"


Ib. s. v. p. 492.

  And since that villain of a man, Pope Hildebrand, as Cardinal Beno
  relates in his Life, could, by shaking of his sleeve make sparks of
  fire fly from it.

If this was fact, was it an idiosyncrasy, as I have known those who by
combing their hair can elicit sparks with a crackling as from a cat's
back rubbed. It is very possible that the sleeve might be silk,
tightened either on a very hairy arm, or else on woollen, and by shaking
it might be meant stripping the silk suddenly off, which would doubtless
produce flashes and sparks.


Vol. XI. s. x. p. 1.

As a general remark suggested indeed by this section, but applicable to
very many parts of Taylor's controversial writings, both against the
anti-Prelatic and the Romish divines, especially to those in which our
incomparable Church-aspist attempts, not always successfully, to
demonstrate the difference between the dogmas and discipline of the
ancient Church, and those which the Romish doctors vindicate by them,--I
would say once for all, that it was the fashion of the Arminian court
divines of Taylor's age, that is, of the High Church party, headed by
Archbishop Laud, to extol, and (in my humble judgment) egregiously to
overrate, the example and authority of the first four, nay, of the first
six centuries; and at all events to take for granted the Evangelical and
Apostolical character of the Church to the death of Athanasius.

Now so far am I from conceding this, that before the first Council of
Nicaea, I believe myself to find the seeds and seedlings of all the
worst corruptions of the Latin Church of the thirteenth century, and not
a few of these even before the close of the second.

One pernicious error of the primitive Church was the conversion of the
ethical ideas, indispensable to the science of morals and religion, into
fixed practical laws and rules for all Christians, in all stages of
spiritual growth, and under all circumstances; and with this the
degradation of free and individual acts into corporate Church
obligations.

Another not less pernicious was the gradual concentration of the Church
into a priesthood, and the consequent rendering of the reciprocal
functions of love and redemption and counsel between Christian and
Christian exclusively official, and between disparates, namely, the
priest and the layman.


Ib. B. II. s. ii. p. 58.

Often have I welcomed, and often have I wrestled with, the thought of
writing an essay on the day of judgment. Are the passages in St. Peter's
Epistle respecting the circumstances of the last day and the final
conflagration, and even St. Paul's, to be regarded as apocalyptic and a
part of the revelation by Christ, or are they, like the dogma of a
personal Satan, accommodations of the current popular creed which they
continued to believe?


Ib. s. iii. p. 105.

  And therefore St. Paul left an excellent precept to the Church to
  avoid 'profanas vocum novitates', 'the prophane newness of words;'
  that is, it is fit that the mysteries revealed in Scripture should be
  preached and taught in the words of the Scripture, and with that
  simplicity, openness, easiness, and candor, and not with new and
  unhallowed words, such as that of Transubstantiation.

Are not then Trinity, Tri-unity, 'hypostasis, perichoresis, diphysis',
and others, excluded? Yet Waterland very ingeniously, nay more, very
honestly and sensibly, shews the necessity of these terms 'per
accidens'. The 'profanum' fell back on the heretics who had occasioned
the necessity.


Ib. p. 106.

  "The oblation of a cake was a figure of the Eucharistical bread which
  the Lord commanded to do in remembrance of his passion." These are
  Justin's words in that place.

Justin Martyr could have meant no more, and the Greek construction means
no more, than that the cake we offer is the representative, substitute,
and 'fac-simile' of the bread which Christ broke and delivered.

I find no necessary absurdity in Transubstantiation. For substance is
but a notion 'thought on' to the aggregate of
accidents--'hinzugedacht'--conceived, not perceived, and conceived
always in universals, never in 'concreto'.

Therefore, X. Y. Z. being unknown quantities, Y. may be as well annexed
by the choice of the mind as the imagined 'substratum' as X. For we
cannot distinguish substance from substance any more than X. from X.

The substrate or 'causa invisibilis' may be the 'noumenon' or actuality,
'das Ding in sich', of Christ's humanity, as well as the 'Ding in sich'
of which the sensation, bread, is the appearance.

But then, on the other hand, there is not a word of sense possible to
prove that it is really so; and from the not impossible to the real is a
strange 'ultra'-Rhodian leap.

And it is opposite both to the simplicity of Evangelical meaning, and
anomalous from the interpretation of all analogous phrases which all men
expound as figures,--'I am the gate, I am the way, I am the vine', and
the like,--and to Christ's own declarations that his words were to be
understood spiritually, that is, figuratively.


Ib. s. vi. p. 164.

  However, if you will not commit downright idolatry, as some of their
  saints teach you, then you must be careful to observe these plain
  distinctions; and first be sure to remember that when you worship an
  image, you do it not materially but formally; not as it is of such a
  substance, but as it is a sign; next take care that you observe what
  sort of image it is, and then proportion your right kind to it, that
  you do not give 'latria' to that where 'hyperdulia' is only due; and
  be careful that if 'dulia' only be due, that your worship be not
  'hyperdulical', &c.

A masterly specimen of grave dignified irony. Indeed, Jeremy Taylor's
'Works' would be of more service to an English barrister than those of
Demosthenes, Æschines, and Cicero taken together.


Ib. s. vii. p. 168.

  A man cannot well understand an essence, and hath no idea of it in his
  mind, much less can a painter's pencil do it.

Noticeable, that this is the only instance I have met in any English
classic before the Revolution of the word 'idea' used as synonymous
with a mental image. Taylor himself has repeatedly placed the two in
opposition; and even here I doubt whether he has done otherwise. I
rather think he meant by the word 'idea' a notion under an indefinite
and confused form, such as Kant calls a 'schema'or vague outline, an
imperfect embryo of a concrete, to the individuation of which the mind
gives no conscious attention; just as when I say--"any thing," I may
imagine a poker or a plate; but I pay no attention to its being this
rather than that; and the very image itself is so wandering and unstable
that at this moment it may be a dim shadow of the one, and in the next
of some other thing. In this sense, idea is opposed to image in degree
instead of kind; yet still contra-distinguished, as is evident by the
sequel, "much less can a painter's pencil do it:" for were it an image,
'individui et concreti', then the painter's pencil could do it as well
as his fancy or better.



A DISCOURSE OF CONFIRMATION.

Of all Taylor's works, the Discourse of Confirmation seems to me the
least judicious; and yet that is not the right word either. I mean,
however, that one is puzzled to know for what class of readers or
auditors it was intended.

He announces his subject as one of such lofty claims; he begins with
positions taken on such high ground, no less than the superior dignity
and spiritual importance of Confirmation above Baptism itself--whether
considered as a sacramental rite and mystery distinct from Baptism, or
as its completory and crowning part (the 'finis coronans opus')--that we
are eager to hear the proof.

But proofs differ in their value according to our previous valuation of
authorities. What would pass for a very sufficient proof, because
grounded on a reverend authority, with a Romanist, would be a mere
fancy-medal and of no currency with a Bible Protestant.

And yet for Protestants, and those too laymen (for we can hardly suppose
that Taylor thought his Episcopal brethren in need of it), must this
Discourse have been intended; and in this point of view, surely never
did so wise a man adopt means so unsuitable to his end, or frame a
discourse so inappropriate to his audience.

The authorities of the Fathers are, indeed, as strong and decisive in
favour of the Bishop's position as the warmest advocate of Confirmation
could wish; but this very circumstance was calculated to create a
prejudice against the doctrine in the mind of a zealous Protestant, from
the contrast in which the unequivocal and explicit declarations of the
Fathers stand with the remote, arbitrary, and fine-drawn inferences from
the few passages of the New Testament which can be forced into an
implied sanction of a rite no where mentioned, and as a distinct and
separate ministration, utterly, as I conceive, unknown in the Apostolic
age.

How much more rational and convincing (as to me it seems) would it have
been to have shewn, that when from various causes the practice of Infant
Baptism became general in the Church, Confirmation or the acknowledgment
'in propria persona' of the obligations that had been incurred by proxy
was introduced; and needed no other justification than its own evident
necessity, as substantiating the preceding form as to the intended
effects of Baptism on the believer himself, and then to have shewn the
great uses and spiritual benefits of the institution.

But this would not do. Such was the spirit of the age that nothing less
than the assertion of a divine origin,--of a formal and positive
institution by Christ himself, or by the Apostles in their Apostolic
capacity as legislators for the universal Church in all ages, could
serve; and accordingly Bishops, liturgies, tithes, monarchy, and what
not, were, 'de jure divino', with celestial patents, wrapped up in the
womb of this or that text of Scripture to be exforcipated by the
logico-obstetric skill of High Church doctors and ultra-loyal court
chaplains.



THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO THE DUKE OF ORMONDE.

Ib. p. ccxvii.

  This very poor church.

With the exception of Spain, the Church establishment in Ireland is now,
I conceive, the richest in Europe; though by the most iniquitous measure
of the Irish Parliament, most iniquitously permitted to acquire the
force of law at the Union, the Irish Church was robbed of the tithes
from all pasture lands. What occasioned so great a change in its favour
since the time of Charles II?

1810.


Ib. p. ccxviii.

  And amidst these and very many more inconveniences it was greatly
  necessary that God should send us such a king.

Such a king! O sorrow and shame! Why, why, O Genius! didst thou suffer
thy darling son to crush the fairest flower of thy garland beneath a
mitre of Charles's putting on!


Ib. p. ccxix.

  For besides that the great usefulness of this ministry will greatly
  endear the Episcopal order, to which (that I may use St. Hierom's
  words) "if there be not attributed a more than common power and
  authority, there will be as many schisms as priests," &c.

On this ground the Romish divines justify the Papacy. The fact of the
Scottish Church is the sufficient answer to both. Episcopacy needs not
rash assertions for its support.


Ib. p. ccxx.

  For it is a sure rule in our religion, and is of an eternal truth,
  that "they who keep not the unity of the Church, have not the Spirit
  of God."

Contrast with this our xixth and xxth Articles on the Church. The Irish
Roman Catholic Bishops, methinks, must have read this with delight. What
an over hasty simpleton that James II. was! Had he waited and caressed
the Bishops, they would have taken the work off his hands.


Ib. p. 229. Introduction.

It has been my conviction that in respect of the theory of the Faith,
(though God be praised! not in the practical result,) the Papal and the
Protestant communions are equi-distant from the true idea of the Gospel
Institute, though erring from opposite directions.

The Romanists sacrifice the Scripture to the Church virtually annulling
the former: the Protestants reversed this practically, and even in
theory, (see the above-mentioned Articles,) annulling the latter.

The consequence has been, as might have been predicted, the extinction
of the Spirit (the indifference or 'mesothesis') in both considered as
bodies: for I doubt not that numerous individuals in both Churches live
in communion with the Spirit.

Towards the close of the reign of our first James, and during the period
from the accession of Charles I to the restoration of his profligate
son, there arose a party of divines, Arminians (and many of them
Latitudinarians) in their creed, but devotees of the throne and the
altar, soaring High Churchmen and ultra royalists.

Much as I dislike their scheme of doctrine and detest their principles
of government both in Church and State, I cannot but allow that they
formed a galaxy of learning and talent, and that among them the Church
of England finds her stars of the first magnitude.

Instead of regarding the Reformation established under Edward VI as
imperfect, they accused the Reformers, some of them openly, but all in
their private opinions, of having gone too far; and while they were
willing to keep down (and if they could not reduce him to a primacy of
honor to keep out) the Pope, and to prune away the innovations in
doctrine brought in under the Papal domination, they were zealous to
restore the hierarchy, and to substitute the authority of the Fathers,
Canonists and Councils of the first six or seven centuries, and the
least Papistic of the later Doctors and Schoolmen, for the names of
Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin and the systematic theologians who
rejected all testimony but that of their Bible.

As far as the principle, on which Archbishop Laud and his followers
acted, went to re-actuate the idea of the Church, as a co-ordinate and
living Power by right of Christ's institution and express promise, I go
along with them; but I soon discover that by the Church they meant the
Clergy, the hierarchy exclusively, and then I fly off from them in a
tangent.

For it is this very interpretation of the Church that, according to my
conviction, constituted the first and fundamental apostasy; and I hold
it for one of the greatest mistakes of our polemic divines in their
controversies with the Romanists, that they trace all the corruptions of
the Gospel faith to the Papacy.

Meantime can we be surprised that our forefathers under the Stuarts were
alarmed, and imagined that the Bishops and court preachers were marching
in quick time with their faces towards Rome, when, to take one instance
of a thousand, a great and famous divine, like Bishop Taylor, asserts
the inferiority, in rank and efficacy, of Baptism to Confirmation, and
grounds this assertion so strange to all Scriptural Protestants on a
text of Cabasilas--a saying of Rupertus--a phrase of St. Denis--and a
sentence of Saint Bernard in a Life of Saint Malachias!--for no
Benedictine can be more liberal in his attribution of saintship than
Jeremy Taylor, or more reverently observant of the beatifications and
canonizations of the Old Lady of the scarlet petticoat.

P. S. If the reader need other illustrations, I refer him to Bishop
Hackett's 'Sermons on the Advent and Nativity', which might almost pass
for the orations of a Franciscan brother, whose reading had been
confined to the 'Aurea Legenda'. It would be uncandid not to add that
this indiscreet traffickery with Romish wares was in part owing to the
immense reading of these divines.


Ib. s. i. p. 247. Acts viii. 14-17.

This is an argument indeed, and one that of itself would suffice to
decide the question, if only it could be proved, or even made probable,
that by the Holy Ghost in this place was meant that receiving of the
Spirit to which Confirmation is by our Church declared to be the means
and vehicle.

But this I suspect cannot be done. The whole passage to which sundry
chapters in St. Paul's Epistles seem to supply the comment, inclines and
almost compels me to understand by the Holy Ghost in this narrative the
miraculous gifts, [Greek: tas dynámeis], collectively.

And in no other sense can I understand the sentence 'the Holy Ghost was
not yet fallen upon any of them'. But the subject is beset with
difficulties from the paucity of particular instances recorded by the
inspired historian, and from the multitude and character of these
instances found in the Fathers and Ecclesiastical historians.


Ib. s. ii. p. 254.

Still they are all [Greek: dynámeis], exhibitable powers, faculties.
Were it otherwise what strange and fearful consequences would follow
from the assertion, 'the Holy Spirit was not yet fallen upon any of
them'.

That we misunderstand the gift of tongues, and that it did not mean the
power of speaking foreign languages unlearnt, I am strongly persuaded.

Yea, but this is not the question. If my heart, bears me witness that I
love my brother, that I love my merciful Saviour, and call Jesus Lord
and the Anointed of God with joy of heart, I am encouraged by Scripture
to infer that the Spirit abideth in me; besides that I know that of
myself, and estranged from the Holy Spirit, I cannot even think a
thought acceptable before God.

But how will this help me to believe that I received this Spirit through
the Bishop's hands laid on my head at Confirmation: when perhaps I am
distinctly conscious, that I loved my Saviour, freely forgave, nay,
tenderly yearned for the weal of, them that hated me before my
Confirmation,--when, indeed, I must have been the most uncharitable of
men if I did not admit instances of the most exemplary faith, charity,
and devotion in Christians who do not practise the imposition of hands
in their Churches. What! did those Christians, of whom St. Luke speaks,
not love their brethren?


'In fine'.

I have had too frequent experience of professional divines, and how they
identify themselves with the theological scheme to which they have been
articled, and I understand too well the nature and the power, the effect
and the consequences, of a wilful faith,--where the sensation of
positiveness is substituted for the sense of certainty, and the stubborn
clutch for quiet insight,--to wonder at any degree of hardihood in
matters of belief.

Therefore the instant and deep-toned affirmative to
the question

  "And do you actually believe the presence of the material water in the
  baptizing of infants or adults is essential to their salvation, so
  indispensably so that the omission of the water in the Baptism of an
  infant who should die the day after would exclude that infant from the
  kingdom of heaven, and whatever else is implied in the loss of
  salvation?"

I should not be surprised, I say, to hear this question answered with an
emphatic,

  "Yes, Sir! I do actually believe this, for thus I find it written, and
  herein begins my right to the name of a Christian, that I have
  exchanged my reason for the Holy Scriptures: I acknowledge no reason
  but the Bible."

But as this intrepid respondent, though he may dispense with reason,
cannot quite so easily free himself from the obligations of common sense
and the canons of logic,--both of which demand consistency, and like
consequences from like premisses 'in rebus ejusdem generis', in subjects
of the same class,--I do find myself tempted to wonder, some small deal,
at the unscrupulous substitution of a few drops of water sprinkled on
the face for the Baptism, that is, immersion or dipping, of the whole
person, even if the rivers or running waters had been thought
non-essential.

And yet where every word in any and in all the four narratives is so
placed under the logical press as it is in this Discourse by Jeremy
Taylor, and each and every incident pronounced exemplary, and for the
purpose of being imitated, I should hold even this hazardous.

But I must wonder a very great deal, and in downright earnest, at the
contemptuous language which the same men employ in their controversies
with the Romish Church, respecting the corporal presence in the
consecrated bread and wine, and the efficacy of extreme unction.

For my own part, the assertion that what is phenomenally bread and wine
is substantially the Body and Blood of Christ, does not shock my common
sense more than that a few drops of water sprinkled on the face should
produce a momentous change, even a regeneration, in the soul; and does
not outrage my moral feelings half as much.

P. S. There is one error of very ill consequence to the reputation of
the Christian community, which Taylor shares with the Romish divines,
namely, the quoting of opinions, and even of rhetorical flights, from
the writings of this and that individual, with 'Saint' prefixed to his
name, as expressing the faith of the Church during the first five or six
centuries.

Whereas it would not, perhaps, be very difficult to convince
an unprejudiced man and a sincere Christian of the impossibility that
even the decrees of the General Councils should represent the Catholic
faith, that is, the belief essential to, or necessarily consequent on,
the faith in Christ common to all the elect.



[Footnote 1: The references are here given to Heber's edition, 1822. Ed.]


[Footnote 2: The page however remains a blank. But a little essay on
punctuation by the Author is in the Editor's possession, and will be
published hereafter.--Ed.]


[Footnote 3: See Euseb. 'Hist.' iii. 27.--Ed.]


[Footnote 4: 'Vindication, &c. Quer.' 13, 14, 15.--Ed.]


[Footnote 5: See the form previously exhibited in this volume,
p. 93.--Ed.]


[Footnote 6: 'Mark' viii. 29. 'Luke' ix. 20.--Ed.]


[Footnote 7: 1 'Pet'. v. 13.--Ed.]


[Footnote 8: Lightfoot and Wall use this strong argument for the
lawfulness and implied duty of Infant Baptism in the Christian Church.
It was the universal practice of the Jews to baptize the infant children
of proselytes as well as their parents. Instead, therefore, of Christ's
silence as to infants by name in his commission to baptize all nations
being an argument that he meant to exclude them, it is a sign that he
meant to include them. For it was natural that the precedent custom
should prevail, unless it were expressly forbidden. The force of this,
however, is limited to the ceremony;--its character and efficacy are not
established by it.--Ed.]


[Footnote 9: The Author's views of Baptism are stated more fully and
methodically in the 'Aids to Reflection'; but even that statement is
imperfect, and consequently open to objection, as was frequently
admitted by Mr. C. himself. The Editor is unable to say what precise
spiritual efficacy the Author ultimately ascribed to Infant Baptism; but
he was certainly an advocate for the practice, and appeared as sponsor
at the font for more than one of his friends' children. See his 'Letter
to a Godchild', printed, for this purpose, at the end of this volume;
his 'Sonnet on his Baptismal Birthday', ('Poet. Works', ii. p. 151.) in
the tenth line of which, in many copies, there was a misprint of 'heart'
for 'front;' and the 'Table Talk', 2nd edit. p. 183. Ed.]


[Footnote 10: 'Deut.' xiii. 1-5. xviii. 22.--Ed.]


[Footnote 11: 'Galat.' i. 8, 9.--Ed.]


[Footnote 12: Pp. 206-227. Ed.]


[Footnote 13: With reference to all these notes on Original Sin, see
'Aids to Reflection', p. 250-286.--Ed.]


[Footnote 14: 'Aids to Reflection', p. 274.--Ed.]


[Footnote 15: Ante. 'Vindication, &c.' p. 357-8.]


[Footnote 16: Ibid.]


[Footnote 17:

  'Dupliciter vero sanguis Christi et caro intelligitur, spiritualis
  ilia atque divina, de qua ipse dixit, Caro mea vere est cibus, &c.,
  vel caro et sanguis, quæ crucifixa est, et qui militis effusus est
  lancea.'

In 'Epist. Ephes.' c.i.]


[Footnote 18: See 'Table Talk', p. 72, second edit. Ed.]


[Footnote 19:

  'Ipsum regem tradunt, volventem commentaries Numæ, quum ibi occulta
  solennia sacrificia Jovi Elicio facta invenisset, operatum his sacris
  se abdidisse; sed non rite initum aut curatum id sacrum esse; nee
  solum nullam ei oblatam Cælestium speciem, sed ira Jovis, sollicitati
  prava religione, fulmine ictum cum domo conflagrasse.'

L. i. c. xxxi.--Ed.]


[Footnote 20:

  "This also rests upon the practice apostolical and traditive
  interpretation of holy Church, and yet cannot be denied that so it
  ought to be, by any man that would not have his Christendom suspected.
  To these I add the communion of women, the distinction of books
  apocryphal from canonical, that such books were written by such
  Evangelists and Apostles, the whole tradition of Scripture itself, the
  Apostles' Creed, &c. ... These and divers others of greater
  consequence, (which I dare not specify for fear of being
  misunderstood,) rely but upon equal faith with this of Episcopacy,"

&c.--Ed.]


[Footnote 21: S. xxvi.]


[Footnote 22: S. iv. 4.--Ed.]





