CHAPTER VII

MERCURY, THE MOON, AND VENUS


The planet Mercury probably resembles Mars in many respects, but
differs particularly in lacking an atmosphere. The fissures in the
crust of the Earth or of Mars are as a rule rapidly filled and their
contours largely hidden from sight by alluvium or sand carried by
windstorms, so that they reveal themselves only through tremors and
various emanations along their course. The fissures on Mercury on
the other hand must remain as yawning chasms. It is probable that
reducing gases stream out of these cracks as on Earth, and colour
the environment in a darker shade than the other visible part of
the planet’s surface, that is the hemisphere turned toward the Sun.
Not very volatile gases, such as sal-ammoniac, other chlorides and
sulphur, which on the Earth are deposited inside the fissures, may
here spread over large areas and discolour surrounding territory,
particularly where iron compounds are present, and, under the attack of
sulphur, turn black. Lowell has made drawings of the dark spots visible
on Mercury, one of which is reproduced as Fig. 25. These spots lie, as
on Antoniadi’s drawing of the surface of Mars (Fig. 17a), arranged in
lines which are almost straight or of a slight curvature only. This
seems to indicate that the spots belong to areas immediately adjoining
enormous fissures. According to Lowell’s drawing, these cracks are
far more regularly distributed on Mercury than on Mars. Very close to
the centre of the ever-sunny side we see a dark spot, a “lake.” It is
evident that this spot is located in by far the hottest point on the
surface of Mercury. This gives rise to the following conception. The
hottest part of Mercury was naturally the last to solidify. Mercury
evidently ceased to rotate around its own axis, leaving one side
continually exposed to the Sun, while its surface yet consisted of
lava that was fluid, at least where the sunshine was most intense. The
weakest point on the planet was therefore the one just opposite the
Sun. When later collapses occurred the cracks commenced at this weak
point. We see on the figure how not less than six fissures radiate
from this centre. Others were formed where the crust broke off from
adjacent solid portions. These latter fissures have a less rectilinear
appearance than those diverging from the centre of collapse. Along
these faults, reducing gases no doubt issue from the interior of the
planet and give a dark tone to the surface layers, which probably
consist of ferruginous dust falling from space. In the neighbourhood
of the Sun, such dust ought to be more plentiful, concentrated as it
were by the gravitation of the Sun. Mercury lies five times nearer
the Sun than the Earth does, and twelve times nearer than Mars. There
probably also exist on Mercury, as on the Moon, large mountains which
are not subject to the wear of running water and blowing sand. We
cannot, however, observe them from the Earth. Possibly they correspond
to the widely extended spots, which several investigators as Schroeter,
Vogel, and others, have noticed, formations resembling the “seas” on
the Moon. Vogel believed that he had found traces of water vapour in
the atmosphere of Mercury as in that of Mars, a belief in both cases
undoubtedly founded on erroneous observations.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 25. Drawing by Lowell, representing the planet Mercury
           with “canals.”
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 26. A part of the moon near its south pole. The big crater
           above, in the interior and on the walls of which a large
           number of smaller craters appear, is Clavius. A little
           below and to the right is Longomontanus just at the edge
           of the shadow; almost in the middle of the picture appears
           Tycho with its central cone. The moon diameter corresponds
           to 43.4 cm. Photo by Yerkes Observatory.
]

[Illustration:

  Fig. 27. Mare Serenitatis (below), Mare Tranquillitatis (upper
           left) and vicinity. To the left of Mare Serenitatis the
           great crater Posidonius; 2.8 cm. from the right edge a
           small white spot may be seen. This is the remarkable
           crater Linné, said to have undergone changes. The
           moon diameter corresponds to 35.7 cm. Photo by Yerkes
           Observatory.
]

The part of Mercury which is turned from the Sun must be characterized
by a tremendous cold due to radiation into space. The temperature
stays probably about 200° C. (360° F.) below the freezing point of
water (328° below zero F.). Even the most concentrated solutions we
know of freeze to ice precipitating the salt considerably above this
temperature. Moisture in fluid state can, therefore, not very well
exist on this side. On the sunny hemisphere it must be lacking as well,
due to evaporation over to the cold side. As a result, the desolation
on Mercury must be far greater than that on Mars and surface changes
caused by variations in temperature are almost precluded. On account
of the so-called libration, certain dark portions near the boundary of
the illuminated hemisphere occasionally enter the sunlight. But, during
this interval, all traces of moisture are undoubtedly driven away from
these parts, also never to return.

The Earth’s moon is not entirely as stagnant as Mercury, although on
the whole it closely resembles this planet. The Moon always turns the
same side to the Earth--a small libration exists here also--so that
each part of its surface is illumined by the Sun during one half of the
synodical month (29.53 days). This time, however, is so long that the
moon’s surface in the meantime almost assumes the temperatures due to
continuous sunlight and continuous night.

Some investigators, as W. H. Pickering, are persuaded that portions
of the moon just emerged from the shadow show a lighter colour than
after a short time of illumination. These observations, however, have
not been accepted as correct. According to Pickering, the light colour
should result from a slight formation of snow or hoar-frost during the
long night of 355 hours. If an appreciable trace of vapour existed on
the Moon, it ought to evaporate and form white caps over the poles
where the Sun’s heat is not sufficiently strong to melt them. As no
such signs have ever been observed, the faith in snow on the Moon is
not likely to find many defenders.

The lunar mountains are not attacked by water or sandstorms, nor do
they peel off due to rapid heating by the Sun. They rise, therefore, to
full stature over their surroundings. Their height can be measured by
the length of their shadows. Mädler, in this manner, computed one of
the peaks of the Mountain Newton to rise 7300 m. (24,000 ft.) above the
territory on which its shadow falls. Six peaks reach between 6000 and
7000 m. (19,500 and 24,000 ft.), 21 between 5000 and 6000 m. (16,500
and 19,500 ft.), 82 between 4000 and 5000 m. (13,000 and 16,500 ft.),
and 582 reach 2000 m. (6500 ft.) and more. These figures show the
extraordinary mountainous character of the Moon’s surface compared to
that of the Earth which is thirteen times larger.

In Fig. 26, we see a picture of the portion of the Moon most rich in
volcanoes, with the crater Tycho in the centre and Clavius above.

The numerous volcanoes are particularly characteristic of the Moon.
They vary in magnitude from a diameter of over 200 km. (125 miles),
for example the colossal Clavius with its companion craters, down to
dimensions just visible with the aid of a telescope. The largest exceed
our biggest many times in width and differ essentially from them,
inasmuch as their bottoms are flat, occasionally provided with smaller
volcanic cones--see the crater Longomontanus to the right of Tycho on
Fig. 26--and surrounded by a high (inwardly often very steep, outwardly
more sloping) wall as on Clavius, Longomontanus, and Tycho. The
largest, as for example Clavius, may be compared to a province such as
Bohemia, surrounded as it is on all sides by mountains. The elevated
ring, as well as the interior of Clavius, is adorned with numerous
large and small craters. The smallest of these resemble hemispherical
excavations in the crust of the Moon, or they may be small volcanic
cones which break through the walls. Sometimes they are strung out like
pearls along rents in the ground.

All these volcanoes have undoubtedly given passage from the interior
to the surface of the Moon for enormous volumes of gases previously
enclosed in the lunar magma. Nor is it less certain that these gases
have consisted largely of water vapour. If this had been condensed to
water, oceans and rivers would have been formed, and on the bottom
of the seas would have been deposited sediments carried down from
the mountains. Such, however, is not the case. The so-called “seas”
on the Moon are indeed on a lower level than their surroundings, but
their surface is even (see Fig. 27 with Mare Serenitatis below and
Mare Tranquillitatis above to the left; see also Fig. 29 with Mare
Imbrium below; it is bounded on the right by the “Carpathians”). The
“seas” consist of volcanic rocks, and are not at all covered with loose
sediments which if present ought to reflect light better than the
volcanic vitreous rocks. But the lunar “seas” are much darker than the
environments. This shows that seas proper, or bodies of water, have
probably never existed on the Moon. Even before the surface had changed
from its molten condition the water vapour had departed from the
atmosphere, and the new quantities which the volcanoes emitted from the
depths below disappeared so rapidly that lakes were never formed. The
history of other atmospheric gases on the Moon was no doubt similar.
All evidence, therefore, points to the conclusion that life never
inhabited its rough surface. Fig. 27 shows that the “sea-bottoms” are
not free from volcanoes. They also abound in folds, corresponding to
mountain-chains on the Earth. These folds indicate old breaks in the
crust while it was yet very thin. To the right, in Mare Serenitatis,
appear a few white spots which W. H. Pickering ascribed to snow. The
largest is the much discussed “crater” (?) Linné. Mare Serenitatis is
surrounded by a ring of volcanoes.

A noted astronomer, Cerulli, observed, when he directed a glass of
moderate power, such as opera glasses, toward the Moon that the spots
seemingly arranged themselves in rows forming intersecting lines
similar to the canal-system on Mars. As the regularity disappeared
with greater enlargement, Cerulli believed that the canal-system on
Mars also would dissolve into small spots if a sufficiently powerful
telescope were used. His idea, which partly has been verified, was more
recently adopted by the Englishman, Maunder, who denies the existence
of canals on Mars. Photography, however, has proved their reality (Fig.
18).

If we disregard the illusory reticulation, there are nevertheless
on the surface of the Moon numerous designs of a nearly rectilinear
outline. There are to begin with the sinuses, extended trenches,
often dotted along their sides with minor volcanoes. Fig. 27 shows,
in the upper right corner, two such sinuses, the right one with a
small volcano, Hyginus, in the middle. There are, further, five
such volcanoes in its left arm, not visible on the photograph, and
two in the right arm. The second, “Sinus Ariadaeus,” commences to
the left with the Volcano Ariadaeus, not visible on the figure. The
explanation of the origin of these sinuses is probably to be found in
the different contraction of the Moon’s surface layer and of the hotter
substrata immediately after the solid crust was formed. In a way, they
correspond therefore to cracks in the glazing on porcelain. Like the
two sinuses just mentioned they frequently commence and end with small
craters which formed weak spots in the crust that facilitated the
original break. Later on, volcanoes broke through along the sinuses
themselves. In several regions of the Moon, and particularly in the
equatorial belt, observers have claimed discoveries of new sinuses
and occasionally of minor craters, “which could not possibly have
escaped notice if they had existed before.” At present, the almost
unanimous verdict is that such changes are very improbable, and that
the visibility of the “new” objects largely depends on favourable
sidelight, so that they might well have been overlooked if the
region in question previously was examined under less advantageous
illumination.

The most peculiar formations on the Moon are the so-called “bright
streaks” which as a rule issue in almost straight lines from some of
the larger craters, particularly Tycho and Copernicus. Those around
Tycho (see Fig. 28) do not seem to be either raised above nor depressed
below the surroundings to any degree worth mentioning. For this reason
they are not visible under oblique illumination as in Fig. 25. They
proceed in straight lines independent of elevations. This quality
is in striking conformity with the characteristics of fissures on
earth as for instance those that traverse the Tyrrhenian Sea and the
Calabrian mountains. They also resemble the canals on Mars in this
respect. Nasmyth and Carpenter caused a glass ball, containing water
under pressure, to break at one point and obtained a system of beams
radiating from this point and vividly reminding of the streaks around
the lunar craters. The same effect appears if a homogeneous plate, of
glass for instance, is broken by a blow in one point. No doubt these
streak centres were once centres of collapse although they sometimes
now are found at a considerable elevation, like Tycho. This may be
the result of a later secular lifting of the rocky substrata like the
slow rise of the Scandinavian peninsula. The streaks around Copernicus
(see Fig. 29) are very different from those around Tycho. They are not
rectilinear and consist next to the crater of distinct mountain chains
plainly visible under oblique illumination. They penetrate into Mare
Imbrium (Fig. 29 below) crossing the mighty “Carpathian” mountains.
Frequently, they are provided with minor volcanoes, as in the streak
directed almost straight downward on the figure, _i. e._, to the north.
They are obviously volcanic fissures like those on the Earth.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 28. Tycho in full illumination with surrounding magnificent
           system of streaks. In the lower right corner Copernicus
           with a less regular system appears. Between them Mare
           Nubium, in the upper right Mare Humonum, with the
           great crater Gassendi below. The moon diameter
           corresponds to 16.7 cm. Photo by Yerkes Observatory.
           Compare Figs. 25 and 28, showing parts of the same
           territory under side light.
]

The streaks, in many cases, would not be visible at all were it not
for their different colour, which is considerably lighter than that
of the surroundings. The only explanation offered for this fact is
the assumption that the original cracks were filled by some light
matter forced out from the interior of the Moon, that is by the
lunar magma. This magma was not very viscous, as it has spread out
considerably beyond the edges of the cracks proper. These presumably,
like those on Earth, were of a rather moderate width, not enough to
be distinguishable at the Moon’s distance. Similar light-flowing
emanations from long fissures are known also on our planet, for
instance, from the Laki eruption on Iceland in 1783. The colour
may be light simply by comparison with the previously solidified
crust, which, optically, as regards reflexion of light, has proved
very similar to obsidian or, even more like another volcanic mineral
product, vitrophyre. It is also possible, however, that gas bubbles
were liberated as the lava solidified and gave the surface a milkwhite
appearance--gravity on the Moon is only one sixth of that on the Earth
so that the bubbles would rise and evaporate extremely slowly from
the magma. Due to the very low atmospheric pressure on the Moon, the
bubbles would also occupy a larger volume than in a corresponding case
on Earth and become more conspicuous in proportion. They probably
partly remained on the surface of the outpoured lava as a thin scum,
which hardened in that state. Since then, it has suffered no more
change than all other formations on the Moon, while on the Earth it
would soon have been scoured away by sand and water.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 29. The great lunar crater Copernicus surrounded with streaks.
           Below the Carpathian mountain range and at bottom part of
           Mare Imbrium. The moon diameter corresponds to 55 cm.
           Photo by Yerkes Observatory.
]

Before we leave the Moon it may be well to say a few words about its
colour. Mädler states in agreement with several other observers that
Mare Serenitatis, a “sea” on the Moon’s north side (25° latitude) just
to the right of the centre meridian (see Fig. 27) is remarkable for
its beautiful pure green colour, while Mare Crisium about 16° Lat. N.
near the right edge of the Moon is of a dark grey-green hue. In Mare
Humorum (about 22° Lat. S., not far from the edge of the Moon, see Fig.
28) grey and dark green shades alternate and in Mare Frigoris, just
inside the lunar north pole, the colour is a dingy yellowish-green.
In other words, the characteristic colour of the great lava seas is
apparently green. This agrees closely with conditions on the Earth
where similar formations are coloured green by silicates of ferrous
protoxides, certain species of which are called green-stones. Franz,
however, questions the observations of Mädler and professes the belief
that very light craters appear bluish and assumes this to be a contrast
effect to the general yellow hue of the Moon. Langley investigated the
lunar radiation with the spectroscope and found that the ratio of
blue to yellow was smaller in the moonlight than in the sunlight, for
which reason the general colour of the moon resembles that of yellow
sandstone.

A very interesting observation was made at the Lowell observatory when
investigating the spectrum of the sparse light reflected from the Earth
to the portions of the Moon not exposed to the sunlight. It proved to
be of a far more blue tinge than sunlight reflected from the Moon.
Our conclusion must be that the Earth shines with a blue lustre. This
is perfectly natural, as the diffused light which reaches us after
having been scattered by particles suspended in the air (and by gas
molecules as well) is a deep blue and there exists no reason why that
part of the light which is thrown outward into space should be of a
different colour. The Earth, therefore, is blue in contradistinction
to Mars which is red, on account of its desert surface, and Venus
which is bright white. The cloudy portions around the equator and the
poles should appear light blue from without and should be separated
by dark blue bands over the so-called horse latitudes, under which the
cloudless desert regions are located on either side of the equator.
(Compare the title page illustration.)

Compared to Mars the Moon offers a scene of far greater desolation.
On Mars, we observe at least some considerable changes such as the
disappearance of the white pole-caps at midsummer when at the same time
a dark ring appears to surround them; then the “lakes” and the “canals”
come into view, beginning close to the ring mentioned, later on
nearer the equator, and finally on its other side, while the opposite
pole-cap puts on its winter hue. Again, we have the sudden appearance,
and equally hasty disappearance, of white spots, particularly in the
neighbourhood of the lakes, and the sand storms which hide the surface
of Mars and often fill its canals. The abruptness of the changes
indicate that they are confined to a very thin surface layer. The
formation, on the other hand, of canals, for many years unobserved,
must be ascribed to a volcanic activity which, while feeble, yet must
be seated in the deeper portions of the planet. In addition, a stunted
vegetation of low forms is not unthinkable in the polar regions.

As against this, the Moon is undoubtedly a stellar body entirely
insusceptible of surface change. Near its centre, it is probably not
completely solidified and an extremely slow growth of the firm crust
is therefore likely. Gases are no doubt set free during this process,
but they are unable to penetrate the enclosing thick armour and remain
therefore as bubbles in the hardening magma.

As a matter of fact, no changes have, with certainty, been detected on
the Moon’s surface. It is true that the great Wm. Herschel, known as
an excellent observer, believed that he discovered, in 1873, mountains
which had not existed before that time, and Schröter, who diligently
studied the lunar surface, was of the opinion that he too had discerned
numerous changes. These discoveries, however, were doubted by careful
critics, and after the publication of Mädler’s great work about the
Moon (1837) the complete stagnation on that body was taken for granted.
Nevertheless, there are several astronomers, such as Schmidt in Athens
(1866) and lately W. H. Pickering in Cambridge, Mass., who think that
they have discerned considerable modifications. The former held that
the crater Linné (Fig. 27) had vanished since the publication of
Mädler’s work. In 1867, Mädler, himself, proclaimed that it had the
same appearance as before. Pickering, again, reports periodic changes
of “snow” and “vegetation.” (Compare Fig. 27 taken from Pickering’s
Moon-atlas.) Closer analysis, however, indicates that the phenomena
are probably only apparent and depend on the angle of illumination at
each particular time of observation. For some time, rather more than
a quarter of a century, photography has been pressed into the service
of lunar investigation with far more objective results than would be
possible through direct ocular inspection alone. During this period,
which, it must be admitted, is not very long, no distinct signs of
changes have been recorded by the photographic plates.

The great difference between Mars and the Moon depends upon the
existence of a real atmosphere on the former. The oxygen will probably
vanish from Mars also, being used up in the course of disintegration.
But nitrogen, argon, and the other permanent gases will always remain,
as will the water vapour from the bodies of water ever present,
particularly around the south pole. It is true that this water vapour
also will diminish with sinking temperature and when the latter finally
has reached the freezing point of the salt solutions on Mars, the
canals and the lakes will cease to thaw out or liquify under the vapour
distilled over from the warm to the cold pole. But sand storms and thin
mist formations will always appear and cause colour changes on the
desolate planet.

If we wish to picture to us the future fate of our Earth when it
gradually enters the reign of darkness and cold in consequence of the
enfeebling of the Sun, we must seek our illustration on Mars and not
on the Moon. Slowly are the oceans going to freeze, finally down to
their bottom, the abundance of the rainfalls will diminish, only light
snow will now and then bring change to a surface evermore transformed
into a sand desert as far as the continents reach. Rents in the rocky
substrata of the latter will appear as dark lines, caused by the gases
rising from the interior. When the temperature at the equator has
fallen below the freezing point, the polar regions will remain the only
parts where a light covering of frost will melt in the height of the
summer season and where the last feeble organisms will eke out their
hard existence, resorting to a prolonged winter’s sleep of their seeds
and spores. Finally, the last remnant of life will also disappear and
sandstorms alone, save for the gasps of gas emanation from fissures
in the rocky ground, will bring relief to the monotonous desolation.
Falling meteoric dust, which now exists in original state only on
the bottom of the oceans, will gradually cover the entire surface of
the Earth with a mantle coloured brick-red through the influence of
atmospheric oxygen. When the oxygen itself is used up, the meteoric
dust will retain its original greyish-green hue and lend it to the
funeral pall of the Earth.

Very different conditions obtain on our neighbour planet, which is
closer both to the Sun and to ourselves, the radiant Venus, an object
of interested human attention already in ancient times. The average
temperature there is calculated to about 47° C. (116.6° F.) assuming
the sun constant to two calories per cubic centimeter (.061 cu. in.)
per minute. The humidity is probably about six times the average of
that on the Earth, or three times that in Congo where the average
temperature is 26° C. (78.8° F). The atmosphere of Venus holds about
as much water vapour 5 km. (3.1 miles) _above_ the surface as does the
atmosphere of the Earth _at_ the surface. We must therefore conclude
that everything on Venus is dripping wet. The rainstorms on the other
hand do not necessarily bring greater precipitation than with us. The
cloud-formation is enormous and dense rainclouds travel as high up as
10 km. (6.2 miles). The heat from the Sun does not attack the ground
but the dense clouds, causing a powerful external circulation of air
which carries the vapour to higher strata where it condenses into
new clouds. Thus, an effective barrier is formed against horizontal
air currents in the great expanses below. At the surface of Venus,
therefore, there exists a complete absence of wind both vertically, as
the Sun’s radiation is absorbed by the ever present clouds above, and
horizontally due to friction. Disintegration takes place with enormous
rapidity, probably about eight times as fast as on the Earth, and the
violent rains carry the products speedily downhill where they fill the
valleys and the oceans in front of all river mouths.

A very great part of the surface of Venus is no doubt covered with
swamps, corresponding to those on the Earth in which the coal deposits
were formed, except that they are about 30° C. (54° F.) warmer. No
dust is lifted high into the air to lend it a distinct colour; Only
the dazzling white reflex from the clouds reaches the outside space
and gives the planet its remarkable, brilliantly white, lustre. The
powerful air currents in the highest strata of the atmosphere equalize
the temperature difference between poles and equator almost completely
so that a uniform climate exists all over the planet analogous to
conditions on the Earth during its hottest periods.

The temperature on Venus is not so high as to prevent a luxuriant
vegetation. The constantly uniform climatic conditions which exist
everywhere result in an entire absence of adaptation to changing
exterior conditions. Only low forms of life are therefore represented,
mostly no doubt belonging to the vegetable kingdom; and the organisms
are nearly of the same kind all over the planet. The vegetative
processes are greatly accelerated by the high temperature. Therefore,
the lifetime of the organisms is probably short. Their dead bodies,
decaying rapidly, if lying in the open air, fill it with stifling
gases; if embedded in the slime carried down by the rivers, they
speedily turn into small lumps of coal, which, later, under the
pressure of new layers combined with high temperature, become particles
of graphite. Fossils proper are not formed as was also the case in the
early periods of the Earth.

The temperature at the poles of Venus is probably somewhat lower,
perhaps about 10° C. (18° F.) than the average temperature on the
planet. The organisms there should have developed into higher forms
than elsewhere, and progress and culture, if we may so express it,
will gradually spread from the poles toward the equator. Later, the
temperature will sink, the dense clouds and the gloom disperse, and
some time, perhaps not before life on the Earth has reverted to its
simpler forms or has even become extinct, a flora and a fauna will
appear, similar in kind to those that now delight our human eye, and
Venus will then indeed be the “Heavenly Queen” of Babylonian fame, not
because of her radiant lustre alone, but as the dwelling place of the
highest beings in our solar system.

The ancients believed that the fates of men could be read in the
stars and this faith persisted with the power of a religion until
a few centuries ago. It was shared by the foremost astronomers,
pre-eminently by Tycho Brahe, who endeavoured to support it through
his investigations. Traces are yet to be found in popular conceptions.
These ideas have been verified today in a certain sense although with a
wholly different meaning than held by our forefathers. The planets do
tell us the conditions that existed on the Earth at the first dawn of
life and we can also draw from them a prediction of the fate that once,
after milliards of years perhaps, will befall the latter descendants of
present generations.

In one respect the dreams of our ancestors have not proved true,
namely, with reference to the habitability of the other globes in our
solar system. According to the great Kant, conditions on the wandering
stars outside of the Earth’s orbit were so favourable to life that
their inhabitants ought to have reached a far higher development than
beings on the Earth. The last remnant of this conception lives in the
speculations about the marvellously proficient engineers who built the
magnificent system of giant canals on Mars. A thorough critique has
demonstrated that any other planet in our solar system hardly can offer
an abode for higher beings, except this very Earth, which therefore
justly may be called “the best of worlds” among those that we know. And
yet, it was undoubtedly a great truth that Giordano Bruno gave his life
for, because it is highly probable, nay almost certain, that around
the countless suns which dot the firmament spin dark bodies, although
unfortunately our most powerful lenses do not reveal them. A number
of these unseen stellar bodies shelter living beings, which even might
have climbed to a higher point on the ladder of evolution than have the
inhabitants of the Earth.

[Illustration:

  Fig. 17. Map of the planet Mars in Mercator’s projection
           according to drawing by Schiaparelli. A comparison
           with the drawing by Antoniadi (Fig. 17a) suggests that
           Schiaparelli has made a somewhat diagrammatic picture,
           which sets forth a very great number of strictly straight
           “canals.”
]

[Illustration: Fig. 17a. Map of the planet Mars in Mercator’s
projection, drawn in 1909 by E. M. Antoniadi.

  Explanations:  Meredies = south; Oriens = east; Occidens = west;
                 Septentrio = north; Nix = snow.
  Abbreviations: M = Mare, sea; S = Sinus, bay; Fr = Fretum, channel;
                 L = Lacus, lake; Fl = Flumen, river;
                 R = Regio, region; I = Insula, island;
                 Pr = Promontorium, cape.
]




  _A Selection from the
  Catalogue of_

  G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS

  ❧

  Complete Catalogue sent
  on application


The Essence of Astronomy

Things Every One Should Know About the Sun, Moon and Stars

By Edward W. Price

  _12mo.    Fully Illustrated.    Price $1.50.    By mail, $1.65_

Here is a volume quite different from the usual “popular book on
astronomy.”

It answers in untechnical language the every-day questions of every-day
people, the material being so arranged that it is readily available for
quick reference use, as well as for interesting consecutive reading.

An individual chapter is devoted to each member of the Solar System.
Special space is given to “Freaks and Oddities of the Skies.”

The illustrations are from photographs taken at the great
observatories. The drawings of Mars are the most recent published,
being made by Professor Lowell in January of this year.

The chronological table and annotated bibliography are of real value.


Sun Lore of All Ages

A Collection of Myths and Legends Concerning the Sun and its Worship

By William Tyler Olcott

Author of “Star Lore of All Ages,” “A Field Book of the Stars,” etc.

  _8^o.    With 30 Illustrations.    $2.50 net.    By mail, $2.70_

A companion volume to _Star Lore of All Ages_ by the same author. It
comprises a compilation of the myths, legends, and facts concerning the
sun, of equal interest to the lay-reader or to the student.

The literature of the subject is teeming with interest, linked as it
is with the life story of mankind from the cradle of the race to the
present day, for the solar myth lies at the very foundation of all
mythology, and as such must forever claim pre-eminence.

  G. P. Putnam’s Sons

  New York      London


A Beginner’s Star-Book

An Easy Guide to the Stars and to the Astronomical Uses of the
Opera-Glass, the Field-Glass, and the Telescope

By Kelvin McKready

  _Square 8vo.  Including 70 Illustrations._
  _$2.75 net.  Postage Additional_

This volume, peculiarly definite and helpful in method, is especially
adapted to the practical needs of those who wish a well illustrated
and clearly written handbook,--accurate in its scientific information
and yet popular enough to meet the wishes of the average man or woman.
The book is distinguished from other volumes on popular astronomy by
a novel system of mapping, and by an unusually full discussion of the
uses of the simpler astronomical instruments. Special care has been
given to reproductions of recent astronomical photographs.

“_Mr. McKready’s book is the finest thing for the beginner that I have
ever seen. It is a pleasure to read a book so excellent in so many
different ways. I have never seen photographs reproduced better. I have
never seen maps of the heavens so intelligible to the beginner, and
I have never read explanations so concise and yet so complete as in
this book._”--Prof. S. A. Mitchell, Department of Astronomy, Columbia
University, New York City.

  New York      G. P. Putnam’s Sons       London


A Revised Edition of a Standard Work

A Field Book of the Stars

By William Tyler Olcott

Author of “Star Lore of All Ages,” etc.

  _Second Edition, Revised. With Additional Material. 16^o._
  _With Fifty Diagrams. $1.00 net. By mail, $1.10_

In the new edition of this standard work the author has given full
information, together with diagrams representing the result of the
latest investigations. All matters of a technical or theoretical nature
have been omitted. Only what the reader can observe with the naked eye
or with an opera-glass have been included in it.

Excellently arranged and copiously illustrated, this manual is a real
field-book and will prove valuable for all who wish to become familiar
with the stars.

  New York      G. P. Putnam’s Sons       London


Star Lore of All Ages

A Collection of Myths, Legends, and Facts, Concerning the
Constellations of the Northern Hemisphere

By William Tyler Olcott

Author of “A Field Book of the Stars,” etc.

  _8^o.  With 164 Illustrations and Diagrams_
  _$3.50 net. By mail, $3.75_

“A sumptuous treasure-house in which the lover of ancient myth and
modern miracle may wander for enchanted hours. Its red and gold
doors open upon a gallery of masterpieces in art, all being inspired
conceptions connected in some way with star lore. The pictures and
the legends of all ages have been ransacked to make this gallery
irresistible to art and nature lovers, and not in vain. Withal the most
intense facts of astronomical knowledge and discovery are given beside
the tapestried romance which earlier peoples wove with star-stuff as
the medium of their art. It is a book delightful to the eye, scholarly
in conception and treatment, and charming to the inner sense.”--From
_Scientific American._

“Here all the myths, legends, and facts relating to all our northern
constellations are set forth fully as well as with scientific
exactness, are illustrated with clear maps and diagrams, and are
brought into close association with their classic origins by
beautifully reproduced photographs of works of art and architecture.”

                    _The Outlook._

  New York      G. P. Putnam’s Sons      London




Transcriber’s Notes


Punctuation and spelling were made consistent when a predominant
preference was found in this book; otherwise they were not changed.

Simple typographical errors were corrected; occasional unbalanced
quotation marks retained.

The spelling and accent marks of non-English words have not been
changed.

Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines were retained; occurrences of
inconsistent hyphenation have not been changed.

Illustrations have been moved, when necessary, to fall between
paragraphs and outside of quoted text. In some cases, this places them
on different pages than the ones given in the Table of Illustrations.
In versions of this eBook that support “links”, the page numbers in
that table link to the correct illustrations.

Wide tables on pages 113 and 146 have been split to fit within
recommended width limits. The left-hand identifier columns have been
duplicated in both halves of the split tables.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Destinies of the Stars, by Svante Arrhenius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DESTINIES OF THE STARS ***

***** This file should be named 58222-0.txt or 58222-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/8/2/2/58222/

Produced by ellinora, Charlie Howard, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


