CHAPTER XXXV. How Sir Tristram was holpen by his men, and of Queen
Isoud which was put in a lazar-cote, and how Tristram was hurt.

So when they were departed, Gouvernail, and Sir Lambegus, and Sir
Sentraille de Lushon, that were Sir Tristram’s men, sought their
master. When they heard he was escaped then they were passing glad; and
on the rocks they found him, and with towels they pulled him up. And
then Sir Tristram asked them where was La Beale Isoud, for he weened
she had been had away of Andred’s people. Sir, said Gouvernail, she is
put in a lazar-cote. Alas, said Sir Tristram, this is a full ungoodly
place for such a fair lady, and if I may she shall not be long there.
And so he took his men and went thereas was La Beale Isoud, and fetched
her away, and brought her into a forest to a fair manor, and Sir
Tristram there abode with her. So the good knight bade his men go from
him: For at this time I may not help you. So they departed all save
Gouvernail. And so upon a day Sir Tristram yede into the forest for to
disport him, and then it happened that there he fell sleep; and there
came a man that Sir Tristram aforehand had slain his brother, and when
this man had found him he shot him through the shoulder with an arrow,
and Sir Tristram leapt up and killed that man. And in the meantime it
was told King Mark how Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud were in that
same manor, and as soon as ever he might thither he came with many
knights to slay Sir Tristram. And when he came there he found him gone;
and there he took La Beale Isoud home with him, and kept her strait
that by no means never she might wit nor send unto Tristram, nor he
unto her. And then when Sir Tristram came toward the old manor he found
the track of many horses, and thereby he wist his lady was gone. And
then Sir Tristram took great sorrow, and endured with great pain long
time, for the arrow that he was hurt withal was envenomed.

Then by the mean of La Beale Isoud she told a lady that was cousin unto
Dame Bragwaine, and she came to Sir Tristram, and told him that he
might not be whole by no means. For thy lady, La Beale Isoud, may not
help thee, therefore she biddeth you haste into Brittany to King Howel,
and there ye shall find his daughter, Isoud la Blanche Mains, and she
shall help thee. Then Sir Tristram and Gouvernail gat them shipping,
and so sailed into Brittany. And when King Howel wist that it was Sir
Tristram he was full glad of him. Sir, he said, I am come into this
country to have help of your daughter, for it is told me that there is
none other may heal me but she; and so within a while she healed him.



CHAPTER XXXVI. How Sir Tristram served in war King Howel of Brittany,
and slew his adversary in the field.

There was an earl that hight Grip, and this earl made great war upon
the king, and put the king to the worse, and besieged him. And on a
time Sir Kehydius, that was son to King Howel, as he issued out he was
sore wounded, nigh to the death. Then Gouvernail went to the king and
said: Sir, I counsel you to desire my lord, Sir Tristram, as in your
need to help you. I will do by your counsel, said the king. And so he
yede unto Sir Tristram, and prayed him in his wars to help him: For my
son, Sir Kehydius, may not go into the field. Sir, said Sir Tristram, I
will go to the field and do what I may. Then Sir Tristram issued out of
the town with such fellowship as he might make, and did such deeds that
all Brittany spake of him. And then, at the last, by great might and
force, he slew the Earl Grip with his own hands, and more than an
hundred knights he slew that day. And then Sir Tristram was received
worshipfully with procession. Then King Howel embraced him in his arms,
and said: Sir Tristram, all my kingdom I will resign to thee. God
defend, said Sir Tristram, for I am beholden unto you for your
daughter’s sake to do for you.

Then by the great means of King Howel and Kehydius his son, by great
proffers, there grew great love betwixt Isoud and Sir Tristram, for
that lady was both good and fair, and a woman of noble blood and fame.
And for because Sir Tristram had such cheer and riches, and all other
pleasaunce that he had, almost he had forsaken La Beale Isoud. And so
upon a time Sir Tristram agreed to wed Isoud la Blanche Mains. And at
the last they were wedded, and solemnly held their marriage. And so
when they were abed both Sir Tristram remembered him of his old lady La
Beale Isoud. And then he took such a thought suddenly that he was all
dismayed, and other cheer made he none but with clipping and kissing;
as for other fleshly lusts Sir Tristram never thought nor had ado with
her: such mention maketh the French book; also it maketh mention that
the lady weened there had been no pleasure but kissing and clipping.
And in the meantime there was a knight in Brittany, his name was
Suppinabiles, and he came over the sea into England, and then he came
into the court of King Arthur, and there he met with Sir Launcelot du
Lake, and told him of the marriage of Sir Tristram. Then said Sir
Launcelot: Fie upon him, untrue knight to his lady, that so noble a
knight as Sir Tristram is should be found to his first lady false, La
Beale Isoud, Queen of Cornwall; but say ye him this, said Sir
Launcelot, that of all knights in the world I loved him most, and had
most joy of him, and all was for his noble deeds; and let him wit the
love between him and me is done for ever, and that I give him warning
from this day forth as his mortal enemy.



CHAPTER XXXVII. How Sir Suppinabiles told Sir Tristram how he was
defamed in the court of King Arthur, and of Sir Lamorak.

Then departed Sir Suppinabiles unto Brittany again, and there he found
Sir Tristram, and told him that he had been in King Arthur’s court.
Then said Sir Tristram: Heard ye anything of me? So God me help, said
Sir Suppinabiles, there I heard Sir Launcelot speak of you great shame,
and that ye be a false knight to your lady and he bade me do you to wit
that he will be your mortal enemy in every place where he may meet you.
That me repenteth, said Tristram, for of all knights I loved to be in
his fellowship. So Sir Tristram made great moan and was ashamed that
noble knights should defame him for the sake of his lady. And in this
meanwhile La Beale Isoud made a letter unto Queen Guenever, complaining
her of the untruth of Sir Tristram, and how he had wedded the king’s
daughter of Brittany. Queen Guenever sent her another letter, and bade
her be of good cheer, for she should have joy after sorrow, for Sir
Tristram was so noble a knight called, that by crafts of sorcery ladies
would make such noble men to wed them. But in the end, Queen Guenever
said, it shall be thus, that he shall hate her, and love you better
than ever he did to-fore.

So leave we Sir Tristram in Brittany, and speak we of Sir Lamorak de
Galis, that as he sailed his ship fell on a rock and perished all, save
Sir Lamorak and his squire; and there he swam mightily, and fishers of
the Isle of Servage took him up, and his squire was drowned, and the
shipmen had great labour to save Sir Lamorak’s life, for all the
comfort that they could do.

And the lord of that isle, hight Sir Nabon le Noire, a great mighty
giant. And this Sir Nabon hated all the knights of King Arthur’s, and
in no wise he would do them favour. And these fishers told Sir Lamorak
all the guise of Sir Nabon; how there came never knight of King
Arthur’s but he destroyed him. And at the last battle that he did was
slain Sir Nanowne le Petite, the which he put to a shameful death in
despite of King Arthur, for he was drawn limb-meal. That forthinketh
me, said Sir Lamorak, for that knight’s death, for he was my cousin;
and if I were at mine ease as well as ever I was, I would revenge his
death. Peace, said the fishers, and make here no words, for or ever ye
depart from hence Sir Nabon must know that ye have been here, or else
we should die for your sake. So that I be whole, said Lamorak, of my
disease that I have taken in the sea, I will that ye tell him that I am
a knight of King Arthur’s, for I was never afeard to reneye my lord.



