CHAPTER XL. How Sir Lamorak departed from Sir Tristram, and how he met
with Sir Frol, and after with Sir Launcelot.

So turn we unto Sir Lamorak, that rode toward Arthur’s court, and Sir
Tristram’s wife and Kehydius took a vessel and sailed into Brittany,
unto King Howel, where he was welcome. And when he heard of these
adventures they marvelled of his noble deeds. Now turn we unto Sir
Lamorak, that when he was departed from Sir Tristram he rode out of the
forest, till he came to an hermitage. When the hermit saw him, he asked
him from whence he came. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, I come from this
valley. Sir, said the hermit: thereof I marvel. For this twenty winter
I saw never no knight pass this country but he was either slain or
villainously wounded, or pass as a poor prisoner. Those ill customs,
said Sir Lamorak, are fordone, for Sir Tristram slew your lord, Sir
Nabon, and his son. Then was the hermit glad, and all his brethren, for
he said there was never such a tyrant among Christian men. And
therefore, said the hermit, this valley and franchise we will hold of
Sir Tristram.

So on the morrow Sir Lamorak departed; and as he rode he saw four
knights fight against one, and that one knight defended him well, but
at the last the four knights had him down. And then Sir Lamorak went
betwixt them, and asked them why they would slay that one knight, and
said it was shame, four against one. Thou shalt well wit, said the four
knights, that he is false. That is your tale, said Sir Lamorak, and
when I hear him also speak, I will say as ye say. Then said Lamorak:
Ah, knight, can ye not excuse you, but that ye are a false knight. Sir,
said he, yet can I excuse me both with my word and with my hands, that
I will make good upon one of the best of them, my body to his body.
Then spake they all at once: We will not jeopardy our bodies as for
thee. But wit thou well, they said, an King Arthur were here himself,
it should not lie in his power to save his life. That is too much said,
said Sir Lamorak, but many speak behind a man more than they will say
to his face; and because of your words ye shall understand that I am
one of the simplest of King Arthur’s court; in the worship of my lord
now do your best, and in despite of you I shall rescue him. And then
they lashed all at once to Sir Lamorak, but anon at two strokes Sir
Lamorak had slain two of them, and then the other two fled. So then Sir
Lamorak turned again to that knight, and asked him his name. Sir, he
said, my name is Sir Frol of the Out Isles. Then he rode with Sir
Lamorak and bare him company.

And as they rode by the way they saw a seemly knight riding against
them, and all in white. Ah, said Frol, yonder knight jousted late with
me and smote me down, therefore I will joust with him. Ye shall not do
so, said Sir Lamorak, by my counsel, an ye will tell me your quarrel,
whether ye jousted at his request, or he at yours. Nay, said Sir Frol,
I jousted with him at my request. Sir, said Lamorak, then will I
counsel you deal no more with him, for meseemeth by his countenance he
should be a noble knight, and no japer; for methinketh he should be of
the Table Round. Therefore I will not spare, said Sir Frol. And then he
cried and said: Sir knight, make thee ready to joust. That needeth not,
said the White Knight, for I have no lust to joust with thee; but yet
they feutred their spears, and the White Knight overthrew Sir Frol, and
then he rode his way a soft pace. Then Sir Lamorak rode after him, and
prayed him to tell him his name: For meseemeth ye should be of the
fellowship of the Round Table. Upon a covenant, said he, I will tell
you my name, so that ye will not discover my name, and also that ye
will tell me yours. Then, said he, my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis. And
my name is Sir Launcelot du Lake. Then they put up their swords, and
kissed heartily together, and either made great joy of other. Sir, said
Sir Lamorak, an it please you I will do you service. God defend, said
Launcelot, that any of so noble a blood as ye be should do me service.
Then he said: More, I am in a quest that I must do myself alone. Now
God speed you, said Sir Lamorak, and so they departed. Then Sir Lamorak
came to Sir Frol and horsed him again. What knight is that? said Sir
Frol. Sir, he said, it is not for you to know, nor it is no point of my
charge. Ye are the more uncourteous, said Sir Frol, and therefore I
will depart from you. Ye may do as ye list, said Sir Lamorak, and yet
by my company ye have saved the fairest flower of your garland; so they
departed.



CHAPTER XLI. How Sir Lamorak slew Sir Frol, and of the courteous
fighting with Sir Belliance his brother.

Then within two or three days Sir Lamorak found a knight at a well
sleeping, and his lady sat with him and waked. Right so came Sir
Gawaine and took the knight’s lady, and set her up behind his squire.
So Sir Lamorak rode after Sir Gawaine, and said: Sir Gawaine, turn
again. And then said Sir Gawaine: What will ye do with me? for I am
nephew unto King Arthur. Sir, said he, for that cause I will spare you,
else that lady should abide with me, or else ye should joust with me.
Then Sir Gawaine turned him and ran to him that ought the lady, with
his spear, but the knight with pure might smote down Sir Gawaine, and
took his lady with him. All this Sir Lamorak saw, and said to himself:
But I revenge my fellow he will say of me dishonour in King Arthur’s
court. Then Sir Lamorak returned and proffered that knight to joust.
Sir, said he, I am ready. And there they came together with all their
might, and there Sir Lamorak smote the knight through both sides that
he fell to the earth dead.

Then that lady rode to that knight’s brother that hight Belliance le
Orgulus, that dwelt fast thereby, and then she told him how his brother
was slain. Alas, said he, I will be revenged. And so he horsed him, and
armed him, and within a while he overtook Sir Lamorak, and bade him:
Turn and leave that lady, for thou and I must play a new play; for thou
hast slain my brother Sir Frol, that was a better knight than ever wert
thou. It might well be, said Sir Lamorak, but this day in the field I
was found the better. So they rode together, and unhorsed other, and
turned their shields, and drew their swords, and fought mightily as
noble knights proved, by the space of two hours. So then Sir Belliance
prayed him to tell him his name. Sir, said he, my name is Sir Lamorak
de Galis. Ah, said Sir Belliance, thou art the man in the world that I
most hate, for I slew my sons for thy sake, where I saved thy life, and
now thou hast slain my brother Sir Frol. Alas, how should I be accorded
with thee; therefore defend thee, for thou shalt die, there is none
other remedy. Alas, said Sir Lamorak, full well me ought to know you,
for ye are the man that most have done for me. And therewithal Sir
Lamorak kneeled down, and besought him of grace. Arise, said Sir
Belliance, or else thereas thou kneelest I shall slay thee. That shall
not need, said Sir Lamorak, for I will yield me unto you, not for fear
of you, nor for your strength, but your goodness maketh me full loath
to have ado with you; wherefore I require you for God’s sake, and for
the honour of knighthood, forgive me all that I have offended unto you.
Alas, said Belliance, leave thy kneeling, or else I shall slay thee
without mercy.

Then they yede again unto battle, and either wounded other, that all
the ground was bloody thereas they fought. And at the last Belliance
withdrew him aback and set him down softly upon a little hill, for he
was so faint for bleeding that he might not stand. Then Sir Lamorak
threw his shield upon his back, and asked him what cheer. Well, said
Sir Belliance. Ah, Sir, yet shall I show you favour in your mal-ease.
Ah, Knight Sir Belliance, said Sir Lamorak, thou art a fool, for an I
had had thee at such advantage as thou hast done me, I should slay
thee; but thy gentleness is so good and so large, that I must needs
forgive thee mine evil will. And then Sir Lamorak kneeled down, and
unlaced first his umberere, and then his own, and then either kissed
other with weeping tears. Then Sir Lamorak led Sir Belliance to an
abbey fast by, and there Sir Lamorak would not depart from Belliance
till he was whole. And then they sware together that none of them
should never fight against other. So Sir Lamorak departed and went to
the court of King Arthur.

 Here leave we of Sir Lamorak and of Sir Tristram. And here beginneth
 the history of La Cote Male Taile.



