CHAPTER VI. How Sir Gawaine rode for to fetch again the hart, and how
two brethren fought each against other for the hart.

Sir Gawaine rode more than a pace, and Gaheris his brother that rode
with him instead of a squire to do him service. So as they rode they
saw two knights fight on horseback passing sore, so Sir Gawaine and his
brother rode betwixt them, and asked them for what cause they fought
so. The one knight answered and said, We fight for a simple matter, for
we two be two brethren born and begotten of one man and of one woman.
Alas, said Sir Gawaine, why do ye so? Sir, said the elder, there came a
white hart this way this day, and many hounds chased him, and a white
brachet was alway next him, and we understood it was adventure made for
the high feast of King Arthur, and therefore I would have gone after to
have won me worship; and here my younger brother said he would go after
the hart, for he was better knight than I: and for this cause we fell
at debate, and so we thought to prove which of us both was better
knight. This is a simple cause, said Sir Gawaine; uncouth men ye should
debate withal, and not brother with brother; therefore but if you will
do by my counsel I will have ado with you, that is ye shall yield you
unto me, and that ye go unto King Arthur and yield you unto his grace.
Sir knight, said the two brethren, we are forfoughten and much blood
have we lost through our wilfulness, and therefore we would be loath to
have ado with you. Then do as I will have you, said Sir Gawaine. We
will agree to fulfil your will; but by whom shall we say that we be
thither sent? Ye may say, By the knight that followeth the quest of the
hart that was white. Now what is your name? said Gawaine. Sorlouse of
the Forest, said the elder. And my name is, said the younger, Brian of
the Forest. And so they departed and went to the king’s court, and Sir
Gawaine on his quest.

And as Gawaine followed the hart by the cry of the hounds, even afore
him there was a great river, and the hart swam over; and as Sir Gawaine
would follow after, there stood a knight over the other side, and said,
Sir knight, come not over after this hart but if thou wilt joust with
me. I will not fail as for that, said Sir Gawaine, to follow the quest
that I am in, and so made his horse to swim over the water. And anon
they gat their spears and ran together full hard; but Sir Gawaine smote
him off his horse, and then he turned his horse and bade him yield him.
Nay, said the knight, not so, though thou have the better of me on
horseback. I pray thee, valiant knight, alight afoot, and match we
together with swords. What is your name? said Sir Gawaine. Allardin of
the Isles, said the other. Then either dressed their shields and smote
together, but Sir Gawaine smote him so hard through the helm that it
went to the brains, and the knight fell down dead. Ah! said Gaheris,
that was a mighty stroke of a young knight.



CHAPTER VII How the hart was chased into a castle and there slain, and
how Sir Gawaine slew a lady.

Then Gawaine and Gaheris rode more than a pace after the white hart,
and let slip at the hart three couple of greyhounds, and so they chased
the hart into a castle, and in the chief place of the castle they slew
the hart; Sir Gawaine and Gaheris followed after. Right so there came a
knight out of a chamber with a sword drawn in his hand and slew two of
the greyhounds, even in the sight of Sir Gawaine, and the remnant he
chased them with his sword out of the castle. And when he came again,
he said, O my white hart, me repenteth that thou art dead, for my
sovereign lady gave thee to me, and evil have I kept thee, and thy
death shall be dear bought an I live. And anon he went into his chamber
and armed him, and came out fiercely, and there met he with Sir
Gawaine. Why have ye slain my hounds? said Sir Gawaine, for they did
but their kind, and liefer I had ye had wroken your anger upon me than
upon a dumb beast. Thou sayest truth, said the knight, I have avenged
me on thy hounds, and so I will on thee or thou go. Then Sir Gawaine
alighted afoot and dressed his shield, and struck together mightily,
and clave their shields, and stoned their helms, and brake their
hauberks that the blood ran down to their feet.

At the last Sir Gawaine smote the knight so hard that he fell to the
earth, and then he cried mercy, and yielded him, and besought him as he
was a knight and gentleman, to save his life. Thou shalt die, said Sir
Gawaine, for slaying of my hounds. I will make amends, said the knight,
unto my power. Sir Gawaine would no mercy have, but unlaced his helm to
have stricken off his head. Right so came his lady out of a chamber and
fell over him, and so he smote off her head by misadventure. Alas, said
Gaheris, that is foully and shamefully done, that shame shall never
from you; also ye should give mercy unto them that ask mercy, for a
knight without mercy is without worship. Sir Gawaine was so stonied of
the death of this fair lady that he wist not what he did, and said unto
the knight, Arise, I will give thee mercy. Nay, nay, said the knight, I
take no force of mercy now, for thou hast slain my love and my lady
that I loved best of all earthly things. Me sore repenteth it, said Sir
Gawaine, for I thought to strike unto thee; but now thou shalt go unto
King Arthur and tell him of thine adventures, and how thou art overcome
by the knight that went in the quest of the white hart. I take no
force, said the knight, whether I live or I die; but so for dread of
death he swore to go unto King Arthur, and he made him to bear one
greyhound before him on his horse, and another behind him. What is your
name? said Sir Gawaine, or we depart. My name is, said the knight,
Ablamar of the Marsh. So he departed toward Camelot.



CHAPTER VIII. How four knights fought against Gawaine and Gaheris, and
how they were overcome, and their lives saved at request of four
ladies.

And Sir Gawaine went into the castle, and made him ready to lie there
all night, and would have unarmed him. What will ye do, said Gaheris,
will ye unarm you in this country? Ye may think ye have many enemies
here. They had not sooner said that word but there came four knights
well armed, and assailed Sir Gawaine hard, and said unto him, Thou
new-made knight, thou hast shamed thy knighthood, for a knight without
mercy is dishonoured. Also thou hast slain a fair lady to thy great
shame to the world’s end, and doubt thou not thou shalt have great need
of mercy or thou depart from us. And therewith one of them smote Sir
Gawaine a great stroke that nigh he fell to the earth, and Gaheris
smote him again sore, and so they were on the one side and on the
other, that Sir Gawaine and Gaheris were in jeopardy of their lives;
and one with a bow, an archer, smote Sir Gawaine through the arm that
it grieved him wonderly sore. And as they should have been slain, there
came four fair ladies, and besought the knights of grace for Sir
Gawaine; and goodly at request of the ladies they gave Sir Gawaine and
Gaheris their lives, and made them to yield them as prisoners. Then
Gawaine and Gaheris made great dole. Alas! said Sir Gawaine, mine arm
grieveth me sore, I am like to be maimed; and so made his complaint
piteously.

Early on the morrow there came to Sir Gawaine one of the four ladies
that had heard all his complaint, and said, Sir knight, what cheer? Not
good, said he. It is your own default, said the lady, for ye have done
a passing foul deed in the slaying of the lady, the which will be great
villainy unto you. But be ye not of King Arthur’s kin? said the lady.
Yes truly, said Sir Gawaine. What is your name? said the lady, ye must
tell it me or ye pass. My name is Gawaine, the King Lot of Orkney’s
son, and my mother is King Arthur’s sister. Ah! then are ye nephew unto
King Arthur, said the lady, and I shall so speak for you that ye shall
have conduct to go to King Arthur for his love. And so she departed and
told the four knights how their prisoner was King Arthur’s nephew, and
his name is Sir Gawaine, King Lot’s son of Orkney. And they gave him
the hart’s head because it was in his quest. Then anon they delivered
Sir Gawaine under this promise, that he should bear the dead lady with
him in this manner; the head of her was hanged about his neck, and the
whole body of her lay before him on his horse’s mane. Right so rode he
forth unto Camelot. And anon as he was come, Merlin desired of King
Arthur that Sir Gawaine should be sworn to tell of all his adventures,
and how he slew the lady, and how he would give no mercy unto the
knight, wherethrough the lady was slain. Then the king and the queen
were greatly displeased with Sir Gawaine for the slaying of the lady.
And there by ordinance of the queen there was set a quest of ladies on
Sir Gawaine, and they judged him for ever while he lived to be with all
ladies, and to fight for their quarrels; and that ever he should be
courteous, and never to refuse mercy to him that asketh mercy. Thus was
Gawaine sworn upon the Four Evangelists that he should never be against
lady nor gentlewoman, but if he fought for a lady and his adversary
fought for another. And thus endeth the adventure of Sir Gawaine that
he did at the marriage of King Arthur. Amen.



