CHAPTER VII. How Arthur took upon him to fight to be delivered out of
prison, and also for to deliver twenty knights that were in prison.

What are ye that so complain? said King Arthur. We be here twenty
knights, prisoners, said they, and some of us have lain here seven
year, and some more and some less. For what cause? said Arthur. We
shall tell you, said the knights; this lord of this castle, his name is
Sir Damas, and he is the falsest knight that liveth, and full of
treason, and a very coward as any liveth, and he hath a younger
brother, a good knight of prowess, his name is Sir Ontzlake; and this
traitor Damas, the elder brother will give him no part of his
livelihood, but as Sir Ontzlake keepeth thorough prowess of his hands,
and so he keepeth from him a full fair manor and a rich, and therein
Sir Ontzlake dwelleth worshipfully, and is well beloved of all people.
And this Sir Damas, our master is as evil beloved, for he is without
mercy, and he is a coward, and great war hath been betwixt them both,
but Ontzlake hath ever the better, and ever he proffereth Sir Damas to
fight for the livelihood, body for body, but he will not do; other-else
to find a knight to fight for him. Unto that Sir Damas had granted to
find a knight, but he is so evil beloved and hated, that there is never
a knight will fight for him. And when Damas saw this, that there was
never a knight would fight for him, he hath daily lain await with many
knights with him, and taken all the knights in this country to see and
espy their adventures, he hath taken them by force and brought them to
his prison. And so he took us separately as we rode on our adventures,
and many good knights have died in this prison for hunger, to the
number of eighteen knights; and if any of us all that here is, or hath
been, would have foughten with his brother Ontzlake, he would have
delivered us, but for because this Damas is so false and so full of
treason we would never fight for him to die for it. And we be so lean
for hunger that unnethe we may stand on our feet. God deliver you, for
his mercy, said Arthur.

Anon, therewithal there came a damosel unto Arthur, and asked him, What
cheer? I cannot say, said he. Sir, said she, an ye will fight for my
lord, ye shall be delivered out of prison, and else ye escape never the
life. Now, said Arthur, that is hard, yet had I liefer to fight with a
knight than to die in prison; with this, said Arthur, I may be
delivered and all these prisoners, I will do the battle. Yes, said the
damosel. I am ready, said Arthur, an I had horse and armour. Ye shall
lack none, said the damosel. Meseemeth, damosel, I should have seen you
in the court of Arthur. Nay said the damosel, I came never there, I am
the lord’s daughter of this castle. Yet was she false, for she was one
of the damosels of Morgan le Fay.

Anon she went unto Sir Damas, and told him how he would do battle for
him, and so he sent for Arthur. And when he came he was well coloured,
and well made of his limbs, that all knights that saw him said it were
pity that such a knight should die in prison. So Sir Damas and he were
agreed that he should fight for him upon this covenant, that all other
knights should be delivered; and unto that was Sir Damas sworn unto
Arthur, and also to do the battle to the uttermost. And with that all
the twenty knights were brought out of the dark prison into the hall,
and delivered, and so they all abode to see the battle.



CHAPTER VIII. How Accolon found himself by a well, and he took upon him
to do battle against Arthur.

Now turn we unto Accolon of Gaul, that when he awoke he found himself
by a deep well-side, within half a foot, in great peril of death. And
there came out of that fountain a pipe of silver, and out of that pipe
ran water all on high in a stone of marble. When Sir Accolon saw this,
he blessed him and said, Jesus save my lord King Arthur, and King
Uriens, for these damosels in this ship have betrayed us, they were
devils and no women; and if I may escape this misadventure, I shall
destroy all where I may find these false damosels that use
enchantments. Right with that there came a dwarf with a great mouth and
a flat nose, and saluted Sir Accolon, and said how he came from Queen
Morgan le Fay, and she greeteth you well, and biddeth you be of strong
heart, for ye shall fight to morrow with a knight at the hour of prime,
and therefore she hath sent you here Excalibur, Arthur’s sword, and the
scabbard, and she biddeth you as ye love her, that ye do the battle to
the uttermost, without any mercy, like as ye had promised her when ye
spake together in privity; and what damosel that bringeth her the
knight’s head, which ye shall fight withal, she will make her a queen.
Now I understand you well, said Accolon, I shall hold that I have
promised her now I have the sword: when saw ye my lady Queen Morgan le
Fay? Right late, said the dwarf. Then Accolon took him in his arms and
said, Recommend me unto my lady queen, and tell her all shall be done
that I have promised her, and else I will die for it. Now I suppose,
said Accolon, she hath made all these crafts and enchantments for this
battle. Ye may well believe it, said the dwarf. Right so there came a
knight and a lady with six squires, and saluted Accolon, and prayed him
for to arise, and come and rest him at his manor. And so Accolon
mounted upon a void horse, and went with the knight unto a fair manor
by a priory, and there he had passing good cheer.

Then Sir Damas sent unto his brother Sir Ontzlake, and bade make him
ready by to-morn at the hour of prime, and to be in the field to fight
with a good knight, for he had found a good knight that was ready to do
battle at all points. When this word came unto Sir Ontzlake he was
passing heavy, for he was wounded a little to-fore through both his
thighs with a spear, and made great dole; but as he was wounded, he
would have taken the battle on hand. So it happed at that time, by the
means of Morgan le Fay, Accolon was with Sir Ontzlake lodged; and when
he heard of that battle, and how Ontzlake was wounded, he said that he
would fight for him. Because Morgan le Fay had sent him Excalibur and
the sheath for to fight with the knight on the morn: this was the cause
Sir Accolon took the battle on hand. Then Sir Ontzlake was passing
glad, and thanked Sir Accolon with all his heart that he would do so
much for him. And therewithal Sir Ontzlake sent word unto his brother
Sir Damas, that he had a knight that for him should be ready in the
field by the hour of prime.

So on the morn Sir Arthur was armed and well horsed, and asked Sir
Damas, When shall we to the field? Sir, said Sir Damas, ye shall hear
mass. And so Arthur heard a mass, and when mass was done there came a
squire on a great horse, and asked Sir Damas if his knight were ready,
for our knight is ready in the field. Then Sir Arthur mounted upon
horseback, and there were all the knights and commons of that country;
and so by all advices there were chosen twelve good men of the country
for to wait upon the two knights. And right as Arthur was on horseback
there came a damosel from Morgan le Fay, and brought unto Sir Arthur a
sword like unto Excalibur, and the scabbard, and said unto Arthur,
Morgan le Fay sendeth here your sword for great love. And he thanked
her, and weened it had been so, but she was false, for the sword and
the scabbard was counterfeit, and brittle, and false.



