CHAPTER V. How a knight found Sir Launcelot lying in his leman’s bed,
and how Sir Launcelot fought with the knight.

Then within an hour there came the knight to whom the pavilion ought,
and he weened that his leman had lain in that bed, and so he laid him
down beside Sir Launcelot, and took him in his arms and began to kiss
him. And when Sir Launcelot felt a rough beard kissing him, he started
out of the bed lightly, and the other knight after him, and either of
them gat their swords in their hands, and out at the pavilion door went
the knight of the pavilion, and Sir Launcelot followed him, and there
by a little slake Sir Launcelot wounded him sore, nigh unto the death.
And then he yielded him unto Sir Launcelot, and so he granted him, so
that he would tell him why he came into the bed. Sir, said the knight,
the pavilion is mine own, and there this night I had assigned my lady
to have slept with me, and now I am likely to die of this wound. That
me repenteth, said Launcelot, of your hurt, but I was adread of
treason, for I was late beguiled, and therefore come on your way into
your pavilion and take your rest, and as I suppose I shall staunch your
blood. And so they went both into the pavilion, and anon Sir Launcelot
staunched his blood.

Therewithal came the knight’s lady, that was a passing fair lady, and
when she espied that her lord Belleus was sore wounded, she cried out
on Sir Launcelot, and made great dole out of measure. Peace, my lady
and my love, said Belleus, for this knight is a good man, and a knight
adventurous, and there he told her all the cause how he was wounded;
And when that I yielded me unto him, he left me goodly and hath
staunched my blood. Sir, said the lady, I require thee tell me what
knight ye be, and what is your name? Fair lady, he said, my name is Sir
Launcelot du Lake. So me thought ever by your speech, said the lady,
for I have seen you oft or this, and I know you better than ye ween.
But now an ye would promise me of your courtesy, for the harms that ye
have done to me and my Lord Belleus, that when he cometh unto Arthur’s
court for to cause him to be made knight of the Round Table, for he is
a passing good man of arms, and a mighty lord of lands of many out
isles.

Fair lady, said Sir Launcelot, let him come unto the court the next
high feast, and look that ye come with him, and I shall do my power, an
ye prove you doughty of your hands, that ye shall have your desire. So
thus within a while, as they thus talked, the night passed, and the day
shone, and then Sir Launcelot armed him, and took his horse, and they
taught him to the Abbey, and thither he rode within the space of two
hours.



CHAPTER VI. How Sir Launcelot was received of King Bagdemagus’
daughter, and how he made his complaint to her father.

And soon as Sir Launcelot came within the abbey yard, the daughter of
King Bagdemagus heard a great horse go on the pavement. And she then
arose and yede unto a window, and there she saw Sir Launcelot, and anon
she made men fast to take his horse from him and let lead him into a
stable, and himself was led into a fair chamber, and unarmed him, and
the lady sent him a long gown, and anon she came herself. And then she
made Launcelot passing good cheer, and she said he was the knight in
the world was most welcome to her. Then in all haste she sent for her
father Bagdemagus that was within twelve mile of that Abbey, and afore
even he came, with a fair fellowship of knights with him. And when the
king was alighted off his horse he yode straight unto Sir Launcelot’s
chamber and there he found his daughter, and then the king embraced Sir
Launcelot in his arms, and either made other good cheer.

Anon Sir Launcelot made his complaint unto the king how he was
betrayed, and how his brother Sir Lionel was departed from him he wist
not where, and how his daughter had delivered him out of prison;
Therefore while I live I shall do her service and all her kindred. Then
am I sure of your help, said the king, on Tuesday next coming. Yea,
sir, said Sir Launcelot, I shall not fail you, for so I have promised
my lady your daughter. But, sir, what knights be they of my lord
Arthur’s that were with the King of Northgalis? And the king said it
was Sir Mador de la Porte, and Sir Mordred and Sir Gahalantine that all
for-fared my knights, for against them three I nor my knights might
bear no strength. Sir, said Sir Launcelot, as I hear say that the
tournament shall be here within this three mile of this abbey, ye shall
send unto me three knights of yours, such as ye trust, and look that
the three knights have all white shields, and I also, and no painture
on the shields, and we four will come out of a little wood in midst of
both parties, and we shall fall in the front of our enemies and grieve
them that we may; and thus shall I not be known what knight I am.

So they took their rest that night, and this was on the Sunday, and so
the king departed, and sent unto Sir Launcelot three knights with the
four white shields. And on the Tuesday they lodged them in a little
leaved wood beside there the tournament should be. And there were
scaffolds and holes that lords and ladies might behold and to give the
prize. Then came into the field the King of Northgalis with eight score
helms. And then the three knights of Arthur’s stood by themselves. Then
came into the field King Bagdemagus with four score of helms. And then
they feutred their spears, and came together with a great dash, and
there were slain of knights at the first recounter twelve of King
Bagdemagus’ party, and six of the King of Northgalis’ party, and King
Bagdemagus’ party was far set aback.



CHAPTER VII. How Sir Launcelot behaved him in a tournament, and how he
met with Sir Turquine leading Sir Gaheris.

With that came Sir Launcelot du Lake, and he thrust in with his spear
in the thickest of the press, and there he smote down with one spear
five knights, and of four of them he brake their backs. And in that
throng he smote down the King of Northgalis, and brake his thigh in
that fall. All this doing of Sir Launcelot saw the three knights of
Arthur’s. Yonder is a shrewd guest, said Sir Mador de la Porte,
therefore have here once at him. So they encountered, and Sir Launcelot
bare him down horse and man, so that his shoulder went out of lith. Now
befalleth it to me to joust, said Mordred, for Sir Mador hath a sore
fall. Sir Launcelot was ware of him, and gat a great spear in his hand,
and met him, and Sir Mordred brake a spear upon him, and Sir Launcelot
gave him such a buffet that the arson of his saddle brake, and so he
flew over his horse’s tail, that his helm butted into the earth a foot
and more, that nigh his neck was broken, and there he lay long in a
swoon.

Then came in Sir Gahalantine with a great spear and Launcelot against
him, with all their strength that they might drive, that both their
spears to-brast even to their hands, and then they flang out with their
swords and gave many a grim stroke. Then was Sir Launcelot wroth out of
measure, and then he smote Sir Gahalantine on the helm that his nose
brast out on blood, and ears and mouth both, and therewith his head
hung low. And therewith his horse ran away with him, and he fell down
to the earth. Anon therewithal Sir Launcelot gat a great spear in his
hand, and or ever that great spear brake, he bare down to the earth
sixteen knights, some horse and man, and some the man and not the
horse, and there was none but that he hit surely, he bare none arms
that day. And then he gat another great spear, and smote down twelve
knights, and the most part of them never throve after. And then the
knights of the King of Northgalis would joust no more. And there the
gree was given to King Bagdemagus.

So either party departed unto his own place, and Sir Launcelot rode
forth with King Bagdemagus unto his castle, and there he had passing
good cheer both with the king and with his daughter, and they proffered
him great gifts. And on the morn he took his leave, and told the king
that he would go and seek his brother Sir Lionel, that went from him
when that he slept, so he took his horse, and betaught them all to God.
And there he said unto the king’s daughter, If ye have need any time of
my service I pray you let me have knowledge, and I shall not fail you
as I am true knight. And so Sir Launcelot departed, and by adventure he
came into the same forest there he was taken sleeping. And in the midst
of a highway he met a damosel riding on a white palfrey, and there
either saluted other. Fair damosel, said Sir Launcelot, know ye in this
country any adventures? Sir knight, said that damosel, here are
adventures near hand, an thou durst prove them. Why should I not prove
adventures? said Sir Launcelot for that cause come I hither. Well, said
she, thou seemest well to be a good knight, and if thou dare meet with
a good knight, I shall bring thee where is the best knight, and the
mightiest that ever thou found, so thou wilt tell me what is thy name,
and what knight thou art. Damosel, as for to tell thee my name I take
no great force; truly my name is Sir Launcelot du Lake. Sir, thou
beseemest well, here be adventures by that fall for thee, for hereby
dwelleth a knight that will not be overmatched for no man I know but ye
overmatch him, and his name is Sir Turquine. And, as I understand, he
hath in his prison, of Arthur’s court, good knights three score and
four, that he hath won with his own hands. But when ye have done that
journey ye shall promise me as ye are a true knight for to go with me,
and to help me and other damosels that are distressed daily with a
false knight. All your intent, damosel, and desire I will fulfil, so ye
will bring me unto this knight. Now, fair knight, come on your way; and
so she brought him unto the ford and the tree where hung the basin.

So Sir Launcelot let his horse drink, and then he beat on the basin
with the butt of his spear so hard with all his might till the bottom
fell out, and long he did so, but he saw nothing. Then he rode endlong
the gates of that manor nigh half-an-hour. And then was he ware of a
great knight that drove an horse afore him, and overthwart the horse
there lay an armed knight bound. And ever as they came near and near,
Sir Launcelot thought he should know him. Then Sir Launcelot was ware
that it was Sir Gaheris, Gawaine’s brother, a knight of the Table
Round. Now, fair damosel, said Sir Launcelot, I see yonder cometh a
knight fast bounden that is a fellow of mine, and brother he is unto
Sir Gawaine. And at the first beginning I promise you, by the leave of
God, to rescue that knight; but if his master sit better in the saddle
I shall deliver all the prisoners that he hath out of danger, for I am
sure he hath two brethren of mine prisoners with him. By that time that
either had seen other, they gripped their spears unto them. Now, fair
knight, said Sir Launcelot, put that wounded knight off the horse, and
let him rest awhile, and let us two prove our strengths; for as it is
informed me, thou doest and hast done great despite and shame unto
knights of the Round Table, and therefore now defend thee. An thou be
of the Table Round, said Turquine, I defy thee and all thy fellowship.
That is overmuch said, said Sir Launcelot.



