CHAPTER XV. How Sir Bleoberis demanded the fairest lady in King Mark’s
court, whom he took away, and how he was fought with.

Then it befell upon a day that the good knight Bleoberis de Ganis,
brother to Blamore de Ganis, and nigh cousin unto the good knight Sir
Launcelot du Lake, this Bleoberis came unto the court of King Mark, and
there he asked of King Mark a boon, to give him what gift that he would
ask in his court. When the king heard him ask so, he marvelled of his
asking, but because he was a knight of the Round Table, and of a great
renown, King Mark granted him his whole asking. Then, said Sir
Bleoberis, I will have the fairest lady in your court that me list to
choose. I may not say nay, said King Mark; now choose at your
adventure. And so Sir Bleoberis did choose Sir Segwarides’ wife, and
took her by the hand, and so went his way with her; and so he took his
horse and gart set her behind his squire, and rode upon his way.

When Sir Segwarides heard tell that his lady was gone with a knight of
King Arthur’s court, then he armed him and rode after that knight for
to rescue his lady. So when Bleoberis was gone with this lady, King
Mark and all the court was wroth that she was away. Then were there
certain ladies that knew that there were great love between Sir
Tristram and her, and also that lady loved Sir Tristram above all other
knights. Then there was one lady that rebuked Sir Tristram in the
horriblest wise, and called him coward knight, that he would for shame
of his knighthood see a lady so shamefully be taken away from his
uncle’s court. But she meant that either of them had loved other with
entire heart. But Sir Tristram answered her thus: Fair lady, it is not
my part to have ado in such matters while her lord and husband is
present here; and if it had been that her lord had not been here in
this court, then for the worship of this court peradventure I would
have been her champion, and if so be Sir Segwarides speed not well, it
may happen that I will speak with that good knight or ever he pass from
this country.

Then within a while came one of Sir Segwarides’ squires, and told in
the court that Sir Segwarides was beaten sore and wounded to the point
of death; as he would have rescued his lady Sir Bleoberis overthrew him
and sore hath wounded him. Then was King Mark heavy thereof, and all
the court. When Sir Tristram heard of this he was ashamed and sore
grieved; and then was he soon armed and on horseback, and Gouvernail,
his servant, bare his shield and spear. And so as Sir Tristram rode
fast he met with Sir Andred his cousin, that by the commandment of King
Mark was sent to bring forth, an ever it lay in his power, two knights
of Arthur’s court, that rode by the country to seek their adventures.
When Sir Tristram saw Sir Andred he asked him what tidings. So God me
help, said Sir Andred, there was never worse with me, for here by the
commandment of King Mark I was sent to fetch two knights of King
Arthur’s court, and that one beat me and wounded me, and set nought by
my message. Fair cousin, said Sir Tristram, ride on your way, and if I
may meet them it may happen I shall revenge you. So Sir Andred rode
into Cornwall, and Sir Tristram rode after the two knights, the which
one hight Sagramore le Desirous, and the other hight Dodinas le Savage.



CHAPTER XVI. How Sir Tristram fought with two knights of the Round
Table.

Then within a while Sir Tristram saw them afore him, two likely
knights. Sir, said Gouvernail unto his master, Sir, I would counsel you
not to have ado with them, for they be two proved knights of Arthur’s
court. As for that, said Sir Tristram, have ye no doubt but I will have
ado with them to increase my worship, for it is many day sithen I did
any deeds of arms. Do as ye list, said Gouvernail. And therewithal anon
Sir Tristram asked them from whence they came, and whither they would,
and what they did in those marches. Sir Sagramore looked upon Sir
Tristram, and had scorn of his words, and asked him again, Fair knight,
be ye a knight of Cornwall? Whereby ask ye it? said Sir Tristram. For
it is seldom seen, said Sir Sagramore, that ye Cornish knights be
valiant men of arms; for within these two hours there met us one of
your Cornish knights, and great words he spake, and anon with little
might he was laid to the earth. And, as I trow, said Sir Sagramore, ye
shall have the same handsel that he had. Fair lords, said Sir Tristram,
it may so happen that I may better withstand than he did, and whether
ye will or nill I will have ado with you, because he was my cousin that
ye beat. And therefore here do your best, and wit ye well but if ye
quit you the better here upon this ground, one knight of Cornwall shall
beat you both.

When Sir Dodinas le Savage heard him say so he gat a spear in his hand,
and said, Sir knight, keep well thyself: And then they departed and
came together as it had been thunder. And Sir Dodinas’ spear brast
in-sunder, but Sir Tristram smote him with a more might, that he smote
him clean over the horse-croup, that nigh he had broken his neck. When
Sir Sagramore saw his fellow have such a fall he marvelled what knight
he might be. And he dressed his spear with all his might, and Sir
Tristram against him, and they came together as the thunder, and there
Sir Tristram smote Sir Sagramore a strong buffet, that he bare his
horse and him to the earth, and in the falling he brake his thigh.

When this was done Sir Tristram asked them: Fair knights, will ye any
more? Be there no bigger knights in the court of King Arthur? it is to
you shame to say of us knights of Cornwall dishonour, for it may happen
a Cornish knight may match you. That is truth, said Sir Sagramore, that
have we well proved; but I require thee, said Sir Sagramore, tell us
your right name, by the faith and troth that ye owe to the high order
of knighthood. Ye charge me with a great thing, said Sir Tristram, and
sithen ye list to wit it, ye shall know and understand that my name is
Sir Tristram de Liones, King Meliodas’ son, and nephew unto King Mark.
Then were they two knights fain that they had met with Tristram, and so
they prayed him to abide in their fellowship. Nay, said Sir Tristram,
for I must have ado with one of your fellows, his name is Sir Bleoberis
de Ganis. God speed you well, said Sir Sagramore and Dodinas. Sir
Tristram departed and rode onward on his way. And then was he ware
before him in a valley where rode Sir Bleoberis, with Sir Segwarides’
lady, that rode behind his squire upon a palfrey.



