CHAPTER XI. Of a great tourney made by King Arthur and the two kings
Ban and Bors, and how they went over the sea.

And King Arthur and the two kings let depart the seven hundred knights
in two parties. And there were three hundred knights of the realm of
Benwick and of Gaul turned on the other side. Then they dressed their
shields, and began to couch their spears many good knights. So Griflet
was the first that met with a knight, one Ladinas, and they met so
eagerly that all men had wonder; and they so fought that their shields
fell to pieces, and horse and man fell to the earth; and both the
French knight and the English knight lay so long that all men weened
they had been dead. When Lucas the butler saw Griflet so lie, he horsed
him again anon, and they two did marvellous deeds of arms with many
bachelors. Also Sir Kay came out of an ambushment with five knights
with him, and they six smote other six down. But Sir Kay did that day
marvellous deeds of arms, that there was none did so well as he that
day. Then there came Ladinas and Gracian, two knights of France, and
did passing well, that all men praised them.

Then came there Sir Placidas, a good knight, and met with Sir Kay, and
smote him down horse and man, where fore Sir Griflet was wroth, and met
with Sir Placidas so hard, that horse and man fell to the earth. But
when the five knights wist that Sir Kay had a fall, they were wroth out
of wit, and therewith each of them five bare down a knight. When King
Arthur and the two kings saw them begin to wax wroth on both parties,
they leapt on small hackneys, and let cry that all men should depart
unto their lodging. And so they went home and unarmed them, and so to
evensong and supper. And after, the three kings went into a garden, and
gave the prize unto Sir Kay, and to Lucas the butler, and unto Sir
Griflet. And then they went unto council, and with them Gwenbaus, the
brother unto Sir Ban and Bors, a wise clerk, and thither went Ulfius
and Brastias, and Merlin. And after they had been in council, they went
unto bed. And on the morn they heard mass, and to dinner, and so to
their council, and made many arguments what were best to do. At the
last they were concluded, that Merlin should go with a token of King
Ban, and that was a ring, unto his men and King Bors’; and Gracian and
Placidas should go again and keep their castles and their countries, as
for [dread of King Claudas] King Ban of Benwick, and King Bors of Gaul
had ordained them, and so passed the sea and came to Benwick. And when
the people saw King Ban’s ring, and Gracian and Placidas, they were
glad, and asked how the kings fared, and made great joy of their
welfare and cording, and according unto the sovereign lords desire, the
men of war made them ready in all haste possible, so that they were
fifteen thousand on horse and foot, and they had great plenty of
victual with them, by Merlin’s provision. But Gracian and Placidas were
left to furnish and garnish the castles, for dread of King Claudas.
Right so Merlin passed the sea, well victualled both by water and by
land. And when he came to the sea he sent home the footmen again, and
took no more with him but ten thousand men on horseback, the most part
men of arms, and so shipped and passed the sea into England, and landed
at Dover; and through the wit of Merlin, he had the host northward, the
priviest way that could be thought, unto the forest of Bedegraine, and
there in a valley he lodged them secretly.

Then rode Merlin unto Arthur and the two kings, and told them how he
had sped; whereof they had great marvel, that man on earth might speed
so soon, and go and come. So Merlin told them ten thousand were in the
forest of Bedegraine, well armed at all points. Then was there no more
to say, but to horseback went all the host as Arthur had afore
purveyed. So with twenty thousand he passed by night and day, but there
was made such an ordinance afore by Merlin, that there should no man of
war ride nor go in no country on this side Trent water, but if he had a
token from King Arthur, where through the king’s enemies durst not ride
as they did to-fore to espy.



CHAPTER XII. How eleven kings gathered a great host against King
Arthur.

And so within a little space the three kings came unto the castle of
Bedegraine, and found there a passing fair fellowship, and well beseen,
whereof they had great joy, and victual they wanted none. This was the
cause of the northern host: that they were reared for the despite and
rebuke the six kings had at Carlion. And those six kings by their
means, gat unto them five other kings; and thus they began to gather
their people.

And now they sware that for weal nor woe, they should not leave other,
till they had destroyed Arthur. And then they made an oath. The first
that began the oath was the Duke of Cambenet, that he would bring with
him five thousand men of arms, the which were ready on horseback. Then
sware King Brandegoris of Stranggore that he would bring five thousand
men of arms on horseback. Then sware King Clariance of Northumberland
he would bring three thousand men of arms. Then sware the King of the
Hundred Knights, that was a passing good man and a young, that he would
bring four thousand men of arms on horseback. Then there swore King
Lot, a passing good knight, and Sir Gawain’s father, that he would
bring five thousand men of arms on horseback. Also there swore King
Urience, that was Sir Uwain’s father, of the land of Gore, and he would
bring six thousand men of arms on horseback. Also there swore King
Idres of Cornwall, that he would bring five thousand men of arms on
horseback. Also there swore King Cradelmas to bring five thousand men
on horseback. Also there swore King Agwisance of Ireland to bring five
thousand men of arms on horseback. Also there swore King Nentres to
bring five thousand men of arms on horseback. Also there swore King
Carados to bring five thousand men of arms on horseback. So their whole
host was of clean men of arms on horseback fifty thousand, and a-foot
ten thousand of good men’s bodies. Then were they soon ready, and
mounted upon horse and sent forth their fore-riders, for these eleven
kings in their ways laid a siege unto the castle of Bedegraine; and so
they departed and drew toward Arthur, and left few to abide at the
siege, for the castle of Bedegraine was holden of King Arthur, and the
men that were therein were Arthur’s.



