CHAPTER XIX. How King Mark sent Sir Tristram for La Beale Isoud toward
Ireland, and how by fortune he arrived into England.

Then when this was done King Mark cast always in his heart how he might
destroy Sir Tristram. And then he imagined in himself to send Sir
Tristram into Ireland for La Beale Isoud. For Sir Tristram had so
praised her beauty and her goodness that King Mark said that he would
wed her, whereupon he prayed Sir Tristram to take his way into Ireland
for him on message. And all this was done to the intent to slay Sir
Tristram. Notwithstanding, Sir Tristram would not refuse the message
for no danger nor peril that might fall, for the pleasure of his uncle,
but to go he made him ready in the most goodliest wise that might be
devised. For Sir Tristram took with him the most goodliest knights that
he might find in the court; and they were arrayed, after the guise that
was then used, in the goodliest manner. So Sir Tristram departed and
took the sea with all his fellowship. And anon, as he was in the broad
sea a tempest took him and his fellowship, and drove them back into the
coast of England; and there they arrived fast by Camelot, and full fain
they were to take the land.

And when they were landed Sir Tristram set up his pavilion upon the
land of Camelot, and there he let hang his shield upon the pavilion.
And that same day came two knights of King Arthur’s, that one was Sir
Ector de Maris, and Sir Morganor. And they touched the shield, and bade
him come out of the pavilion for to joust, an he would joust. Ye shall
be answered, said Sir Tristram, an ye will tarry a little while. So he
made him ready, and first he smote down Sir Ector de Maris, and after
he smote down Sir Morganor, all with one spear, and sore bruised them.
And when they lay upon the earth they asked Sir Tristram what he was,
and of what country he was knight. Fair lords, said Sir Tristram, wit
ye well that I am of Cornwall. Alas, said Sir Ector, now am I ashamed
that ever any Cornish knight should overcome me. And then for despite
Sir Ector put off his armour from him, and went on foot, and would not
ride.



CHAPTER XX. How King Anguish of Ireland was summoned to come to King
Arthur’s court for treason.

Then it fell that Sir Bleoberis and Sir Blamore de Ganis, that were
brethren, they had summoned the King Anguish of Ireland for to come to
Arthur’s court upon pain of forfeiture of King Arthur’s good grace. And
if the King of Ireland came not in, at the day assigned and set, the
king should lose his lands. So it happened that at the day assigned,
King Arthur neither Sir Launcelot might not be there for to give the
judgment, for King Arthur was with Sir Launcelot at the Castle Joyous
Garde. And so King Arthur assigned King Carados and the King of Scots
to be there that day as judges. So when the kings were at Camelot King
Anguish of Ireland was come to know his accusers. Then was there Sir
Blamore de Ganis, and appealed the King of Ireland of treason, that he
had slain a cousin of his in his court in Ireland by treason. The king
was sore abashed of his accusation, for-why he was come at the summons
of King Arthur, and or he came at Camelot he wist not wherefore he was
sent after. And when the king heard Sir Blamore say his will, he
understood well there was none other remedy but for to answer him
knightly; for the custom was such in those days, that an any man were
appealed of any treason or murder he should fight body for body, or
else to find another knight for him. And all manner of murders in those
days were called treason.

So when King Anguish understood his accusing he was passing heavy, for
he knew Sir Blamore de Ganis that he was a noble knight, and of noble
knights come. Then the King of Ireland was simply purveyed of his
answer; therefore the judges gave him respite by the third day to give
his answer. So the king departed unto his lodging. The meanwhile there
came a lady by Sir Tristram’s pavilion making great dole. What aileth
you, said Sir Tristram, that ye make such dole? Ah, fair knight, said
the lady, I am ashamed unless that some good knight help me; for a
great lady of worship sent by me a fair child and a rich, unto Sir
Launcelot du Lake, and hereby there met with me a knight, and threw me
down from my palfrey, and took away the child from me. Well, my lady,
said Sir Tristram, and for my lord Sir Launcelot’s sake I shall get you
that child again, or else I shall be beaten for it. And so Sir Tristram
took his horse, and asked the lady which way the knight rode; and then
she told him. And he rode after him, and within a while he overtook
that knight. And then Sir Tristram bade him turn and give again the
child.



CHAPTER XXI. How Sir Tristram rescued a child from a knight, and how
Gouvernail told him of King Anguish.

The knight turned his horse and made him ready to fight. And then Sir
Tristram smote him with a sword such a buffet that he tumbled to the
earth. And then he yielded him unto Sir Tristram. Then come thy way,
said Sir Tristram, and bring the child to the lady again. So he took
his horse meekly and rode with Sir Tristram; and then by the way Sir
Tristram asked him his name. Then he said, My name is Breuse Saunce
Pité. So when he had delivered that child to the lady, he said: Sir, as
in this the child is well remedied. Then Sir Tristram let him go again
that sore repented him after, for he was a great foe unto many good
knights of King Arthur’s court.

Then when Sir Tristram was in his pavilion Gouvernail, his man, came
and told him how that King Anguish of Ireland was come thither, and he
was put in great distress; and there Gouvernail told Sir Tristram how
King Anguish was summoned and appealed of murder. So God me help, said
Sir Tristram, these be the best tidings that ever came to me this seven
years, for now shall the King of Ireland have need of my help; for I
daresay there is no knight in this country that is not of Arthur’s
court dare do battle with Sir Blamore de Ganis; and for to win the love
of the King of Ireland I will take the battle upon me; and therefore
Gouvernail bring me, I charge thee, to the king.

Then Gouvernail went unto King Anguish of Ireland, and saluted him
fair. The king welcomed him and asked him what he would. Sir, said
Gouvernail, here is a knight near hand that desireth to speak with you:
he bade me say he would do you service. What knight is he? said the
king. Sir, said he, it is Sir Tristram de Liones, that for your good
grace that ye showed him in your lands will reward you in this country.
Come on, fellow, said the king, with me anon and show me unto Sir
Tristram. So the king took a little hackney and but few fellowship with
him, until he came unto Sir Tristram’s pavilion. And when Sir Tristram
saw the king he ran unto him and would have holden his stirrup. But the
king leapt from his horse lightly, and either halsed other in their
arms. My gracious lord, said Sir Tristram, gramercy of your great
goodnesses showed unto me in your marches and lands: and at that time I
promised you to do you service an ever it lay in my power. And, gentle
knight, said the king unto Sir Tristram, now have I great need of you,
never had I so great need of no knight’s help. How so, my good lord?
said Sir Tristram. I shall tell you, said the king: I am summoned and
appealed from my country for the death of a knight that was kin unto
the good knight Sir Launcelot; wherefore Sir Blamore de Ganis, brother
to Sir Bleoberis hath appealed me to fight with him, outher to find a
knight in my stead. And well I wot, said the king, these that are come
of King Ban’s blood, as Sir Launcelot and these other, are passing good
knights, and hard men for to win in battle as any that I know now
living. Sir, said Sir Tristram, for the good lordship ye showed me in
Ireland, and for my lady your daughter’s sake, La Beale Isoud, I will
take the battle for you upon this condition that ye shall grant me two
things: that one is that ye shall swear to me that ye are in the right,
that ye were never consenting to the knight’s death; Sir, then said Sir
Tristram, when that I have done this battle, if God give me grace that
I speed, that ye shall give me a reward, what thing reasonable that I
will ask of you. So God me help, said the king, ye shall have
whatsomever ye will ask. It is well said, said Sir Tristram.



