CHAPTER I. First, How Uther Pendragon sent for the duke of Cornwall and
Igraine his wife, and of their departing suddenly again.

It befell in the days of Uther Pendragon, when he was king of all
England, and so reigned, that there was a mighty duke in Cornwall that
held war against him long time. And the duke was called the Duke of
Tintagil. And so by means King Uther sent for this duke, charging him
to bring his wife with him, for she was called a fair lady, and a
passing wise, and her name was called Igraine.

So when the duke and his wife were come unto the king, by the means of
great lords they were accorded both. The king liked and loved this lady
well, and he made them great cheer out of measure, and desired to have
lain by her. But she was a passing good woman, and would not assent
unto the king. And then she told the duke her husband, and said, I
suppose that we were sent for that I should be dishonoured; wherefore,
husband, I counsel you, that we depart from hence suddenly, that we may
ride all night unto our own castle. And in like wise as she said so
they departed, that neither the king nor none of his council were ware
of their departing. All so soon as King Uther knew of their departing
so suddenly, he was wonderly wroth. Then he called to him his privy
council, and told them of the sudden departing of the duke and his
wife.

Then they advised the king to send for the duke and his wife by a great
charge; and if he will not come at your summons, then may ye do your
best, then have ye cause to make mighty war upon him. So that was done,
and the messengers had their answers; and that was this shortly, that
neither he nor his wife would not come at him.

Then was the king wonderly wroth. And then the king sent him plain word
again, and bade him be ready and stuff him and garnish him, for within
forty days he would fetch him out of the biggest castle that he hath.

When the duke had this warning, anon he went and furnished and
garnished two strong castles of his, of the which the one hight
Tintagil, and the other castle hight Terrabil. So his wife Dame Igraine
he put in the castle of Tintagil, and himself he put in the castle of
Terrabil, the which had many issues and posterns out. Then in all haste
came Uther with a great host, and laid a siege about the castle of
Terrabil. And there he pight many pavilions, and there was great war
made on both parties, and much people slain. Then for pure anger and
for great love of fair Igraine the king Uther fell sick. So came to the
king Uther Sir Ulfius, a noble knight, and asked the king why he was
sick. I shall tell thee, said the king, I am sick for anger and for
love of fair Igraine, that I may not be whole. Well, my lord, said Sir
Ulfius, I shall seek Merlin, and he shall do you remedy, that your
heart shall be pleased. So Ulfius departed, and by adventure he met
Merlin in a beggar’s array, and there Merlin asked Ulfius whom he
sought. And he said he had little ado to tell him. Well, said Merlin, I
know whom thou seekest, for thou seekest Merlin; therefore seek no
farther, for I am he; and if King Uther will well reward me, and be
sworn unto me to fulfil my desire, that shall be his honour and profit
more than mine; for I shall cause him to have all his desire. All this
will I undertake, said Ulfius, that there shall be nothing reasonable
but thou shalt have thy desire. Well, said Merlin, he shall have his
intent and desire. And therefore, said Merlin, ride on your way, for I
will not be long behind.



CHAPTER II. How Uther Pendragon made war on the duke of Cornwall, and
how by the mean of Merlin he lay by the duchess and gat Arthur.

Then Ulfius was glad, and rode on more than a pace till that he came to
King Uther Pendragon, and told him he had met with Merlin. Where is he?
said the king. Sir, said Ulfius, he will not dwell long. Therewithal
Ulfius was ware where Merlin stood at the porch of the pavilion’s door.
And then Merlin was bound to come to the king. When King Uther saw him,
he said he was welcome. Sir, said Merlin, I know all your heart every
deal; so ye will be sworn unto me as ye be a true king anointed, to
fulfil my desire, ye shall have your desire. Then the king was sworn
upon the Four Evangelists. Sir, said Merlin, this is my desire: the
first night that ye shall lie by Igraine ye shall get a child on her,
and when that is born, that it shall be delivered to me for to nourish
there as I will have it; for it shall be your worship, and the child’s
avail, as mickle as the child is worth. I will well, said the king, as
thou wilt have it. Now make you ready, said Merlin, this night ye shall
lie with Igraine in the castle of Tintagil; and ye shall be like the
duke her husband, Ulfius shall be like Sir Brastias, a knight of the
duke’s, and I will be like a knight that hight Sir Jordanus, a knight
of the duke’s. But wait ye make not many questions with her nor her
men, but say ye are diseased, and so hie you to bed, and rise not on
the morn till I come to you, for the castle of Tintagil is but ten
miles hence; so this was done as they devised. But the duke of Tintagil
espied how the king rode from the siege of Terrabil, and therefore that
night he issued out of the castle at a postern for to have distressed
the king’s host. And so, through his own issue, the duke himself was
slain or ever the king came at the castle of Tintagil.

So after the death of the duke, King Uther lay with Igraine more than
three hours after his death, and begat on her that night Arthur, and on
day came Merlin to the king, and bade him make him ready, and so he
kissed the lady Igraine and departed in all haste. But when the lady
heard tell of the duke her husband, and by all record he was dead or
ever King Uther came to her, then she marvelled who that might be that
lay with her in likeness of her lord; so she mourned privily and held
her peace. Then all the barons by one assent prayed the king of accord
betwixt the lady Igraine and him; the king gave them leave, for fain
would he have been accorded with her. So the king put all the trust in
Ulfius to entreat between them, so by the entreaty at the last the king
and she met together. Now will we do well, said Ulfius, our king is a
lusty knight and wifeless, and my lady Igraine is a passing fair lady;
it were great joy unto us all, an it might please the king to make her
his queen. Unto that they all well accorded and moved it to the king.
And anon, like a lusty knight, he assented thereto with good will, and
so in all haste they were married in a morning with great mirth and
joy.

And King Lot of Lothian and of Orkney then wedded Margawse that was
Gawaine’s mother, and King Nentres of the land of Garlot wedded Elaine.
All this was done at the request of King Uther. And the third sister
Morgan le Fay was put to school in a nunnery, and there she learned so
much that she was a great clerk of necromancy. And after she was wedded
to King Uriens of the land of Gore, that was Sir Ewain’s le
Blanchemain’s father.



