CHAPTER XVIII. How Sir Tristram soused Dagonet in a well, and how
Palomides sent a damosel to seek Tristram, and how Palomides met with
King Mark.

And upon a day Dagonet, King Arthur’s fool, came into Cornwall with two
squires with him; and as they rode through that forest they came by a
fair well where Sir Tristram was wont to be; and the weather was hot,
and they alighted to drink of that well, and in the meanwhile their
horses brake loose. Right so Sir Tristram came unto them, and first he
soused Sir Dagonet in that well, and after his squires, and thereat
laughed the shepherds; and forthwithal he ran after their horses and
brought them again one by one, and right so, wet as they were, he made
them leap up and ride their ways. Thus Sir Tristram endured there an
half year naked, and would never come in town nor village. The
meanwhile the damosel that Sir Palomides sent to seek Sir Tristram, she
yede unto Sir Palomides and told him all the mischief that Sir Tristram
endured. Alas, said Sir Palomides, it is great pity that ever so noble
a knight should be so mischieved for the love of a lady; but
nevertheless, I will go and seek him, and comfort him an I may. Then a
little before that time La Beale Isoud had commanded Sir Kehydius out
of the country of Cornwall. So Sir Kehydius departed with a dolorous
heart, and by adventure he met with Sir Palomides, and they
enfellowshipped together; and either complained to other of their hot
love that they loved La Beale Isoud. Now let us, said Sir Palomides,
seek Sir Tristram, that loved her as well as we, and let us prove
whether we may recover him. So they rode into that forest, and three
days and three nights they would never take their lodging, but ever
sought Sir Tristram.

And upon a time, by adventure, they met with King Mark that was ridden
from his men all alone. When they saw him Sir Palomides knew him, but
Sir Kehydius knew him not. Ah, false king, said Sir Palomides, it is
pity thou hast thy life, for thou art a destroyer of all worshipful
knights, and by thy mischief and thy vengeance thou hast destroyed that
most noble knight, Sir Tristram de Liones. And therefore defend thee,
said Sir Palomides, for thou shalt die this day. That were shame, said
King Mark, for ye two are armed and I am unarmed. As for that, said Sir
Palomides, I shall find a remedy therefore; here is a knight with me,
and thou shalt have his harness. Nay, said King Mark, I will not have
ado with you, for cause have ye none to me; for all the misease that
Sir Tristram hath was for a letter that he found; for as to me I did to
him no displeasure, and God knoweth I am full sorry for his disease and
malady. So when the king had thus excused him they were friends, and
King Mark would have had them unto Tintagil; but Sir Palomides would
not, but turned unto the realm of Logris, and Sir Kehydius said that he
would go into Brittany.

Now turn we unto Sir Dagonet again, that when he and his squires were
upon horseback he deemed that the shepherds had sent that fool to array
them so, because that they laughed at them, and so they rode unto the
keepers of beasts and all to-beat them. Sir Tristram saw them beat that
were wont to give him meat and drink, then he ran thither and gat Sir
Dagonet by the head, and gave him such a fall to the earth that he
bruised him sore so that he lay still. And then he wrast his sword out
of his hand, and therewith he ran to one of his squires and smote off
his head, and the other fled. And so Sir Tristram took his way with
that sword in his hand, running as he had been wild wood. Then Sir
Dagonet rode to King Mark and told him how he had sped in that forest.
And therefore, said Sir Dagonet, beware, King Mark, that thou come not
about that well in the forest, for there is a fool naked, and that fool
and I fool met together, and he had almost slain me. Ah, said King
Mark, that is Sir Matto le Breune, that fell out of his wit because he
lost his lady; for when Sir Gaheris smote down Sir Matto and won his
lady of him, never since was he in his mind, and that was pity, for he
was a good knight.



CHAPTER XIX. How it was noised how Sir Tristram was dead, and how La
Beale Isoud would have slain herself.

Then Sir Andred, that was cousin unto Sir Tristram, made a lady that
was his paramour to say and to noise it that she was with Sir Tristram
or ever he died. And this tale she brought unto King Mark’s court, that
she buried him by a well, and that or he died he besought King Mark to
make his cousin, Sir Andred, king of the country of Liones, of the
which Sir Tristram was lord of. All this did Sir Andred because he
would have had Sir Tristram’s lands. And when King Mark heard tell that
Sir Tristram was dead he wept and made great dole. But when Queen Isoud
heard of these tidings she made such sorrow that she was nigh out of
her mind; and so upon a day she thought to slay herself and never to
live after Sir Tristram’s death. And so upon a day La Beale Isoud gat a
sword privily and bare it to her garden, and there she pight the sword
through a plum tree up to the hilt, so that it stuck fast, and it stood
breast high. And as she would have run upon the sword and to have slain
herself all this espied King Mark, how she kneeled down and said: Sweet
Lord Jesu, have mercy upon me, for I may not live after the death of
Sir Tristram de Liones, for he was my first love and he shall be the
last. And with these words came King Mark and took her in his arms, and
then he took up the sword, and bare her away with him into a tower; and
there he made her to be kept, and watched her surely, and after that
she lay long sick, nigh at the point of death.

This meanwhile ran Sir Tristram naked in the forest with the sword in
his hand, and so he came to an hermitage, and there he laid him down
and slept; and in the meanwhile the hermit stole away his sword, and
laid meat down by him. Thus was he kept there ten days; and at the last
he departed and came to the herdmen again. And there was a giant in
that country that hight Tauleas, and for fear of Sir Tristram more than
seven year he durst never much go at large, but for the most part he
kept him in a sure castle of his own; and so this Tauleas heard tell
that Sir Tristram was dead, by the noise of the court of King Mark.
Then this Tauleas went daily at large. And so he happed upon a day he
came to the herdmen wandering and langering, and there he set him down
to rest among them. The meanwhile there came a knight of Cornwall that
led a lady with him, and his name was Sir Dinant; and when the giant
saw him he went from the herdmen and hid him under a tree, and so the
knight came to that well, and there he alighted to repose him. And as
soon as he was from his horse this giant Tauleas came betwixt this
knight and his horse, and took the horse and leapt upon him. So
forthwith he rode unto Sir Dinant and took him by the collar, and
pulled him afore him upon his horse, and there would have stricken off
his head. Then the herdmen said unto Sir Tristram: Help yonder knight.
Help ye him, said Sir Tristram. We dare not, said the herdmen. Then Sir
Tristram was ware of the sword of the knight thereas it lay; and so
thither he ran and took up the sword and struck off Sir Tauleas’ head,
and so he yede his way to the herdmen.



