CHAPTER VI. How a damosel, which was love to Lanceor, slew herself for
love, and how Balin met with his brother Balan.

Then he looked by him, and was ware of a damosel that came riding full
fast as the horse might ride, on a fair palfrey. And when she espied
that Lanceor was slain, she made sorrow out of measure, and said, O
Balin, two bodies thou hast slain and one heart, and two hearts in one
body, and two souls thou hast lost. And therewith she took the sword
from her love that lay dead, and fell to the ground in a swoon. And
when she arose she made great dole out of measure, the which sorrow
grieved Balin passingly sore, and he went unto her for to have taken
the sword out of her hand, but she held it so fast he might not take it
out of her hand unless he should have hurt her, and suddenly she set
the pommel to the ground, and rove herself through the body. When Balin
espied her deeds, he was passing heavy in his heart, and ashamed that
so fair a damosel had destroyed herself for the love of his death.
Alas, said Balin, me repenteth sore the death of this knight, for the
love of this damosel, for there was much true love betwixt them both,
and for sorrow might not longer behold him, but turned his horse and
looked toward a great forest, and there he was ware, by the arms, of
his brother Balan. And when they were met they put off their helms and
kissed together, and wept for joy and pity. Then Balan said, I little
weened to have met with you at this sudden adventure; I am right glad
of your deliverance out of your dolorous prisonment, for a man told me,
in the castle of Four Stones, that ye were delivered, and that man had
seen you in the court of King Arthur, and therefore I came hither into
this country, for here I supposed to find you. Anon the knight Balin
told his brother of his adventure of the sword, and of the death of the
Lady of the Lake, and how King Arthur was displeased with him.
Wherefore he sent this knight after me, that lieth here dead, and the
death of this damosel grieveth me sore. So doth it me, said Balan, but
ye must take the adventure that God will ordain you. Truly, said Balin,
I am right heavy that my Lord Arthur is displeased with me, for he is
the most worshipful knight that reigneth now on earth, and his love
will I get or else will I put my life in adventure. For the King Rience
lieth at a siege at the Castle Terrabil, and thither will we draw in
all haste, to prove our worship and prowess upon him. I will well, said
Balan, that we do, and we will help each other as brethren ought to do.



CHAPTER VII. How a dwarf reproved Balin for the death of Lanceor, and
how King Mark of Cornwall found them, and made a tomb over them.

Now go we hence, said Balin, and well be we met. The meanwhile as they
talked, there came a dwarf from the city of Camelot on horseback, as
much as he might; and found the dead bodies, wherefore he made great
dole, and pulled out his hair for sorrow, and said, Which of you
knights have done this deed? Whereby askest thou it? said Balan. For I
would wit it, said the dwarf. It was I, said Balin, that slew this
knight in my defence, for hither he came to chase me, and either I must
slay him or he me; and this damosel slew herself for his love, which
repenteth me, and for her sake I shall owe all women the better love.
Alas, said the dwarf, thou hast done great damage unto thyself, for
this knight that is here dead was one of the most valiantest men that
lived, and trust well, Balin, the kin of this knight will chase you
through the world till they have slain you. As for that, said Balin, I
fear not greatly, but I am right heavy that I have displeased my lord
King Arthur, for the death of this knight. So as they talked together,
there came a king of Cornwall riding, the which hight King Mark. And
when he saw these two bodies dead, and understood how they were dead,
by the two knights above said, then made the king great sorrow for the
true love that was betwixt them, and said, I will not depart till I
have on this earth made a tomb, and there he pight his pavilions and
sought through all the country to find a tomb, and in a church they
found one was fair and rich, and then the king let put them both in the
earth, and put the tomb upon them, and wrote the names of them both on
the tomb. How here lieth Lanceor the king’s son of Ireland, that at his
own request was slain by the hands of Balin; and how his lady, Colombe,
and paramour, slew herself with her love’s sword for dole and sorrow.



CHAPTER VIII. How Merlin prophesied that two the best knights of the
world should fight there, which were Sir Lancelot and Sir Tristram.

The meanwhile as this was a-doing, in came Merlin to King Mark, and
seeing all his doing, said, Here shall be in this same place the
greatest battle betwixt two knights that was or ever shall be, and the
truest lovers, and yet none of them shall slay other. And there Merlin
wrote their names upon the tomb with letters of gold that should fight
in that place, whose names were Launcelot de Lake, and Tristram. Thou
art a marvellous man, said King Mark unto Merlin, that speakest of such
marvels, thou art a boistous man and an unlikely to tell of such deeds.
What is thy name? said King Mark. At this time, said Merlin, I will not
tell, but at that time when Sir Tristram is taken with his sovereign
lady, then ye shall hear and know my name, and at that time ye shall
hear tidings that shall not please you. Then said Merlin to Balin, Thou
hast done thyself great hurt, because that thou savest not this lady
that slew herself, that might have saved her an thou wouldest. By the
faith of my body, said Balin, I might not save her, for she slew
herself suddenly. Me repenteth, said Merlin; because of the death of
that lady thou shalt strike a stroke most dolorous that ever man
struck, except the stroke of our Lord, for thou shalt hurt the truest
knight and the man of most worship that now liveth, and through that
stroke three kingdoms shall be in great poverty, misery and
wretchedness twelve years, and the knight shall not be whole of that
wound for many years. Then Merlin took his leave of Balin. And Balin
said, If I wist it were sooth that ye say I should do such a perilous
deed as that, I would slay myself to make thee a liar. Therewith Merlin
vanished away suddenly. And then Balan and his brother took their leave
of King Mark. First, said the king, tell me your name. Sir, said Balan,
ye may see he beareth two swords, thereby ye may call him the Knight
with the Two Swords. And so departed King Mark unto Camelot to King
Arthur, and Balin took the way toward King Rience; and as they rode
together they met with Merlin disguised, but they knew him not. Whither
ride you? said Merlin. We have little to do, said the two knights, to
tell thee. But what is thy name? said Balin. At this time, said Merlin,
I will not tell it thee. It is evil seen, said the knights, that thou
art a true man that thou wilt not tell thy name. As for that, said
Merlin, be it as it be may, I can tell you wherefore ye ride this way,
for to meet King Rience; but it will not avail you without ye have my
counsel. Ah! said Balin, ye are Merlin; we will be ruled by your
counsel. Come on, said Merlin, ye shall have great worship, and look
that ye do knightly, for ye shall have great need. As for that, said
Balin, dread you not, we will do what we may.



