BOOK VI.



CHAPTER I. How Sir Launcelot and Sir Lionel departed from the court,
and how Sir Lionel left him sleeping and was taken.

Soon after that King Arthur was come from Rome into England, then all
the knights of the Table Round resorted unto the king, and made many
jousts and tournaments, and some there were that were but knights,
which increased so in arms and worship that they passed all their
fellows in prowess and noble deeds, and that was well proved on many;
but in especial it was proved on Sir Launcelot du Lake, for in all
tournaments and jousts and deeds of arms, both for life and death, he
passed all other knights, and at no time he was never overcome but if
it were by treason or enchantment; so Sir Launcelot increased so
marvellously in worship, and in honour, therefore is he the first
knight that the French book maketh mention of after King Arthur came
from Rome. Wherefore Queen Guenever had him in great favour above all
other knights, and in certain he loved the queen again above all other
ladies and damosels of his life, and for her he did many deeds of arms,
and saved her from the fire through his noble chivalry.

Thus Sir Launcelot rested him long with play and game. And then he
thought himself to prove himself in strange adventures, then he bade
his nephew, Sir Lionel, for to make him ready; for we two will seek
adventures. So they mounted on their horses, armed at all rights, and
rode into a deep forest and so into a deep plain. And then the weather
was hot about noon, and Sir Launcelot had great lust to sleep. Then Sir
Lionel espied a great apple-tree that stood by an hedge, and said,
Brother, yonder is a fair shadow, there may we rest us [and] our
horses. It is well said, fair brother, said Sir Launcelot, for this
eight year I was not so sleepy as I am now; and so they there alighted
and tied their horses unto sundry trees, and so Sir Launcelot laid him
down under an appletree, and his helm he laid under his head. And Sir
Lionel waked while he slept. So Sir Launcelot was asleep passing fast.

And in the meanwhile there came three knights riding, as fast fleeing
as ever they might ride. And there followed them three but one knight.
And when Sir Lionel saw him, him thought he saw never so great a
knight, nor so well faring a man, neither so well apparelled unto all
rights. So within a while this strong knight had overtaken one of these
knights, and there he smote him to the cold earth that he lay still.
And then he rode unto the second knight, and smote him so that man and
horse fell down. And then straight to the third knight he rode, and
smote him behind his horse’s arse a spear length. And then he alighted
down and reined his horse on the bridle, and bound all the three
knights fast with the reins of their own bridles. When Sir Lionel saw
him do thus, he thought to assay him, and made him ready, and stilly
and privily he took his horse, and thought not for to awake Sir
Launcelot. And when he was mounted upon his horse, he overtook this
strong knight, and bade him turn, and the other smote Sir Lionel so
hard that horse and man he bare to the earth, and so he alighted down
and bound him fast, and threw him overthwart his own horse, and so he
served them all four, and rode with them away to his own castle. And
when he came there he gart unarm them, and beat them with thorns all
naked, and after put them in a deep prison where were many more
knights, that made great dolour.



CHAPTER II. How Sir Ector followed for to seek Sir Launcelot, and how
he was taken by Sir Turquine.

When Sir Ector de Maris wist that Sir Launcelot was passed out of the
court to seek adventures, he was wroth with himself, and made him ready
to seek Sir Launcelot, and as he had ridden long in a great forest he
met with a man was like a forester. Fair fellow, said Sir Ector,
knowest thou in this country any adventures that be here nigh hand?
Sir, said the forester, this country know I well, and hereby, within
this mile, is a strong manor, and well dyked, and by that manor, on the
left hand, there is a fair ford for horses to drink of, and over that
ford there groweth a fair tree, and thereon hang many fair shields that
wielded sometime good knights, and at the hole of the tree hangeth a
basin of copper and latten, and strike upon that basin with the butt of
thy spear thrice, and soon after thou shalt hear new tidings, and else
hast thou the fairest grace that many a year had ever knight that
passed through this forest. Gramercy, said Sir Ector, and departed and
came to the tree, and saw many fair shields. And among them he saw his
brother’s shield, Sir Lionel, and many more that he knew that were his
fellows of the Round Table, the which grieved his heart, and promised
to revenge his brother.

Then anon Sir Ector beat on the basin as he were wood, and then he gave
his horse drink at the ford, and there came a knight behind him and
bade him come out of the water and make him ready; and Sir Ector anon
turned him shortly, and in feuter cast his spear, and smote the other
knight a great buffet that his horse turned twice about. This was well
done, said the strong knight, and knightly thou hast stricken me; and
therewith he rushed his horse on Sir Ector, and cleight him under his
right arm, and bare him clean out of the saddle, and rode with him away
into his own hall, and threw him down in midst of the floor. The name
of this knight was Sir Turquine. Then he said unto Sir Ector, For thou
hast done this day more unto me than any knight did these twelve years,
now will I grant thee thy life, so thou wilt be sworn to be my prisoner
all thy life days. Nay, said Sir Ector, that will I never promise thee,
but that I will do mine advantage. That me repenteth, said Sir
Turquine. And then he gart to unarm him, and beat him with thorns all
naked, and sithen put him down in a deep dungeon, where he knew many of
his fellows. But when Sir Ector saw Sir Lionel, then made he great
sorrow. Alas, brother, said Sir Ector, where is my brother Sir
Launcelot? Fair brother, I left him asleep when that I from him yode,
under an apple-tree, and what is become of him I cannot tell you. Alas,
said the knights, but Sir Launcelot help us we may never be delivered,
for we know now no knight that is able to match our master Turquine.



