CHAPTER XIX. How King Arthur rode to Carlion, and of his dream, and how
he saw the questing beast.

Then after the departing of King Ban and of King Bors, King Arthur rode
into Carlion. And thither came to him, King Lot’s wife, of Orkney, in
manner of a message, but she was sent thither to espy the court of King
Arthur; and she came richly beseen, with her four sons, Gawaine,
Gaheris, Agravine, and Gareth, with many other knights and ladies. For
she was a passing fair lady, therefore the king cast great love unto
her, and desired to lie by her; so they were agreed, and he begat upon
her Mordred, and she was his sister, on his mother’s side, Igraine. So
there she rested her a month, and at the last departed. Then the king
dreamed a marvellous dream whereof he was sore adread. But all this
time King Arthur knew not that King Lot’s wife was his sister. Thus was
the dream of Arthur: Him thought there was come into this land griffins
and serpents, and him thought they burnt and slew all the people in the
land, and then him thought he fought with them, and they did him
passing great harm, and wounded him full sore, but at the last he slew
them. When the king awaked, he was passing heavy of his dream, and so
to put it out of thoughts, he made him ready with many knights to ride
a-hunting. As soon as he was in the forest the king saw a great hart
afore him. This hart will I chase, said King Arthur, and so he spurred
the horse, and rode after long, and so by fine force oft he was like to
have smitten the hart; whereas the king had chased the hart so long,
that his horse lost his breath, and fell down dead. Then a yeoman
fetched the king another horse.

So the king saw the hart enbushed, and his horse dead, he set him down
by a fountain, and there he fell in great thoughts. And as he sat so,
him thought he heard a noise of hounds, to the sum of thirty. And with
that the king saw coming toward him the strangest beast that ever he
saw or heard of; so the beast went to the well and drank, and the noise
was in the beast’s belly like unto the questing of thirty couple
hounds; but all the while the beast drank there was no noise in the
beast’s belly: and there with the beast departed with a great noise,
whereof the king had great marvel. And so he was in a great thought,
and therewith he fell asleep. Right so there came a knight afoot unto
Arthur and said, Knight full of thought and sleepy, tell me if thou
sawest a strange beast pass this way. Such one saw I, said King Arthur,
that is past two mile; what would ye with the beast? said Arthur. Sir,
I have followed that beast long time, and killed mine horse, so would
God I had another to follow my quest. Right so came one with the king’s
horse, and when the knight saw the horse, he prayed the king to give
him the horse: for I have followed this quest this twelvemonth, and
either I shall achieve him, or bleed of the best blood of my body.
Pellinore, that time king, followed the Questing Beast, and after his
death Sir Palamides followed it.



CHAPTER XX. How King Pellinore took Arthur’s horse and followed the
Questing Beast, and how Merlin met with Arthur.

Sir knight, said the king, leave that quest, and suffer me to have it,
and I will follow it another twelvemonth. Ah, fool, said the knight
unto Arthur, it is in vain thy desire, for it shall never be achieved
but by me, or my next kin. Therewith he started unto the king’s horse
and mounted into the saddle, and said, Gramercy, this horse is my own.
Well, said the king, thou mayst take my horse by force, but an I might
prove thee whether thou were better on horseback or I.—Well, said the
knight, seek me here when thou wilt, and here nigh this well thou shalt
find me, and so passed on his way. Then the king sat in a study, and
bade his men fetch his horse as fast as ever they might. Right so came
by him Merlin like a child of fourteen year of age, and saluted the
king, and asked him why he was so pensive. I may well be pensive, said
the king, for I have seen the marvellest sight that ever I saw. That
know I well, said Merlin, as well as thyself, and of all thy thoughts,
but thou art but a fool to take thought, for it will not amend thee.
Also I know what thou art, and who was thy father, and of whom thou
wert begotten; King Uther Pendragon was thy father, and begat thee on
Igraine. That is false, said King Arthur, how shouldest thou know it,
for thou art not so old of years to know my father? Yes, said Merlin, I
know it better than ye or any man living. I will not believe thee, said
Arthur, and was wroth with the child. So departed Merlin, and came
again in the likeness of an old man of fourscore year of age, whereof
the king was right glad, for he seemed to be right wise.

Then said the old man, Why are ye so sad? I may well be heavy, said
Arthur, for many things. Also here was a child, and told me many things
that meseemeth he should not know, for he was not of age to know my
father. Yes, said the old man, the child told you truth, and more would
he have told you an ye would have suffered him. But ye have done a
thing late that God is displeased with you, for ye have lain by your
sister, and on her ye have gotten a child that shall destroy you and
all the knights of your realm. What are ye, said Arthur, that tell me
these tidings? I am Merlin, and I was he in the child’s likeness. Ah,
said King Arthur, ye are a marvellous man, but I marvel much of thy
words that I must die in battle. Marvel not, said Merlin, for it is
God’s will your body to be punished for your foul deeds; but I may well
be sorry, said Merlin, for I shall die a shameful death, to be put in
the earth quick, and ye shall die a worshipful death. And as they
talked this, came one with the king’s horse, and so the king mounted on
his horse, and Merlin on another, and so rode unto Carlion. And anon
the king asked Ector and Ulfius how he was begotten, and they told him
Uther Pendragon was his father and Queen Igraine his mother. Then he
said to Merlin, I will that my mother be sent for that I may speak with
her; and if she say so herself then will I believe it. In all haste,
the queen was sent for, and she came and brought with her Morgan le
Fay, her daughter, that was as fair a lady as any might be, and the
king welcomed Igraine in the best manner.



