CHAPTER XI. How the Saracens came out of a wood for to rescue their
beasts, and of a great battle.

Then Sir Florence called to him Sir Floridas, with an hundred knights,
and drove forth the herd of beasts. Then followed him seven hundred men
of arms; and Sir Ferant of Spain on a fair steed came springing out of
the woods, and came to Sir Florence and asked him why he fled. Then Sir
Florence took his spear and rode against him, and smote him in the
forehead and brake his neck bone. Then all the other were moved, and
thought to avenge the death of Sir Ferant, and smote in among them, and
there was great fight, and many slain and laid down to ground, and Sir
Florence with his hundred knights alway kept the stale, and fought
manly.

Then when Priamus the good knight perceived the great fight, he went to
Sir Gawaine, and bade him that he should go and succour his fellowship,
which were sore bestead with their enemies. Sir, grieve you not, said
Sir Gawaine, for their gree shall be theirs. I shall not once move my
horse to them ward, but if I see more than there be; for they be strong
enough to match them.

And with that he saw an earl called Sir Ethelwold and the duke of
Dutchmen, came leaping out of a wood with many thousands, and Priamus’
knights, and came straight unto the battle. Then Sir Gawaine comforted
his knights, and bade them not to be abashed, for all shall be ours.
Then they began to wallop and met with their enemies, there were men
slain and overthrown on every side. Then thrust in among them the
knights of the Table Round, and smote down to the earth all them that
withstood them, in so much that they made them to recoil and flee. By
God, said Sir Gawaine, this gladdeth my heart, for now be they less in
number by twenty thousand. Then entered into the battle Jubance a
giant, and fought and slew down right, and distressed many of our
knights, among whom was slain Sir Gherard, a knight of Wales. Then our
knights took heart to them, and slew many Saracens. And then came in
Sir Priamus with his pennon, and rode with the knights of the Round
Table, and fought so manfully that many of their enemies lost their
lives. And there Sir Priamus slew the Marquis of Moises land, and Sir
Gawaine with his fellows so quit them that they had the field, but in
that stour was Sir Chestelaine, a child and ward of Sir Gawaine slain,
wherefore was much sorrow made, and his death was soon avenged. Thus
was the battle ended, and many lords of Lombardy and Saracens left dead
in the field.

Then Sir Florence and Sir Gawaine harboured surely their people, and
took great plenty of bestial, of gold and silver, and great treasure
and riches, and returned unto King Arthur, which lay still at the
siege. And when they came to the king they presented their prisoners
and recounted their adventures, and how they had vanquished their
enemies.



CHAPTER XII. How Sir Gawaine returned to King Arthur with his
prisoners, and how the King won a city, and how he was crowned Emperor.

Now thanked be God, said the noble King Arthur. But what manner man is
he that standeth by himself, him seemeth no prisoner. Sir, said
Gawaine, this is a good man of arms, he hath matched me, but he is
yielden unto God, and to me, for to become Christian; had not he have
been we should never have returned, wherefore I pray you that he may be
baptised, for there liveth not a nobler man nor better knight of his
hands. Then the king let him anon be christened, and did do call him
his first name Priamus, and made him a duke and knight of the Table
Round. And then anon the king let do cry assault to the city, and there
was rearing of ladders, breaking of walls, and the ditch filled, that
men with little pain might enter into the city. Then came out a
duchess, and Clarisin the countess, with many ladies and damosels, and
kneeling before King Arthur, required him for the love of God to
receive the city, and not to take it by assault, for then should many
guiltless be slain. Then the king avaled his visor with a meek and
noble countenance, and said, Madam, there shall none of my subjects
misdo you nor your maidens, nor to none that to you belong, but the
duke shall abide my judgment. Then anon the king commanded to leave the
assault, and anon the duke’s oldest son brought out the keys, and
kneeling delivered them to the king, and besought him of grace; and the
king seized the town by assent of his lords, and took the duke and sent
him to Dover, there for to abide prisoner term of his life, and
assigned certain rents for the dower of the duchess and for her
children.

Then he made lords to rule those lands, and laws as a lord ought to do
in his own country; and after he took his journey toward Rome, and sent
Sir Floris and Sir Floridas to-fore, with five hundred men of arms, and
they came to the city of Urbino and laid there a bushment, thereas them
seemed most best for them, and rode to-fore the town, where anon issued
out much people and skirmished with the fore-riders. Then brake out the
bushment and won the bridge, and after the town, and set upon the walls
the king’s banner. Then came the king upon an hill, and saw the city
and his banner on the walls, by which he knew that the city was won.
And anon he sent and commanded that none of his liege men should defoul
nor lie by no lady, wife nor maid; and when he came into the city, he
passed to the castle, and comforted them that were in sorrow, and
ordained there a captain, a knight of his own country.

And when they of Milan heard that thilk city was won, they sent to King
Arthur great sums of money, and besought him as their lord to have pity
on them, promising to be his subjects for ever, and yield to him homage
and fealty for the lands of Pleasance and Pavia, Petersaint, and the
Port of Tremble, and to give him yearly a million of gold all his
lifetime. Then he rideth into Tuscany, and winneth towns and castles,
and wasted all in his way that to him will not obey, and so to Spolute
and Viterbe, and from thence he rode into the Vale of Vicecount among
the vines. And from thence he sent to the senators, to wit whether they
would know him for their lord. But soon after on a Saturday came unto
King Arthur all the senators that were left alive, and the noblest
cardinals that then dwelt in Rome, and prayed him of peace, and
proferred him full large, and besought him as governor to give licence
for six weeks for to assemble all the Romans, and then to crown him
emperor with chrism as it belongeth to so high estate. I assent, said
the king, like as ye have devised, and at Christmas there to be
crowned, and to hold my Round Table with my knights as me liketh. And
then the senators made ready for his enthronization. And at the day
appointed, as the romance telleth, he came into Rome, and was crowned
emperor by the pope’s hand, with all the royalty that could be made,
and sojourned there a time, and established all his lands from Rome
into France, and gave lands and realms unto his servants and knights,
to everych after his desert, in such wise that none complained, rich
nor poor. And he gave to Sir Priamus the duchy of Lorraine; and he
thanked him, and said he would serve him the days of his life; and
after made dukes and earls, and made every man rich.

Then after this all his knights and lords assembled them afore him, and
said: Blessed be God, your war is finished and your conquest achieved,
in so much that we know none so great nor mighty that dare make war
against you: wherefore we beseech you to return homeward, and give us
licence to go home to our wives, from whom we have been long, and to
rest us, for your journey is finished with honour and worship. Then
said the king, Ye say truth, and for to tempt God it is no wisdom, and
therefore make you ready and return we into England. Then there was
trussing of harness and baggage and great carriage. And after licence
given, he returned and commanded that no man in pain of death should
not rob nor take victual, nor other thing by the way but that he should
pay therefore. And thus he came over the sea and landed at Sandwich,
against whom Queen Guenever his wife came and met him, and he was nobly
received of all his commons in every city and burgh, and great gifts
presented to him at his home-coming to welcome him with.

Thus endeth the fifth book of the conquest that King Arthur had against
Lucius the Emperor of Rome, and here followeth the sixth book, which is
of Sir Launcelot du Lake.



