CHAPTER XXI. How King Pelleas suffered himself to be taken prisoner
because he would have a sight of his lady, and how Sir Gawaine promised
him to get to him the love of his lady.

And so he chose her for his sovereign lady, and never to love other but
her, but she was so proud that she had scorn of him, and said that she
would never love him though he would die for her. Wherefore all ladies
and gentlewomen had scorn of her that she was so proud, for there were
fairer than she, and there was none that was there but an Sir Pelleas
would have proffered them love, they would have loved him for his noble
prowess. And so this knight promised the Lady Ettard to follow her into
this country, and never to leave her till she loved him. And thus he is
here the most part nigh her, and lodged by a priory, and every week she
sendeth knights to fight with him. And when he hath put them to the
worse, then will he suffer them wilfully to take him prisoner, because
he would have a sight of this lady. And always she doth him great
despite, for sometime she maketh her knights to tie him to his horse’s
tail, and some to bind him under the horse’s belly; thus in the most
shamefullest ways that she can think he is brought to her. And all she
doth it for to cause him to leave this country, and to leave his
loving; but all this cannot make him to leave, for an he would have
fought on foot he might have had the better of the ten knights as well
on foot as on horseback. Alas, said Sir Gawaine, it is great pity of
him; and after this night I will seek him to-morrow, in this forest, to
do him all the help I can. So on the morn Sir Gawaine took his leave of
his host Sir Carados, and rode into the forest; and at the last he met
with Sir Pelleas, making great moan out of measure, so each of them
saluted other, and asked him why he made such sorrow. And as it is
above rehearsed, Sir Pelleas told Sir Gawaine: But always I suffer her
knights to fare so with me as ye saw yesterday, in trust at the last to
win her love, for she knoweth well all her knights should not lightly
win me, an me list to fight with them to the uttermost. Wherefore an I
loved her not so sore, I had liefer die an hundred times, an I might
die so oft, rather than I would suffer that despite; but I trust she
will have pity upon me at the last, for love causeth many a good knight
to suffer to have his entent, but alas I am unfortunate. And therewith
he made so great dole and sorrow that unnethe he might hold him on
horseback.

Now, said Sir Gawaine, leave your mourning and I shall promise you by
the faith of my body to do all that lieth in my power to get you the
love of your lady, and thereto I will plight you my troth. Ah, said Sir
Pelleas, of what court are ye? tell me, I pray you, my good friend. And
then Sir Gawaine said, I am of the court of King Arthur, and his
sister’s son, and King Lot of Orkney was my father, and my name is Sir
Gawaine. And then he said, My name is Sir Pelleas, born in the Isles,
and of many isles I am lord, and never have I loved lady nor damosel
till now in an unhappy time; and, sir knight, since ye are so nigh
cousin unto King Arthur, and a king’s son, therefore betray me not but
help me, for I may never come by her but by some good knight, for she
is in a strong castle here, fast by within this four mile, and over all
this country she is lady of. And so I may never come to her presence,
but as I suffer her knights to take me, and but if I did so that I
might have a sight of her, I had been dead long or this time; and yet
fair word had I never of her, but when I am brought to-fore her she
rebuketh me in the foulest manner. And then they take my horse and
harness and put me out of the gates, and she will not suffer me to eat
nor drink; and always I offer me to be her prisoner, but that she will
not suffer me, for I would desire no more, what pains so ever I had, so
that I might have a sight of her daily. Well, said Sir Gawaine, all
this shall I amend an ye will do as I shall devise: I will have your
horse and your armour, and so will I ride unto her castle and tell her
that I have slain you, and so shall I come within her to cause her to
cherish me, and then shall I do my true part that ye shall not fail to
have the love of her.



CHAPTER XXII. How Sir Gawaine came to the Lady Ettard, and how Sir
Pelleas found them sleeping.

And therewith Sir Gawaine plight his troth unto Sir Pelleas to be true
and faithful unto him; so each one plight their troth to other, and so
they changed horses and harness, and Sir Gawaine departed, and came to
the castle whereas stood the pavilions of this lady without the gate.
And as soon as Ettard had espied Sir Gawaine she fled in toward the
castle. Sir Gawaine spake on high, and bade her abide, for he was not
Sir Pelleas; I am another knight that have slain Sir Pelleas. Do off
your helm, said the Lady Ettard, that I may see your visage. And so
when she saw that it was not Sir Pelleas, she bade him alight and led
him unto her castle, and asked him faithfully whether he had slain Sir
Pelleas. And he said her yea, and told her his name was Sir Gawaine of
the court of King Arthur, and his sister’s son. Truly, said she, that
is great pity, for he was a passing good knight of his body, but of all
men alive I hated him most, for I could never be quit of him; and for
ye have slain him I shall be your woman, and to do anything that might
please you. So she made Sir Gawaine good cheer. Then Sir Gawaine said
that he loved a lady and by no means she would love him. She is to
blame, said Ettard, an she will not love you, for ye that be so well
born a man, and such a man of prowess, there is no lady in the world
too good for you. Will ye, said Sir Gawaine, promise me to do all that
ye may, by the faith of your body, to get me the love of my lady? Yea,
sir, said she, and that I promise you by the faith of my body. Now,
said Sir Gawaine, it is yourself that I love so well, therefore I pray
you hold your promise. I may not choose, said the Lady Ettard, but if I
should be forsworn; and so she granted him to fulfil all his desire.

So it was then in the month of May that she and Sir Gawaine went out of
the castle and supped in a pavilion, and there was made a bed, and
there Sir Gawaine and the Lady Ettard went to bed together, and in
another pavilion she laid her damosels, and in the third pavilion she
laid part of her knights, for then she had no dread of Sir Pelleas. And
there Sir Gawaine lay with her in that pavilion two days and two
nights. And on the third day, in the morning early, Sir Pelleas armed
him, for he had never slept since Sir Gawaine departed from him; for
Sir Gawaine had promised him by the faith of his body, to come to him
unto his pavilion by that priory within the space of a day and a night.

Then Sir Pelleas mounted upon horseback, and came to the pavilions that
stood without the castle, and found in the first pavilion three knights
in three beds, and three squires lying at their feet. Then went he to
the second pavilion and found four gentlewomen lying in four beds. And
then he yede to the third pavilion and found Sir Gawaine lying in bed
with his Lady Ettard, and either clipping other in arms, and when he
saw that his heart well-nigh brast for sorrow, and said: Alas! that
ever a knight should be found so false; and then he took his horse and
might not abide no longer for pure sorrow. And when he had ridden nigh
half a mile he turned again and thought to slay them both; and when he
saw them both so lie sleeping fast, unnethe he might hold him on
horseback for sorrow, and said thus to himself, Though this knight be
never so false, I will never slay him sleeping, for I will never
destroy the high order of knighthood; and therewith he departed again.
And or he had ridden half a mile he returned again, and thought then to
slay them both, making the greatest sorrow that ever man made. And when
he came to the pavilions, he tied his horse unto a tree, and pulled out
his sword naked in his hand, and went to them thereas they lay, and yet
he thought it were shame to slay them sleeping, and laid the naked
sword overthwart both their throats, and so took his horse and rode his
way.

And when Sir Pelleas came to his pavilions he told his knights and his
squires how he had sped, and said thus to them, For your true and good
service ye have done me I shall give you all my goods, for I will go
unto my bed and never arise until I am dead. And when that I am dead I
charge you that ye take the heart out of my body and bear it her
betwixt two silver dishes, and tell her how I saw her lie with the
false knight Sir Gawaine. Right so Sir Pelleas unarmed himself, and
went unto his bed making marvellous dole and sorrow.

When Sir Gawaine and Ettard awoke of their sleep, and found the naked
sword overthwart their throats, then she knew well it was Sir Pelleas’
sword. Alas! said she to Sir Gawaine, ye have betrayed me and Sir
Pelleas both, for ye told me ye had slain him, and now I know well it
is not so, he is alive. And if Sir Pelleas had been as uncourteous to
you as ye have been to him ye had been a dead knight; but ye have
deceived me and betrayed me falsely, that all ladies and damosels may
beware by you and me. And therewith Sir Gawaine made him ready, and
went into the forest. So it happed then that the Damosel of the Lake,
Nimue, met with a knight of Sir Pelleas, that went on his foot in the
forest making great dole, and she asked him the cause. And so the woful
knight told her how his master and lord was betrayed through a knight
and lady, and how he will never arise out of his bed till he be dead.
Bring me to him, said she anon, and I will warrant his life he shall
not die for love, and she that hath caused him so to love, she shall be
in as evil plight as he is or it be long to, for it is no joy of such a
proud lady that will have no mercy of such a valiant knight. Anon that
knight brought her unto him, and when she saw him lie in his bed, she
thought she saw never so likely a knight; and therewith she threw an
enchantment upon him, and he fell asleep. And therewhile she rode unto
the Lady Ettard, and charged no man to awake him till she came again.
So within two hours she brought the Lady Ettard thither, and both
ladies found him asleep: Lo, said the Damosel of the Lake, ye ought to
be ashamed for to murder such a knight. And therewith she threw such an
enchantment upon her that she loved him sore, that well-nigh she was
out of her mind. O Lord Jesu, said the Lady Ettard, how is it befallen
unto me that I love now him that I have most hated of any man alive?
That is the righteous judgment of God, said the damosel. And then anon
Sir Pelleas awaked and looked upon Ettard; and when he saw her he knew
her, and then he hated her more than any woman alive, and said: Away,
traitress, come never in my sight. And when she heard him say so, she
wept and made great sorrow out of measure.



