CHAPTER XXVI. How Sir Tristram fought with Sir Breunor, and at the last
smote off his head.

Now take thine horse: sithen I am ladyless I will win thy lady an I
may.

Then they took their horses and came together as it had been the
thunder; and Sir Tristram smote Sir Breunor clean from his horse, and
lightly he rose up; and as Sir Tristram came again by him he thrust his
horse throughout both the shoulders, that his horse hurled here and
there and fell dead to the ground. And ever Sir Breunor ran after to
have slain Sir Tristram, but Sir Tristram was light and nimble, and
voided his horse lightly. And or ever Sir Tristram might dress his
shield and his sword the other gave him three or four sad strokes. Then
they rushed together like two boars, tracing and traversing mightily
and wisely as two noble knights. For this Sir Breunor was a proved
knight, and had been or then the death of many good knights, that it
was pity that he had so long endured.

Thus they fought, hurling here and there nigh two hours, and either
were wounded sore. Then at the last Sir Breunor rashed upon Sir
Tristram and took him in his arms, for he trusted much in his strength.
Then was Sir Tristram called the strongest and the highest knight of
the world; for he was called bigger than Sir Launcelot, but Sir
Launcelot was better breathed. So anon Sir Tristram thrust Sir Breunor
down grovelling, and then he unlaced his helm and struck off his head.
And then all they that longed to the castle came to him, and did him
homage and fealty, praying him that he would abide there still a little
while to fordo that foul custom. Sir Tristram granted thereto. The
meanwhile one of the knights of the castle rode unto Sir Galahad, the
haut prince, the which was Sir Breunor’s son, which was a noble knight,
and told him what misadventure his father had and his mother.



CHAPTER XXVII. How Sir Galahad fought with Sir Tristram, and how Sir
Tristram yielded him and promised to fellowship with Launcelot.

Then came Sir Galahad, and the King with the Hundred Knights with him;
and this Sir Galahad proffered to fight with Sir Tristram hand for
hand. And so they made them ready to go unto battle on horseback with
great courage. Then Sir Galahad and Sir Tristram met together so hard
that either bare other down, horse and all, to the earth. And then they
avoided their horses as noble knights, and dressed their shields, and
drew their swords with ire and rancour, and they lashed together many
sad strokes, and one while striking, another while foining, tracing and
traversing as noble knights; thus they fought long, near half a day,
and either were sore wounded. At the last Sir Tristram waxed light and
big, and doubled his strokes, and drove Sir Galahad aback on the one
side and on the other, so that he was like to have been slain.

With that came the King with the Hundred Knights, and all that
fellowship went fiercely upon Sir Tristram. When Sir Tristram saw them
coming upon him, then he wist well he might not endure. Then as a wise
knight of war, he said to Sir Galahad, the haut prince: Sir, ye show to
me no knighthood, for to suffer all your men to have ado with me all at
once; and as meseemeth ye be a noble knight of your hands it is great
shame to you. So God me help, said Sir Galahad, there is none other way
but thou must yield thee to me, other else to die, said Sir Galahad to
Sir Tristram. I will rather yield me to you than die for that is more
for the might of your men than of your hands. And therewithal Sir
Tristram took his own sword by the point, and put the pommel in the
hand of Sir Galahad.

Therewithal came the King with the Hundred Knights, and hard began to
assail Sir Tristram. Let be, said Sir Galahad, be ye not so hardy to
touch him, for I have given this knight his life. That is your shame,
said the King with the Hundred Knights; hath he not slain your father
and your mother? As for that, said Sir Galahad, I may not wite him
greatly, for my father had him in prison, and enforced him to do battle
with him; and my father had such a custom that was a shameful custom,
that what knight came there to ask harbour his lady must needs die but
if she were fairer than my mother; and if my father overcame that
knight he must needs die. This was a shameful custom and usage, a
knight for his harbour-asking to have such harbourage. And for this
custom I would never draw about him. So God me help, said the King,
this was a shameful custom. Truly, said Sir Galahad, so seemed me; and
meseemed it had been great pity that this knight should have been
slain, for I dare say he is the noblest man that beareth life, but if
it were Sir Launcelot du Lake. Now, fair knight, said Sir Galahad, I
require thee tell me thy name, and of whence thou art, and whither thou
wilt. Sir, he said, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and from King
Mark of Cornwall I was sent on message unto King Anguish of Ireland,
for to fetch his daughter to be his wife, and here she is ready to go
with me into Cornwall, and her name is La Beale Isoud. And, Sir
Tristram, said Sir Galahad, the haut prince, well be ye found in these
marches, and so ye will promise me to go unto Sir Launcelot du Lake,
and accompany with him, ye shall go where ye will, and your fair lady
with you; and I shall promise you never in all my days shall such
customs be used in this castle as have been used. Sir, said Sir
Tristram, now I let you wit, so God me help, I weened ye had been Sir
Launcelot du Lake when I saw you first, and therefore I dread you the
more; and sir, I promise you, said Sir Tristram, as soon as I may I
will see Sir Launcelot and in fellowship me with him; for of all the
knights of the world I most desire his fellowship.



CHAPTER XXVIII. How Sir Launcelot met with Sir Carados bearing away Sir
Gawaine, and of the rescue of Sir Gawaine.

And then Sir Tristram took his leave when he saw his time, and took the
sea. And in the meanwhile word came unto Sir Launcelot and to Sir
Tristram that Sir Carados, the mighty king, that was made like a giant,
fought with Sir Gawaine, and gave him such strokes that he swooned in
his saddle, and after that he took him by the collar and pulled him out
of his saddle, and fast bound him to the saddle-bow, and so rode his
way with him toward his castle. And as he rode, by fortune Sir
Launcelot met with Sir Carados, and anon he knew Sir Gawaine that lay
bound after him. Ah, said Sir Launcelot unto Sir Gawaine, how stands it
with you? Never so hard, said Sir Gawaine, unless that ye help me, for
so God me help, without ye rescue me I know no knight that may, but
outher you or Sir Tristram. Wherefore Sir Launcelot was heavy of Sir
Gawaine’s words. And then Sir Launcelot bade Sir Carados: Lay down that
knight and fight with me. Thou art but a fool, said Sir Carados, for I
will serve you in the same wise. As for that, said Sir Launcelot, spare
me not, for I warn thee I will not spare thee. And then he bound Sir
Gawaine hand and foot, and so threw him to the ground. And then he gat
his spear of his squire, and departed from Sir Launcelot to fetch his
course. And so either met with other, and brake their spears to their
hands; and then they pulled out swords, and hurtled together on
horseback more than an hour. And at the last Sir Launcelot smote Sir
Carados such a buffet upon the helm that it pierced his brain-pan. So
then Sir Launcelot took Sir Carados by the collar and pulled him under
his horse’s feet, and then he alighted and pulled off his helm and
struck off his head. And then Sir Launcelot unbound Sir Gawaine. So
this same tale was told to Sir Galahad and to Sir Tristram:—here may ye
hear the nobleness that followeth Sir Launcelot. Alas, said Sir
Tristram, an I had not this message in hand with this fair lady, truly
I would never stint or I had found Sir Launcelot. Then Sir Tristram and
La Beale Isoud went to the sea and came into Cornwall, and there all
the barons met them.



