CHAPTER VII. How Beaumains fought with the Knight of the Black Launds,
and fought with him till he fell down and died.

There sat a knight all armed in black harness, and his name was the
Knight of the Black Laund. Then the damosel, when she saw that knight,
she bade him flee down that valley, for his horse was not saddled.
Gramercy, said Beaumains, for always ye would have me a coward. With
that the Black Knight, when she came nigh him, spake and said, Damosel,
have ye brought this knight of King Arthur to be your champion? Nay,
fair knight, said she, this is but a kitchen knave that was fed in King
Arthur’s kitchen for alms. Why cometh he, said the knight, in such
array? it is shame that he beareth you company. Sir, I cannot be
delivered of him, said she, for with me he rideth maugre mine head: God
would that ye should put him from me, other to slay him an ye may, for
he is an unhappy knave, and unhappily he hath done this day: through
mishap I saw him slay two knights at the passage of the water; and
other deeds he did before right marvellous and through unhappiness.
That marvelleth me, said the Black Knight, that any man that is of
worship will have ado with him. They know him not, said the damosel,
and for because he rideth with me, they ween that he be some man of
worship born. That may be, said the Black Knight; howbeit as ye say
that he be no man of worship, he is a full likely person, and full like
to be a strong man: but thus much shall I grant you, said the Black
Knight; I shall put him down upon one foot, and his horse and his
harness he shall leave with me, for it were shame to me to do him any
more harm.

When Sir Beaumains heard him say thus, he said, Sir knight, thou art
full large of my horse and my harness; I let thee wit it cost thee
nought, and whether it liketh thee or not, this laund will I pass
maugre thine head. And horse nor harness gettest thou none of mine, but
if thou win them with thy hands; and therefore let see what thou canst
do. Sayest thou that? said the Black Knight, now yield thy lady from
thee, for it beseemeth never a kitchen page to ride with such a lady.
Thou liest, said Beaumains, I am a gentleman born, and of more high
lineage than thou, and that will I prove on thy body.

Then in great wrath they departed with their horses, and came together
as it had been the thunder, and the Black Knight’s spear brake, and
Beaumains thrust him through both his sides, and therewith his spear
brake, and the truncheon left still in his side. But nevertheless the
Black Knight drew his sword, and smote many eager strokes, and of great
might, and hurt Beaumains full sore. But at the last the Black Knight,
within an hour and an half, he fell down off his horse in swoon, and
there he died. And when Beaumains saw him so well horsed and armed,
then he alighted down and armed him in his armour, and so took his
horse and rode after the damosel.

When she saw him come nigh, she said, Away, kitchen knave, out of the
wind, for the smell of thy bawdy clothes grieveth me. Alas, she said,
that ever such a knave should by mishap slay so good a knight as thou
hast done, but all this is thine unhappiness. But here by is one shall
pay thee all thy payment, and therefore yet I counsel thee, flee. It
may happen me, said Beaumains, to be beaten or slain, but I warn you,
fair damosel, I will not flee away, a nor leave your company, for all
that ye can say; for ever ye say that they will kill me or beat me, but
howsomever it happeneth I escape, and they lie on the ground. And
therefore it were as good for you to hold you still thus all day
rebuking me, for away will I not till I see the uttermost of this
journey, or else I will be slain, other truly beaten; therefore ride on
your way, for follow you I will whatsomever happen.



CHAPTER VIII. How the brother of the knight that was slain met with
Beaumains, and fought with Beaumains till he was yielden.

Thus as they rode together, they saw a knight come driving by them all
in green, both his horse and his harness; and when he came nigh the
damosel, he asked her, Is that my brother the Black Knight that ye have
brought with you? Nay, nay, she said, this unhappy kitchen knave hath
slain your brother through unhappiness. Alas, said the Green Knight,
that is great pity, that so noble a knight as he was should so
unhappily be slain, and namely of a knave’s hand, as ye say that he is.
Ah! traitor, said the Green Knight, thou shalt die for slaying of my
brother; he was a full noble knight, and his name was Sir Perard. I
defy thee, said Beaumains, for I let thee wit I slew him knightly and
not shamefully.

Therewithal the Green Knight rode unto an horn that was green, and it
hung upon a thorn, and there he blew three deadly motes, and there came
two damosels and armed him lightly. And then he took a great horse, and
a green shield and a green spear. And then they ran together with all
their mights, and brake their spears unto their hands. And then they
drew their swords, and gave many sad strokes, and either of them
wounded other full ill. And at the last, at an overthwart, Beaumains
with his horse struck the Green Knight’s horse upon the side, that he
fell to the earth. And then the Green Knight avoided his horse lightly,
and dressed him upon foot. That saw Beaumains, and therewithal he
alighted, and they rushed together like two mighty kemps a long while,
and sore they bled both. With that came the damosel, and said, My lord
the Green Knight, why for shame stand ye so long fighting with the
kitchen knave? Alas, it is shame that ever ye were made knight, to see
such a lad to match such a knight, as the weed overgrew the corn.
Therewith the Green Knight was ashamed, and therewithal he gave a great
stroke of might, and clave his shield through. When Beaumains saw his
shield cloven asunder he was a little ashamed of that stroke and of her
language; and then he gave him such a buffet upon the helm that he fell
on his knees. And so suddenly Beaumains pulled him upon the ground
grovelling. And then the Green Knight cried him mercy, and yielded him
unto Sir Beaumains, and prayed him to slay him not. All is in vain,
said Beaumains, for thou shalt die but if this damosel that came with
me pray me to save thy life. And therewithal he unlaced his helm like
as he would slay him. Fie upon thee, false kitchen page, I will never
pray thee to save his life, for I will never be so much in thy danger.
Then shall he die, said Beaumains. Not so hardy, thou bawdy knave, said
the damosel, that thou slay him. Alas, said the Green Knight, suffer me
not to die for a fair word may save me. Fair knight, said the Green
Knight, save my life, and I will forgive thee the death of my brother,
and for ever to become thy man, and thirty knights that hold of me for
ever shall do you service. In the devil’s name, said the damosel, that
such a bawdy kitchen knave should have thee and thirty knights’
service.

Sir knight, said Beaumains, all this availeth thee not, but if my
damosel speak with me for thy life. And therewithal he made a semblant
to slay him. Let be, said the damosel, thou bawdy knave; slay him not,
for an thou do thou shalt repent it. Damosel, said Beaumains, your
charge is to me a pleasure, and at your commandment his life shall be
saved, and else not. Then he said, Sir knight with the green arms, I
release thee quit at this damosel’s request, for I will not make her
wroth, I will fulfil all that she chargeth me. And then the Green
Knight kneeled down, and did him homage with his sword. Then said the
damosel, Me repenteth, Green Knight, of your damage, and of your
brother’s death, the Black Knight, for of your help I had great mister,
for I dread me sore to pass this forest. Nay, dread you not, said the
Green Knight, for ye shall lodge with me this night, and to-morn I
shall help you through this forest. So they took their horses and rode
to his manor, which was fast there beside.



