CHAPTER XXVI. How Sir Uwaine rode with the damosel of sixty year of
age, and how he gat the prize at tourneying.

Now turn we unto Sir Uwaine, that rode westward with his damosel of
three score winter of age, and she brought him thereas was a tournament
nigh the march of Wales. And at that tournament Sir Uwaine smote down
thirty knights, therefore was given him the prize, and that was a
gerfalcon, and a white steed trapped with cloth of gold. So then Sir
Uwaine did many strange adventures by the means of the old damosel, and
so she brought him to a lady that was called the Lady of the Rock, the
which was much courteous. So there were in the country two knights that
were brethren, and they were called two perilous knights, the one
knight hight Sir Edward of the Red Castle, and the other Sir Hue of the
Red Castle; and these two brethren had disherited the Lady of the Rock
of a barony of lands by their extortion. And as this knight was lodged
with this lady she made her complaint to him of these two knights.

Madam, said Sir Uwaine, they are to blame, for they do against the high
order of knighthood, and the oath that they made; and if it like you I
will speak with them, because I am a knight of King Arthur’s, and I
will entreat them with fairness; and if they will not, I shall do
battle with them, and in the defence of your right. Gramercy said the
lady, and thereas I may not acquit you, God shall. So on the morn the
two knights were sent for, that they should come thither to speak with
the Lady of the Rock, and wit ye well they failed not, for they came
with an hundred horse. But when this lady saw them in this manner so
big, she would not suffer Sir Uwaine to go out to them upon no surety
nor for no fair language, but she made him speak with them over a
tower, but finally these two brethren would not be entreated, and
answered that they would keep that they had. Well, said Sir Uwaine,
then will I fight with one of you, and prove that ye do this lady
wrong. That will we not, said they, for an we do battle, we two will
fight with one knight at once, and therefore if ye will fight so, we
will be ready at what hour ye will assign. And if ye win us in battle
the lady shall have her lands again. Ye say well, said Sir Uwaine,
therefore make you ready so that ye be here to-morn in the defence of
the lady’s right.



CHAPTER XXVII. How Sir Uwaine fought with two knights and overcame
them.

So was there sikerness made on both parties that no treason should be
wrought on neither party; so then the knights departed and made them
ready, and that night Sir Uwaine had great cheer. And on the morn he
arose early and heard mass, and brake his fast, and so he rode unto the
plain without the gates, where hoved the two brethren abiding him. So
they rode together passing sore, that Sir Edward and Sir Hue brake
their spears upon Sir Uwaine. And Sir Uwaine smote Sir Edward that he
fell over his horse and yet his spear brast not. And then he spurred
his horse and came upon Sir Hue and overthrew him, but they soon
recovered and dressed their shields and drew their swords and bade Sir
Uwaine alight and do his battle to the uttermost. Then Sir Uwaine
devoided his horse suddenly, and put his shield afore him and drew his
sword, and so they dressed together, and either gave other such
strokes, and there these two brethren wounded Sir Uwaine passing
grievously that the Lady of the Rock weened he should have died. And
thus they fought together five hours as men raged out of reason. And at
the last Sir Uwaine smote Sir Edward upon the helm such a stroke that
his sword carved unto his canel bone, and then Sir Hue abated his
courage, but Sir Uwaine pressed fast to have slain him. That saw Sir
Hue: he kneeled down and yielded him to Sir Uwaine. And he of his
gentleness received his sword, and took him by the hand, and went into
the castle together. Then the Lady of the Rock was passing glad, and
the other brother made great sorrow for his brother’s death. Then the
lady was restored of all her lands, and Sir Hue was commanded to be at
the court of King Arthur at the next feast of Pentecost. So Sir Uwaine
dwelt with the lady nigh half a year, for it was long or he might be
whole of his great hurts. And so when it drew nigh the term-day that
Sir Gawaine, Sir Marhaus, and Sir Uwaine should meet at the cross-way,
then every knight drew him thither to hold his promise that they had
made; and Sir Marhaus and Sir Uwaine brought their damosels with them,
but Sir Gawaine had lost his damosel, as it is afore rehearsed.



CHAPTER XXVIII. How at the year’s end all three knights with their
three damosels met at the fountain.

Right so at the twelvemonths’ end they met all three knights at the
fountain and their damosels, but the damosel that Sir Gawaine had could
say but little worship of him so they departed from the damosels and
rode through a great forest, and there they met with a messenger that
came from King Arthur, that had sought them well-nigh a twelvemonth
throughout all England, Wales, and Scotland, and charged if ever he
might find Sir Gawaine and Sir Uwaine to bring them to the court again.
And then were they all glad, and so prayed they Sir Marhaus to ride
with them to the king’s court. And so within twelve days they came to
Camelot, and the king was passing glad of their coming, and so was all
the court. Then the king made them to swear upon a book to tell him all
their adventures that had befallen them that twelvemonth, and so they
did. And there was Sir Marhaus well known, for there were knights that
he had matched aforetime, and he was named one of the best knights
living.

Against the feast of Pentecost came the Damosel of the Lake and brought
with her Sir Pelleas; and at that high feast there was great jousting
of knights, and of all knights that were at that jousts, Sir Pelleas
had the prize, and Sir Marhaus was named the next; but Sir Pelleas was
so strong there might but few knights sit him a buffet with a spear.
And at that next feast Sir Pelleas and Sir Marhaus were made knights of
the Table Round, for there were two sieges void, for two knights were
slain that twelvemonth, and great joy had King Arthur of Sir Pelleas
and of Sir Marhaus. But Pelleas loved never after Sir Gawaine, but as
he spared him for the love of King Arthur; but ofttimes at jousts and
tournaments Sir Pelleas quit Sir Gawaine, for so it rehearseth in the
book of French. So Sir Tristram many days after fought with Sir Marhaus
in an island, and there they did a great battle, but at the last Sir
Tristram slew him, so Sir Tristram was wounded that unnethe he might
recover, and lay at a nunnery half a year. And Sir Pelleas was a
worshipful knight, and was one of the four that achieved the Sangreal,
and the Damosel of the Lake made by her means that never he had ado
with Sir Launcelot de Lake, for where Sir Launcelot was at any jousts
or any tournament, she would not suffer him be there that day, but if
it were on the side of Sir Launcelot.

Explicit liber quartus.
Incipit liber quintus.



