CHAPTER XXXV. Of the Great Royalty, and what officers were made at the
feast of the wedding, and of the jousts at the feast.

So it drew fast to Michaelmas; and thither came Dame Lionesse, the lady
of the Castle Perilous, and her sister, Dame Linet, with Sir
Gringamore, her brother, with them for he had the conduct of these
ladies. And there they were lodged at the device of King Arthur. And
upon Michaelmas Day the Bishop of Canterbury made the wedding betwixt
Sir Gareth and the Lady Lionesse with great solemnity. And King Arthur
made Gaheris to wed the Damosel Savage, that was Dame Linet; and King
Arthur made Sir Agravaine to wed Dame Lionesse’s niece, a fair lady,
her name was Dame Laurel.

And so when this solemnization was done, then came in the Green Knight,
Sir Pertolepe, with thirty knights, and there he did homage and fealty
to Sir Gareth, and these knights to hold of him for evermore. Also Sir
Pertolepe said: I pray you that at this feast I may be your
chamberlain. With a good will, said Sir Gareth sith it liketh you to
take so simple an office. Then came in the Red Knight, with three score
knights with him, and did to Sir Gareth homage and fealty, and all
those knights to hold of him for evermore. And then this Sir Perimones
prayed Sir Gareth to grant him to be his chief butler at that high
feast. I will well, said Sir Gareth, that ye have this office, and it
were better. Then came in Sir Persant of Inde, with an hundred knights
with him, and there he did homage and fealty, and all his knights
should do him service, and hold their lands of him for ever; and there
he prayed Sir Gareth to make him his sewer-chief at the feast. I will
well, said Sir Gareth, that ye have it and it were better. Then came
the Duke de la Rowse with an hundred knights with him, and there he did
homage and fealty to Sir Gareth, and so to hold their lands of him for
ever. And he required Sir Gareth that he might serve him of the wine
that day of that feast. I will well, said Sir Gareth, and it were
better. Then came in the Red Knight of the Red Launds, that was Sir
Ironside, and he brought with him three hundred knights, and there he
did homage and fealty, and all these knights to hold their lands of him
for ever. And then he asked Sir Gareth to be his carver. I will well,
said Sir Gareth, an it please you.

Then came into the court thirty ladies, and all they seemed widows, and
those thirty ladies brought with them many fair gentlewomen. And all
they kneeled down at once unto King Arthur and unto Sir Gareth, and
there all those ladies told the king how Sir Gareth delivered them from
the dolorous tower, and slew the Brown Knight without Pity: And
therefore we, and our heirs for evermore, will do homage unto Sir
Gareth of Orkney. So then the kings and queens, princes and earls,
barons and many bold knights, went unto meat; and well may ye wit there
were all manner of meat plenteously, all manner revels and games, with
all manner of minstrelsy that was used in those days. Also there was
great jousts three days. But the king would not suffer Sir Gareth to
joust, because of his new bride; for, as the French book saith, that
Dame Lionesse desired of the king that none that were wedded should
joust at that feast.

So the first day there jousted Sir Lamorak de Galis, for he overthrew
thirty knights, and did passing marvellously deeds of arms; and then
King Arthur made Sir Persant and his two brethren Knights of the Round
Table to their lives’ end, and gave them great lands. Also the second
day there jousted Tristram best, and he overthrew forty knights, and
did there marvellous deeds of arms. And there King Arthur made
Ironside, that was the Red Knight of the Red Launds, a Knight of the
Table Round to his life’s end, and gave him great lands. The third day
there jousted Sir Launcelot du Lake, and he overthrew fifty knights,
and did many marvellous deeds of arms, that all men wondered on him.
And there King Arthur made the Duke de la Rowse a Knight of the Round
Table to his life’s end, and gave him great lands to spend. But when
these jousts were done, Sir Lamorak and Sir Tristram departed suddenly,
and would not be known, for the which King Arthur and all the court
were sore displeased. And so they held the court forty days with great
solemnity. And this Sir Gareth was a noble knight, and a well-ruled,
and fair-languaged.

Thus endeth this tale of Sir Gareth of Orkney that wedded Dame Lionesse
of the Castle Perilous. And also Sir Gaheris wedded her sister, Dame
Linet, that was called the Damosel Sabage. And Sir Agrabaine wedded
Dame Laurel, a fair lady and great, and mighty lands with great riches
gave with them King Arthur, that royally they might live till their
lives’ end.

 Here followeth the viii. book, the which is the first book of Sir
 Tristram de Liones, and who was his father and his mother, and how he
 was born and fostered, and how he was made knight.



BOOK VIII.



CHAPTER I. How Sir Tristram de Liones was born, and how his mother died
at his birth, wherefore she named him Tristram.

It was a king that hight Meliodas, and he was lord and king of the
country of Liones, and this Meliodas was a likely knight as any was
that time living. And by fortune he wedded King Mark’s sister of
Cornwall, and she was called Elizabeth, that was called both good and
fair. And at that time King Arthur reigned, and he was whole king of
England, Wales, and Scotland, and of many other realms: howbeit there
were many kings that were lords of many countries, but all they held
their lands of King Arthur; for in Wales were two kings, and in the
north were many kings; and in Cornwall and in the west were two kings;
also in Ireland were two or three kings, and all were under the
obeissance of King Arthur. So was the King of France, and the King of
Brittany, and all the lordships unto Rome.

So when this King Meliodas had been with his wife, within a while she
waxed great with child, and she was a full meek lady, and well she
loved her lord, and he her again, so there was great joy betwixt them.
Then there was a lady in that country that had loved King Meliodas
long, and by no mean she never could get his love; therefore she let
ordain upon a day, as King Meliodas rode a-hunting, for he was a great
chaser, and there by an enchantment she made him chase an hart by
himself alone till that he came to an old castle, and there anon he was
taken prisoner by the lady that him loved. When Elizabeth, King
Meliodas’ wife, missed her lord, and she was nigh out of her wit, and
also as great with child as she was, she took a gentlewoman with her,
and ran into the forest to seek her lord. And when she was far in the
forest she might no farther, for she began to travail fast of her
child. And she had many grimly throes; her gentlewoman helped her all
that she might, and so by miracle of Our Lady of Heaven she was
delivered with great pains. But she had taken such cold for the default
of help that deep draughts of death took her, that needs she must die
and depart out of this world; there was none other bote.

And when this Queen Elizabeth saw that there was none other bote, then
she made great dole, and said unto her gentlewoman: When ye see my
lord, King Meliodas, recommend me unto him, and tell him what pains I
endure here for his love, and how I must die here for his sake for
default of good help; and let him wit that I am full sorry to depart
out of this world from him, therefore pray him to be friend to my soul.
Now let me see my little child, for whom I have had all this sorrow.
And when she saw him she said thus: Ah, my little son, thou hast
murdered thy mother, and therefore I suppose, thou that art a murderer
so young, thou art full likely to be a manly man in thine age. And
because I shall die of the birth of thee, I charge thee, gentlewoman,
that thou pray my lord, King Meliodas, that when he is christened let
call him Tristram, that is as much to say as a sorrowful birth. And
therewith this queen gave up the ghost and died. Then the gentlewoman
laid her under an umbre of a great tree, and then she lapped the child
as well as she might for cold. Right so there came the barons,
following after the queen, and when they saw that she was dead, and
understood none other but the king was destroyed.



