CHAPTER IV. How Sir Marhaus came out of Ireland for to ask truage of
Cornwall, or else he would fight therefore.

Then it befell that King Anguish of Ireland sent unto King Mark of
Cornwall for his truage, that Cornwall had paid many winters. And all
that time King Mark was behind of the truage for seven years. And King
Mark and his barons gave unto the messenger of Ireland these words and
answer, that they would none pay; and bade the messenger go unto his
King Anguish, and tell him we will pay him no truage, but tell your
lord, an he will always have truage of us of Cornwall, bid him send a
trusty knight of his land, that will fight for his right, and we shall
find another for to defend our right. With this answer the messengers
departed into Ireland. And when King Anguish understood the answer of
the messengers he was wonderly wroth. And then he called unto him Sir
Marhaus, the good knight, that was nobly proved, and a Knight of the
Table Round. And this Marhaus was brother unto the queen of Ireland.
Then the king said thus: Fair brother, Sir Marhaus, I pray you go into
Cornwall for my sake, and do battle for our truage that of right we
ought to have; and whatsomever ye spend ye shall have sufficiently,
more than ye shall need. Sir, said Marhaus, wit ye well that I shall
not be loath to do battle in the right of you and your land with the
best knight of the Table Round; for I know them, for the most part,
what be their deeds; and for to advance my deeds and to increase my
worship I will right gladly go unto this journey for our right.

So in all haste there was made purveyance for Sir Marhaus, and he had
all things that to him needed; and so he departed out of Ireland, and
arrived up in Cornwall even fast by the Castle of Tintagil. And when
King Mark understood that he was there arrived to fight for Ireland,
then made King Mark great sorrow when he understood that the good and
noble knight Sir Marhaus was come. For they knew no knight that durst
have ado with him. For at that time Sir Marhaus was called one of the
famousest and renowned knights of the world. And thus Sir Marhaus abode
in the sea, and every day he sent unto King Mark for to pay the truage
that was behind of seven year, other else to find a knight to fight
with him for the truage. This manner of message Sir Marhaus sent daily
unto King Mark.

Then they of Cornwall let make cries in every place, that what knight
would fight for to save the truage of Cornwall, he should be rewarded
so that he should fare the better, term of his life. Then some of the
barons said to King Mark, and counselled him to send to the court of
King Arthur for to seek Sir Launcelot du Lake, that was that time named
for the marvelloust knight of all the world. Then there were some other
barons that counselled the king not to do so, and said that it was
labour in vain, because Sir Marhaus was a knight of the Round Table,
therefore any of them will be loath to have ado with other, but if it
were any knight at his own request would fight disguised and unknown.
So the king and all his barons assented that it was no bote to seek any
knight of the Round Table. This mean while came the language and the
noise unto King Meliodas, how that Sir Marhaus abode battle fast by
Tintagil, and how King Mark could find no manner knight to fight for
him. When young Tristram heard of this he was wroth, and sore ashamed
that there durst no knight in Cornwall have ado with Sir Marhaus of
Ireland.



CHAPTER V. How Tristram enterprized the battle to fight for the truage
of Cornwall, and how he was made knight.

Therewithal Tristram went unto his father, King Meliodas, and asked him
counsel what was best to do for to recover Cornwall from truage. For,
as meseemeth, said Sir Tristram, it were shame that Sir Marhaus, the
queen’s brother of Ireland, should go away unless that he were foughten
withal. As for that, said King Meliodas, wit you well, son Tristram,
that Sir Marhaus is called one of the best knights of the world, and
Knight of the Table Round; and therefore I know no knight in this
country that is able to match with him. Alas, said Sir Tristram, that I
am not made knight; and if Sir Marhaus should thus depart into Ireland,
God let me never have worship: an I were made knight I should match
him. And sir, said Tristram, I pray you give me leave to ride to King
Mark; and, so ye be not displeased, of King Mark will I be made knight.
I will well, said King Meliodas, that ye be ruled as your courage will
rule you. Then Sir Tristram thanked his father much. And then he made
him ready to ride into Cornwall.

In the meanwhile there came a messenger with letters of love from King
Faramon of France’s daughter unto Sir Tristram, that were full piteous
letters, and in them were written many complaints of love; but Sir
Tristram had no joy of her letters nor regard unto her. Also she sent
him a little brachet that was passing fair. But when the king’s
daughter understood that Sir Tristram would not love her, as the book
saith, she died for sorrow. And then the same squire that brought the
letter and the brachet came again unto Sir Tristram, as after ye shall
hear in the tale.

So this young Sir Tristram rode unto his eme, King Mark of Cornwall.
And when he came there he heard say that there would no knight fight
with Sir Marhaus. Then yede Sir Tristram unto his eme and said: Sir, if
ye will give me the order of knighthood, I will do battle with Sir
Marhaus. What are ye, said the king, and from whence be ye come? Sir,
said Tristram, I come from King Meliodas that wedded your sister, and a
gentleman wit ye well I am. King Mark beheld Sir Tristram and saw that
he was but a young man of age, but he was passingly well made and big.
Fair sir, said the king, what is your name, and where were ye born?
Sir, said he again, my name is Tristram, and in the country of Liones
was I born. Ye say well, said the king; and if ye will do this battle I
shall make you knight. Therefore I come to you, said Sir Tristram, and
for none other cause. But then King Mark made him knight. And
therewithal, anon as he had made him knight, he sent a messenger unto
Sir Marhaus with letters that said that he had found a young knight
ready for to take the battle to the uttermost. It may well be, said Sir
Marhaus; but tell King Mark I will not fight with no knight but he be
of blood royal, that is to say, other king’s son, other queen’s son,
born of a prince or princess.

When King Mark understood that, he sent for Sir Tristram de Liones and
told him what was the answer of Sir Marhaus. Then said Sir Tristram:
Sithen that he saith so, let him wit that I am come of father side and
mother side of as noble blood as he is: for, sir, now shall ye know
that I am King Meliodas’ son, born of your own sister, Dame Elizabeth,
that died in the forest in the birth of me. O Jesu, said King Mark, ye
are welcome fair nephew to me. Then in all the haste the king let horse
Sir Tristram, and armed him in the best manner that might be had or
gotten for gold or silver. And then King Mark sent unto Sir Marhaus,
and did him to wit that a better born man than he was himself should
fight with him, and his name is Sir Tristram de Liones, gotten of King
Meliodas, and born of King Mark’s sister. Then was Sir Marhaus glad and
blithe that he should fight with such a gentleman. And so by the assent
of King Mark and of Sir Marhaus they let ordain that they should fight
within an island nigh Sir Marhaus’ ships; and so was Sir Tristram put
into a vessel both his horse and he, and all that to him longed both
for his body and for his horse. Sir Tristram lacked nothing. And when
King Mark and his barons of Cornwall beheld how young Sir Tristram
departed with such a carriage to fight for the right of Cornwall, there
was neither man nor woman of worship but they wept to see and
understand so young a knight to jeopardy himself for their right.



