CHAPTER III. Of the birth of King Arthur and of his nurture.

Then Queen Igraine waxed daily greater and greater, so it befell after
within half a year, as King Uther lay by his queen, he asked her, by
the faith she owed to him, whose was the body; then she sore abashed to
give answer. Dismay you not, said the king, but tell me the truth, and
I shall love you the better, by the faith of my body. Sir, said she, I
shall tell you the truth. The same night that my lord was dead, the
hour of his death, as his knights record, there came into my castle of
Tintagil a man like my lord in speech and in countenance, and two
knights with him in likeness of his two knights Brastias and Jordanus,
and so I went unto bed with him as I ought to do with my lord, and the
same night, as I shall answer unto God, this child was begotten upon
me. That is truth, said the king, as ye say; for it was I myself that
came in the likeness, and therefore dismay you not, for I am father of
the child; and there he told her all the cause, how it was by Merlin’s
counsel. Then the queen made great joy when she knew who was the father
of her child.

Soon came Merlin unto the king, and said, Sir, ye must purvey you for
the nourishing of your child. As thou wilt, said the king, be it. Well,
said Merlin, I know a lord of yours in this land, that is a passing
true man and a faithful, and he shall have the nourishing of your
child, and his name is Sir Ector, and he is a lord of fair livelihood
in many parts in England and Wales; and this lord, Sir Ector, let him
be sent for, for to come and speak with you, and desire him yourself,
as he loveth you, that he will put his own child to nourishing to
another woman, and that his wife nourish yours. And when the child is
born let it be delivered to me at yonder privy postern unchristened. So
like as Merlin devised it was done. And when Sir Ector was come he made
fiaunce to the king for to nourish the child like as the king desired;
and there the king granted Sir Ector great rewards. Then when the lady
was delivered, the king commanded two knights and two ladies to take
the child, bound in a cloth of gold, and that ye deliver him to what
poor man ye meet at the postern gate of the castle. So the child was
delivered unto Merlin, and so he bare it forth unto Sir Ector, and made
an holy man to christen him, and named him Arthur; and so Sir Ector’s
wife nourished him with her own pap.



CHAPTER IV. Of the death of King Uther Pendragon.

Then within two years King Uther fell sick of a great malady. And in
the meanwhile his enemies usurped upon him, and did a great battle upon
his men, and slew many of his people. Sir, said Merlin, ye may not lie
so as ye do, for ye must to the field though ye ride on an
horse-litter: for ye shall never have the better of your enemies but if
your person be there, and then shall ye have the victory. So it was
done as Merlin had devised, and they carried the king forth in an
horse-litter with a great host towards his enemies. And at St. Albans
there met with the king a great host of the North. And that day Sir
Ulfius and Sir Brastias did great deeds of arms, and King Uther’s men
overcame the Northern battle and slew many people, and put the remnant
to flight. And then the king returned unto London, and made great joy
of his victory. And then he fell passing sore sick, so that three days
and three nights he was speechless: wherefore all the barons made great
sorrow, and asked Merlin what counsel were best. There is none other
remedy, said Merlin, but God will have his will. But look ye all barons
be before King Uther to-morn, and God and I shall make him to speak. So
on the morn all the barons with Merlin came to-fore the king; then
Merlin said aloud unto King Uther, Sir, shall your son Arthur be king
after your days, of this realm with all the appurtenance? Then Uther
Pendragon turned him, and said in hearing of them all, I give him God’s
blessing and mine, and bid him pray for my soul, and righteously and
worshipfully that he claim the crown, upon forfeiture of my blessing;
and therewith he yielded up the ghost, and then was he interred as
longed to a king. Wherefore the queen, fair Igraine, made great sorrow,
and all the barons.



CHAPTER V. How Arthur was chosen king, and of wonders and marvels of a
sword taken out of a stone by the said Arthur.

Then stood the realm in great jeopardy long while, for every lord that
was mighty of men made him strong, and many weened to have been king.
Then Merlin went to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and counselled him
for to send for all the lords of the realm, and all the gentlemen of
arms, that they should to London come by Christmas, upon pain of
cursing; and for this cause, that Jesus, that was born on that night,
that he would of his great mercy show some miracle, as he was come to
be king of mankind, for to show some miracle who should be rightwise
king of this realm. So the Archbishop, by the advice of Merlin, sent
for all the lords and gentlemen of arms that they should come by
Christmas even unto London. And many of them made them clean of their
life, that their prayer might be the more acceptable unto God. So in
the greatest church of London, whether it were Paul’s or not the French
book maketh no mention, all the estates were long or day in the church
for to pray. And when matins and the first mass was done, there was
seen in the churchyard, against the high altar, a great stone four
square, like unto a marble stone; and in midst thereof was like an
anvil of steel a foot on high, and therein stuck a fair sword naked by
the point, and letters there were written in gold about the sword that
said thus:—Whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil, is
rightwise king born of all England. Then the people marvelled, and told
it to the Archbishop.

I command, said the Archbishop, that ye keep you within your church and
pray unto God still, that no man touch the sword till the high mass be
all done. So when all masses were done all the lords went to behold the
stone and the sword. And when they saw the scripture some assayed, such
as would have been king. But none might stir the sword nor move it. He
is not here, said the Archbishop, that shall achieve the sword, but
doubt not God will make him known. But this is my counsel, said the
Archbishop, that we let purvey ten knights, men of good fame, and they
to keep this sword. So it was ordained, and then there was made a cry,
that every man should assay that would, for to win the sword. And upon
New Year’s Day the barons let make a jousts and a tournament, that all
knights that would joust or tourney there might play, and all this was
ordained for to keep the lords together and the commons, for the
Archbishop trusted that God would make him known that should win the
sword.

So upon New Year’s Day, when the service was done, the barons rode unto
the field, some to joust and some to tourney, and so it happened that
Sir Ector, that had great livelihood about London, rode unto the
jousts, and with him rode Sir Kay his son, and young Arthur that was
his nourished brother; and Sir Kay was made knight at All Hallowmass
afore. So as they rode to the jousts-ward, Sir Kay lost his sword, for
he had left it at his father’s lodging, and so he prayed young Arthur
for to ride for his sword. I will well, said Arthur, and rode fast
after the sword, and when he came home, the lady and all were out to
see the jousting. Then was Arthur wroth, and said to himself, I will
ride to the churchyard, and take the sword with me that sticketh in the
stone, for my brother Sir Kay shall not be without a sword this day. So
when he came to the churchyard, Sir Arthur alighted and tied his horse
to the stile, and so he went to the tent, and found no knights there,
for they were at the jousting. And so he handled the sword by the
handles, and lightly and fiercely pulled it out of the stone, and took
his horse and rode his way until he came to his brother Sir Kay, and
delivered him the sword. And as soon as Sir Kay saw the sword, he wist
well it was the sword of the stone, and so he rode to his father Sir
Ector, and said: Sir, lo here is the sword of the stone, wherefore I
must be king of this land. When Sir Ector beheld the sword, he returned
again and came to the church, and there they alighted all three, and
went into the church. And anon he made Sir Kay swear upon a book how he
came to that sword. Sir, said Sir Kay, by my brother Arthur, for he
brought it to me. How gat ye this sword? said Sir Ector to Arthur. Sir,
I will tell you. When I came home for my brother’s sword, I found
nobody at home to deliver me his sword; and so I thought my brother Sir
Kay should not be swordless, and so I came hither eagerly and pulled it
out of the stone without any pain. Found ye any knights about this
sword? said Sir Ector. Nay, said Arthur. Now, said Sir Ector to Arthur,
I understand ye must be king of this land. Wherefore I, said Arthur,
and for what cause? Sir, said Ector, for God will have it so; for there
should never man have drawn out this sword, but he that shall be
rightwise king of this land. Now let me see whether ye can put the
sword there as it was, and pull it out again. That is no mastery, said
Arthur, and so he put it in the stone; wherewithal Sir Ector assayed to
pull out the sword and failed.



