CHAPTER XI. How Accolon confessed the treason of Morgan le Fay, King
Arthur’s sister, and how she would have done slay him.

Then Sir Accolon bethought him, and said, Woe worth this sword, for by
it have I got my death. It may well be, said the king. Now, sir, said
Accolon, I will tell you; this sword hath been in my keeping the most
part of this twelvemonth; and Morgan le Fay, King Uriens’ wife, sent it
me yesterday by a dwarf, to this intent, that I should slay King
Arthur, her brother. For ye shall understand King Arthur is the man in
the world that she most hateth, because he is most of worship and of
prowess of any of her blood; also she loveth me out of measure as
paramour, and I her again; and if she might bring about to slay Arthur
by her crafts, she would slay her husband King Uriens lightly, and then
had she me devised to be king in this land, and so to reign, and she to
be my queen; but that is now done, said Accolon, for I am sure of my
death. Well, said Sir Arthur, I feel by you ye would have been king in
this land. It had been great damage to have destroyed your lord, said
Arthur. It is truth, said Accolon, but now I have told you truth,
wherefore I pray you tell me of whence ye are, and of what court? O
Accolon, said King Arthur, now I let thee wit that I am King Arthur, to
whom thou hast done great damage. When Accolon heard that he cried
aloud, Fair, sweet lord, have mercy on me, for I knew not you. O Sir
Accolon, said King Arthur, mercy shalt thou have, because I feel by thy
words at this time thou knewest not my person; but I understand well by
thy words that thou hast agreed to the death of my person, and
therefore thou art a traitor; but I wite thee the less, for my sister
Morgan le Fay by her false crafts made thee to agree and consent to her
false lusts, but I shall be sore avenged upon her an I live, that all
Christendom shall speak of it; God knoweth I have honoured her and
worshipped her more than all my kin, and more have I trusted her than
mine own wife and all my kin after.

Then Sir Arthur called the keepers of the field, and said, Sirs, come
hither, for here are we two knights that have fought unto a great
damage unto us both, and like each one of us to have slain other, if it
had happed so; and had any of us known other, here had been no battle,
nor stroke stricken. Then all aloud cried Accolon unto all the knights
and men that were then there gathered together, and said to them in
this manner, O lords, this noble knight that I have fought withal, the
which me sore repenteth, is the most man of prowess, of manhood, and of
worship in the world, for it is himself King Arthur, our alther liege
lord, and with mishap and with misadventure have I done this battle
with the king and lord that I am holden withal.



CHAPTER XII. How Arthur accorded the two brethren, and delivered the
twenty knights, and how Sir Accolon died.

Then all the people fell down on their knees and cried King Arthur
mercy. Mercy shall ye have, said Arthur: here may ye see what
adventures befall ofttime of errant knights, how that I have fought
with a knight of mine own unto my great damage and his both. But, sirs,
because I am sore hurt, and he both, and I had great need of a little
rest, ye shall understand the opinion betwixt you two brethren: As to
thee, Sir Damas, for whom I have been champion and won the field of
this knight, yet will I judge because ye, Sir Damas, are called an
orgulous knight, and full of villainy, and not worth of prowess your
deeds, therefore I will that ye give unto your brother all the whole
manor with the appurtenance, under this form, that Sir Ontzlake hold
the manor of you, and yearly to give you a palfrey to ride upon, for
that will become you better to ride on than upon a courser. Also I
charge thee, Sir Damas, upon pain of death, that thou never distress no
knights errant that ride on their adventure. And also that thou restore
these twenty knights that thou hast long kept prisoners, of all their
harness, that they be content for; and if any of them come to my court
and complain of thee, by my head thou shalt die therefore. Also, Sir
Ontzlake, as to you, because ye are named a good knight, and full of
prowess, and true and gentle in all your deeds, this shall be your
charge I will give you, that in all goodly haste ye come unto me and my
court, and ye shall be a knight of mine, and if your deeds be
thereafter I shall so prefer you, by the grace of God, that ye shall in
short time be in ease for to live as worshipfully as your brother Sir
Damas. God thank your largeness of your goodness and of your bounty, I
shall be from henceforward at all times at your commandment; for, sir,
said Sir Ontzlake, as God would, as I was hurt but late with an
adventurous knight through both my thighs, that grieved me sore, and
else had I done this battle with you. God would, said Arthur, it had
been so, for then had not I been hurt as I am. I shall tell you the
cause why: for I had not been hurt as I am, had it not been mine own
sword, that was stolen from me by treason; and this battle was ordained
aforehand to have slain me, and so it was brought to the purpose by
false treason, and by false enchantment. Alas, said Sir Ontzlake, that
is great pity that ever so noble a man as ye are of your deeds and
prowess, that any man or woman might find in their hearts to work any
treason against you. I shall reward them, said Arthur, in short time,
by the grace of God. Now, tell me, said Arthur, how far am I from
Camelot? Sir, ye are two days’ journey therefrom. I would fain be at
some place of worship, said Sir Arthur, that I might rest me. Sir, said
Sir Ontzlake, hereby is a rich abbey of your elders’ foundation, of
nuns, but three miles hence. So the king took his leave of all the
people, and mounted upon horseback, and Sir Accolon with him. And when
they were come to the abbey, he let fetch leeches and search his wounds
and Accolon’s both; but Sir Accolon died within four days, for he had
bled so much blood that he might not live, but King Arthur was well
recovered. So when Accolon was dead he let send him on an horse-bier
with six knights unto Camelot, and said: Bear him to my sister Morgan
le Fay, and say that I send her him to a present, and tell her I have
my sword Excalibur and the scabbard; so they departed with the body.



