CHAPTER III. How a poor man riding upon a lean mare desired King Arthur
to make his son knight.

Forthwithal there came a poor man into the court, and brought with him
a fair young man of eighteen years of age riding upon a lean mare; and
the poor man asked all men that he met, Where shall I find King Arthur?
Yonder he is, said the knights, wilt thou anything with him? Yea, said
the poor man, therefore I came hither. Anon as he came before the king,
he saluted him and said: O King Arthur, the flower of all knights and
kings, I beseech Jesu save thee. Sir, it was told me that at this time
of your marriage ye would give any man the gift that he would ask, out
except that were unreasonable. That is truth, said the king, such cries
I let make, and that will I hold, so it apair not my realm nor mine
estate. Ye say well and graciously, said the poor man; Sir, I ask
nothing else but that ye will make my son here a knight. It is a great
thing thou askest of me, said the king. What is thy name? said the king
to the poor man. Sir, my name is Aries the cowherd. Whether cometh this
of thee or of thy son? said the king. Nay, sir, said Aries, this desire
cometh of my son and not of me, for I shall tell you I have thirteen
sons, and all they will fall to what labour I put them, and will be
right glad to do labour, but this child will not labour for me, for
anything that my wife or I may do, but always he will be shooting or
casting darts, and glad for to see battles and to behold knights, and
always day and night he desireth of me to be made a knight. What is thy
name? said the king unto the young man. Sir, my name is Tor. The king
beheld him fast, and saw he was passingly well-visaged and passingly
well made of his years. Well, said King Arthur unto Aries the cowherd,
fetch all thy sons afore me that I may see them. And so the poor man
did, and all were shaped much like the poor man. But Tor was not like
none of them all in shape nor in countenance, for he was much more than
any of them. Now, said King Arthur unto the cow herd, where is the
sword he shall be made knight withal? It is here, said Tor. Take it out
of the sheath, said the king, and require me to make you a knight.

Then Tor alighted off his mare and pulled out his sword, kneeling, and
requiring the king that he would make him knight, and that he might be
a knight of the Table Round. As for a knight I will make you, and
therewith smote him in the neck with the sword, saying, Be ye a good
knight, and so I pray to God so ye may be, and if ye be of prowess and
of worthiness ye shall be a knight of the Table Round. Now Merlin, said
Arthur, say whether this Tor shall be a good knight or no. Yea, sir, he
ought to be a good knight, for he is come of as good a man as any is
alive, and of kings’ blood. How so, sir? said the king. I shall tell
you, said Merlin: This poor man, Aries the cowherd, is not his father;
he is nothing sib to him, for King Pellinore is his father. I suppose
nay, said the cowherd. Fetch thy wife afore me, said Merlin, and she
shall not say nay. Anon the wife was fetched, which was a fair
housewife, and there she answered Merlin full womanly, and there she
told the king and Merlin that when she was a maid, and went to milk
kine, there met with her a stern knight, and half by force he had my
maidenhead, and at that time he begat my son Tor, and he took away from
me my greyhound that I had that time with me, and said that he would
keep the greyhound for my love. Ah, said the cowherd, I weened not
this, but I may believe it well, for he had never no tatches of me.
Sir, said Tor unto Merlin, dishonour not my mother. Sir, said Merlin,
it is more for your worship than hurt, for your father is a good man
and a king, and he may right well advance you and your mother, for ye
were begotten or ever she was wedded. That is truth, said the wife. It
is the less grief unto me, said the cowherd.



CHAPTER IV. How Sir Tor was known for son of King Pellinore, and how
Gawaine was made knight.

So on the morn King Pellinore came to the court of King Arthur, which
had great joy of him, and told him of Tor, how he was his son, and how
he had made him knight at the request of the cowherd. When Pellinore
beheld Tor, he pleased him much. So the king made Gawaine knight, but
Tor was the first he made at the feast. What is the cause, said King
Arthur, that there be two places void in the sieges? Sir, said Merlin,
there shall no man sit in those places but they that shall be of most
worship. But in the Siege Perilous there shall no man sit therein but
one, and if there be any so hardy to do it he shall be destroyed, and
he that shall sit there shall have no fellow. And therewith Merlin took
King Pellinore by the hand, and in the one hand next the two sieges and
the Siege Perilous he said, in open audience, This is your place and
best ye are worthy to sit therein of any that is here. Thereat sat Sir
Gawaine in great envy and told Gaheris his brother, yonder knight is
put to great worship, the which grieveth me sore, for he slew our
father King Lot, therefore I will slay him, said Gawaine, with a sword
that was sent me that is passing trenchant. Ye shall not so, said
Gaheris, at this time, for at this time I am but a squire, and when I
am made knight I will be avenged on him, and therefore, brother, it is
best ye suffer till another time, that we may have him out of the
court, for an we did so we should trouble this high feast. I will well,
said Gawaine, as ye will.



CHAPTER V. How at feast of the wedding of King Arthur to Guenever, a
white hart came into the hall, and thirty couple hounds, and how a
brachet pinched the hart which was taken away.

Then was the high feast made ready, and the king was wedded at Camelot
unto Dame Guenever in the church of Saint Stephen’s, with great
solemnity. And as every man was set after his degree, Merlin went to
all the knights of the Round Table, and bade them sit still, that none
of them remove. For ye shall see a strange and a marvellous adventure.
Right so as they sat there came running in a white hart into the hall,
and a white brachet next him, and thirty couple of black running hounds
came after with a great cry, and the hart went about the Table Round as
he went by other boards. The white brachet bit him by the buttock and
pulled out a piece, wherethrough the hart leapt a great leap and
overthrew a knight that sat at the board side; and therewith the knight
arose and took up the brachet, and so went forth out of the hall, and
took his horse and rode his way with the brachet. Right so anon came in
a lady on a white palfrey, and cried aloud to King Arthur, Sir, suffer
me not to have this despite, for the brachet was mine that the knight
led away. I may not do therewith, said the king.

With this there came a knight riding all armed on a great horse, and
took the lady away with him with force, and ever she cried and made
great dole. When she was gone the king was glad, for she made such a
noise. Nay, said Merlin, ye may not leave these adventures so lightly;
for these adventures must be brought again or else it would be
disworship to you and to your feast. I will, said the king, that all be
done by your advice. Then, said Merlin, let call Sir Gawaine, for he
must bring again the white hart. Also, sir, ye must let call Sir Tor,
for he must bring again the brachet and the knight, or else slay him.
Also let call King Pellinore, for he must bring again the lady and the
knight, or else slay him. And these three knights shall do marvellous
adventures or they come again. Then were they called all three as it
rehearseth afore, and each of them took his charge, and armed them
surely. But Sir Gawaine had the first request, and therefore we will
begin at him.



