CHAPTER XIV. How Balin met with that knight named Garlon at a feast,
and there he slew him, to have his blood to heal therewith the son of
his host.

Then they rode three or four days and never met with adventure, and by
hap they were lodged with a gentle man that was a rich man and well at
ease. And as they sat at their supper Balin overheard one complain
grievously by him in a chair. What is this noise? said Balin. Forsooth,
said his host, I will tell you. I was but late at a jousting, and there
I jousted with a knight that is brother unto King Pellam, and twice
smote I him down, and then he promised to quit me on my best friend;
and so he wounded my son, that cannot be whole till I have of that
knight’s blood, and he rideth alway invisible; but I know not his name.
Ah! said Balin, I know that knight, his name is Garlon, he hath slain
two knights of mine in the same manner, therefore I had liefer meet
with that knight than all the gold in this realm, for the despite he
hath done me. Well, said his host, I shall tell you, King Pellam of
Listeneise hath made do cry in all this country a great feast that
shall be within these twenty days, and no knight may come there but if
he bring his wife with him, or his paramour; and that knight, your
enemy and mine, ye shall see that day. Then I behote you, said Balin,
part of his blood to heal your son withal. We will be forward to-morn,
said his host. So on the morn they rode all three toward Pellam, and
they had fifteen days’ journey or they came thither; and that same day
began the great feast. And so they alighted and stabled their horses,
and went into the castle; but Balin’s host might not be let in because
he had no lady. Then Balin was well received and brought unto a chamber
and unarmed him; and there were brought him robes to his pleasure, and
would have had Balin leave his sword behind him. Nay, said Balin, that
do I not, for it is the custom of my country a knight always to keep
his weapon with him, and that custom will I keep, or else I will depart
as I came. Then they gave him leave to wear his sword, and so he went
unto the castle, and was set among knights of worship, and his lady
afore him.

Soon Balin asked a knight, Is there not a knight in this court whose
name is Garlon? Yonder he goeth, said a knight, he with the black face;
he is the marvellest knight that is now living, for he destroyeth many
good knights, for he goeth invisible. Ah well, said Balin, is that he?
Then Balin advised him long: If I slay him here I shall not escape, and
if I leave him now, peradventure I shall never meet with him again at
such a steven, and much harm he will do an he live. Therewith this
Garlon espied that this Balin beheld him, and then he came and smote
Balin on the face with the back of his hand, and said, Knight, why
beholdest me so? for shame therefore, eat thy meat and do that thou
came for. Thou sayest sooth, said Balin, this is not the first despite
that thou hast done me, and therefore I will do what I came for, and
rose up fiercely and clave his head to the shoulders. Give me the
truncheon, said Balin to his lady, wherewith he slew your knight. Anon
she gave it him, for alway she bare the truncheon with her. And
therewith Balin smote him through the body, and said openly, With that
truncheon thou hast slain a good knight, and now it sticketh in thy
body. And then Balin called unto him his host, saying, Now may ye fetch
blood enough to heal your son withal.



CHAPTER XV. How Balin fought with King Pellam, and how his sword brake,
and how he gat a spear wherewith he smote the dolorous stroke.

Anon all the knights arose from the table for to set on Balin, and King
Pellam himself arose up fiercely, and said, Knight, hast thou slain my
brother? thou shalt die therefore or thou depart. Well, said Balin, do
it yourself. Yes, said King Pellam, there shall no man have ado with
thee but myself, for the love of my brother. Then King Pellam caught in
his hand a grim weapon and smote eagerly at Balin; but Balin put the
sword betwixt his head and the stroke, and therewith his sword burst in
sunder. And when Balin was weaponless he ran into a chamber for to seek
some weapon, and so from chamber to chamber, and no weapon he could
find, and always King Pellam after him. And at the last he entered into
a chamber that was marvellously well dight and richly, and a bed
arrayed with cloth of gold, the richest that might be thought, and one
lying therein, and thereby stood a table of clean gold with four
pillars of silver that bare up the table, and upon the table stood a
marvellous spear strangely wrought. And when Balin saw that spear, he
gat it in his hand and turned him to King Pellam, and smote him
passingly sore with that spear, that King Pellam fell down in a swoon,
and therewith the castle roof and walls brake and fell to the earth,
and Balin fell down so that he might not stir foot nor hand. And so the
most part of the castle, that was fallen down through that dolorous
stroke, lay upon Pellam and Balin three days.



CHAPTER XVI. How Balin was delivered by Merlin, and saved a knight that
would have slain himself for love.

Then Merlin came thither and took up Balin, and gat him a good horse,
for his was dead, and bade him ride out of that country. I would have
my damosel, said Balin. Lo, said Merlin, where she lieth dead. And King
Pellam lay so, many years sore wounded, and might never be whole till
Galahad the haut prince healed him in the quest of the Sangreal, for in
that place was part of the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that Joseph
of Arimathea brought into this land, and there himself lay in that rich
bed. And that was the same spear that Longius smote our Lord to the
heart; and King Pellam was nigh of Joseph’s kin, and that was the most
worshipful man that lived in those days, and great pity it was of his
hurt, for through that stroke, turned to great dole, tray and tene.
Then departed Balin from Merlin, and said, In this world we meet never
no more. So he rode forth through the fair countries and cities, and
found the people dead, slain on every side. And all that were alive
cried, O Balin, thou hast caused great damage in these countries; for
the dolorous stroke thou gavest unto King Pellam three countries are
destroyed, and doubt not but the vengeance will fall on thee at the
last. When Balin was past those countries he was passing fain.

So he rode eight days or he met with adventure. And at the last he came
into a fair forest in a valley, and was ware of a tower, and there
beside he saw a great horse of war, tied to a tree, and there beside
sat a fair knight on the ground and made great mourning, and he was a
likely man, and a well made. Balin said, God save you, why be ye so
heavy? tell me and I will amend it, an I may, to my power. Sir knight,
said he again, thou dost me great grief, for I was in merry thoughts,
and now thou puttest me to more pain. Balin went a little from him, and
looked on his horse; then heard Balin him say thus: Ah, fair lady, why
have ye broken my promise, for thou promisest me to meet me here by
noon, and I may curse thee that ever ye gave me this sword, for with
this sword I slay myself, and pulled it out. And therewith Balin stert
unto him and took him by the hand. Let go my hand, said the knight, or
else I shall slay thee. That shall not need, said Balin, for I shall
promise you my help to get you your lady, an ye will tell me where she
is. What is your name? said the knight. My name is Balin le Savage. Ah,
sir, I know you well enough, ye are the Knight with the Two Swords, and
the man of most prowess of your hands living. What is your name? said
Balin. My name is Garnish of the Mount, a poor man’s son, but by my
prowess and hardiness a duke hath made me knight, and gave me lands;
his name is Duke Hermel, and his daughter is she that I love, and she
me as I deemed. How far is she hence? said Balin. But six mile, said
the knight. Now ride we hence, said these two knights. So they rode
more than a pace, till that they came to a fair castle well walled and
ditched. I will into the castle, said Balin, and look if she be there.
So he went in and searched from chamber to chamber, and found her bed,
but she was not there. Then Balin looked into a fair little garden, and
under a laurel tree he saw her lie upon a quilt of green samite and a
knight in her arms, fast halsing either other, and under their heads
grass and herbs. When Balin saw her lie so with the foulest knight that
ever he saw, and she a fair lady, then Balin went through all the
chambers again, and told the knight how he found her as she had slept
fast, and so brought him in the place there she lay fast sleeping.



