CHAPTER XV. Yet of the same battle.

Then Lucas saw King Agwisance, that late had slain Moris de la Roche,
and Lucas ran to him with a short spear that was great, that he gave
him such a fall, that the horse fell down to the earth. Also Lucas
found there on foot, Bloias de La Flandres, and Sir Gwinas, two hardy
knights, and in that woodness that Lucas was in, he slew two bachelors
and horsed them again. Then waxed the battle passing hard on both
parties, but Arthur was glad that his knights were horsed again, and
then they fought together, that the noise and sound rang by the water
and the wood. Wherefore King Ban and King Bors made them ready, and
dressed their shields and harness, and they were so courageous that
many knights shook and bevered for eagerness. All this while Lucas, and
Gwinas, and Briant, and Bellias of Flanders, held strong medley against
six kings, that was King Lot, King Nentres, King Brandegoris, King
Idres, King Uriens, and King Agwisance. So with the help of Sir Kay and
of Sir Griflet they held these six kings hard, that unnethe they had
any power to defend them. But when Sir Arthur saw the battle would not
be ended by no manner, he fared wood as a lion, and steered his horse
here and there, on the right hand, and on the left hand, that he
stinted not till he had slain twenty knights. Also he wounded King Lot
sore on the shoulder, and made him to leave that ground, for Sir Kay
and Griflet did with King Arthur there great deeds of arms. Then
Ulfius, and Brastias, and Sir Ector encountered against the Duke
Eustace, and King Cradelment, and King Clariance of Northumberland, and
King Carados, and against the King with the Hundred Knights. So these
knights encountered with these kings, that they made them to avoid the
ground. Then King Lot made great dole for his damages and his fellows,
and said unto the ten kings, But if ye will do as I devise we shall be
slain and destroyed; let me have the King with the Hundred Knights, and
King Agwisance, and King Idres, and the Duke of Cambenet, and we five
kings will have fifteen thousand men of arms with us, and we will go
apart while ye six kings hold medley with twelve thousand; an we see
that ye have foughten with them long, then will we come on fiercely,
and else shall we never match them, said King Lot, but by this mean. So
they departed as they here devised, and six kings made their party
strong against Arthur, and made great war long.

In the meanwhile brake the ambushment of King Ban and King Bors, and
Lionses and Phariance had the vanguard, and they two knights met with
King Idres and his fellowship, and there began a great medley of
breaking of spears, and smiting of swords, with slaying of men and
horses, and King Idres was near at discomforture.

That saw Agwisance the king, and put Lionses and Phariance in point of
death; for the Duke of Cambenet came on withal with a great fellowship.
So these two knights were in great danger of their lives that they were
fain to return, but always they rescued themselves and their fellowship
marvellously. When King Bors saw those knights put aback, it grieved
him sore; then he came on so fast that his fellowship seemed as black
as Inde. When King Lot had espied King Bors, he knew him well, then he
said, O Jesu, defend us from death and horrible maims! for I see well
we be in great peril of death; for I see yonder a king, one of the most
worshipfullest men and one of the best knights of the world, is
inclined unto his fellowship. What is he? said the King with the
Hundred Knights. It is, said King Lot, King Bors of Gaul; I marvel how
they came into this country without witting of us all. It was by
Merlin’s advice, said the knight. As for him, said King Carados, I will
encounter with King Bors, an ye will rescue me when myster is. Go on,
said they all, we will do all that we may. Then King Carados and his
host rode on a soft pace, till that they came as nigh King Bors as
bow-draught; then either battle let their horse run as fast as they
might. And Bleoberis, that was godson unto King Bors, he bare his chief
standard, that was a passing good knight. Now shall we see, said King
Bors, how these northern Britons can bear the arms: and King Bors
encountered with a knight, and smote him throughout with a spear that
he fell dead unto the earth; and after drew his sword and did
marvellous deeds of arms, that all parties had great wonder thereof;
and his knights failed not, but did their part, and King Carados was
smitten to the earth. With that came the King with the Hundred Knights
and rescued King Carados mightily by force of arms, for he was a
passing good knight of a king, and but a young man.



CHAPTER XVI. Yet more of the same battle.

By then came into the field King Ban as fierce as a lion, with bands of
green and thereupon gold. Ha! a! said King Lot, we must be discomfited,
for yonder I see the most valiant knight of the world, and the man of
the most renown, for such two brethren as is King Ban and King Bors are
not living, wherefore we must needs void or die; and but if we avoid
manly and wisely there is but death. When King Ban came into the
battle, he came in so fiercely that the strokes redounded again from
the wood and the water; wherefore King Lot wept for pity and dole that
he saw so many good knights take their end. But through the great force
of King Ban they made both the northern battles that were departed
hurtled together for great dread; and the three kings and their knights
slew on ever, that it was pity on to behold that multitude of the
people that fled. But King Lot, and King of the Hundred Knights, and
King Morganore gathered the people together passing knightly, and did
great prowess of arms, and held the battle all that day, like hard.

When the King of the Hundred Knights beheld the great damage that King
Ban did, he thrust unto him with his horse, and smote him on high upon
the helm, a great stroke, and astonied him sore. Then King Ban was
wroth with him, and followed on him fiercely; the other saw that, and
cast up his shield, and spurred his horse forward, but the stroke of
King Ban fell down and carved a cantel off the shield, and the sword
slid down by the hauberk behind his back, and cut through the trapping
of steel and the horse even in two pieces, that the sword felt the
earth. Then the King of the Hundred Knights voided the horse lightly,
and with his sword he broached the horse of King Ban through and
through. With that King Ban voided lightly from the dead horse, and
then King Ban smote at the other so eagerly, and smote him on the helm
that he fell to the earth. Also in that ire he felled King Morganore,
and there was great slaughter of good knights and much people. By then
came into the press King Arthur, and found King Ban standing among dead
men and dead horses, fighting on foot as a wood lion, that there came
none nigh him, as far as he might reach with his sword, but he caught a
grievous buffet; whereof King Arthur had great pity. And Arthur was so
bloody, that by his shield there might no man know him, for all was
blood and brains on his sword. And as Arthur looked by him he saw a
knight that was passingly well horsed, and therewith Sir Arthur ran to
him, and smote him on the helm, that his sword went unto his teeth, and
the knight sank down to the earth dead, and anon Arthur took the horse
by the rein, and led him unto King Ban, and said, Fair brother, have
this horse, for he have great myster thereof, and me repenteth sore of
your great damage. It shall be soon revenged, said King Ban, for I
trust in God mine ure is not such but some of them may sore repent
this. I will well, said Arthur, for I see your deeds full actual;
nevertheless, I might not come at you at that time.

But when King Ban was mounted on horseback, then there began new
battle, the which was sore and hard, and passing great slaughter. And
so through great force King Arthur, King Ban, and King Bors made their
knights a little to withdraw them. But alway the eleven kings with
their chivalry never turned back; and so withdrew them to a little
wood, and so over a little river, and there they rested them, for on
the night they might have no rest on the field. And then the eleven
kings and knights put them on a heap all together, as men adread and
out of all comfort. But there was no man might pass them, they held
them so hard together both behind and before, that King Arthur had
marvel of their deeds of arms, and was passing wroth. Ah, Sir Arthur,
said King Ban and King Bors, blame them not, for they do as good men
ought to do. For by my faith, said King Ban, they are the best fighting
men, and knights of most prowess, that ever I saw or heard speak of,
and those eleven kings are men of great worship; and if they were
longing unto you there were no king under the heaven had such eleven
knights, and of such worship. I may not love them, said Arthur, they
would destroy me. That wot we well, said King Ban and King Bors, for
they are your mortal enemies, and that hath been proved aforehand; and
this day they have done their part, and that is great pity of their
wilfulness.

Then all the eleven kings drew them together, and then said King Lot,
Lords, ye must other ways than ye do, or else the great loss is behind;
ye may see what people we have lost, and what good men we lose, because
we wait always on these foot-men, and ever in saving of one of the
foot-men we lose ten horsemen for him; therefore this is mine advice,
let us put our foot-men from us, for it is near night, for the noble
Arthur will not tarry on the footmen, for they may save themselves, the
wood is near hand. And when we horsemen be together, look every each of
you kings let make such ordinance that none break upon pain of death.
And who that seeth any man dress him to flee, lightly that he be slain,
for it is better that we slay a coward, than through a coward all we to
be slain. How say ye? said King Lot, answer me all ye kings. It is well
said, quoth King Nentres; so said the King of the Hundred Knights; the
same said the King Carados, and King Uriens; so did King Idres and King
Brandegoris; and so did King Cradelment, and the Duke of Cambenet; the
same said King Clariance and King Agwisance, and sware they would never
fail other, neither for life nor for death. And whoso that fled, but
did as they did, should be slain. Then they amended their harness, and
righted their shields, and took new spears and set them on their
thighs, and stood still as it had been a plump of wood.



