CHAPTER XXXI. How Sir Gareth came to a castle where he was well lodged,
and he jousted with a knight and slew him.

Then Sir Gareth rode unto the barbican of the castle, and prayed the
porter fair to let him into the castle. The porter answered ungoodly
again, and said, Thou gettest no lodging here. Fair sir, say not so,
for I am a knight of King Arthur’s, and pray the lord or the lady of
this castle to give me harbour for the love of King Arthur. Then the
porter went unto the duchess, and told her how there was a knight of
King Arthur’s would have harbour. Let him in, said the duchess, for I
will see that knight, and for King Arthur’s sake he shall not be
harbourless. Then she yode up into a tower over the gate, with great
torchlight.

When Sir Gareth saw that torch-light he cried on high: Whether thou be
lord or lady, giant or champion, I take no force so that I may have
harbour this night; and if it so be that I must needs fight, spare me
not to-morn when I have rested me, for both I and mine horse be weary.
Sir knight, said the lady, thou speakest knightly and boldly; but wit
thou well the lord of this castle loveth not King Arthur, nor none of
his court, for my lord hath ever been against him; and therefore thou
were better not to come within this castle; for an thou come in this
night, thou must come in under such form, that wheresomever thou meet
my lord, by stigh or by street, thou must yield thee to him as
prisoner. Madam, said Sir Gareth, what is your lord, and what is his
name? Sir, my lord’s name is the Duke de la Rowse. Well madam, said Sir
Gareth, I shall promise you in what place I meet your lord I shall
yield me unto him and to his good grace; with that I understand he will
do me no harm: and if I understand that he will, I will release myself
an I can with my spear and my sword. Ye say well, said the duchess; and
then she let the drawbridge down, and so he rode into the hall, and
there he alighted, and his horse was led into a stable; and in the hall
he unarmed him and said, Madam, I will not out of this hall this night;
and when it is daylight, let see who will have ado with me, he shall
find me ready. Then was he set unto supper, and had many good dishes.
Then Sir Gareth list well to eat, and knightly he ate his meat, and
eagerly; there was many a fair lady by him, and some said they never
saw a goodlier man nor so well of eating. Then they made him passing
good cheer, and shortly when he had supped his bed was made there; so
he rested him all night.

And on the morn he heard mass, and brake his fast and took his leave at
the duchess, and at them all; and thanked her goodly of her lodging,
and of his good cheer; and then she asked him his name. Madam, he said,
truly my name is Gareth of Orkney, and some men call me Beaumains. Then
knew she well it was the same knight that fought for Dame Lionesse. So
Sir Gareth departed and rode up into a mountain, and there met him a
knight, his name was Sir Bendelaine, and said to Sir Gareth: Thou shalt
not pass this way, for either thou shalt joust with me, or else be my
prisoner. Then will I joust, said Sir Gareth. And so they let their
horses run, and there Sir Gareth smote him throughout the body; and Sir
Bendelaine rode forth to his castle there beside, and there died. So
Sir Gareth would have rested him, and he came riding to Bendelaine’s
castle. Then his knights and servants espied that it was he that had
slain their lord. Then they armed twenty good men, and came out and
assailed Sir Gareth; and so he had no spear, but his sword, and put his
shield afore him; and there they brake their spears upon him, and they
assailed him passingly sore. But ever Sir Gareth defended him as a
knight.



CHAPTER XXXII. How Sir Gareth fought with a knight that held within his
castle thirty ladies, and how he slew him.

So when they saw that they might not overcome him, they rode from him,
and took their counsel to slay his horse; and so they came in upon Sir
Gareth, and with spears they slew his horse, and then they assailed him
hard. But when he was on foot, there was none that he fought but he
gave him such a buffet that he did never recover. So he slew them by
one and one till they were but four, and there they fled; and Sir
Gareth took a good horse that was one of theirs, and rode his way.

Then he rode a great pace till that he came to a castle, and there he
heard much mourning of ladies and gentlewomen. So there came by him a
page. What noise is this, said Sir Gareth, that I hear within this
castle? Sir knight, said the page, here be within this castle thirty
ladies, and all they be widows; for here is a knight that waiteth daily
upon this castle, and his name is the Brown Knight without Pity, and he
is the periloust knight that now liveth; and therefore sir, said the
page, I rede you flee. Nay, said Sir Gareth, I will not flee though
thou be afeard of him. And then the page saw where came the Brown
Knight: Lo, said the page, yonder he cometh. Let me deal with him, said
Sir Gareth. And when either of other had a sight they let their horses
run, and the Brown Knight brake his spear, and Sir Gareth smote him
throughout the body, that he overthrew him to the ground stark dead. So
Sir Gareth rode into the castle, and prayed the ladies that he might
repose him. Alas, said the ladies, ye may not be lodged here. Make him
good cheer, said the page, for this knight hath slain your enemy. Then
they all made him good cheer as lay in their power. But wit ye well
they made him good cheer, for they might none otherwise do, for they
were but poor.

And so on the morn he went to mass, and there he saw the thirty ladies
kneel, and lay grovelling upon divers tombs, making great dole and
sorrow. Then Sir Gareth wist well that in the tombs lay their lords.
Fair ladies, said Sir Gareth, ye must at the next feast of Pentecost be
at the court of King Arthur, and say that I, Sir Gareth, sent you
thither. We shall do this, said the ladies. So he departed, and by
fortune he came to a mountain, and there he found a goodly knight that
bade him, Abide sir knight, and joust with me. What are ye? said Sir
Gareth. My name is, said he, the Duke de la Rowse. Ah sir, ye are the
same knight that I lodged once in your castle; and there I made promise
unto your lady that I should yield me unto you. Ah, said the duke, art
thou that proud knight that profferest to fight with my knights;
therefore make thee ready, for I will have ado with you. So they let
their horses run, and there Sir Gareth smote the duke down from his
horse. But the duke lightly avoided his horse, and dressed his shield
and drew his sword, and bade Sir Gareth alight and fight with him. So
he did alight, and they did great battle together more than an hour,
and either hurt other full sore. At the last Sir Gareth gat the duke to
the earth, and would have slain him, and then he yield him to him. Then
must ye go, said Sir Gareth, unto Sir Arthur my lord at the next feast,
and say that I, Sir Gareth of Orkney, sent you unto him. It shall be
done, said the duke, and I will do to you homage and fealty with an
hundred knights with me; and all the days of my life to do you service
where ye will command me.



