CHAPTER VI. How Sir Tristram arrived into the Island for to furnish the
battle with Sir Marhaus.

So to shorten this tale, when Sir Tristram was arrived within the
island he looked to the farther side, and there he saw at an anchor six
ships nigh to the land; and under the shadow of the ships upon the
land, there hoved the noble knight, Sir Marhaus of Ireland. Then Sir
Tristram commanded his servant Gouvernail to bring his horse to the
land, and dress his harness at all manner of rights. And then when he
had so done he mounted upon his horse; and when he was in his saddle
well apparelled, and his shield dressed upon his shoulder, Tristram
asked Gouvernail, Where is this knight that I shall have ado withal?
Sir, said Gouvernail, see ye him not? I weened ye had seen him; yonder
he hoveth under the umbre of his ships on horseback, with his spear in
his hand and his shield upon his shoulder. That is truth, said the
noble knight, Sir Tristram, now I see him well enough.

Then he commanded his servant Gouvernail to go to his vessel again: And
commend me unto mine eme King Mark, and pray him, if that I be slain in
this battle, for to inter my body as him seemed best; and as for me,
let him wit that I will never yield me for cowardice; and if I be slain
and flee not, then they have lost no truage for me; and if so be that I
flee or yield me as recreant, bid mine eme never bury me in Christian
burials. And upon thy life, said Sir Tristram to Gouvernail, come thou
not nigh this island till that thou see me overcome or slain, or else
that I win yonder knight. So either departed from other sore weeping.



CHAPTER VII. How Sir Tristram fought against Sir Marhaus and achieved
his battle, and how Sir Marhaus fled to his ship.

And then Sir Marhaus avised Sir Tristram, and said thus: Young knight,
Sir Tristram, what dost thou here? me sore repenteth of thy courage,
for wit thou well I have been assayed, and the best knights of this
land have been assayed of my hand; and also I have matched with the
best knights of the world, and therefore by my counsel return again
unto thy vessel. And fair knight, and well-proved knight, said Sir
Tristram, thou shalt well wit I may not forsake thee in this quarrel,
for I am for thy sake made knight. And thou shalt well wit that I am a
king’s son born, and gotten upon a queen; and such promise I have made
at my uncle’s request and mine own seeking, that I shall fight with
thee unto the uttermost, and deliver Cornwall from the old truage. And
also wit thou well, Sir Marhaus, that this is the greatest cause that
thou couragest me to have ado with thee, for thou art called one of the
most renowned knights of the world, and because of that noise and fame
that thou hast thou givest me courage to have ado with thee, for never
yet was I proved with good knight; and sithen I took the order of
knighthood this day, I am well pleased that I may have ado with so good
a knight as thou art. And now wit thou well, Sir Marhaus, that I cast
me to get worship on thy body; and if that I be not proved, I trust to
God that I shall be worshipfully proved upon thy body, and to deliver
the country of Cornwall for ever from all manner of truage from Ireland
for ever.

When Sir Marhaus had heard him say what he would, he said then thus
again: Fair knight, sithen it is so that thou castest to win worship of
me, I let thee wit worship may thou none lose by me if thou mayest
stand me three strokes; for I let thee wit for my noble deeds, proved
and seen, King Arthur made me Knight of the Table Round.

Then they began to feutre their spears, and they met so fiercely
together that they smote either other down, both horse and all. But Sir
Marhaus smote Sir Tristram a great wound in the side with his spear,
and then they avoided their horses, and pulled out their swords, and
threw their shields afore them. And then they lashed together as men
that were wild and courageous. And when they had stricken so together
long, then they left their strokes, and foined at their breaths and
visors; and when they saw that that might not prevail them, then they
hurtled together like rams to bear either other down. Thus they fought
still more than half a day, and either were wounded passing sore, that
the blood ran down freshly from them upon the ground. By then Sir
Tristram waxed more fresher than Sir Marhaus, and better winded and
bigger; and with a mighty stroke he smote Sir Marhaus upon the helm
such a buffet that it went through his helm, and through the coif of
steel, and through the brain-pan, and the sword stuck so fast in the
helm and in his brain-pan that Sir Tristram pulled thrice at his sword
or ever he might pull it out from his head; and there Marhaus fell down
on his knees, the edge of Tristram’s sword left in his brain-pan. And
suddenly Sir Marhaus rose grovelling, and threw his sword and his
shield from him, and so ran to his ships and fled his way, and Sir
Tristram had ever his shield and his sword.

And when Sir Tristram saw Sir Marhaus withdraw him, he said: Ah! Sir
Knight of the Round Table, why withdrawest thou thee? thou dost thyself
and thy kin great shame, for I am but a young knight, or now I was
never proved, and rather than I should withdraw me from thee, I had
rather be hewn in an hundred pieces. Sir Marhaus answered no word but
yede his way sore groaning. Well, Sir Knight, said Sir Tristram, I
promise thee thy sword and thy shield shall be mine; and thy shield
shall I wear in all places where I ride on mine adventures, and in the
sight of King Arthur and all the Round Table.



CHAPTER VIII. How Sir Marhaus after that he was arrived in Ireland died
of the stroke that Sir Tristram had given him, and how Tristram was
hurt.

Anon Sir Marhaus and his fellowship departed into Ireland. And as soon
as he came to the king, his brother, he let search his wounds. And when
his head was searched a piece of Sir Tristram’s sword was found
therein, and might never be had out of his head for no surgeons, and so
he died of Sir Tristram’s sword; and that piece of the sword the queen,
his sister, kept it for ever with her, for she thought to be revenged
an she might.

Now turn we again unto Sir Tristram, that was sore wounded, and full
sore bled that he might not within a little while, when he had taken
cold, unnethe stir him of his limbs. And then he set him down softly
upon a little hill, and bled fast. Then anon came Gouvernail, his man,
with his vessel; and the king and his barons came with procession
against him. And when he was come unto the land, King Mark took him in
his arms, and the king and Sir Dinas, the seneschal, led Sir Tristram
into the castle of Tintagil. And then was he searched in the best
manner, and laid in his bed. And when King Mark saw his wounds he wept
heartily, and so did all his lords. So God me help, said King Mark, I
would not for all my lands that my nephew died. So Sir Tristram lay
there a month and more, and ever he was like to die of that stroke that
Sir Marhaus smote him first with the spear. For, as the French book
saith, the spear’s head was envenomed, that Sir Tristram might not be
whole. Then was King Mark and all his barons passing heavy, for they
deemed none other but that Sir Tristram should not recover. Then the
king let send after all manner of leeches and surgeons, both unto men
and women, and there was none that would behote him the life. Then came
there a lady that was a right wise lady, and she said plainly unto King
Mark, and to Sir Tristram, and to all his barons, that he should never
be whole but if Sir Tristram went in the same country that the venom
came from, and in that country should he be holpen or else never. Thus
said the lady unto the king.

When King Mark understood that, he let purvey for Sir Tristram a fair
vessel, well victualled, and therein was put Sir Tristram, and
Gouvernail with him, and Sir Tristram took his harp with him, and so he
was put into the sea to sail into Ireland; and so by good fortune he
arrived up in Ireland, even fast by a castle where the king and the
queen was; and at his arrival he sat and harped in his bed a merry lay,
such one heard they never none in Ireland before that time.

And when it was told the king and the queen of such a knight that was
such an harper, anon the king sent for him, and let search his wounds,
and then asked him his name. Then he answered, I am of the country of
Liones, and my name is Tramtrist, that thus was wounded in a battle as
I fought for a lady’s right. So God me help, said King Anguish, ye
shall have all the help in this land that ye may have here; but I let
you wit, in Cornwall I had a great loss as ever had king, for there I
lost the best knight of the world; his name was Marhaus, a full noble
knight, and Knight of the Table Round; and there he told Sir Tristram
wherefore Sir Marhaus was slain. Sir Tristram made semblant as he had
been sorry, and better knew he how it was than the king.



