CHAPTER II. How Sir Launcelot and Sir Gawaine were wroth because Sir
Kay mocked Beaumains, and of a damosel which desired a knight to fight
for a lady.

Thereat was Sir Gawaine wroth, and in especial Sir Launcelot bade Sir
Kay leave his mocking, for I dare lay my head he shall prove a man of
great worship. Let be said Sir Kay, it may not be by no reason, for as
he is, so he hath asked. Beware, said Sir Launcelot, so ye gave the
good knight Brewnor, Sir Dinadan’s brother, a name, and ye called him
La Cote Male Taile, and that turned you to anger afterward. As for
that, said Sir Kay, this shall never prove none such. For Sir Brewnor
desired ever worship, and this desireth bread and drink and broth; upon
pain of my life he was fostered up in some abbey, and, howsomever it
was, they failed meat and drink, and so hither he is come for his
sustenance.

And so Sir Kay bade get him a place, and sit down to meat; so Beaumains
went to the hall door, and set him down among boys and lads, and there
he ate sadly. And then Sir Launcelot after meat bade him come to his
chamber, and there he should have meat and drink enough. And so did Sir
Gawaine: but he refused them all; he would do none other but as Sir Kay
commanded him, for no proffer. But as touching Sir Gawaine, he had
reason to proffer him lodging, meat, and drink, for that proffer came
of his blood, for he was nearer kin to him than he wist. But that as
Sir Launcelot did was of his great gentleness and courtesy.

So thus he was put into the kitchen, and lay nightly as the boys of the
kitchen did. And so he endured all that twelvemonth, and never
displeased man nor child, but always he was meek and mild. But ever
when that he saw any jousting of knights, that would he see an he
might. And ever Sir Launcelot would give him gold to spend, and
clothes, and so did Sir Gawaine, and where there were any masteries
done, thereat would he be, and there might none cast bar nor stone to
him by two yards. Then would Sir Kay say, How liketh you my boy of the
kitchen? So it passed on till the feast of Whitsuntide. And at that
time the king held it at Carlion in the most royallest wise that might
be, like as he did yearly. But the king would no meat eat upon the
Whitsunday, until he heard some adventures. Then came there a squire to
the king and said, Sir, ye may go to your meat, for here cometh a
damosel with some strange adventures. Then was the king glad and sat
him down.

Right so there came a damosel into the hall and saluted the king, and
prayed him of succour. For whom? said the king, what is the adventure?

Sir, she said, I have a lady of great worship and renown, and she is
besieged with a tyrant, so that she may not out of her castle; and
because here are called the noblest knights of the world, I come to you
to pray you of succour. What hight your lady, and where dwelleth she,
and who is she, and what is his name that hath besieged her? Sir king,
she said, as for my lady’s name that shall not ye know for me as at
this time, but I let you wit she is a lady of great worship and of
great lands; and as for the tyrant that besiegeth her and destroyeth
her lands, he is called the Red Knight of the Red Launds. I know him
not, said the king. Sir, said Sir Gawaine, I know him well, for he is
one of the perilloust knights of the world; men say that he hath seven
men’s strength, and from him I escaped once full hard with my life.
Fair damosel, said the king, there be knights here would do their power
for to rescue your lady, but because you will not tell her name, nor
where she dwelleth, therefore none of my knights that here be now shall
go with you by my will. Then must I speak further, said the damosel.



CHAPTER III. How Beaumains desired the battle, and how it was granted
to him, and how he desired to be made knight of Sir Launcelot.

With these words came before the king Beaumains, while the damosel was
there, and thus he said, Sir king, God thank you, I have been this
twelvemonth in your kitchen, and have had my full sustenance, and now I
will ask my two gifts that be behind. Ask, upon my peril, said the
king. Sir, this shall be my two gifts, first that ye will grant me to
have this adventure of the damosel, for it belongeth unto me. Thou
shalt have it, said the king, I grant it thee. Then, sir, this is the
other gift, that ye shall bid Launcelot du Lake to make me knight, for
of him I will be made knight and else of none. And when I am passed I
pray you let him ride after me, and make me knight when I require him.
All this shall be done, said the king. Fie on thee, said the damosel,
shall I have none but one that is your kitchen page? Then was she wroth
and took her horse and departed. And with that there came one to
Beaumains and told him his horse and armour was come for him; and there
was the dwarf come with all thing that him needed, in the richest
manner; thereat all the court had much marvel from whence came all that
gear. So when he was armed there was none but few so goodly a man as he
was; and right so as he came into the hall and took his leave of King
Arthur, and Sir Gawaine, and Sir Launcelot, and prayed that he would
hie after him, and so departed and rode after the damosel.



CHAPTER IV. How Beaumains departed, and how he gat of Sir Kay a spear
and a shield, and how he jousted with Sir Launcelot.

But there went many after to behold how well he was horsed and trapped
in cloth of gold, but he had neither shield nor spear. Then Sir Kay
said all open in the hall, I will ride after my boy in the kitchen, to
wit whether he will know me for his better. Said Sir Launcelot and Sir
Gawaine, Yet abide at home. So Sir Kay made him ready and took his
horse and his spear, and rode after him. And right as Beaumains
overtook the damosel, right so came Sir Kay and said, Beaumains, what,
sir, know ye not me? Then he turned his horse, and knew it was Sir Kay,
that had done him all the despite as ye have heard afore. Yea, said
Beaumains, I know you for an ungentle knight of the court, and
therefore beware of me. Therewith Sir Kay put his spear in the rest,
and ran straight upon him; and Beaumains came as fast upon him with his
sword in his hand, and so he put away his spear with his sword, and
with a foin thrust him through the side, that Sir Kay fell down as he
had been dead; and he alighted down and took Sir Kay’s shield and his
spear, and stert upon his own horse and rode his way.

All that saw Sir Launcelot, and so did the damosel. And then he bade
his dwarf stert upon Sir Kay’s horse, and so he did. By that Sir
Launcelot was come, then he proffered Sir Launcelot to joust; and
either made them ready, and they came together so fiercely that either
bare down other to the earth, and sore were they bruised. Then Sir
Launcelot arose and helped him from his horse. And then Beaumains threw
his shield from him, and proffered to fight with Sir Launcelot on foot;
and so they rushed together like boars, tracing, rasing, and foining to
the mountenance of an hour; and Sir Launcelot felt him so big that he
marvelled of his strength, for he fought more liker a giant than a
knight, and that his fighting was durable and passing perilous. For Sir
Launcelot had so much ado with him that he dreaded himself to be
shamed, and said, Beaumains, fight not so sore, your quarrel and mine
is not so great but we may leave off. Truly that is truth, said
Beaumains, but it doth me good to feel your might, and yet, my lord, I
showed not the utterance.



