CHAPTER XIV. How Sir Launcelot followed a brachet into a castle, where
he found a dead knight, and how he after was required of a damosel to
heal her brother.

Now leave we there and speak of Sir Launcelot that rode a great while
in a deep forest, where he saw a black brachet, seeking in manner as it
had been in the feute of an hurt deer. And therewith he rode after the
brachet, and he saw lie on the ground a large feute of blood. And then
Sir Launcelot rode after. And ever the brachet looked behind her, and
so she went through a great marsh, and ever Sir Launcelot followed. And
then was he ware of an old manor, and thither ran the brachet, and so
over the bridge. So Sir Launcelot rode over that bridge that was old
and feeble; and when he came in midst of a great hall, there he saw lie
a dead knight that was a seemly man, and that brachet licked his
wounds. And therewithal came out a lady weeping and wringing her hands;
and then she said, O knight, too much sorrow hast thou brought me. Why
say ye so? said Sir Launcelot, I did never this knight no harm, for
hither by feute of blood this brachet brought me; and therefore, fair
lady, be not displeased with me, for I am full sore aggrieved of your
grievance. Truly, sir, she said, I trow it be not ye that hath slain my
husband, for he that did that deed is sore wounded, and he is never
likely to recover, that shall I ensure him. What was your husband’s
name? said Sir Launcelot. Sir, said she, his name was called Sir
Gilbert the Bastard, one of the best knights of the world, and he that
hath slain him I know not his name. Now God send you better comfort,
said Sir Launcelot; and so he departed and went into the forest again,
and there he met with a damosel, the which knew him well, and she said
aloud, Well be ye found, my lord; and now I require thee, on thy
knighthood, help my brother that is sore wounded, and never stinteth
bleeding; for this day he fought with Sir Gilbert the Bastard and slew
him in plain battle, and there was my brother sore wounded, and there
is a lady a sorceress that dwelleth in a castle here beside, and this
day she told me my brother’s wounds should never be whole till I could
find a knight that would go into the Chapel Perilous, and there he
should find a sword and a bloody cloth that the wounded knight was
lapped in, and a piece of that cloth and sword should heal my brother’s
wounds, so that his wounds were searched with the sword and the cloth.
This is a marvellous thing, said Sir Launcelot, but what is your
brother’s name? Sir, she said, his name was Sir Meliot de Logres. That
me repenteth, said Sir Launcelot, for he is a fellow of the Table
Round, and to his help I will do my power. Then, sir, said she, follow
even this highway, and it will bring you unto the Chapel Perilous; and
here I shall abide till God send you here again, and, but you speed, I
know no knight living that may achieve that adventure.



CHAPTER XV. How Sir Launcelot came into the Chapel Perilous and gat
there of a dead corpse a piece of the cloth and a sword.

Right so Sir Launcelot departed, and when he came unto the Chapel
Perilous he alighted down, and tied his horse unto a little gate. And
as soon as he was within the churchyard he saw on the front of the
chapel many fair rich shields turned up-so-down, and many of the
shields Sir Launcelot had seen knights bear beforehand. With that he
saw by him there stand a thirty great knights, more by a yard than any
man that ever he had seen, and all those grinned and gnashed at Sir
Launcelot. And when he saw their countenance he dreaded him sore, and
so put his shield afore him, and took his sword ready in his hand ready
unto battle, and they were all armed in black harness ready with their
shields and their swords drawn. And when Sir Launcelot would have gone
throughout them, they scattered on every side of him, and gave him the
way, and therewith he waxed all bold, and entered into the chapel, and
then he saw no light but a dim lamp burning, and then was he ware of a
corpse hilled with a cloth of silk. Then Sir Launcelot stooped down,
and cut a piece away of that cloth, and then it fared under him as the
earth had quaked a little; therewithal he feared. And then he saw a
fair sword lie by the dead knight, and that he gat in his hand and hied
him out of the chapel.

Anon as ever he was in the chapel yard all the knights spake to him
with a grimly voice, and said, Knight, Sir Launcelot, lay that sword
from thee or else thou shalt die. Whether that I live or die, said Sir
Launcelot, with no great word get ye it again, therefore fight for it
an ye list. Then right so he passed throughout them, and beyond the
chapel yard there met him a fair damosel, and said, Sir Launcelot,
leave that sword behind thee, or thou wilt die for it. I leave it not,
said Sir Launcelot, for no treaties. No, said she, an thou didst leave
that sword, Queen Guenever should thou never see. Then were I a fool an
I would leave this sword, said Launcelot. Now, gentle knight, said the
damosel, I require thee to kiss me but once. Nay, said Sir Launcelot,
that God me forbid. Well, sir, said she, an thou hadst kissed me thy
life days had been done, but now, alas, she said, I have lost all my
labour, for I ordained this chapel for thy sake, and for Sir Gawaine.
And once I had Sir Gawaine within me, and at that time he fought with
that knight that lieth there dead in yonder chapel, Sir Gilbert the
Bastard; and at that time he smote the left hand off of Sir Gilbert the
Bastard. And, Sir Launcelot, now I tell thee, I have loved thee this
seven year, but there may no woman have thy love but Queen Guenever.
But sithen I may not rejoice thee to have thy body alive, I had kept no
more joy in this world but to have thy body dead. Then would I have
balmed it and served it, and so have kept it my life days, and daily I
should have clipped thee, and kissed thee, in despite of Queen
Guenever. Ye say well, said Sir Launcelot, Jesu preserve me from your
subtle crafts. And therewithal he took his horse and so departed from
her. And as the book saith, when Sir Launcelot was departed she took
such sorrow that she died within a fourteen night, and her name was
Hellawes the sorceress, Lady of the Castle Nigramous.

Anon Sir Launcelot met with the damosel, Sir Meliot’s sister. And when
she saw him she clapped her hands, and wept for joy. And then they rode
unto a castle thereby where lay Sir Meliot. And anon as Sir Launcelot
saw him he knew him, but he was passing pale, as the earth, for
bleeding. When Sir Meliot saw Sir Launcelot he kneeled upon his knees
and cried on high: O lord Sir Launcelot, help me! Anon Sir Launcelot
leapt unto him and touched his wounds with Sir Gilbert’s sword. And
then he wiped his wounds with a part of the bloody cloth that Sir
Gilbert was wrapped in, and anon an wholer man in his life was he
never. And then there was great joy between them, and they made Sir
Launcelot all the cheer that they might, and so on the morn Sir
Launcelot took his leave, and bade Sir Meliot hie him to the court of
my lord Arthur, for it draweth nigh to the Feast of Pentecost, and
there by the grace of God ye shall find me. And therewith they
departed.



