CHAPTER XI. Of the interment of twelve kings, and of the prophecy of
Merlin, and how Balin should give the dolorous stroke.

So at the interment came King Lot’s wife Margawse with her four sons,
Gawaine, Agravaine, Gaheris, and Gareth. Also there came thither King
Uriens, Sir Ewaine’s father, and Morgan le Fay his wife that was King
Arthur’s sister. All these came to the interment. But of all these
twelve kings King Arthur let make the tomb of King Lot passing richly,
and made his tomb by his own; and then Arthur let make twelve images of
latten and copper, and over-gilt it with gold, in the sign of twelve
kings, and each one of them held a taper of wax that burnt day and
night; and King Arthur was made in sign of a figure standing above them
with a sword drawn in his hand, and all the twelve figures had
countenance like unto men that were overcome. All this made Merlin by
his subtle craft, and there he told the king, When I am dead these
tapers shall burn no longer, and soon after the adventures of the
Sangreal shall come among you and be achieved. Also he told Arthur how
Balin the worshipful knight shall give the dolorous stroke, whereof
shall fall great vengeance. Oh, where is Balin and Balan and Pellinore?
said King Arthur. As for Pellinore, said Merlin, he will meet with you
soon; and as for Balin he will not be long from you; but the other
brother will depart, ye shall see him no more. By my faith, said
Arthur, they are two marvellous knights, and namely Balin passeth of
prowess of any knight that ever I found, for much beholden am I unto
him; would God he would abide with me. Sir, said Merlin, look ye keep
well the scabbard of Excalibur, for ye shall lose no blood while ye
have the scabbard upon you, though ye have as many wounds upon you as
ye may have. So after, for great trust, Arthur betook the scabbard to
Morgan le Fay his sister, and she loved another knight better than her
husband King Uriens or King Arthur, and she would have had Arthur her
brother slain, and therefore she let make another scabbard like it by
enchantment, and gave the scabbard Excalibur to her love; and the
knight’s name was called Accolon, that after had near slain King
Arthur. After this Merlin told unto King Arthur of the prophecy that
there should be a great battle beside Salisbury, and Mordred his own
son should be against him. Also he told him that Bagdemegus was his
cousin, and germain unto King Uriens.



CHAPTER XII. How a sorrowful knight came before Arthur, and how Balin
fetched him, and how that knight was slain by a knight invisible.

Within a day or two King Arthur was somewhat sick, and he let pitch his
pavilion in a meadow, and there he laid him down on a pallet to sleep,
but he might have no rest. Right so he heard a great noise of an horse,
and therewith the king looked out at the porch of the pavilion, and saw
a knight coming even by him, making great dole. Abide, fair sir, said
Arthur, and tell me wherefore thou makest this sorrow. Ye may little
amend me, said the knight, and so passed forth to the castle of Meliot.
Anon after there came Balin, and when he saw King Arthur he alighted
off his horse, and came to the King on foot, and saluted him. By my
head, said Arthur, ye be welcome. Sir, right now came riding this way a
knight making great mourn, for what cause I cannot tell; wherefore I
would desire of you of your courtesy and of your gentleness to fetch
again that knight either by force or else by his good will. I will do
more for your lordship than that, said Balin; and so he rode more than
a pace, and found the knight with a damosel in a forest, and said, Sir
knight, ye must come with me unto King Arthur, for to tell him of your
sorrow. That will I not, said the knight, for it will scathe me
greatly, and do you none avail. Sir, said Balin, I pray you make you
ready, for ye must go with me, or else I must fight with you and bring
you by force, and that were me loath to do. Will ye be my warrant, said
the knight, an I go with you? Yea, said Balin, or else I will die
therefore. And so he made him ready to go with Balin, and left the
damosel still. And as they were even afore King Arthur’s pavilion,
there came one invisible, and smote this knight that went with Balin
throughout the body with a spear. Alas, said the knight, I am slain
under your conduct with a knight called Garlon; therefore take my horse
that is better than yours, and ride to the damosel, and follow the
quest that I was in as she will lead you, and revenge my death when ye
may. That shall I do, said Balin, and that I make vow unto knighthood;
and so he departed from this knight with great sorrow. So King Arthur
let bury this knight richly, and made a mention on his tomb, how there
was slain Herlews le Berbeus, and by whom the treachery was done, the
knight Garlon. But ever the damosel bare the truncheon of the spear
with her that Sir Herlews was slain withal.



CHAPTER XIII. How Balin and the damosel met with a knight which was in
likewise slain, and how the damosel bled for the custom of a castle.

So Balin and the damosel rode into a forest, and there met with a
knight that had been a-hunting, and that knight asked Balin for what
cause he made so great sorrow. Me list not to tell you, said Balin.
Now, said the knight, an I were armed as ye be I would fight with you.
That should little need, said Balin, I am not afeard to tell you, and
told him all the cause how it was. Ah, said the knight, is this all?
here I ensure you by the faith of my body never to depart from you
while my life lasteth. And so they went to the hostelry and armed them,
and so rode forth with Balin. And as they came by an hermitage even by
a churchyard, there came the knight Garlon invisible, and smote this
knight, Perin de Mountbeliard, through the body with a spear. Alas,
said the knight, I am slain by this traitor knight that rideth
invisible. Alas, said Balin, it is not the first despite he hath done
me; and there the hermit and Balin buried the knight under a rich stone
and a tomb royal. And on the morn they found letters of gold written,
how Sir Gawaine shall revenge his father’s death, King Lot, on the King
Pellinore. Anon after this Balin and the damosel rode till they came to
a castle, and there Balin alighted, and he and the damosel went to go
into the castle, and anon as Balin came within the castle’s gate the
portcullis fell down at his back, and there fell many men about the
damosel, and would have slain her. When Balin saw that, he was sore
aggrieved, for he might not help the damosel. Then he went up into the
tower, and leapt over walls into the ditch, and hurt him not; and anon
he pulled out his sword and would have foughten with them. And they all
said nay, they would not fight with him, for they did nothing but the
old custom of the castle; and told him how their lady was sick, and had
lain many years, and she might not be whole but if she had a dish of
silver full of blood of a clean maid and a king’s daughter; and
therefore the custom of this castle is, there shall no damosel pass
this way but she shall bleed of her blood in a silver dish full. Well,
said Balin, she shall bleed as much as she may bleed, but I will not
lose the life of her whiles my life lasteth. And so Balin made her to
bleed by her good will, but her blood helped not the lady. And so he
and she rested there all night, and had there right good cheer, and on
the morn they passed on their ways. And as it telleth after in the
Sangreal, that Sir Percivale’s sister helped that lady with her blood,
whereof she was dead.



