CHAPTER XXI. How Ulfius impeached Queen Igraine, Arthur’s mother, of
treason; and how a knight came and desired to have the death of his
master revenged.

Right so came Ulfius, and said openly, that the king and all might hear
that were feasted that day, Ye are the falsest lady of the world, and
the most traitress unto the king’s person. Beware, said Arthur, what
thou sayest; thou speakest a great word. I am well ware, said Ulfius,
what I speak, and here is my glove to prove it upon any man that will
say the contrary, that this Queen Igraine is causer of your great
damage, and of your great war. For, an she would have uttered it in the
life of King Uther Pendragon, of the birth of you, and how ye were
begotten ye had never had the mortal wars that ye have had; for the
most part of your barons of your realm knew never whose son ye were,
nor of whom ye were begotten; and she that bare you of her body should
have made it known openly in excusing of her worship and yours, and in
like wise to all the realm, wherefore I prove her false to God and to
you and to all your realm, and who will say the contrary I will prove
it on his body.

Then spake Igraine and said, I am a woman and I may not fight, but
rather than I should be dishonoured, there would some good man take my
quarrel. More, she said, Merlin knoweth well, and ye Sir Ulfius, how
King Uther came to me in the Castle of Tintagil in the likeness of my
lord, that was dead three hours to-fore, and thereby gat a child that
night upon me. And after the thirteenth day King Uther wedded me, and
by his commandment when the child was born it was delivered unto Merlin
and nourished by him, and so I saw the child never after, nor wot not
what is his name, for I knew him never yet. And there, Ulfius said to
the queen, Merlin is more to blame than ye. Well I wot, said the queen,
I bare a child by my lord King Uther, but I wot not where he is become.
Then Merlin took the king by the hand, saying, This is your mother. And
therewith Sir Ector bare witness how he nourished him by Uther’s
commandment. And therewith King Arthur took his mother, Queen Igraine,
in his arms and kissed her, and either wept upon other. And then the
king let make a feast that lasted eight days.

Then on a day there came in the court a squire on horseback, leading a
knight before him wounded to the death, and told him how there was a
knight in the forest had reared up a pavilion by a well, and hath slain
my master, a good knight, his name was Miles; wherefore I beseech you
that my master may be buried, and that some knight may revenge my
master’s death. Then the noise was great of that knight’s death in the
court, and every man said his advice. Then came Griflet that was but a
squire, and he was but young, of the age of the king Arthur, so he
besought the king for all his service that he had done him to give the
order of knighthood.



CHAPTER XXII. How Griflet was made knight, and jousted with a knight.

Thou art full young and tender of age, said Arthur, for to take so high
an order on thee. Sir, said Griflet, I beseech you make me knight. Sir,
said Merlin, it were great pity to lose Griflet, for he will be a
passing good man when he is of age, abiding with you the term of his
life. And if he adventure his body with yonder knight at the fountain,
it is in great peril if ever he come again, for he is one of the best
knights of the world, and the strongest man of arms. Well, said Arthur.
So at the desire of Griflet the king made him knight. Now, said Arthur
unto Sir Griflet, sith I have made you knight thou must give me a gift.
What ye will, said Griflet. Thou shalt promise me by the faith of thy
body, when thou hast jousted with the knight at the fountain, whether
it fall ye be on foot or on horseback, that right so ye shall come
again unto me without making any more debate. I will promise you, said
Griflet, as you desire. Then took Griflet his horse in great haste, and
dressed his shield and took a spear in his hand, and so he rode a great
wallop till he came to the fountain, and thereby he saw a rich
pavilion, and thereby under a cloth stood a fair horse well saddled and
bridled, and on a tree a shield of divers colours and a great spear.
Then Griflet smote on the shield with the butt of his spear, that the
shield fell down to the ground. With that the knight came out of the
pavilion, and said, Fair knight, why smote ye down my shield? For I
will joust with you, said Griflet. It is better ye do not, said the
knight, for ye are but young, and late made knight, and your might is
nothing to mine. As for that, said Griflet, I will joust with you. That
is me loath, said the knight, but sith I must needs, I will dress me
thereto. Of whence be ye? said the knight. Sir, I am of Arthur’s court.
So the two knights ran together that Griflet’s spear all to-shivered;
and there withal he smote Griflet through the shield and the left side,
and brake the spear that the truncheon stuck in his body, that horse
and knight fell down.



CHAPTER XXIII. How twelve knights came from Rome and asked truage for
this land of Arthur, and how Arthur fought with a knight.

When the knight saw him lie so on the ground, he alighted, and was
passing heavy, for he weened he had slain him, and then he unlaced his
helm and gat him wind, and so with the truncheon he set him on his
horse, and so betook him to God, and said he had a mighty heart, and if
he might live he would prove a passing good knight. And so Sir Griflet
rode to the court, where great dole was made for him. But through good
leeches he was healed and saved. Right so came into the court twelve
knights, and were aged men, and they came from the Emperor of Rome, and
they asked of Arthur truage for this realm, other else the emperor
would destroy him and his land. Well, said King Arthur, ye are
messengers, therefore ye may say what ye will, other else ye should die
therefore. But this is mine answer: I owe the emperor no truage, nor
none will I hold him, but on a fair field I shall give him my truage
that shall be with a sharp spear, or else with a sharp sword, and that
shall not be long, by my father’s soul, Uther Pendragon. And therewith
the messengers departed passingly wroth, and King Arthur as wroth, for
in evil time came they then; for the king was passingly wroth for the
hurt of Sir Griflet. And so he commanded a privy man of his chamber
that or it be day his best horse and armour, with all that longeth unto
his person, be without the city or to-morrow day. Right so or to-morrow
day he met with his man and his horse, and so mounted up and dressed
his shield and took his spear, and bade his chamberlain tarry there
till he came again. And so Arthur rode a soft pace till it was day, and
then was he ware of three churls chasing Merlin, and would have slain
him. Then the king rode unto them, and bade them: Flee, churls! then
were they afeard when they saw a knight, and fled. O Merlin, said
Arthur, here hadst thou been slain for all thy crafts had I not been.
Nay, said Merlin, not so, for I could save myself an I would; and thou
art more near thy death than I am, for thou goest to the deathward, an
God be not thy friend.

So as they went thus talking they came to the fountain, and the rich
pavilion there by it. Then King Arthur was ware where sat a knight
armed in a chair. Sir knight, said Arthur, for what cause abidest thou
here, that there may no knight ride this way but if he joust with thee?
said the king. I rede thee leave that custom, said Arthur. This custom,
said the knight, have I used and will use maugre who saith nay, and who
is grieved with my custom let him amend it that will. I will amend it,
said Arthur. I shall defend thee, said the knight. Anon he took his
horse and dressed his shield and took a spear, and they met so hard
either in other’s shields, that all to-shivered their spears. Therewith
anon Arthur pulled out his sword. Nay, not so, said the knight; it is
fairer, said the knight, that we twain run more together with sharp
spears. I will well, said Arthur, an I had any more spears. I have
enow, said the knight; so there came a squire and brought two good
spears, and Arthur chose one and he another; so they spurred their
horses and came together with all their mights, that either brake their
spears to their hands. Then Arthur set hand on his sword. Nay, said the
knight, ye shall do better, ye are a passing good jouster as ever I met
withal, and once for the love of the high order of knighthood let us
joust once again. I assent me, said Arthur. Anon there were brought two
great spears, and every knight gat a spear, and therewith they ran
together that Arthur’s spear all to-shivered. But the other knight hit
him so hard in midst of the shield, that horse and man fell to the
earth, and therewith Arthur was eager, and pulled out his sword, and
said, I will assay thee, sir knight, on foot, for I have lost the
honour on horseback. I will be on horseback, said the knight. Then was
Arthur wroth, and dressed his shield toward him with his sword drawn.
When the knight saw that, he alighted, for him thought no worship to
have a knight at such avail, he to be on horseback and he on foot, and
so he alighted and dressed his shield unto Arthur. And there began a
strong battle with many great strokes, and so hewed with their swords
that the cantels flew in the fields, and much blood they bled both,
that all the place there as they fought was overbled with blood, and
thus they fought long and rested them, and then they went to the battle
again, and so hurtled together like two rams that either fell to the
earth. So at the last they smote together that both their swords met
even together. But the sword of the knight smote King Arthur’s sword in
two pieces, wherefore he was heavy. Then said the knight unto Arthur,
Thou art in my daunger whether me list to save thee or slay thee, and
but thou yield thee as overcome and recreant, thou shalt die. As for
death, said King Arthur, welcome be it when it cometh, but to yield me
unto thee as recreant I had liefer die than to be so shamed. And
therewithal the king leapt unto Pellinore, and took him by the middle
and threw him down, and raced off his helm. When the knight felt that
he was adread, for he was a passing big man of might, and anon he
brought Arthur under him, and raced off his helm and would have smitten
off his head.



