CHAPTER XIX. How Beaumains came to the lady, and when he came to the
castle the gates were closed against him, and of the words that the
lady said to him.

Now turn we unto Sir Beaumains that desired of Linet that he might see
her sister, his lady. Sir, she said, I would fain ye saw her. Then Sir
Beaumains all armed him, and took his horse and his spear, and rode
straight unto the castle. And when he came to the gate he found there
many men armed, and pulled up the drawbridge and drew the port close.

Then marvelled he why they would not suffer him to enter. And then he
looked up to the window; and there he saw the fair Lionesse that said
on high: Go thy way, Sir Beaumains, for as yet thou shalt not have
wholly my love, unto the time that thou be called one of the number of
the worthy knights. And therefore go labour in worship this
twelvemonth, and then thou shalt hear new tidings. Alas, fair lady,
said Beaumains, I have not deserved that ye should show me this
strangeness, and I had weened that I should have right good cheer with
you, and unto my power I have deserved thank, and well I am sure I have
bought your love with part of the best blood within my body. Fair
courteous knight, said Dame Lionesse, be not displeased nor over-hasty;
for wit you well your great travail nor good love shall not be lost,
for I consider your great travail and labour, your bounty and your
goodness as me ought to do. And therefore go on your way, and look that
ye be of good comfort, for all shall be for your worship and for the
best, and perdy a twelvemonth will soon be done, and trust me, fair
knight, I shall be true to you, and never to betray you, but to my
death I shall love you and none other. And therewithal she turned her
from the window, and Sir Beaumains rode awayward from the castle,
making great dole, and so he rode here and there and wist not where he
rode, till it was dark night. And then it happened him to come to a
poor man’s house, and there he was harboured all that night.

But Sir Beaumains had no rest, but wallowed and writhed for the love of
the lady of the castle. And so upon the morrow he took his horse and
rode until underne, and then he came to a broad water, and thereby was
a great lodge, and there he alighted to sleep and laid his head upon
the shield, and betook his horse to the dwarf, and commanded him to
watch all night.

Now turn we to the lady of the same castle, that thought much upon
Beaumains, and then she called unto her Sir Gringamore her brother, and
prayed him in all manner, as he loved her heartily, that he would ride
after Sir Beaumains: And ever have ye wait upon him till ye may find
him sleeping, for I am sure in his heaviness he will alight down in
some place, and lie him down to sleep; and therefore have ye your wait
upon him, and in the priviest manner ye can, take his dwarf, and go ye
your way with him as fast as ever ye may or Sir Beaumains awake. For my
sister Linet telleth me that he can tell of what kindred he is come,
and what is his right name. And the meanwhile I and my sister will ride
unto your castle to await when ye bring with you the dwarf. And then
when ye have brought him unto your castle, I will have him in
examination myself. Unto the time that I know what is his right name,
and of what kindred he is come, shall I never be merry at my heart.
Sister, said Sir Gringamore, all this shall be done after your intent.

And so he rode all the other day and the night till that he found Sir
Beaumains lying by a water, and his head upon his shield, for to sleep.
And then when he saw Sir Beaumains fast asleep, he came stilly stalking
behind the dwarf, and plucked him fast under his arm, and so he rode
away with him as fast as ever he might unto his own castle. And this
Sir Gringamore’s arms were all black, and that to him longeth. But ever
as he rode with the dwarf toward his castle, he cried unto his lord and
prayed him of help. And therewith awoke Sir Beaumains, and up he leapt
lightly, and saw where Sir Gringamore rode his way with the dwarf, and
so Sir Gringamore rode out of his sight.



CHAPTER XX. How Sir Beaumains rode after to rescue his dwarf, and came
into the castle where he was.

Then Sir Beaumains put on his helm anon, and buckled his shield, and
took his horse, and rode after him all that ever he might ride through
marshes, and fields, and great dales, that many times his horse and he
plunged over the head in deep mires, for he knew not the way, but took
the gainest way in that woodness, that many times he was like to
perish. And at the last him happened to come to a fair green way, and
there he met with a poor man of the country, whom he saluted and asked
him whether he met not with a knight upon a black horse and all black
harness, a little dwarf sitting behind him with heavy cheer. Sir, said
the poor man, here by me came Sir Gringamore the knight, with such a
dwarf mourning as ye say; and therefore I rede you not follow him, for
he is one of the periloust knights of the world, and his castle is here
nigh hand but two mile; therefore we advise you ride not after Sir
Gringamore, but if ye owe him good will.

So leave we Sir Beaumains riding toward the castle, and speak we of Sir
Gringamore and the dwarf. Anon as the dwarf was come to the castle,
Dame Lionesse and Dame Linet her sister, asked the dwarf where was his
master born, and of what lineage he was come. And but if thou tell me,
said Dame Lionesse, thou shalt never escape this castle, but ever here
to be prisoner. As for that, said the dwarf, I fear not greatly to tell
his name and of what kin he is come. Wit you well he is a king’s son,
and his mother is sister to King Arthur, and he is brother to the good
knight Sir Gawaine, and his name is Sir Gareth of Orkney. And now I
have told you his right name, I pray you, fair lady, let me go to my
lord again, for he will never out of this country until that he have me
again. And if he be angry he will do much harm or that he be stint, and
work you wrack in this country. As for that threatening, said Sir
Gringamore, be it as it be may, we will go to dinner. And so they
washed and went to meat, and made them merry and well at ease, and
because the Lady Lionesse of the castle was there, they made great joy.
Truly, madam, said Linet unto her sister, well may he be a king’s son,
for he hath many good tatches on him, for he is courteous and mild, and
the most suffering man that ever I met withal. For I dare say there was
never gentlewoman reviled man in so foul a manner as I have rebuked
him; and at all times he gave me goodly and meek answers again.

And as they sat thus talking, there came Sir Gareth in at the gate with
an angry countenance, and his sword drawn in his hand, and cried aloud
that all the castle might hear it, saying: Thou traitor, Sir
Gringamore, deliver me my dwarf again, or by the faith that I owe to
the order of knighthood, I shall do thee all the harm that I can. Then
Sir Gringamore looked out at a window and said, Sir Gareth of Orkney,
leave thy boasting words, for thou gettest not thy dwarf again. Thou
coward knight, said Sir Gareth, bring him with thee, and come and do
battle with me, and win him and take him. So will I do, said Sir
Gringamore, an me list, but for all thy great words thou gettest him
not. Ah! fair brother, said Dame Lionesse, I would he had his dwarf
again, for I would he were not wroth, for now he hath told me all my
desire I keep no more of the dwarf. And also, brother, he hath done
much for me, and delivered me from the Red Knight of the Red Launds,
and therefore, brother, I owe him my service afore all knights living.
And wit ye well that I love him before all other, and full fain I would
speak with him. But in nowise I would that he wist what I were, but
that I were another strange lady.

Well, said Sir Gringamore, sithen I know now your will, I will obey now
unto him. And right therewithal he went down unto Sir Gareth, and said:
Sir, I cry you mercy, and all that I have misdone I will amend it at
your will. And therefore I pray you that ye would alight, and take such
cheer as I can make you in this castle. Shall I have my dwarf? said Sir
Gareth. Yea, sir, and all the pleasaunce that I can make you, for as
soon as your dwarf told me what ye were and of what blood ye are come,
and what noble deeds ye have done in these marches, then I repented of
my deeds. And then Sir Gareth alighted, and there came his dwarf and
took his horse. O my fellow, said Sir Gareth, I have had many
adventures for thy sake. And so Sir Gringamore took him by the hand and
led him into the hall where his own wife was.



