CHAPTER XIII. How Morgan would have slain Sir Uriens her husband, and
how Sir Uwaine her son saved him.

The meanwhile Morgan le Fay had weened King Arthur had been dead. So on
a day she espied King Uriens lay in his bed sleeping. Then she called
unto her a maiden of her counsel, and said, Go fetch me my lord’s
sword, for I saw never better time to slay him than now. O madam, said
the damosel, an ye slay my lord ye can never escape. Care not you, said
Morgan le Fay, for now I see my time in the which it is best to do it,
and therefore hie thee fast and fetch me the sword. Then the damosel
departed, and found Sir Uwaine sleeping upon a bed in another chamber,
so she went unto Sir Uwaine, and awaked him, and bade him, Arise, and
wait on my lady your mother, for she will slay the king your father
sleeping in his bed, for I go to fetch his sword. Well, said Sir
Uwaine, go on your way, and let me deal. Anon the damosel brought
Morgan the sword with quaking hands, and she lightly took the sword,
and pulled it out, and went boldly unto the bed’s side, and awaited how
and where she might slay him best. And as she lifted up the sword to
smite, Sir Uwaine leapt unto his mother, and caught her by the hand,
and said, Ah, fiend, what wilt thou do? An thou wert not my mother,
with this sword I should smite off thy head. Ah, said Sir Uwaine, men
saith that Merlin was begotten of a devil, but I may say an earthly
devil bare me. O fair son, Uwaine, have mercy upon me, I was tempted
with a devil, wherefore I cry thee mercy; I will never more do so; and
save my worship and discover me not. On this covenant, said Sir Uwaine,
I will forgive it you, so ye will never be about to do such deeds. Nay,
son, said she, and that I make you assurance.



CHAPTER XIV. How Queen Morgan le Fay made great sorrow for the death of
Accolon, and how she stole away the scabbard from Arthur.

Then came tidings unto Morgan le Fay that Accolon was dead, and his
body brought unto the church, and how King Arthur had his sword again.
But when Queen Morgan wist that Accolon was dead, she was so sorrowful
that near her heart to-brast. But because she would not it were known,
outward she kept her countenance, and made no semblant of sorrow. But
well she wist an she abode till her brother Arthur came thither, there
should no gold go for her life.

Then she went unto Queen Guenever, and asked her leave to ride into the
country. Ye may abide, said Queen Guenever, till your brother the king
come home. I may not, said Morgan le Fay, for I have such hasty
tidings, that I may not tarry. Well, said Guenever, ye may depart when
ye will. So early on the morn, or it was day, she took her horse and
rode all that day and most part of the night, and on the morn by noon
she came to the same abbey of nuns whereas lay King Arthur; and she
knowing he was there, she asked where he was. And they answered how he
had laid him in his bed to sleep, for he had had but little rest these
three nights. Well, said she, I charge you that none of you awake him
till I do, and then she alighted off her horse, and thought for to
steal away Excalibur his sword, and so she went straight unto his
chamber, and no man durst disobey her commandment, and there she found
Arthur asleep in his bed, and Excalibur in his right hand naked. When
she saw that she was passing heavy that she might not come by the sword
without she had awaked him, and then she wist well she had been dead.
Then she took the scabbard and went her way on horseback. When the king
awoke and missed his scabbard, he was wroth, and he asked who had been
there, and they said his sister, Queen Morgan had been there, and had
put the scabbard under her mantle and was gone. Alas, said Arthur,
falsely ye have watched me. Sir, said they all, we durst not disobey
your sister’s commandment. Ah, said the king, let fetch the best horse
may be found, and bid Sir Ontzlake arm him in all haste, and take
another good horse and ride with me. So anon the king and Ontzlake were
well armed, and rode after this lady, and so they came by a cross and
found a cowherd, and they asked the poor man if there came any lady
riding that way. Sir, said this poor man, right late came a lady riding
with a forty horses, and to yonder forest she rode. Then they spurred
their horses, and followed fast, and within a while Arthur had a sight
of Morgan le Fay; then he chased as fast as he might. When she espied
him following her, she rode a greater pace through the forest till she
came to a plain, and when she saw she might not escape, she rode unto a
lake thereby, and said, Whatsoever come of me, my brother shall not
have this scabbard. And then she let throw the scabbard in the deepest
of the water so it sank, for it was heavy of gold and precious stones.

Then she rode into a valley where many great stones were, and when she
saw she must be overtaken, she shaped herself, horse and man, by
enchantment unto a great marble stone. Anon withal came Sir Arthur and
Sir Ontzlake whereas the king might know his sister and her men, and
one knight from another. Ah, said the king, here may ye see the
vengeance of God, and now am I sorry that this misadventure is
befallen. And then he looked for the scabbard, but it would not be
found, so he returned to the abbey where he came from. So when Arthur
was gone she turned all into the likeliness as she and they were
before, and said, Sirs, now may we go where we will.



CHAPTER XV. How Morgan le Fay saved a knight that should have been
drowned, and how King Arthur returned home again.

Then said Morgan, Saw ye Arthur, my brother? Yea, said her knights,
right well, and that ye should have found an we might have stirred from
one stead, for by his armyvestal countenance he would have caused us to
have fled. I believe you, said Morgan. Anon after as she rode she met a
knight leading another knight on his horse before him, bound hand and
foot, blindfold, to have drowned him in a fountain. When she saw this
knight so bound, she asked him, What will ye do with that knight? Lady,
said he, I will drown him. For what cause? she asked. For I found him
with my wife, and she shall have the same death anon. That were pity,
said Morgan le Fay. Now, what say ye, knight, is it truth that he saith
of you? she said to the knight that should be drowned. Nay truly,
madam, he saith not right on me. Of whence be ye, said Morgan le Fay,
and of what country? I am of the court of King Arthur, and my name is
Manassen, cousin unto Accolon of Gaul. Ye say well, said she, and for
the love of him ye shall be delivered, and ye shall have your adversary
in the same case ye be in. So Manassen was loosed and the other knight
bound. And anon Manassen unarmed him, and armed himself in his harness,
and so mounted on horseback, and the knight afore him, and so threw him
into the fountain and drowned him. And then he rode unto Morgan again,
and asked if she would anything unto King Arthur. Tell him that I
rescued thee, not for the love of him but for the love of Accolon, and
tell him I fear him not while I can make me and them that be with me in
likeness of stones; and let him wit I can do much more when I see my
time. And so she departed into the country of Gore, and there was she
richly received, and made her castles and towns passing strong, for
always she dreaded much King Arthur.

When the king had well rested him at the abbey, he rode unto Camelot,
and found his queen and his barons right glad of his coming. And when
they heard of his strange adventures as is afore rehearsed, then all
had marvel of the falsehood of Morgan le Fay; many knights wished her
burnt. Then came Manassen to court and told the king of his adventure.
Well, said the king, she is a kind sister; I shall so be avenged on her
an I live, that all Christendom shall speak of it. So on the morn there
came a damosel from Morgan to the king, and she brought with her the
richest mantle that ever was seen in that court, for it was set as full
of precious stones as one might stand by another, and there were the
richest stones that ever the king saw. And the damosel said, Your
sister sendeth you this mantle, and desireth that ye should take this
gift of her; and in what thing she hath offended you, she will amend it
at your own pleasure. When the king beheld this mantle it pleased him
much, but he said but little.



