CHAPTER XXXIII. How Sir Gareth and Sir Gawaine fought each against
other, and how they knew each other by the damosel Linet.

So the duke departed, and Sir Gareth stood there alone; and there he
saw an armed knight coming toward him. Then Sir Gareth took the duke’s
shield, and mounted upon horseback, and so without biding they ran
together as it had been the thunder. And there that knight hurt Sir
Gareth under the side with his spear. And then they alighted and drew
their swords, and gave great strokes that the blood trailed to the
ground. And so they fought two hours.

At the last there came the damosel Linet, that some men called the
damosel Savage, and she came riding upon an ambling mule; and there she
cried all on high, Sir Gawaine, Sir Gawaine, leave thy fighting with
thy brother Sir Gareth.

And when he heard her say so he threw away his shield and his sword,
and ran to Sir Gareth, and took him in his arms, and sithen kneeled
down and asked him mercy.

What are ye, said Sir Gareth, that right now were so strong and so
mighty, and now so suddenly yield you to me? O Gareth, I am your
brother Sir Gawaine, that for your sake have had great sorrow and
labour.

Then Sir Gareth unlaced his helm, and kneeled down to him, and asked
him mercy. Then they rose both, and embraced either other in their
arms, and wept a great while or they might speak, and either of them
gave other the prize of the battle. And there were many kind words
between them.

Alas, my fair brother, said Sir Gawaine, perdy I owe of right to
worship you an ye were not my brother, for ye have worshipped King
Arthur and all his court, for ye have sent me more worshipful knights
this twelvemonth than six the best of the Round Table have done, except
Sir Launcelot.

Then came the damosel Savage that was the Lady Linet, that rode with
Sir Gareth so long, and there she did staunch Sir Gareth’s wounds and
Sir Gawaine’s. Now what will ye do? said the damosel Savage; meseemeth
that it were well done that Arthur had witting of you both, for your
horses are so bruised that they may not bear. Now, fair damosel, said
Sir Gawaine, I pray you ride unto my lord mine uncle, King Arthur, and
tell him what adventure is to me betid here, and I suppose he will not
tarry long. Then she took her mule, and lightly she came to King Arthur
that was but two mile thence. And when she had told him tidings the
king bade get him a palfrey. And when he was upon his back he bade the
lords and ladies come after, who that would; and there was saddling and
bridling of queens’ horses and princes’ horses, and well was him that
soonest might be ready.

So when the king came thereas they were, he saw Sir Gawaine and Sir
Gareth sit upon a little hill-side, and then the king avoided his
horse. And when he came nigh Sir Gareth he would have spoken but he
might not; and therewith he sank down in a swoon for gladness. And so
they stert unto their uncle, and required him of his good grace to be
of good comfort. Wit ye well the king made great joy, and many a
piteous complaint he made to Sir Gareth, and ever he wept as he had
been a child. With that came his mother, the Queen of Orkney, Dame
Morgawse, and when she saw Sir Gareth readily in the visage she might
not weep, but suddenly fell down in a swoon, and lay there a great
while like as she had been dead. And then Sir Gareth recomforted his
mother in such wise that she recovered and made good cheer. Then the
king commanded that all manner of knights that were under his
obeissance should make their lodging right there for the love of his
nephews. And so it was done, and all manner of purveyance purveyed,
that there lacked nothing that might be gotten of tame nor wild for
gold or silver. And then by the means of the damosel Savage Sir Gawaine
and Sir Gareth were healed of their wounds; and there they sojourned
eight days.

Then said King Arthur unto the damosel Savage: I marvel that your
sister, Dame Lionesse, cometh not here to me, and in especial that she
cometh not to visit her knight, my nephew Sir Gareth, that hath had so
much travail for her love. My lord, said the damosel Linet, ye must of
your good grace hold her excused, for she knoweth not that my lord, Sir
Gareth, is here. Go then for her, said King Arthur, that we may be
appointed what is best to be done, according to the pleasure of my
nephew. Sir, said the damosel, that shall be done, and so she rode unto
her sister. And as lightly as she might she made her ready; and she
came on the morn with her brother Sir Gringamore, and with her forty
knights. And so when she was come she had all the cheer that might be
done, both of the king, and of many other kings and queens.



CHAPTER XXXIV. How Sir Gareth acknowledged that they loved each other
to King Arthur, and of the appointment of their wedding.

And among all these ladies she was named the fairest, and peerless.
Then when Sir Gawaine saw her there was many a goodly look and goodly
words, that all men of worship had joy to behold them. Then came King
Arthur and many other kings, and Dame Guenever, and the Queen of
Orkney. And there the king asked his nephew, Sir Gareth, whether he
would have that lady as paramour, or to have her to his wife. My lord,
wit you well that I love her above all ladies living. Now, fair lady,
said King Arthur, what say ye? Most noble King, said Dame Lionesse, wit
you well that my lord, Sir Gareth, is to me more liefer to have and
wield as my husband, than any king or prince that is christened; and if
I may not have him I promise you I will never have none. For, my lord
Arthur, said Dame Lionesse, wit ye well he is my first love, and he
shall be the last; and if ye will suffer him to have his will and free
choice I dare say he will have me. That is truth, said Sir Gareth; an I
have not you and wield not you as my wife, there shall never lady nor
gentlewoman rejoice me. What, nephew, said the king, is the wind in
that door? for wit ye well I would not for the stint of my crown to be
causer to withdraw your hearts; and wit ye well ye cannot love so well
but I shall rather increase it than distress it. And also ye shall have
my love and my lordship in the uttermost wise that may lie in my power.
And in the same wise said Sir Gareth’s mother.

Then there was made a provision for the day of marriage; and by the
king’s advice it was provided that it should be at Michaelmas
following, at Kink Kenadon by the seaside, for there is a plentiful
country. And so it was cried in all the places through the realm. And
then Sir Gareth sent his summons to all these knights and ladies that
he had won in battle to-fore, that they should be at his day of
marriage at Kink Kenadon by the sands.

And then Dame Lionesse, and the damosel Linet with Sir Gringamore, rode
to their castle; and a goodly and a rich ring she gave to Sir Gareth,
and he gave her another. And King Arthur gave her a rich pair of bee of
gold; and so she departed.

And King Arthur and his fellowship rode toward Kink Kenadon, and Sir
Gareth brought his lady on the way, and so came to the king again and
rode with him.

Lord! the great cheer that Sir Launcelot made of Sir Gareth and he of
him, for there was never no knight that Sir Gareth loved so well as he
did Sir Launcelot; and ever for the most part he would be in Sir
Launcelot’s company; for after Sir Gareth had espied Sir Gawaine’s
conditions, he withdrew himself from his brother, Sir Gawaine’s,
fellowship, for he was vengeable, and where he hated he would be
avenged with murder, and that hated Sir Gareth.



