CHAPTER II. How five kings came into this land to war against King
Arthur, and what counsel Arthur had against them.

And as King Arthur rode to Camelot, and held there a great feast with
mirth and joy, so soon after he returned unto Cardoile, and there came
unto Arthur new tidings that the king of Denmark, and the king of
Ireland that was his brother, and the king of the Vale, and the king of
Soleise, and the king of the Isle of Longtains, all these five kings
with a great host were entered into the land of King Arthur, and burnt
and slew clean afore them, both cities and castles, that it was pity to
hear. Alas, said Arthur, yet had I never rest one month since I was
crowned king of this land. Now shall I never rest till I meet with
those kings in a fair field, that I make mine avow; for my true liege
people shall not be destroyed in my default, go with me who will, and
abide who that will. Then the king let write unto King Pellinore, and
prayed him in all haste to make him ready with such people as he might
lightliest rear and hie him after in all haste. All the barons were
privily wroth that the king would depart so suddenly; but the king by
no mean would abide, but made writing unto them that were not there,
and bade them hie after him, such as were not at that time in the
court. Then the king came to Queen Guenever, and said, Lady, make you
ready, for ye shall go with me, for I may not long miss you; ye shall
cause me to be the more hardy, what adventure so befall me; I will not
wit my lady to be in no jeopardy. Sir, said she, I am at your
commandment, and shall be ready what time so ye be ready. So on the
morn the king and the queen departed with such fellowship as they had,
and came into the north, into a forest beside Humber, and there lodged
them. When the word and tiding came unto the five kings above said,
that Arthur was beside Humber in a forest, there was a knight, brother
unto one of the five kings, that gave them this counsel: Ye know well
that Sir Arthur hath the flower of chivalry of the world with him, as
it is proved by the great battle he did with the eleven kings; and
therefore hie unto him night and day till that we be nigh him, for the
longer he tarrieth the bigger he is, and we ever the weaker; and he is
so courageous of himself that he is come to the field with little
people, and therefore let us set upon him or day and we shall slay
down; of his knights there shall none escape.



CHAPTER III. How King Arthur had ado with them and overthrew them, and
slew the five kings and made the remnant to flee.

Unto this counsel these five kings assented, and so they passed forth
with their host through North Wales, and came upon Arthur by night, and
set upon his host as the king and his knights were in their pavilions.
King Arthur was unarmed, and had laid him to rest with his Queen
Guenever. Sir, said Sir Kay, it is not good we be unarmed. We shall
have no need, said Sir Gawaine and Sir Griflet, that lay in a little
pavilion by the king. With that they heard a great noise, and many
cried, Treason, treason! Alas, said King Arthur, we be betrayed! Unto
arms, fellows, then he cried. So they were armed anon at all points.
Then came there a wounded knight unto the king, and said, Sir, save
yourself and my lady the queen, for our host is destroyed, and much
people of ours slain. So anon the king and the queen and the three
knights took their horses, and rode toward Humber to pass over it, and
the water was so rough that they were afraid to pass over. Now may ye
choose, said King Arthur, whether ye will abide and take the adventure
on this side, for an ye be taken they will slay you. It were me liefer,
said the queen, to die in the water than to fall in your enemies’ hands
and there be slain.

And as they stood so talking, Sir Kay saw the five kings coming on
horseback by themselves alone, with their spears in their hands even
toward them. Lo, said Sir Kay, yonder be the five kings; let us go to
them and match them. That were folly, said Sir Gawaine, for we are but
three and they be five. That is truth, said Sir Griflet. No force, said
Sir Kay, I will undertake for two of them, and then may ye three
undertake for the other three. And therewithal, Sir Kay let his horse
run as fast as he might, and struck one of them through the shield and
the body a fathom, that the king fell to the earth stark dead. That saw
Sir Gawaine, and ran unto another king so hard that he smote him
through the body. And therewithal King Arthur ran to another, and smote
him through the body with a spear, that he fell to the earth dead. Then
Sir Griflet ran unto the fourth king, and gave him such a fall that his
neck brake. Anon Sir Kay ran unto the fifth king, and smote him so hard
on the helm that the stroke clave the helm and the head to the earth.
That was well stricken, said King Arthur, and worshipfully hast thou
holden thy promise, therefore I shall honour thee while that I live.
And therewithal they set the queen in a barge into Humber; but always
Queen Guenever praised Sir Kay for his deeds, and said, What lady that
ye love, and she love you not again she were greatly to blame; and
among ladies, said the queen, I shall bear your noble fame, for ye
spake a great word, and fulfilled it worshipfully. And therewith the
queen departed.

Then the king and the three knights rode into the forest, for there
they supposed to hear of them that were escaped; and there he found the
most part of his people, and told them all how the five kings were
dead. And therefore let us hold us together till it be day, and when
their host have espied that their chieftains be slain, they will make
such dole that they shall no more help themselves. And right so as the
king said, so it was; for when they found the five kings dead, they
made such dole that they fell from their horses. Therewithal came King
Arthur but with a few people, and slew on the left hand and on the
right hand, that well-nigh there escaped no man, but all were slain to
the number thirty thousand. And when the battle was all ended, the king
kneeled down and thanked God meekly. And then he sent for the queen,
and soon she was come, and she made great joy of the overcoming of that
battle.



