CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Tristram and King Mark hurted each other for the
love of a knight’s wife.

So Sir Tristram departed, and took the sea, and with good wind he
arrived up at Tintagil in Cornwall; and when King Mark was whole in his
prosperity there came tidings that Sir Tristram was arrived, and whole
of his wounds: thereof was King Mark passing glad, and so were all the
barons; and when he saw his time he rode unto his father, King
Meliodas, and there he had all the cheer that the king and the queen
could make him. And then largely King Meliodas and his queen departed
of their lands and goods to Sir Tristram.

Then by the license of King Meliodas, his father, he returned again
unto the court of King Mark, and there he lived in great joy long time,
until at the last there befell a jealousy and an unkindness betwixt
King Mark and Sir Tristram, for they loved both one lady. And she was
an earl’s wife that hight Sir Segwarides. And this lady loved Sir
Tristram passingly well. And he loved her again, for she was a passing
fair lady, and that espied Sir Tristram well. Then King Mark understood
that and was jealous, for King Mark loved her passingly well.

So it fell upon a day this lady sent a dwarf unto Sir Tristram, and
bade him, as he loved her, that he would be with her the night next
following. Also she charged you that ye come not to her but if ye be
well armed, for her lover was called a good knight. Sir Tristram
answered to the dwarf: Recommend me unto my lady, and tell her I will
not fail but I will be with her the term that she hath set me. And with
this answer the dwarf departed. And King Mark espied that the dwarf was
with Sir Tristram upon message from Segwarides’ wife; then King Mark
sent for the dwarf, and when he was come he made the dwarf by force to
tell him all, why and wherefore that he came on message from Sir
Tristram. Now, said King Mark, go where thou wilt, and upon pain of
death that thou say no word that thou spakest with me; so the dwarf
departed from the king.

And that same night that the steven was set betwixt Segwarides’ wife
and Sir Tristram, King Mark armed him, and made him ready, and took two
knights of his counsel with him; and so he rode afore for to abide by
the way for to wait upon Sir Tristram. And as Sir Tristram came riding
upon his way with his spear in his hand, King Mark came hurtling upon
him with his two knights suddenly. And all three smote him with their
spears, and King Mark hurt Sir Tristram on the breast right sore. And
then Sir Tristram feutred his spear, and smote his uncle, King Mark, so
sore, that he rashed him to the earth, and bruised him that he lay
still in a swoon, and long it was or ever he might wield himself. And
then he ran to the one knight, and eft to the other, and smote them to
the cold earth, that they lay still. And therewithal Sir Tristram rode
forth sore wounded to the lady, and found her abiding him at a postern.



CHAPTER XIV. How Sir Tristram lay with the lady, and how her husband
fought with Sir Tristram.

And there she welcomed him fair, and either halsed other in arms, and
so she let put up his horse in the best wise, and then she unarmed him.
And so they supped lightly, and went to bed with great joy and
pleasaunce; and so in his raging he took no keep of his green wound
that King Mark had given him. And so Sir Tristram be-bled both the over
sheet and the nether, and pillows, and head sheet. And within a while
there came one afore, that warned her that her lord was near-hand
within a bow-draught. So she made Sir Tristram to arise, and so he
armed him, and took his horse, and so departed. By then was come
Segwarides, her lord, and when he found her bed troubled and broken,
and went near and beheld it by candle light, then he saw that there had
lain a wounded knight. Ah, false traitress, then he said, why hast thou
betrayed me? And therewithal he swang out a sword, and said: But if
thou tell me who hath been here, here thou shalt die. Ah, my lord,
mercy, said the lady, and held up her hands, saying: Slay me not, and I
shall tell you all who hath been here. Tell anon, said Segwarides, to
me all the truth. Anon for dread she said: Here was Sir Tristram with
me, and by the way as he came to me ward, he was sore wounded. Ah,
false traitress, said Segwarides, where is he become? Sir, she said, he
is armed, and departed on horseback, not yet hence half a mile. Ye say
well, said Segwarides.

Then he armed him lightly, and gat his horse, and rode after Sir
Tristram that rode straightway unto Tintagil. And within a while he
overtook Sir Tristram, and then he bade him, Turn, false traitor
knight. And Sir Tristram anon turned him against him. And therewithal
Segwarides smote Sir Tristram with a spear that it all to-brast; and
then he swang out his sword and smote fast at Sir Tristram. Sir knight,
said Sir Tristram, I counsel you that ye smite no more, howbeit for the
wrongs that I have done you I will forbear you as long as I may. Nay,
said Segwarides, that shall not be, for either thou shalt die or I.

Then Sir Tristram drew out his sword, and hurtled his horse unto him
fiercely, and through the waist of the body he smote Sir Segwarides
that he fell to the earth in a swoon. And so Sir Tristram departed and
left him there. And so he rode unto Tintagil and took his lodging
secretly, for he would not be known that he was hurt. Also Sir
Segwarides’ men rode after their master, whom they found lying in the
field sore wounded, and brought him home on his shield, and there he
lay long or that he were whole, but at the last he recovered. Also King
Mark would not be aknown of that Sir Tristram and he had met that
night. And as for Sir Tristram, he knew not that King Mark had met with
him. And so the king askance came to Sir Tristram, to comfort him as he
lay sick in his bed. But as long as King Mark lived he loved never Sir
Tristram after that; though there was fair speech, love was there none.
And thus it passed many weeks and days, and all was forgiven and
forgotten; for Sir Segwarides durst not have ado with Sir Tristram,
because of his noble prowess, and also because he was nephew unto King
Mark; therefore he let it overslip: for he that hath a privy hurt is
loath to have a shame outward.



