CHAPTER XIX. How after that Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, and Sir
Dinadan had been long in prison they were delivered.

Now leave we off this tale, and speak we of Sir Dinas that had within
the castle a paramour, and she loved another knight better than him.
And so when Sir Dinas went out a-hunting she slipped down by a towel,
and took with her two brachets, and so she yede to the knight that she
loved, and he her again. And when Sir Dinas came home and missed his
paramour and his brachets, then was he the more wrother for his
brachets than for the lady. So then he rode after the knight that had
his paramour, and bade him turn and joust. So Sir Dinas smote him down,
that with the fall he brake his leg and his arm. And then his lady and
paramour cried Sir Dinas mercy, and said she would love him better than
ever she did. Nay, said Sir Dinas, I shall never trust them that once
betrayed me, and therefore, as ye have begun, so end, for I will never
meddle with you. And so Sir Dinas departed, and took his brachets with
him, and so rode to his castle.

Now will we turn unto Sir Launcelot, that was right heavy that he could
never hear no tidings of Sir Tristram, for all this while he was in
prison with Sir Darras, Palomides, and Dinadan. Then Dame Bragwaine
took her leave to go into Cornwall, and Sir Launcelot, Sir Kay, and Sir
Gaheris rode to seek Sir Tristram in the country of Surluse.

Now speaketh this tale of Sir Tristram and of his two fellows, for
every day Sir Palomides brawled and said language against Sir Tristram.
I marvel, said Sir Dinadan, of thee, Sir Palomides, an thou haddest Sir
Tristram here thou wouldst do him no harm; for an a wolf and a sheep
were together in a prison the wolf would suffer the sheep to be in
peace. And wit thou well, said Sir Dinadan, this same is Sir Tristram
at a word, and now must thou do thy best with him, and let see now if
ye can skift it with your hands. Then was Sir Palomides abashed and
said little. Sir Palomides, then said Sir Tristram, I have heard much
of your maugre against me, but I will not meddle with you as at this
time by my will, because I dread the lord of this place that hath us in
governance; for an I dread him not more than I do thee, soon it should
be skift: so they peaced themself. Right so came in a damosel and said:
Knights, be of good cheer, for ye are sure of your lives, and that I
heard say my lord, Sir Darras. Then were they glad all three, for daily
they weened they should have died.

Then soon after this Sir Tristram fell sick that he weened to have
died; then Sir Dinadan wept, and so did Sir Palomides under them both
making great sorrow. So a damosel came in to them and found them
mourning. Then she went unto Sir Darras, and told him how that mighty
knight that bare the black shield was likely to die. That shall not be,
said Sir Darras, for God defend when knights come to me for succour
that I should suffer them to die within my prison. Therefore, said Sir
Darras to the damosel, fetch that knight and his fellows afore me. And
then anon Sir Darras saw Sir Tristram brought afore him. He said: Sir
knight, me repenteth of thy sickness for thou art called a full noble
knight, and so it seemeth by thee; and wit ye well it shall never be
said that Sir Darras shall destroy such a noble knight as thou art in
prison, howbeit that thou hast slain three of my sons whereby I was
greatly aggrieved. But now shalt thou go and thy fellows, and your
harness and horses have been fair and clean kept, and ye shall go where
it liketh you, upon this covenant, that thou, knight, wilt promise me
to be good friend to my sons two that be now alive, and also that thou
tell me thy name. Sir, said he, as for me my name is Sir Tristram de
Liones, and in Cornwall was I born, and nephew I am unto King Mark. And
as for the death of your sons I might not do withal, for an they had
been the next kin that I have I might have done none otherwise. And if
I had slain them by treason or treachery I had been worthy to have
died. All this I consider, said Sir Darras, that all that ye did was by
force of knighthood, and that was the cause I would not put you to
death. But sith ye be Sir Tristram, the good knight, I pray you
heartily to be my good friend and to my sons. Sir, said Sir Tristram, I
promise you by the faith of my body, ever while I live I will do you
service, for ye have done to us but as a natural knight ought to do.
Then Sir Tristram reposed him there till that he was amended of his
sickness; and when he was big and strong they took their leave, and
every knight took their horses, and so departed and rode together till
they came to a cross way. Now fellows, said Sir Tristram, here will we
depart in sundry ways. And because Sir Dinadan had the first adventure
of him I will begin.



CHAPTER XL. How Sir Dinadan rescued a lady from Sir Breuse Saunce Pité,
and how Sir Tristram received a shield of Morgan le Fay.

So as Sir Dinadan rode by a well he found a lady making great dole.
What aileth you? said Sir Dinadan. Sir knight, said the lady, I am the
wofullest lady of the world, for within these five days here came a
knight called Sir Breuse Saunce Pité, and he slew mine own brother, and
ever since he hath kept me at his own will, and of all men in the world
I hate him most; and therefore I require you of knighthood to avenge
me, for he will not tarry, but be here anon. Let him come, said Sir
Dinadan, and because of honour of all women I will do my part. With
this came Sir Breuse, and when he saw a knight with his lady he was
wood wroth. And then he said: Sir knight, keep thee from me. So they
hurtled together as thunder, and either smote other passing sore, but
Sir Dinadan put him through the shoulder a grievous wound, and or ever
Sir Dinadan might turn him Sir Breuse was gone and fled. Then the lady
prayed him to bring her to a castle there beside but four mile thence;
and so Sir Dinadan brought her there, and she was welcome, for the lord
of that castle was her uncle; and so Sir Dinadan rode his way upon his
adventure.

Now turn we this tale unto Sir Tristram, that by adventure he came to a
castle to ask lodging, wherein was Queen Morgan le Fay; and so when Sir
Tristram was let into that castle he had good cheer all that night. And
upon the morn when he would have departed the queen said: Wit ye well
ye shall not depart lightly, for ye are here as a prisoner. Jesu
defend! said Sir Tristram, for I was but late a prisoner. Fair knight,
said the queen, ye shall abide with me till that I wit what ye are and
from whence ye come. And ever the queen would set Sir Tristram on her
own side, and her paramour on the other side. And ever Queen Morgan
would behold Sir Tristram, and thereat the knight was jealous, and was
in will suddenly to have run upon Sir Tristram with a sword, but he
left it for shame. Then the queen said to Sir Tristram: Tell me thy
name, and I shall suffer you to depart when ye will. Upon that covenant
I tell you my name is Sir Tristram de Liones. Ah, said Morgan le Fay,
an I had wist that, thou shouldst not have departed so soon as thou
shalt. But sithen I have made a promise I will hold it, with that thou
wilt promise me to bear upon thee a shield that I shall deliver thee,
unto the castle of the Hard Rock, where King Arthur had cried a great
tournament, and there I pray you that ye will be, and to do for me as
much deeds of arms as ye may do. For at the Castle of Maidens, Sir
Tristram, ye did marvellous deeds of arms as ever I heard knight do.
Madam, said Sir Tristram, let me see the shield that I shall bear. Then
the shield was brought forth, and the field was goldish, with a king
and a queen therein painted, and a knight standing above them, [one
foot] upon the king’s head, and the other upon the queen’s. Madam, said
Sir Tristram, this is a fair shield and a mighty; but what signifieth
this king and this queen, and the knight standing upon both their
heads? I shall tell you, said Morgan le Fay, it signifieth King Arthur
and Queen Guenever, and a knight who holdeth them both in bondage and
in servage. Who is that knight? said Sir Tristram. That shall ye not
wit as at this time, said the queen. But as the French book saith,
Queen Morgan loved Sir Launcelot best, and ever she desired him, and he
would never love her nor do nothing at her request, and therefore she
held many knights together for to have taken him by strength. And
because she deemed that Sir Launcelot loved Queen Guenever paramour,
and she him again, therefore Queen Morgan le Fay ordained that shield
to put Sir Launcelot to a rebuke, to that intent that King Arthur might
understand the love between them. Then Sir Tristram took that shield
and promised her to bear it at the tournament at the Castle of the Hard
Rock. But Sir Tristram knew not that that shield was ordained against
Sir Launcelot, but afterward he knew it.



