CHAPTER XII. How King Pellinore rode after the lady and the knight that
led her away, and how a lady desired help of him, and how he fought
with two knights for that lady, of whom he slew the one at the first
stroke.

Then King Pellinore armed him and mounted upon his horse, and rode more
than a pace after the lady that the knight led away. And as he rode in
a forest, he saw in a valley a damosel sit by a well, and a wounded
knight in her arms, and Pellinore saluted her. And when she was ware of
him, she cried overloud, Help me, knight; for Christ’s sake, King
Pellinore. And he would not tarry, he was so eager in his quest, and
ever she cried an hundred times after help. When she saw he would not
abide, she prayed unto God to send him as much need of help as she had,
and that he might feel it or he died. So, as the book telleth, the
knight there died that there was wounded, wherefore the lady for pure
sorrow slew herself with his sword. As King Pellinore rode in that
valley he met with a poor man, a labourer. Sawest thou not, said
Pellinore, a knight riding and leading away a lady? Yea, said the man,
I saw that knight, and the lady that made great dole; and yonder
beneath in a valley there shall ye see two pavilions, and one of the
knights of the pavilions challenged that lady of that knight, and said
she was his cousin near, wherefore he should lead her no farther. And
so they waged battle in that quarrel, the one said he would have her by
force, and the other said he would have the rule of her, by cause he
was her kinsman, and would lead her to her kin. For this quarrel he
left them fighting. And if ye will ride a pace ye shall find them
fighting, and the lady was beleft with the two squires in the
pavilions. God thank thee, said King Pellinore.

Then he rode a wallop till he had a sight of the two pavilions, and the
two knights fighting. Anon he rode unto the pavilions, and saw the lady
that was his quest, and said, Fair lady, ye must go with me unto the
court of King Arthur. Sir knight, said the two squires that were with
her, yonder are two knights that fight for this lady, go thither and
depart them, and be agreed with them, and then may ye have her at your
pleasure. Ye say well, said King Pellinore. And anon he rode betwixt
them, and departed them, and asked them the causes why that they
fought? Sir knight, said the one, I shall tell you, this lady is my
kinswoman nigh, mine aunt’s daughter, and when I heard her complain
that she was with him maugre her head, I waged battle to fight with
him. Sir knight, said the other, whose name was Hontzlake of Wentland,
and this lady I gat by my prowess of arms this day at Arthur’s court.
That is untruly said, said King Pellinore, for ye came in suddenly
there as we were at the high feast, and took away this lady or any man
might make him ready; and therefore it was my quest to bring her again
and you both, or else the one of us to abide in the field; therefore
the lady shall go with me, or I will die for it, for I have promised it
King Arthur. And therefore fight ye no more, for none of you shall have
no part of her at this time; and if ye list to fight for her, fight
with me, and I will defend her. Well, said the knights, make you ready,
and we shall assail you with all our power. And as King Pellinore would
have put his horse from them, Sir Hontzlake rove his horse through with
a sword, and said: Now art thou on foot as well as we are. When King
Pellinore espied that his horse was slain, lightly he leapt from his
horse and pulled out his sword, and put his shield afore him, and said,
Knight, keep well thy head, for thou shalt have a buffet for the
slaying of my horse. So King Pellinore gave him such a stroke upon the
helm that he clave the head down to the chin, that he fell to the earth
dead.



CHAPTER XIII. How King Pellinore gat the lady and brought her to
Camelot to the court of King Arthur.

And then he turned him to the other knight, that was sore wounded. But
when he saw the other’s buffet, he would not fight, but kneeled down
and said, Take my cousin the lady with you at your request, and I
require you, as ye be a true knight, put her to no shame nor villainy.
What, said King Pellinore, will ye not fight for her? No, sir, said the
knight, I will not fight with such a knight of prowess as ye be. Well,
said Pellinore, ye say well; I promise you she shall have no villainy
by me, as I am true knight; but now me lacketh an horse, said
Pellinore, but I will have Hontzlake’s horse. Ye shall not need, said
the knight, for I shall give you such an horse as shall please you, so
that you will lodge with me, for it is near night. I will well, said
King Pellinore, abide with you all night. And there he had with him
right good cheer, and fared of the best with passing good wine, and had
merry rest that night. And on the morn he heard a mass and dined; and
then was brought him a fair bay courser, and King Pellinore’s saddle
set upon him. Now, what shall I call you? said the knight, inasmuch as
ye have my cousin at your desire of your quest. Sir, I shall tell you,
my name is King Pellinore of the Isles and knight of the Table Round.
Now I am glad, said the knight, that such a noble man shall have the
rule of my cousin. Now, what is your name? said Pellinore, I pray you
tell me. Sir, my name is Sir Meliot of Logurs, and this lady my cousin
hight Nimue, and the knight that was in the other pavilion is my sworn
brother, a passing good knight, and his name is Brian of the Isles, and
he is full loath to do wrong, and full loath to fight with any man, but
if he be sore sought on, so that for shame he may not leave it. It is
marvel, said Pellinore, that he will not have ado with me. Sir, he will
not have ado with no man but if it be at his request. Bring him to the
court, said Pellinore, one of these days. Sir, we will come together.
And ye shall be welcome, said Pellinore, to the court of King Arthur,
and greatly allowed for your coming. And so he departed with the lady,
and brought her to Camelot.

So as they rode in a valley it was full of stones, and there the lady’s
horse stumbled and threw her down, that her arm was sore bruised and
near she swooned for pain. Alas! sir, said the lady, mine arm is out of
lithe, wherethrough I must needs rest me. Ye shall well, said King
Pellinore. And so he alighted under a fair tree where was fair grass,
and he put his horse thereto, and so laid him under the tree and slept
till it was nigh night. And when he awoke he would have ridden. Sir,
said the lady, it is so dark that ye may as well ride backward as
forward. So they abode still and made there their lodging. Then Sir
Pellinore put off his armour; then a little afore midnight they heard
the trotting of an horse. Be ye still, said King Pellinore, for we
shall hear of some adventure.



