CHAPTER IX. Of the battle between King Arthur and Accolon.

And then they dressed them on both parties of the field, and let their
horses run so fast that either smote other in the midst of the shield
with their spear-heads, that both horse and man went to the earth; and
then they started up both, and pulled out their swords. The meanwhile
that they were thus at the battle, came the Damosel of the Lake into
the field, that put Merlin under the stone; and she came thither for
love of King Arthur, for she knew how Morgan le Fay had so ordained
that King Arthur should have been slain that day, and therefore she
came to save his life. And so they went eagerly to the battle, and gave
many great strokes, but always Arthur’s sword bit not like Accolon’s
sword; but for the most part, every stroke that Accolon gave he wounded
sore Arthur, that it was marvel he stood, and always his blood fell
from him fast.

When Arthur beheld the ground so sore be-bled he was dismayed, and then
he deemed treason that his sword was changed; for his sword bit not
steel as it was wont to do, therefore he dreaded him sore to be dead,
for ever him seemed that the sword in Accolon’s hand was Excalibur, for
at every stroke that Accolon struck he drew blood on Arthur. Now,
knight, said Accolon unto Arthur, keep thee well from me; but Arthur
answered not again, and gave him such a buffet on the helm that it made
him to stoop, nigh falling down to the earth. Then Sir Accolon withdrew
him a little, and came on with Excalibur on high, and smote Sir Arthur
such a buffet that he fell nigh to the earth. Then were they wroth
both, and gave each other many sore strokes, but always Sir Arthur lost
so much blood that it was marvel he stood on his feet, but he was so
full of knighthood that knightly he endured the pain. And Sir Accolon
lost not a deal of blood, therefore he waxed passing light, and Sir
Arthur was passing feeble, and weened verily to have died; but for all
that he made countenance as though he might endure, and held Accolon as
short as he might. But Accolon was so bold because of Excalibur that he
waxed passing hardy. But all men that beheld him said they saw never
knight fight so well as Arthur did considering the blood that he bled.
So was all the people sorry for him, but the two brethren would not
accord. Then always they fought together as fierce knights, and Sir
Arthur withdrew him a little for to rest him, and Sir Accolon called
him to battle and said, It is no time for me to suffer thee to rest.
And therewith he came fiercely upon Arthur, and Sir Arthur was wroth
for the blood that he had lost, and smote Accolon on high upon the
helm, so mightily, that he made him nigh to fall to the earth; and
therewith Arthur’s sword brast at the cross, and fell in the grass
among the blood, and the pommel and the sure handles he held in his
hands. When Sir Arthur saw that, he was in great fear to die, but
always he held up his shield and lost no ground, nor bated no cheer.



CHAPTER X. How King Arthur’s sword that he fought with brake, and how
he recovered of Accolon his own sword Excalibur, and overcame his
enemy.

Then Sir Accolon began with words of treason, and said, Knight, thou
art overcome, and mayst not endure, and also thou art weaponless, and
thou hast lost much of thy blood, and I am full loath to slay thee,
therefore yield thee to me as recreant. Nay, said Sir Arthur, I may not
so, for I have promised to do the battle to the uttermost by the faith
of my body, while me lasteth the life, and therefore I had liefer to
die with honour than to live with shame; and if it were possible for me
to die an hundred times, I had liefer to die so oft than yield me to
thee; for though I lack weapon, I shall lack no worship, and if thou
slay me weaponless that shall be thy shame. Well, said Accolon, as for
the shame I will not spare, now keep thee from me, for thou art but a
dead man. And therewith Accolon gave him such a stroke that he fell
nigh to the earth, and would have had Arthur to have cried him mercy.
But Sir Arthur pressed unto Accolon with his shield, and gave him with
the pommel in his hand such a buffet that he went three strides aback.

When the Damosel of the Lake beheld Arthur, how full of prowess his
body was, and the false treason that was wrought for him to have had
him slain, she had great pity that so good a knight and such a man of
worship should so be destroyed. And at the next stroke Sir Accolon
struck him such a stroke that by the damosel’s enchantment the sword
Excalibur fell out of Accolon’s hand to the earth. And therewithal Sir
Arthur lightly leapt to it, and gat it in his hand, and forthwithal he
knew that it was his sword Excalibur, and said, Thou hast been from me
all too long, and much damage hast thou done me; and therewith he
espied the scabbard hanging by his side, and suddenly he sterte to him
and pulled the scabbard from him, and threw it from him as far as he
might throw it. O knight, said Arthur, this day hast thou done me great
damage with this sword; now are ye come unto your death, for I shall
not warrant you but ye shall as well be rewarded with this sword, or
ever we depart, as thou hast rewarded me; for much pain have ye made me
to endure, and much blood have I lost. And therewith Sir Arthur rushed
on him with all his might and pulled him to the earth, and then rushed
off his helm, and gave him such a buffet on the head that the blood
came out at his ears, his nose, and his mouth. Now will I slay thee,
said Arthur. Slay me ye may well, said Accolon, an it please you, for
ye are the best knight that ever I found, and I see well that God is
with you. But for I promised to do this battle, said Accolon, to the
uttermost, and never to be recreant while I lived, therefore shall I
never yield me with my mouth, but God do with my body what he will.
Then Sir Arthur remembered him, and thought he should have seen this
knight. Now tell me, said Arthur, or I will slay thee, of what country
art thou, and of what court? Sir Knight, said Sir Accolon, I am of the
court of King Arthur, and my name is Accolon of Gaul. Then was Arthur
more dismayed than he was beforehand; for then he remembered him of his
sister Morgan le Fay, and of the enchantment of the ship. O sir knight,
said he, I pray you tell me who gave you this sword, and by whom ye had
it.



