CHAPTER XXIII. How Sir Pelleas loved no more Ettard by means of the
Damosel of the Lake, whom he loved ever after.

Sir knight Pelleas, said the Damosel of the Lake, take your horse and
come forth with me out of this country, and ye shall love a lady that
shall love you. I will well, said Sir Pelleas, for this Lady Ettard
hath done me great despite and shame, and there he told her the
beginning and ending, and how he had purposed never to have arisen till
that he had been dead. And now such grace God hath sent me, that I hate
her as much as ever I loved her, thanked be our Lord Jesus! Thank me,
said the Damosel of the Lake. Anon Sir Pelleas armed him, and took his
horse, and commanded his men to bring after his pavilions and his stuff
where the Damosel of the Lake would assign. So the Lady Ettard died for
sorrow, and the Damosel of the Lake rejoiced Sir Pelleas, and loved
together during their life days.



CHAPTER XXIV. How Sir Marhaus rode with the damosel, and how he came to
the Duke of the South Marches.

Now turn we unto Sir Marhaus, that rode with the damosel of thirty
winter of age, southward. And so they came into a deep forest, and by
fortune they were nighted, and rode long in a deep way, and at the last
they came unto a courtelage, and there they asked harbour. But the man
of the courtelage would not lodge them for no treatise that they could
treat, but thus much the good man said, An ye will take the adventure
of your lodging, I shall bring you where ye shall be lodged. What
adventure is that that I shall have for my lodging? said Sir Marhaus.
Ye shall wit when ye come there, said the good man. Sir, what adventure
so it be, bring me thither I pray thee, said Sir Marhaus; for I am
weary, my damosel, and my horse. So the good man went and opened the
gate, and within an hour he brought him unto a fair castle, and then
the poor man called the porter, and anon he was let into the castle,
and so he told the lord how he brought him a knight errant and a
damosel that would be lodged with him. Let him in, said the lord, it
may happen he shall repent that they took their lodging here.

So Sir Marhaus was let in with torchlight, and there was a goodly sight
of young men that welcomed him. And then his horse was led into the
stable, and he and the damosel were brought into the hall, and there
stood a mighty duke and many goodly men about him. Then this lord asked
him what he hight, and from whence he came, and with whom he dwelt.
Sir, he said, I am a knight of King Arthur’s and knight of the Table
Round, and my name is Sir Marhaus, and born I am in Ireland. And then
said the duke to him, That me sore repenteth: the cause is this, for I
love not thy lord nor none of thy fellows of the Table Round; and
therefore ease thyself this night as well as thou mayest, for as
to-morn I and my six sons shall match with you. Is there no remedy but
that I must have ado with you and your six sons at once? said Sir
Marhaus. No, said the duke, for this cause I made mine avow, for Sir
Gawaine slew my seven sons in a recounter, therefore I made mine avow,
there should never knight of King Arthur’s court lodge with me, or come
thereas I might have ado with him, but that I would have a revenging of
my sons’ death. What is your name? said Sir Marhaus; I require you tell
me, an it please you. Wit thou well I am the Duke of South Marches. Ah,
said Sir Marhaus, I have heard say that ye have been long time a great
foe unto my lord Arthur and to his knights. That shall ye feel to-morn,
said the duke. Shall I have ado with you? said Sir Marhaus. Yea, said
the duke, thereof shalt thou not choose, and therefore take you to your
chamber, and ye shall have all that to you longeth. So Sir Marhaus
departed and was led to a chamber, and his damosel was led unto her
chamber. And on the morn the duke sent unto Sir Marhaus and bade make
him ready. And so Sir Marhaus arose and armed him, and then there was a
mass sung afore him, and brake his fast, and so mounted on horseback in
the court of the castle where they should do the battle. So there was
the duke all ready on horseback, clean armed, and his six sons by him,
and everych had a spear in his hand, and so they encountered, whereas
the duke and his two sons brake their spears upon him, but Sir Marhaus
held up his spear and touched none of them.



CHAPTER XXV. How Sir Marhaus fought with the duke and his four sons and
made them to yield them.

Then came the four sons by couple, and two of them brake their spears,
and so did the other two. And all this while Sir Marhaus touched them
not. Then Sir Marhaus ran to the duke, and smote him with his spear
that horse and man fell to the earth, and so he served his sons; and
then Sir Marhaus alighted down and bade the duke yield him or else he
would slay him. And then some of his sons recovered, and would have set
upon Sir Marhaus; then Sir Marhaus said to the duke, Cease thy sons, or
else I will do the uttermost to you all. Then the duke saw he might not
escape the death, he cried to his sons, and charged them to yield them
to Sir Marhaus; and they kneeled all down and put the pommels of their
swords to the knight, and so he received them. And then they helped up
their father, and so by their cominal assent promised to Sir Marhaus
never to be foes unto King Arthur, and thereupon at Whitsuntide after
to come, he and his sons, and put them in the king’s grace.

Then Sir Marhaus departed, and within two days his damosel brought him
whereas was a great tournament that the Lady de Vawse had cried. And
who that did best should have a rich circlet of gold worth a thousand
besants. And there Sir Marhaus did so nobly that he was renowned, and
had sometime down forty knights, and so the circlet of gold was
rewarded him. Then he departed from them with great worship; and so
within seven nights his damosel brought him to an earl’s place, his
name was the Earl Fergus, that after was Sir Tristram’s knight; and
this earl was but a young man, and late come into his lands, and there
was a giant fast by him that hight Taulurd, and he had another brother
in Cornwall that hight Taulas, that Sir Tristram slew when he was out
of his mind. So this earl made his complaint unto Sir Marhaus, that
there was a giant by him that destroyed all his lands, and how he durst
nowhere ride nor go for him. Sir, said the knight, whether useth he to
fight on horseback or on foot? Nay, said the earl, there may no horse
bear him. Well, said Sir Marhaus, then will I fight with him on foot;
so on the morn Sir Marhaus prayed the earl that one of his men might
bring him whereas the giant was; and so he was, for he saw him sit
under a tree of holly, and many clubs of iron and gisarms about him. So
this knight dressed him to the giant, putting his shield afore him, and
the giant took an iron club in his hand, and at the first stroke he
clave Sir Marhaus’ shield in two pieces. And there he was in great
peril, for the giant was a wily fighter, but at last Sir Marhaus smote
off his right arm above the elbow.

Then the giant fled and the knight after him, and so he drove him into
a water, but the giant was so high that he might not wade after him.
And then Sir Marhaus made the Earl Fergus’ man to fetch him stones, and
with those stones the knight gave the giant many sore knocks, till at
the last he made him fall down into the water, and so was he there
dead. Then Sir Marhaus went unto the giant’s castle, and there he
delivered twenty-four ladies and twelve knights out of the giant’s
prison, and there he had great riches without number, so that the days
of his life he was never poor man. Then he returned to the Earl Fergus,
the which thanked him greatly, and would have given him half his lands,
but he would none take. So Sir Marhaus dwelled with the earl nigh half
a year, for he was sore bruised with the giant, and at the last he took
his leave. And as he rode by the way, he met with Sir Gawaine and Sir
Uwaine, and so by adventure he met with four knights of Arthur’s court,
the first was Sir Sagramore le Desirous, Sir Osanna, Sir Dodinas le
Savage, and Sir Felot of Listinoise; and there Sir Marhaus with one
spear smote down these four knights, and hurt them sore. So he departed
to meet at his day aforeset.



