CHAPTER VII. How Sir Launcelot met with the damosel named Male disant,
and named her the Damosel Bienpensant.

So then they took their horses and rode forth a pace after Sir
Launcelot. And within two mile they overtook him, and saluted him, and
thanked him, and the damosel cried Sir Launcelot mercy of her evil deed
and saying: For now I know the flower of all knighthood is departed
even between Sir Tristram and you. For God knoweth, said the damosel,
that I have sought you my lord, Sir Launcelot, and Sir Tristram long,
and now I thank God I have met with you; and once at Camelot I met with
Sir Tristram, and there he rescued this black shield with the white
hand holding a naked sword that Sir Breuse Saunce Pité had taken from
me. Now, fair damosel, said Sir Launcelot, who told you my name? Sir,
said she, there came a damosel from a knight that ye fought withal at
the bridge, and she told me your name was Sir Launcelot du Lake. Blame
have she then, said Sir Launcelot, but her lord, Sir Nerovens, hath
told her. But, damosel, said Sir Launcelot, upon this covenant I will
ride with you, so that ye will not rebuke this knight Sir La Cote Male
Taile no more; for he is a good knight, and I doubt not he shall prove
a noble knight, and for his sake and pity that he should not be
destroyed I followed him to succour him in this great need. Ah, Jesu
thank you, said the damosel, for now I will say unto you and to him
both, I rebuked him never for no hate that I hated him, but for great
love that I had to him. For ever I supposed that he had been too young
and too tender to take upon him these adventures. And therefore by my
will I would have driven him away for jealousy that I had of his life,
for it may be no young knight’s deed that shall enchieve this adventure
to the end. Pardieu, said Sir Launcelot, it is well said, and where ye
are called the Damosel Maledisant I will call you the Damosel
Bienpensant.

And so they rode forth a great while unto they came to the border of
the country of Surluse, and there they found a fair village with a
strong bridge like a fortress. And when Sir Launcelot and they were at
the bridge there stert forth afore them of gentlemen and yeomen many,
that said: Fair lords, ye may not pass this bridge and this fortress
because of that black shield that I see one of you bear, and therefore
there shall not pass but one of you at once; therefore choose you which
of you shall enter within this bridge first. Then Sir Launcelot
proffered himself first to enter within this bridge. Sir, said La Cote
Male Taile, I beseech you let me enter within this fortress, and if I
may speed well I will send for you, and if it happened that I be slain,
there it goeth. And if so be that I am a prisoner taken, then may ye
rescue me. I am loath, said Sir Launcelot, to let you pass this
passage. Sir, said La Cote Male Taile, I pray you let me put my body in
this adventure. Now go your way, said Sir Launcelot, and Jesu be your
speed.

So he entered, and anon there met with him two brethren, the one hight
Sir Plaine de Force, and the other hight Sir Plaine de Amours. And anon
they met with Sir La Cote Male Taile; and first La Cote Male Taile
smote down Plaine de Force, and after he smote down Plaine de Amours;
and then they dressed them to their shields and swords, and bade La
Cote Male Taile alight, and so he did; and there was dashing and
foining with swords, and so they began to assail full hard La Cote Male
Taile, and many great wounds they gave him upon his head, and upon his
breast, and upon his shoulders. And as he might ever among he gave sad
strokes again. And then the two brethren traced and traversed for to be
of both hands of Sir La Cote Male Taile, but he by fine force and
knightly prowess gat them afore him. And then when he felt himself so
wounded, then he doubled his strokes, and gave them so many wounds that
he felled them to the earth, and would have slain them had they not
yielded them. And right so Sir La Cote Male Taile took the best horse
that there was of them three, and so rode forth his way to the other
fortress and bridge; and there he met with the third brother whose name
was Sir Plenorius, a full noble knight, and there they jousted
together, and either smote other down, horse and man, to the earth. And
then they avoided their horses, and dressed their shields, and drew
their swords, and gave many sad strokes, and one while the one knight
was afore on the bridge, and another while the other. And thus they
fought two hours and more, and never rested. And ever Sir Launcelot and
the damosel beheld them. Alas, said the damosel, my knight fighteth
passing sore and over long. Now may ye see, said Sir Launcelot, that he
is a noble knight, for to consider his first battle, and his grievous
wounds; and even forthwithal so wounded as he is, it is marvel that he
may endure this long battle with that good knight.



CHAPTER VIII. How La Cote Male Taile was taken prisoner, and after
rescued by Sir Launcelot, and how Sir Launcelot overcame four brethren.

This meanwhile Sir La Cote Male Taile sank right down upon the earth,
what for-wounded and what for-bled he might not stand. Then the other
knight had pity of him, and said: Fair young knight, dismay you not,
for had ye been fresh when ye met with me, as I was, I wot well that I
should not have endured so long as ye have done; and therefore for your
noble deeds of arms I shall show to you kindness and gentleness in all
that I may. And forthwithal this noble knight, Sir Plenorius, took him
up in his arms, and led him into his tower. And then he commanded him
the wine, and made to search him and to stop his bleeding wounds. Sir,
said La Cote Male Taile, withdraw you from me, and hie you to yonder
bridge again, for there will meet with you another manner knight than
ever was I. Why, said Plenorius, is there another manner knight behind
of your fellowship? Yea, said La Cote Male Taile, there is a much
better knight than I am. What is his name? said Plenorius. Ye shall not
know for me, said La Cote Male Taile. Well, said the knight, he shall
be encountered withal whatsomever he be.

Then Sir Plenorius heard a knight call that said: Sir Plenorius, where
art thou? either thou must deliver me the prisoner that thou hast led
unto thy tower, or else come and do battle with me. Then Plenorius gat
his horse, and came with a spear in his hand walloping toward Sir
Launcelot; and then they began to feutre their spears, and came
together as thunder, and smote either other so mightily that their
horses fell down under them. And then they avoided their horses, and
pulled out their swords, and like two bulls they lashed together with
great strokes and foins; but ever Sir Launcelot recovered ground upon
him, and Sir Plenorius traced to have gone about him. But Sir Launcelot
would not suffer that, but bare him backer and backer, till he came
nigh his tower gate. And then said Sir Launcelot: I know thee well for
a good knight, but wit thou well thy life and death is in my hand, and
therefore yield thee to me, and thy prisoner. The other answered no
word, but struck mightily upon Sir Launcelot’s helm, that the fire
sprang out of his eyes. Then Sir Launcelot doubled his strokes so
thick, and smote at him so mightily, that he made him kneel upon his
knees. And therewith Sir Launcelot leapt upon him, and pulled him
grovelling down. Then Sir Plenorius yielded him, and his tower, and all
his prisoners at his will.

Then Sir Launcelot received him and took his troth; and then he rode to
the other bridge, and there Sir Launcelot jousted with other three of
his brethren, the one hight Pillounes, and the other hight Pellogris,
and the third Sir Pellandris. And first upon horseback Sir Launcelot
smote them down, and afterward he beat them on foot, and made them to
yield them unto him; and then he returned unto Sir Plenorius, and there
he found in his prison King Carados of Scotland, and many other
knights, and all they were delivered. And then Sir La Cote Male Taile
came to Sir Launcelot, and then Sir Launcelot would have given him all
these fortresses and these bridges. Nay, said La Cote Male Taile, I
will not have Sir Plenorius’ livelihood; with that he will grant you,
my lord Sir Launcelot, to come unto King Arthur’s court, and to be his
knight, and all his brethren, I will pray you, my lord, to let him have
his livelihood. I will well, said Sir Launcelot, with this that he will
come to the court of King Arthur and become his man, and his brethren
five. And as for you, Sir Plenorius, I will undertake, said Sir
Launcelot, at the next feast, so there be a place voided, that ye shall
be Knight of the Round Table. Sir, said Plenorius, at the next feast of
Pentecost I will be at Arthur’s court, and at that time I will be
guided and ruled as King Arthur and ye will have me. Then Sir Launcelot
and Sir La Cote Male Taile reposed them there, unto the time that Sir
La Cote Male Taile was whole of his wounds, and there they had merry
cheer, and good rest, and many good games, and there were many fair
ladies.



