CHAPTER XIV. How on the way he heard two knights, as he lay by night in
a valley, and of their adventures.

And therewith he armed him. So right even afore him there met two
knights, the one came froward Camelot, and the other from the north,
and either saluted other. What tidings at Camelot? said the one. By my
head, said the other, there have I been and espied the court of King
Arthur, and there is such a fellowship they may never be broken, and
well-nigh all the world holdeth with Arthur, for there is the flower of
chivalry. Now for this cause I am riding into the north, to tell our
chieftains of the fellowship that is withholden with King Arthur. As
for that, said the other knight, I have brought a remedy with me, that
is the greatest poison that ever ye heard speak of, and to Camelot will
I with it, for we have a friend right nigh King Arthur, and well
cherished, that shall poison King Arthur; for so he hath promised our
chieftains, and received great gifts for to do it. Beware, said the
other knight, of Merlin, for he knoweth all things by the devil’s
craft. Therefore will I not let it, said the knight. And so they
departed asunder. Anon after Pellinore made him ready, and his lady,
[and] rode toward Camelot; and as they came by the well there as the
wounded knight was and the lady, there he found the knight, and the
lady eaten with lions or wild beasts, all save the head, wherefore he
made great sorrow, and wept passing sore, and said, Alas! her life
might I have saved; but I was so fierce in my quest, therefore I would
not abide. Wherefore make ye such dole? said the lady. I wot not, said
Pellinore, but my heart mourneth sore of the death of her, for she was
a passing fair lady and a young. Now, will ye do by mine advice? said
the lady, take this knight and let him be buried in an hermitage, and
then take the lady’s head and bear it with you unto Arthur. So King
Pellinore took this dead knight on his shoulders, and brought him to
the hermitage, and charged the hermit with the corpse, that service
should be done for the soul; and take his harness for your pain. It
shall be done, said the hermit, as I will answer unto God.



CHAPTER XV. How when he was come to Camelot he was sworn upon a book to
tell the truth of his quest.

And therewith they departed, and came there as the head of the lady lay
with a fair yellow hair that grieved King Pellinore passingly sore when
he looked on it, for much he cast his heart on the visage. And so by
noon they came to Camelot; and the king and the queen were passing fain
of his coming to the court. And there he was made to swear upon the
Four Evangelists, to tell the truth of his quest from the one to the
other. Ah! Sir Pellinore, said Queen Guenever, ye were greatly to blame
that ye saved not this lady’s life. Madam, said Pellinore, ye were
greatly to blame an ye would not save your own life an ye might, but,
save your pleasure, I was so furious in my quest that I would not
abide, and that repenteth me, and shall the days of my life. Truly,
said Merlin, ye ought sore to repent it, for that lady was your own
daughter begotten on the lady of the Rule, and that knight that was
dead was her love, and should have wedded her, and he was a right good
knight of a young man, and would have proved a good man, and to this
court was he coming, and his name was Sir Miles of the Launds, and a
knight came behind him and slew him with a spear, and his name is
Loraine le Savage, a false knight and a coward; and she for great
sorrow and dole slew herself with his sword, and her name was Eleine.
And because ye would not abide and help her, ye shall see your best
friend fail you when ye be in the greatest distress that ever ye were
or shall be. And that penance God hath ordained you for that deed, that
he that ye shall most trust to of any man alive, he shall leave you
there ye shall be slain. Me forthinketh, said King Pellinore, that this
shall me betide, but God may fordo well destiny.

Thus, when the quest was done of the white hart, the which followed Sir
Gawaine; and the quest of the brachet, followed of Sir Tor, Pellinore’s
son; and the quest of the lady that the knight took away, the which
King Pellinore at that time followed; then the king stablished all his
knights, and them that were of lands not rich he gave them lands, and
charged them never to do outrageousity nor murder, and always to flee
treason; also, by no means to be cruel, but to give mercy unto him that
asketh mercy, upon pain of forfeiture of their worship and lordship of
King Arthur for evermore; and always to do ladies, damosels, and
gentlewomen succour, upon pain of death. Also, that no man take no
battles in a wrongful quarrel for no law, nor for no world’s goods.
Unto this were all the knights sworn of the Table Round, both old and
young. And every year were they sworn at the high feast of Pentecost.

Explicit the Wedding of King Arthur. Sequitur quartus liber.



BOOK IV.



CHAPTER I. How Merlin was assotted and doted on one of the ladies of
the lake, and how he was shut in a rock under a stone and there died.

So after these quests of Sir Gawaine, Sir Tor, and King Pellinore, it
fell so that Merlin fell in a dotage on the damosel that King Pellinore
brought to court, and she was one of the damosels of the lake, that
hight Nimue. But Merlin would let her have no rest, but always he would
be with her. And ever she made Merlin good cheer till she had learned
of him all manner thing that she desired; and he was assotted upon her,
that he might not be from her. So on a time he told King Arthur that he
should not dure long, but for all his crafts he should be put in the
earth quick. And so he told the king many things that should befall,
but always he warned the king to keep well his sword and the scabbard,
for he told him how the sword and the scabbard should be stolen by a
woman from him that he most trusted. Also he told King Arthur that he
should miss him,—Yet had ye liefer than all your lands to have me
again. Ah, said the king, since ye know of your adventure, purvey for
it, and put away by your crafts that misadventure. Nay, said Merlin, it
will not be; so he departed from the king. And within a while the
Damosel of the Lake departed, and Merlin went with her evermore
wheresomever she went. And ofttimes Merlin would have had her privily
away by his subtle crafts; then she made him to swear that he should
never do none enchantment upon her if he would have his will. And so he
sware; so she and Merlin went over the sea unto the land of Benwick,
whereas King Ban was king that had great war against King Claudas, and
there Merlin spake with King Ban’s wife, a fair lady and a good, and
her name was Elaine, and there he saw young Launcelot. There the queen
made great sorrow for the mortal war that King Claudas made on her lord
and on her lands. Take none heaviness, said Merlin, for this same child
within this twenty year shall revenge you on King Claudas, that all
Christendom shall speak of it; and this same child shall be the most
man of worship of the world, and his first name is Galahad, that know I
well, said Merlin, and since ye have confirmed him Launcelot. That is
truth, said the queen, his first name was Galahad. O Merlin, said the
queen, shall I live to see my son such a man of prowess? Yea, lady, on
my peril ye shall see it, and live many winters after.

And so, soon after, the lady and Merlin departed, and by the way Merlin
showed her many wonders, and came into Cornwall. And always Merlin lay
about the lady to have her maidenhood, and she was ever passing weary
of him, and fain would have been delivered of him, for she was afeard
of him because he was a devil’s son, and she could not beskift him by
no mean. And so on a time it happed that Merlin showed to her in a rock
whereas was a great wonder, and wrought by enchantment, that went under
a great stone. So by her subtle working she made Merlin to go under
that stone to let her wit of the marvels there; but she wrought so
there for him that he came never out for all the craft he could do. And
so she departed and left Merlin.



