CHAPTER III. How King Arthur held a parliament at York, and how he
ordained the realm should be governed in his absence.

Now leave we of Lucius the Emperor and speak we of King Arthur, that
commanded all them of his retinue to be ready at the utas of Hilary for
to hold a parliament at York. And at that parliament was concluded to
arrest all the navy of the land, and to be ready within fifteen days at
Sandwich, and there he showed to his army how he purposed to conquer
the empire which he ought to have of right. And there he ordained two
governors of this realm, that is to say, Sir Baudwin of Britain, for to
counsel to the best, and Sir Constantine, son to Sir Cador of Cornwall,
which after the death of Arthur was king of this realm. And in the
presence of all his lords he resigned the rule of the realm and
Guenever his queen to them, wherefore Sir Launcelot was wroth, for he
left Sir Tristram with King Mark for the love of Beale Isould. Then the
Queen Guenever made great sorrow for the departing of her lord and
other, and swooned in such wise that the ladies bare her into her
chamber. Thus the king with his great army departed, leaving the queen
and realm in the governance of Sir Baudwin and Constantine. And when he
was on his horse he said with an high voice, If I die in this journey I
will that Sir Constantine be mine heir and king crowned of this realm
as next of my blood. And after departed and entered into the sea at
Sandwich with all his army, with a great multitude of ships, galleys,
cogs, and dromounds, sailing on the sea.



CHAPTER IV. How King Arthur being shipped and lying in his cabin had a
marvellous dream and of the exposition thereof.

And as the king lay in his cabin in the ship, he fell in a slumbering
and dreamed a marvellous dream: him seemed that a dreadful dragon did
drown much of his people, and he came flying out of the west, and his
head was enamelled with azure, and his shoulders shone as gold, his
belly like mails of a marvellous hue, his tail full of tatters, his
feet full of fine sable, and his claws like fine gold; and an hideous
flame of fire flew out of his mouth, like as the land and water had
flamed all of fire. After, him seemed there came out of the orient, a
grimly boar all black in a cloud, and his paws as big as a post; he was
rugged looking roughly, he was the foulest beast that ever man saw, he
roared and romed so hideously that it were marvel to hear. Then the
dreadful dragon advanced him and came in the wind like a falcon giving
great strokes on the boar, and the boar hit him again with his grizzly
tusks that his breast was all bloody, and that the hot blood made all
the sea red of his blood. Then the dragon flew away all on an height,
and came down with such a swough, and smote the boar on the ridge,
which was ten foot large from the head to the tail, and smote the boar
all to powder both flesh and bones, that it flittered all abroad on the
sea.

And therewith the king awoke anon, and was sore abashed of this dream,
and sent anon for a wise philosopher, commanding to tell him the
signification of his dream. Sir, said the philosopher, the dragon that
thou dreamedst of betokeneth thine own person that sailest here, and
the colours of his wings be thy realms that thou hast won, and his tail
which is all to-tattered signifieth the noble knights of the Round
Table; and the boar that the dragon slew coming from the clouds
betokeneth some tyrant that tormenteth the people, or else thou art
like to fight with some giant thyself, being horrible and abominable,
whose peer ye saw never in your days, wherefore of this dreadful dream
doubt thee nothing, but as a conqueror come forth thyself.

Then after this soon they had sight of land, and sailed till they
arrived at Barflete in Flanders, and when they were there he found many
of his great lords ready, as they had been commanded to wait upon him.



CHAPTER V. How a man of the country told to him of a marvellous giant,
and how he fought and conquered him.

Then came to him an husbandman of the country, and told him how there
was in the country of Constantine beside Brittany, a great giant which
had slain, murdered and devoured much people of the country, and had
been sustained seven year with the children of the commons of that
land, insomuch that all the children be all slain and destroyed; and
now late he hath taken the Duchess of Brittany as she rode with her
meiny, and hath led her to his lodging which is in a mountain, for to
ravish and lie by her to her life’s end, and many people followed her,
more than five hundred, but all they might not rescue her, but they
left her shrieking and crying lamentably, wherefore I suppose that he
hath slain her in fulfilling his foul lust of lechery. She was wife
unto thy cousin Sir Howell, whom we call full nigh of thy blood. Now,
as thou art a rightful king, have pity on this lady, and revenge us all
as thou art a noble conqueror. Alas, said King Arthur, this is a great
mischief, I had liefer than the best realm that I have that I had been
a furlong way to-fore him for to have rescued that lady. Now, fellow,
said King Arthur, canst thou bring me thereas this giant haunteth? Yea,
Sir, said the good man, look yonder whereas thou seest those two great
fires, there shalt thou find him, and more treasure than I suppose is
in all France. When the king had understood this piteous case, he
returned into his tent.

Then he called to him Sir Kay and Sir Bedivere, and commanded them
secretly to make ready horse and harness for himself and them twain;
for after evensong he would ride on pilgrimage with them two only unto
Saint Michael’s mount. And then anon he made him ready, and armed him
at all points, and took his horse and his shield. And so they three
departed thence and rode forth as fast as ever they might till that
they came to the foreland of that mount. And there they alighted, and
the king commanded them to tarry there, for he would himself go up into
that mount. And so he ascended up into that hill till he came to a
great fire, and there he found a careful widow wringing her hands and
making great sorrow, sitting by a grave new made. And then King Arthur
saluted her, and demanded of her wherefore she made such lamentation,
to whom she answered and said, Sir knight, speak soft, for yonder is a
devil, if he hear thee speak he will come and destroy thee; I hold thee
unhappy; what dost thou here in this mountain? for if ye were such
fifty as ye be, ye were not able to make resistance against this devil:
here lieth a duchess dead, the which was the fairest of all the world,
wife to Sir Howell, Duke of Brittany, he hath murdered her in forcing
her, and hath slit her unto the navel.

Dame, said the king, I come from the noble conqueror King Arthur, for
to treat with that tyrant for his liege people. Fie on such treaties,
said she, he setteth not by the king nor by no man else; but an if thou
have brought Arthur’s wife, dame Guenever, he shall be gladder than
thou hadst given to him half France. Beware, approach him not too nigh,
for he hath vanquished fifteen kings, and hath made him a coat full of
precious stones embroidered with their beards, which they sent him to
have his love for salvation of their people at this last Christmas. And
if thou wilt, speak with him at yonder great fire at supper. Well, said
Arthur, I will accomplish my message for all your fearful words; and
went forth by the crest of that hill, and saw where he sat at supper
gnawing on a limb of a man, baking his broad limbs by the fire, and
breechless, and three fair damosels turning three broaches whereon were
broached twelve young children late born, like young birds.

When King Arthur beheld that piteous sight he had great compassion on
them, so that his heart bled for sorrow, and hailed him, saying in this
wise: He that all the world wieldeth give thee short life and shameful
death; and the devil have thy soul; why hast thou murdered these young
innocent children, and murdered this duchess? Therefore, arise and
dress thee, thou glutton, for this day shalt thou die of my hand. Then
the glutton anon started up, and took a great club in his hand, and
smote at the king that his coronal fell to the earth. And the king hit
him again that he carved his belly and cut off his genitours, that his
guts and his entrails fell down to the ground. Then the giant threw
away his club, and caught the king in his arms that he crushed his
ribs. Then the three maidens kneeled down and called to Christ for help
and comfort of Arthur. And then Arthur weltered and wrung, that he was
other while under and another time above. And so weltering and
wallowing they rolled down the hill till they came to the sea mark, and
ever as they so weltered Arthur smote him with his dagger.

And it fortuned they came to the place whereas the two knights were and
kept Arthur’s horse; then when they saw the king fast in the giant’s
arms they came and loosed him. And then the king commanded Sir Kay to
smite off the giant’s head, and to set it upon a truncheon of a spear,
and bear it to Sir Howell, and tell him that his enemy was slain; and
after let this head be bound to a barbican that all the people may see
and behold it; and go ye two up to the mountain, and fetch me my
shield, my sword, and the club of iron; and as for the treasure, take
ye it, for ye shall find there goods out of number; so I have the
kirtle and the club I desire no more. This was the fiercest giant that
ever I met with, save one in the mount of Araby, which I overcame, but
this was greater and fiercer. Then the knights fetched the club and the
kirtle, and some of the treasure they took to themselves, and returned
again to the host. And anon this was known through all the country,
wherefore the people came and thanked the king. And he said again, Give
the thanks to God, and depart the goods among you.

And after that King Arthur said and commanded his cousin Howell, that
he should ordain for a church to be builded on the same hill in the
worship of Saint Michael. And on the morn the king removed with his
great battle, and came into Champayne and in a valley, and there they
pight their tents; and the king being set at his dinner, there came in
two messengers, of whom that one was Marshal of France, and said to the
king that the emperor was entered into France, and had destroyed a
great part, and was in Burgoyne, and had destroyed and made great
slaughter of people, and burnt towns and boroughs; wherefore, if thou
come not hastily, they must yield up their bodies and goods.



