CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Tristram fought with Sir Bleoberis for a lady,
and how the lady was put to choice to whom she would go.

Then Sir Tristram rode more than a pace until that he had overtaken
him. Then spake Sir Tristram: Abide, he said, Knight of Arthur’s court,
bring again that lady, or deliver her to me. I will do neither, said
Bleoberis, for I dread no Cornish knight so sore that me list to
deliver her. Why, said Sir Tristram, may not a Cornish knight do as
well as another knight? this same day two knights of your court within
this three mile met with me, and or ever we departed they found a
Cornish knight good enough for them both. What were their names? said
Bleoberis. They told me, said Sir Tristram, that the one of them hight
Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and the other hight Dodinas le Savage. Ah,
said Sir Bleoberis, have ye met with them? so God me help, they were
two good knights and men of great worship, and if ye have beat them
both ye must needs be a good knight; but if it so be ye have beat them
both, yet shall ye not fear me, but ye shall beat me or ever ye have
this lady. Then defend you, said Sir Tristram. So they departed and
came together like thunder, and either bare other down, horse and all,
to the earth.

Then they avoided their horses, and lashed together eagerly with
swords, and mightily, now tracing and traversing on the right hand and
on the left hand more than two hours. And sometime they rushed together
with such a might that they lay both grovelling on the ground. Then Sir
Bleoberis de Ganis stert aback, and said thus: Now, gentle good knight,
a while hold your hands, and let us speak together. Say what ye will,
said Tristram, and I will answer you. Sir, said Bleoberis, I would wit
of whence ye be, and of whom ye be come, and what is your name? So God
me help, said Sir Tristram, I fear not to tell you my name. Wit ye well
I am King Meliodas’ son, and my mother is King Mark’s sister, and my
name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and King Mark is mine uncle. Truly,
said Bleoberis, I am right glad of you, for ye are he that slew Marhaus
the knight, hand for hand in an island, for the truage of Cornwall;
also ye overcame Sir Palamides the good knight, at a tournament in an
island, where ye beat Sir Gawaine and his nine fellows. So God me help,
said Sir Tristram, wit ye well that I am the same knight; now I have
told you my name, tell me yours with good will. Wit ye well that my
name is Sir Bleoberis de Ganis, and my brother hight Sir Blamore de
Ganis, that is called a good knight, and we be sister’s children unto
my lord Sir Launcelot du Lake, that we call one of the best knights of
the world. That is truth, said Sir Tristram, Sir Launcelot is called
peerless of courtesy and of knighthood; and for his sake, said Sir
Tristram, I will not with my good will fight no more with you, for the
great love I have to Sir Launcelot du Lake. In good faith, said
Bleoberis, as for me I will be loath to fight with you; but sithen ye
follow me here to have this lady, I shall proffer you kindness,
courtesy, and gentleness right here upon this ground. This lady shall
be betwixt us both, and to whom that she will go, let him have her in
peace. I will well, said Tristram, for, as I deem, she will leave you
and come to me. Ye shall prove it anon, said Bleoberis.



CHAPTER XVIII. How the lady forsook Sir Tristram and abode with Sir
Bleoberis, and how she desired to go to her husband.

So when she was set betwixt them both she said these words unto Sir
Tristram: Wit ye well, Sir Tristram de Liones, that but late thou wast
the man in the world that I most loved and trusted, and I weened thou
hadst loved me again above all ladies; but when thou sawest this knight
lead me away thou madest no cheer to rescue me, but suffered my lord
Segwarides ride after me; but until that time I weened thou haddest
loved me, and therefore now I will leave thee, and never love thee
more. And therewithal she went unto Sir Bleoberis.

When Sir Tristram saw her do so he was wonderly wroth with that lady,
and ashamed to come to the court. Sir Tristram, said Sir Bleoberis, ye
are in the default, for I hear by this lady’s words she before this day
trusted you above all earthly knights, and, as she saith, ye have
deceived her, therefore wit ye well, there may no man hold that will
away; and rather than ye should be heartily displeased with me I would
ye had her, an she would abide with you. Nay, said the lady, so God me
help I will never go with him; for he that I loved most I weened he had
loved me. And therefore, Sir Tristram, she said, ride as thou came, for
though thou haddest overcome this knight, as ye was likely, with thee
never would I have gone. And I shall pray this knight so fair of his
knighthood, that or ever he pass this country, that he will lead me to
the abbey where my lord Sir Segwarides lieth. So God me help, said
Bleoberis, I let you wit, good knight Sir Tristram, because King Mark
gave me the choice of a gift in this court, and so this lady liked me
best—notwithstanding, she is wedded and hath a lord, and I have
fulfilled my quest, she shall be sent unto her husband again, and in
especial most for your sake, Sir Tristram; and if she would go with you
I would ye had her. I thank you, said Sir Tristram, but for her love I
shall beware what manner a lady I shall love or trust; for had her
lord, Sir Segwarides, been away from the court, I should have been the
first that should have followed you; but sithen that ye have refused
me, as I am true knight I shall her know passingly well that I shall
love or trust. And so they took their leave one from the other and
departed.

And so Sir Tristram rode unto Tintagil, and Sir Bleoberis rode unto the
abbey where Sir Segwarides lay sore wounded, and there he delivered his
lady, and departed as a noble knight; and when Sir Segwarides saw his
lady, he was greatly comforted; and then she told him that Sir Tristram
had done great battle with Sir Bleoberis, and caused him to bring her
again. These words pleased Sir Segwarides right well, that Sir Tristram
would do so much; and so that lady told all the battle unto King Mark
betwixt Sir Tristram and Sir Bleoberis.



