CHAPTER XVIII. How Sir Launcelot came to King Arthur’s Court, and how
there were recounted all his noble feats and acts.

Now turn we unto Sir Launcelot du Lake, that came home two days afore
the Feast of Pentecost; and the king and all the court were passing
fain of his coming. And when Sir Gawaine, Sir Uwaine, Sir Sagramore,
Sir Ector de Maris, saw Sir Launcelot in Kay’s armour, then they wist
well it was he that smote them down all with one spear. Then there was
laughing and smiling among them. And ever now and now came all the
knights home that Sir Turquine had prisoners, and they all honoured and
worshipped Sir Launcelot.

When Sir Gaheris heard them speak, he said, I saw all the battle from
the beginning to the ending, and there he told King Arthur all how it
was, and how Sir Turquine was the strongest knight that ever he saw
except Sir Launcelot: there were many knights bare him record, nigh
three score. Then Sir Kay told the king how Sir Launcelot had rescued
him when he should have been slain, and how he made the knights yield
them to me, and not to him. And there they were all three, and bare
record. And by Jesu, said Sir Kay, because Sir Launcelot took my
harness and left me his I rode in good peace, and no man would have ado
with me.

Anon therewithal there came the three knights that fought with Sir
Launcelot at the long bridge. And there they yielded them unto Sir Kay,
and Sir Kay forsook them and said he fought never with them. But I
shall ease your heart, said Sir Kay, yonder is Sir Launcelot that
overcame you. When they wist that they were glad. And then Sir Meliot
de Logres came home, and told the king how Sir Launcelot had saved him
from the death. And all his deeds were known, how four queens,
sorceresses, had him in prison, and how he was delivered by King
Bagdemagus’ daughter. Also there were told all the great deeds of arms
that Sir Launcelot did betwixt the two kings, that is for to say the
King of Northgalis and King Bagdemagus. All the truth Sir Gahalantine
did tell, and Sir Mador de la Porte and Sir Mordred, for they were at
that same tournament. Then came in the lady that knew Sir Launcelot
when that he wounded Sir Belleus at the pavilion. And there, at request
of Sir Launcelot, Sir Belleus was made knight of the Round Table. And
so at that time Sir Launcelot had the greatest name of any knight of
the world, and most he was honoured of high and low.

 Explicit the noble tale of Sir Launcelot du Lake, which is the vi.
 book. Here followeth the tale of Sir Gareth of Orkney that was called
 Beaumains by Sir Kay, and is the seventh book.



BOOK VII.



CHAPTER I. How Beaumains came to King Arthur’s Court and demanded three
petitions of King Arthur.

When Arthur held his Round Table most plenour, it fortuned that he
commanded that the high feast of Pentecost should be holden at a city
and a castle, the which in those days was called Kynke Kenadonne, upon
the sands that marched nigh Wales. So ever the king had a custom that
at the feast of Pentecost in especial, afore other feasts in the year,
he would not go that day to meat until he had heard or seen of a great
marvel. And for that custom all manner of strange adventures came
before Arthur as at that feast before all other feasts. And so Sir
Gawaine, a little to-fore noon of the day of Pentecost, espied at a
window three men upon horseback, and a dwarf on foot, and so the three
men alighted, and the dwarf kept their horses, and one of the three men
was higher than the other twain by a foot and an half. Then Sir Gawaine
went unto the king and said, Sir, go to your meat, for here at the hand
come strange adventures. So Arthur went unto his meat with many other
kings. And there were all the knights of the Round Table, [save] only
those that were prisoners or slain at a recounter. Then at the high
feast evermore they should be fulfilled the whole number of an hundred
and fifty, for then was the Round Table fully complished.

Right so came into the hall two men well beseen and richly, and upon
their shoulders there leaned the goodliest young man and the fairest
that ever they all saw, and he was large and long, and broad in the
shoulders, and well visaged, and the fairest and the largest handed
that ever man saw, but he fared as though he might not go nor bear
himself but if he leaned upon their shoulders. Anon as Arthur saw him
there was made peace and room, and right so they yede with him unto the
high dais, without saying of any words. Then this much young man pulled
him aback, and easily stretched up straight, saying, King Arthur, God
you bless and all your fair fellowship, and in especial the fellowship
of the Table Round. And for this cause I am come hither, to pray you
and require you to give me three gifts, and they shall not be
unreasonably asked, but that ye may worshipfully and honourably grant
them me, and to you no great hurt nor loss. And the first don and gift
I will ask now, and the other two gifts I will ask this day
twelvemonth, wheresomever ye hold your high feast. Now ask, said
Arthur, and ye shall have your asking.

Now, sir, this is my petition for this feast, that ye will give me meat
and drink sufficiently for this twelvemonth, and at that day I will ask
mine other two gifts.

My fair son, said Arthur, ask better, I counsel thee, for this is but a
simple asking; for my heart giveth me to thee greatly, that thou art
come of men of worship, and greatly my conceit faileth me but thou
shalt prove a man of right great worship. Sir, he said, thereof be as
it be may, I have asked that I will ask. Well, said the king, ye shall
have meat and drink enough; I never defended that none, neither my
friend nor my foe. But what is thy name I would wit? I cannot tell you,
said he. That is marvel, said the king, that thou knowest not thy name,
and thou art the goodliest young man that ever I saw. Then the king
betook him to Sir Kay the steward, and charged him that he should give
him of all manner of meats and drinks of the best, and also that he had
all manner of finding as though he were a lord’s son. That shall little
need, said Sir Kay, to do such cost upon him; for I dare undertake he
is a villain born, and never will make man, for an he had come of
gentlemen he would have asked of you horse and armour, but such as he
is, so he asketh. And sithen he hath no name, I shall give him a name
that shall be Beaumains, that is Fair-hands, and into the kitchen I
shall bring him, and there he shall have fat brose every day, that he
shall be as fat by the twelvemonths’ end as a pork hog. Right so the
two men departed and beleft him to Sir Kay, that scorned him and mocked
him.



