CHAPTER XV. How the damosel and Beaumains came to the siege; and came
to a sycamore tree, and there Beaumains blew a horn, and then the
Knight of the Red Launds came to fight with him.

Now leave we the knight and the dwarf, and speak we of Beaumains, that
all night lay in the hermitage; and upon the morn he and the damosel
Linet heard their mass and brake their fast. And then they took their
horses and rode throughout a fair forest; and then they came to a
plain, and saw where were many pavilions and tents, and a fair castle,
and there was much smoke and great noise; and when they came near the
siege Sir Beaumains espied upon great trees, as he rode, how there hung
full goodly armed knights by the neck, and their shields about their
necks with their swords, and gilt spurs upon their heels, and so there
hung nigh a forty knights shamefully with full rich arms.

Then Sir Beaumains abated his countenance and said, What meaneth this?
Fair sir, said the damosel, abate not your cheer for all this sight,
for ye must courage yourself, or else ye be all shent, for all these
knights came hither to this siege to rescue my sister Dame Lionesse,
and when the Red Knight of the Red Launds had overcome them, he put
them to this shameful death without mercy and pity. And in the same
wise he will serve you but if you quit you the better.

Now Jesu defend me, said Beaumains, from such a villainous death and
shenship of arms. For rather than I should so be faren withal, I would
rather be slain manly in plain battle. So were ye better, said the
damosel; for trust not, in him is no courtesy, but all goeth to the
death or shameful murder, and that is pity, for he is a full likely
man, well made of body, and a full noble knight of prowess, and a lord
of great lands and possessions. Truly, said Beaumains, he may well be a
good knight, but he useth shameful customs, and it is marvel that he
endureth so long that none of the noble knights of my lord Arthur’s
have not dealt with him.

And then they rode to the dykes, and saw them double dyked with full
warlike walls; and there were lodged many great lords nigh the walls;
and there was great noise of minstrelsy; and the sea beat upon the one
side of the walls, where were many ships and mariners’ noise with “hale
and how.” And also there was fast by a sycamore tree, and there hung an
horn, the greatest that ever they saw, of an elephant’s bone; and this
Knight of the Red Launds had hanged it up there, that if there came any
errant-knight, he must blow that horn, and then will he make him ready
and come to him to do battle. But, sir, I pray you, said the damosel
Linet, blow ye not the horn till it be high noon, for now it is about
prime, and now increaseth his might, that as men say he hath seven
men’s strength. Ah, fie for shame, fair damosel, say ye never so more
to me; for, an he were as good a knight as ever was, I shall never fail
him in his most might, for either I will win worship worshipfully, or
die knightly in the field. And therewith he spurred his horse straight
to the sycamore tree, and blew so the horn eagerly that all the siege
and the castle rang thereof. And then there leapt out knights out of
their tents and pavilions, and they within the castle looked over the
walls and out at windows.

Then the Red Knight of the Red Launds armed him hastily, and two barons
set on his spurs upon his heels, and all was blood red, his armour,
spear and shield. And an earl buckled his helm upon his head, and then
they brought him a red spear and a red steed, and so he rode into a
little vale under the castle, that all that were in the castle and at
the siege might behold the battle.



CHAPTER XVI. How the two knights met together, and of their talking,
and how they began their battle.

Sir, said the damosel Linet unto Sir Beaumains, look ye be glad and
light, for yonder is your deadly enemy, and at yonder window is my
lady, my sister, Dame Lionesse. Where? said Beaumains. Yonder, said the
damosel, and pointed with her finger. That is truth, said Beaumains.
She beseemeth afar the fairest lady that ever I looked upon; and truly,
he said, I ask no better quarrel than now for to do battle, for truly
she shall be my lady, and for her I will fight. And ever he looked up
to the window with glad countenance, and the Lady Lionesse made curtsey
to him down to the earth, with holding up both their hands.

With that the Red Knight of the Red Launds called to Sir Beaumains,
Leave, sir knight, thy looking, and behold me, I counsel thee; for I
warn thee well she is my lady, and for her I have done many strong
battles. If thou have so done, said Beaumains, meseemeth it was but
waste labour, for she loveth none of thy fellowship, and thou to love
that loveth not thee is but great folly. For an I understood that she
were not glad of my coming, I would be advised or I did battle for her.
But I understand by the besieging of this castle she may forbear thy
fellowship. And therefore wit thou well, thou Red Knight of the Red
Launds, I love her, and will rescue her, or else to die. Sayst thou
that? said the Red Knight, meseemeth thou ought of reason to be ware by
yonder knights that thou sawest hang upon yonder trees. Fie for shame,
said Beaumains, that ever thou shouldest say or do so evil, for in that
thou shamest thyself and knighthood, and thou mayst be sure there will
no lady love thee that knoweth thy wicked customs. And now thou weenest
that the sight of these hanged knights should fear me. Nay truly, not
so; that shameful sight causeth me to have courage and hardiness
against thee, more than I would have had against thee an thou wert a
well-ruled knight. Make thee ready, said the Red Knight of the Red
Launds, and talk no longer with me.

Then Sir Beaumains bade the damosel go from him; and then they put
their spears in their rests, and came together with all their might
that they had both, and either smote other in midst of their shields
that the paitrelles, surcingles, and cruppers brast, and fell to the
earth both, and the reins of their bridles in their hands; and so they
lay a great while sore astonied, that all that were in the castle and
in the siege weened their necks had been broken; and then many a
stranger and other said the strange knight was a big man, and a noble
jouster, for or now we saw never no knight match the Red Knight of the
Red Launds: thus they said, both within the castle and without. Then
lightly they avoided their horses and put their shields afore them, and
drew their swords and ran together like two fierce lions, and either
gave other such buffets upon their helms that they reeled backward both
two strides; and then they recovered both, and hewed great pieces off
their harness and their shields that a great part fell into the fields.



