CHAPTER II. How the stepmother of Sir Tristram had ordained poison for
to have poisoned Sir Tristram.

Then certain of them would have slain the child, because they would
have been lords of the country of Liones. But then through the fair
speech of the gentlewoman, and by the means that she made, the most
part of the barons would not assent thereto. And then they let carry
home the dead queen, and much dole was made for her.

Then this meanwhile Merlin delivered King Meliodas out of prison on the
morn after his queen was dead. And so when the king was come home the
most part of the barons made great joy. But the sorrow that the king
made for his queen that might no tongue tell. So then the king let
inter her richly, and after he let christen his child as his wife had
commanded afore her death. And then he let call him Tristram, the
sorrowful born child. Then the King Meliodas endured seven years
without a wife, and all this time Tristram was nourished well. Then it
befell that King Meliodas wedded King Howell’s daughter of Brittany,
and anon she had children of King Meliodas: then was she heavy and
wroth that her children should not rejoice the country of Liones,
wherefore this queen ordained for to poison young Tristram. So she let
poison be put in a piece of silver in the chamber whereas Tristram and
her children were together, unto that intent that when Tristram were
thirsty he should drink that drink. And so it fell upon a day, the
queen’s son, as he was in that chamber, espied the piece with poison,
and he weened it had been good drink, and because the child was thirsty
he took the piece with poison and drank freely; and therewithal
suddenly the child brast and was dead.

When the queen of Meliodas wist of the death of her son, wit ye well
that she was heavy. But yet the king understood nothing of her treason.
Notwithstanding the queen would not leave this, but eft she let ordain
more poison, and put it in a piece. And by fortune King Meliodas, her
husband, found the piece with wine where was the poison, and he that
was much thirsty took the piece for to drink thereout. And as he would
have drunken thereof the queen espied him, and then she ran unto him,
and pulled the piece from him suddenly. The king marvelled why she did
so, and remembered him how her son was suddenly slain with poison. And
then he took her by the hand, and said: Thou false traitress, thou
shalt tell me what manner of drink this is, or else I shall slay thee.
And therewith he pulled out his sword, and sware a great oath that he
should slay her but if she told him truth. Ah! mercy, my lord, said
she, and I shall tell you all. And then she told him why she would have
slain Tristram, because her children should rejoice his land. Well,
said King Meliodas, and therefore shall ye have the law. And so she was
condemned by the assent of the barons to be burnt; and then was there
made a great fire, and right as she was at the fire to take her
execution, young Tristram kneeled afore King Meliodas, and besought him
to give him a boon. I will well, said the king again. Then said young
Tristram, Give me the life of thy queen, my stepmother. That is
unrightfully asked, said King Meliodas, for thou ought of right to hate
her, for she would have slain thee with that poison an she might have
had her will; and for thy sake most is my cause that she should die.

Sir, said Tristram, as for that, I beseech you of your mercy that you
will forgive it her, and as for my part, God forgive it her, and I do;
and so much it liked your highness to grant me my boon, for God’s love
I require you hold your promise. Sithen it is so, said the king, I will
that ye have her life. Then, said the king, I give her to you, and go
ye to the fire and take her, and do with her what ye will. So Sir
Tristram went to the fire, and by the commandment of the king delivered
her from the death. But after that King Meliodas would never have ado
with her, as at bed and board. But by the good means of young Tristram
he made the king and her accorded. But then the king would not suffer
young Tristram to abide no longer in his court.



CHAPTER III. How Sir Tristram was sent into France, and had one to
govern him named Gouvernail, and how he learned to harp, hawk, and
hunt.

And then he let ordain a gentleman that was well learned and taught,
his name was Gouvernail; and then he sent young Tristram with
Gouvernail into France to learn the language, and nurture, and deeds of
arms. And there was Tristram more than seven years. And then when he
well could speak the language, and had learned all that he might learn
in that country, then he came home to his father, King Meliodas, again.
And so Tristram learned to be an harper passing all other, that there
was none such called in no country, and so on harping and on
instruments of music he applied him in his youth for to learn.

And after, as he grew in might and strength, he laboured ever in
hunting and in hawking, so that never gentleman more, that ever we
heard read of. And as the book saith, he began good measures of blowing
of beasts of venery, and beasts of chase, and all manner of vermin, and
all these terms we have yet of hawking and hunting. And therefore the
book of venery, of hawking, and hunting, is called the book of Sir
Tristram. Wherefore, as meseemeth, all gentlemen that bear old arms
ought of right to honour Sir Tristram for the goodly terms that
gentlemen have and use, and shall to the day of doom, that thereby in a
manner all men of worship may dissever a gentleman from a yeoman, and
from a yeoman a villain. For he that gentle is will draw him unto
gentle tatches, and to follow the customs of noble gentlemen.

Thus Sir Tristram endured in Cornwall until he was big and strong, of
the age of eighteen years. And then the King Meliodas had great joy of
Sir Tristram, and so had the queen, his wife. For ever after in her
life, because Sir Tristram saved her from the fire, she did never hate
him more after, but loved him ever after, and gave Tristram many great
gifts; for every estate loved him, where that he went.



