CHAPTER XX. How King Mark found Sir Tristram naked, and made him to be
borne home to Tintagil, and how he was there known by a brachet.

Then the knight took up the giant’s head and bare it with him unto King
Mark, and told him what adventure betid him in the forest, and how a
naked man rescued him from the grimly giant, Tauleas. Where had ye this
adventure? said King Mark. Forsooth, said Sir Dinant, at the fair
fountain in your forest where many adventurous knights meet, and there
is the mad man. Well, said King Mark, I will see that wild man. So
within a day or two King Mark commanded his knights and his hunters
that they should be ready on the morn for to hunt, and so upon the morn
he went unto that forest. And when the king came to that well he found
there lying by that well a fair naked man, and a sword by him. Then
King Mark blew and straked, and therewith his knights came to him; and
then the king commanded his knights to: Take that naked man with
fairness, and bring him to my castle. So they did softly and fair, and
cast mantles upon Sir Tristram, and so led him unto Tintagil; and there
they bathed him, and washed him, and gave him hot suppings till they
had brought him well to his remembrance; but all this while there was
no creature that knew Sir Tristram, nor what man he was.

So it fell upon a day that the queen, La Beale Isoud, heard of such a
man, that ran naked in the forest, and how the king had brought him
home to the court. Then La Beale Isoud called unto her Dame Bragwaine
and said: Come on with me, for we will go see this man that my lord
brought from the forest the last day. So they passed forth, and spered
where was the sick man. And then a squire told the queen that he was in
the garden taking his rest, and reposing him against the sun. So when
the queen looked upon Sir Tristram she was not remembered of him. But
ever she said unto Dame Bragwaine: Meseemeth I should have seen him
heretofore in many places. But as soon as Sir Tristram saw her he knew
her well enough. And then he turned away his visage and wept.

Then the queen had always a little brachet with her that Sir Tristram
gave her the first time that ever she came into Cornwall, and never
would that brachet depart from her but if Sir Tristram was nigh thereas
was La Beale Isoud; and this brachet was sent from the king’s daughter
of France unto Sir Tristram for great love. And anon as this little
brachet felt a savour of Sir Tristram, she leapt upon him and licked
his lears and his ears, and then she whined and quested, and she
smelled at his feet and at his hands, and on all parts of his body that
she might come to. Ah, my lady, said Dame Bragwaine unto La Beale
Isoud, alas, alas, said she, I see it is mine own lord, Sir Tristram.
And thereupon Isoud fell down in a swoon, and so lay a great while. And
when she might speak she said: My lord Sir Tristram, blessed be God ye
have your life, and now I am sure ye shall be discovered by this little
brachet, for she will never leave you. And also I am sure as soon as my
lord, King Mark, do know you he will banish you out of the country of
Cornwall, or else he will destroy you; for God’s sake, mine own lord,
grant King Mark his will, and then draw you unto the court of King
Arthur, for there are ye beloved, and ever when I may I shall send unto
you; and when ye list ye may come to me, and at all times early and
late I will be at your commandment, to live as poor a life as ever did
queen or lady. O Madam, said Sir Tristram, go from me, for mickle anger
and danger have I escaped for your love.



CHAPTER XXI. How King Mark, by the advice of his council, banished Sir
Tristram out of Cornwall the term of ten years.

Then the queen departed, but the brachet would not from him; and
therewithal came King Mark, and the brachet set upon him, and bayed at
them all. There withal Sir Andred spake and said: Sir, this is Sir
Tristram, I see by the brachet. Nay, said the king, I cannot suppose
that. Then the king asked him upon his faith what he was, and what was
his name. So God me help, said he, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones;
now do by me what ye list. Ah, said King Mark, me repenteth of your
recovery. And then he let call his barons to judge Sir Tristram to the
death. Then many of his barons would not assent thereto, and in
especial Sir Dinas, the Seneschal, and Sir Fergus. And so by the advice
of them all Sir Tristram was banished out of the country for ten year,
and thereupon he took his oath upon a book before the king and his
barons. And so he was made to depart out of the country of Cornwall;
and there were many barons brought him unto his ship, of the which some
were his friends and some his foes. And in the meanwhile there came a
knight of King Arthur’s, his name was Dinadan, and his coming was for
to seek after Sir Tristram; then they showed him where he was armed at
all points going to the ship. Now fair knight, said Sir Dinadan, or ye
pass this court that ye will joust with me I require thee. With a good
will, said Sir Tristram, an these lords will give me leave. Then the
barons granted thereto, and so they ran together, and there Sir
Tristram gave Sir Dinadan a fall. And then he prayed Sir Tristram to
give him leave to go in his fellowship. Ye shall be right welcome, said
then Sir Tristram.

And so they took their horses and rode to their ships together, and
when Sir Tristram was in the sea he said: Greet well King Mark and all
mine enemies, and say them I will come again when I may; and well am I
rewarded for the fighting with Sir Marhaus, and delivered all this
country from servage; and well am I rewarded for the fetching and costs
of Queen Isoud out of Ireland, and the danger that I was in first and
last, and by the way coming home what danger I had to bring again Queen
Isoud from the Castle Pluere; and well am I rewarded when I fought with
Sir Bleoberis for Sir Segwarides’ wife; and well am I rewarded when I
fought with Sir Blamore de Ganis for King Anguish, father unto La Beale
Isoud; and well am I rewarded when I smote down the good knight, Sir
Lamorak de Galis, at King Mark’s request; and well am I rewarded when I
fought with the King with the Hundred Knights, and the King of
Northgalis, and both these would have put his land in servage, and by
me they were put to a rebuke; and well am I rewarded for the slaying of
Tauleas, the mighty giant, and many other deeds have I done for him,
and now have I my warison. And tell King Mark that many noble knights
of the Table Round have spared the barons of this country for my sake.
Also am I not well rewarded when I fought with the good knight Sir
Palomides and rescued Queen Isoud from him; and at that time King Mark
said afore all his barons I should have been better rewarded. And
forthwithal he took the sea.



