CHAPTER XVII. How after long fighting Beaumains overcame the knight and
would have slain him, but at the request of the lords he saved his
life, and made him to yield him to the lady.

And then thus they fought till it was past noon, and never would stint,
till at the last they lacked wind both; and then they stood wagging and
scattering, panting, blowing and bleeding, that all that beheld them
for the most part wept for pity. So when they had rested them a while
they yede to battle again, tracing, racing, foining as two boars. And
at some time they took their run as it had been two rams, and hurtled
together that sometime they fell grovelling to the earth: and at some
time they were so amazed that either took other’s sword instead of his
own.

Thus they endured till evensong time, that there was none that beheld
them might know whether was like to win the battle; and their armour
was so forhewn that men might see their naked sides; and in other
places they were naked, but ever the naked places they did defend. And
the Red Knight was a wily knight of war, and his wily fighting taught
Sir Beaumains to be wise; but he abought it full sore or he did espy
his fighting.

And thus by assent of them both they granted either other to rest; and
so they set them down upon two mole-hills there beside the fighting
place, and either of them unlaced his helm, and took the cold wind; for
either of their pages was fast by them, to come when they called to
unlace their harness and to set them on again at their commandment. And
then when Sir Beaumains’ helm was off, he looked up to the window, and
there he saw the fair lady Dame Lionesse, and she made him such
countenance that his heart waxed light and jolly; and therewith he bade
the Red Knight of the Red Launds make him ready, and let us do the
battle to the utterance. I will well, said the knight, and then they
laced up their helms, and their pages avoided, and they stepped
together and fought freshly; but the Red Knight of the Red Launds
awaited him, and at an overthwart smote him within the hand, that his
sword fell out of his hand; and yet he gave him another buffet upon the
helm that he fell grovelling to the earth, and the Red Knight fell over
him, for to hold him down.

Then cried the maiden Linet on high: O Sir Beaumains, where is thy
courage become? Alas, my lady my sister beholdeth thee, and she sobbeth
and weepeth, that maketh mine heart heavy. When Sir Beaumains heard her
say so, he abraid up with a great might and gat him upon his feet, and
lightly he leapt to his sword and gripped it in his hand, and doubled
his pace unto the Red Knight, and there they fought a new battle
together. But Sir Beaumains then doubled his strokes, and smote so
thick that he smote the sword out of his hand, and then he smote him
upon the helm that he fell to the earth, and Sir Beaumains fell upon
him, and unlaced his helm to have slain him; and then he yielded him
and asked mercy, and said with a loud voice: O noble knight, I yield me
to thy mercy.

Then Sir Beaumains bethought him upon the knights that he had made to
be hanged shamefully, and then he said: I may not with my worship save
thy life, for the shameful deaths that thou hast caused many full good
knights to die. Sir, said the Red Knight of the Red Launds, hold your
hand and ye shall know the causes why I put them to so shameful a
death. Say on, said Sir Beaumains. Sir, I loved once a lady, a fair
damosel, and she had her brother slain; and she said it was Sir
Launcelot du Lake, or else Sir Gawaine; and she prayed me as that I
loved her heartily, that I would make her a promise by the faith of my
knighthood, for to labour daily in arms unto I met with one of them;
and all that I might overcome I should put them unto a villainous
death; and this is the cause that I have put all these knights to
death, and so I ensured her to do all the villainy unto King Arthur’s
knights, and that I should take vengeance upon all these knights. And,
sir, now I will thee tell that every day my strength increaseth till
noon, and all this time have I seven men’s strength.



CHAPTER XVIII. How the knight yielded him, and how Beaumains made him
to go unto King Arthur’s court, and to cry Sir Launcelot mercy.

Then came there many earls, and barons, and noble knights, and prayed
that knight to save his life, and take him to your prisoner. And all
they fell upon their knees, and prayed him of mercy, and that he would
save his life; and, Sir, they all said, it were fairer of him to take
homage and fealty, and let him hold his lands of you than for to slay
him; by his death ye shall have none advantage, and his misdeeds that
be done may not be undone; and therefore he shall make amends to all
parties, and we all will become your men and do you homage and fealty.
Fair lords, said Beaumains, wit you well I am full loath to slay this
knight, nevertheless he hath done passing ill and shamefully; but
insomuch all that he did was at a lady’s request I blame him the less;
and so for your sake I will release him that he shall have his life
upon this covenant, that he go within the castle, and yield him there
to the lady, and if she will forgive and quit him, I will well; with
this he make her amends of all the trespass he hath done against her
and her lands. And also, when that is done, that ye go unto the court
of King Arthur, and there that ye ask Sir Launcelot mercy, and Sir
Gawaine, for the evil will ye have had against them. Sir, said the Red
Knight of the Red Launds, all this will I do as ye command, and siker
assurance and borrows ye shall have. And so then when the assurance was
made, he made his homage and fealty, and all those earls and barons
with him.

And then the maiden Linet came to Sir Beaumains, and unarmed him and
searched his wounds, and stinted his blood, and in likewise she did to
the Red Knight of the Red Launds. And there they sojourned ten days in
their tents; and the Red Knight made his lords and servants to do all
the pleasure that they might unto Sir Beaumains. And so within a while
the Red Knight of the Red Launds yede unto the castle, and put him in
her grace. And so she received him upon sufficient surety, so all her
hurts were well restored of all that she could complain. And then he
departed unto the court of King Arthur, and there openly the Red Knight
of the Red Launds put him in the mercy of Sir Launcelot and Sir
Gawaine, and there he told openly how he was overcome and by whom, and
also he told all the battles from the beginning unto the ending. Jesu
mercy, said King Arthur and Sir Gawaine, we marvel much of what blood
he is come, for he is a noble knight. Have ye no marvel, said Sir
Launcelot, for ye shall right well wit that he is come of a full noble
blood; and as for his might and hardiness, there be but few now living
that is so mighty as he is, and so noble of prowess. It seemeth by you,
said King Arthur, that ye know his name, and from whence he is come,
and of what blood he is. I suppose I do so, said Launcelot, or else I
would not have given him the order of knighthood; but he gave me such
charge at that time that I should never discover him until he required
me, or else it be known openly by some other.



