CHAPTER IX. How Sir Tristram was put to the keeping of La Beale Isoud
first for to be healed of his wound.

Then the king for great favour made Tramtrist to be put in his
daughter’s ward and keeping, because she was a noble surgeon. And when
she had searched him she found in the bottom of his wound that therein
was poison, and so she healed him within a while; and therefore
Tramtrist cast great love to La Beale Isoud, for she was at that time
the fairest maid and lady of the world. And there Tramtrist learned her
to harp, and she began to have a great fantasy unto him. And at that
time Sir Palamides, the Saracen, was in that country, and well
cherished with the king and the queen. And every day Sir Palamides drew
unto La Beale Isoud and proffered her many gifts, for he loved her
passingly well. All that espied Tramtrist, and full well knew he Sir
Palamides for a noble knight and a mighty man. And wit you well Sir
Tramtrist had great despite at Sir Palamides, for La Beale Isoud told
Tramtrist that Palamides was in will to be christened for her sake.
Thus was there great envy betwixt Tramtrist and Sir Palamides.

Then it befell that King Anguish let cry a great jousts and a great
tournament for a lady that was called the Lady of the Launds, and she
was nigh cousin unto the king. And what man won her, three days after
he should wed her and have all her lands. This cry was made in England,
Wales, Scotland, and also in France and in Brittany. It befell upon a
day La Beale Isoud came unto Sir Tramtrist, and told him of this
tournament. He answered and said: Fair lady, I am but a feeble knight,
and but late I had been dead had not your good ladyship been. Now, fair
lady, what would ye I should do in this matter? well ye wot, my lady,
that I may not joust. Ah, Tramtrist, said La Beale Isoud, why will ye
not have ado at that tournament? well I wot Sir Palamides shall be
there, and to do what he may; and therefore Tramtrist, I pray you for
to be there, for else Sir Palamides is like to win the degree. Madam,
said Tramtrist, as for that, it may be so, for he is a proved knight,
and I am but a young knight and late made; and the first battle that I
did it mishapped me to be sore wounded as ye see. But an I wist ye
would be my better lady, at that tournament I will be, so that ye will
keep my counsel and let no creature have knowledge that I shall joust
but yourself, and such as ye will to keep your counsel, my poor person
shall I jeopard there for your sake, that, peradventure, Sir Palamides
shall know when that I come. Thereto, said La Beale Isoud, do your
best, and as I can, said La Beale Isoud, I shall purvey horse and
armour for you at my device. As ye will so be it, said Sir Tramtrist, I
will be at your commandment.

So at the day of jousts there came Sir Palamides with a black shield,
and he overthrew many knights, that all the people had marvel of him.
For he put to the worse Sir Gawaine, Gaheris, Agravaine, Bagdemagus,
Kay, Dodinas le Savage, Sagramore le Desirous, Gumret le Petit, and
Griflet le Fise de Dieu. All these the first day Sir Palamides struck
down to the earth. And then all manner of knights were adread of Sir
Palamides, and many called him the Knight with the Black Shield. So
that day Sir Palamides had great worship.

Then came King Anguish unto Tramtrist, and asked him why he would not
joust. Sir, he said, I was but late hurt, and as yet I dare not
adventure me. Then came there the same squire that was sent from the
king’s daughter of France unto Sir Tristram. And when he had espied Sir
Tristram he fell flat to his feet. All that espied La Beale Isoud, what
courtesy the squire made unto Sir Tristram. And therewithal suddenly
Sir Tristram ran unto his squire, whose name was Hebes le Renoumes, and
prayed him heartily in no wise to tell his name. Sir, said Hebes, I
will not discover your name but if ye command me.



CHAPTER X. How Sir Tristram won the degree at a tournament in Ireland,
and there made Palamides to bear no more harness in a year.

Then Sir Tristram asked him what he did in those countries. Sir, he
said, I came hither with Sir Gawaine for to be made knight, and if it
please you, of your hands that I may be made knight. Await upon me as
to-morn secretly, and in the field I shall make you a knight.

Then had La Beale Isoud great suspicion unto Tramtrist, that he was
some man of worship proved, and therewith she comforted herself, and
cast more love unto him than she had done to-fore. And so on the morn
Sir Palamides made him ready to come into the field as he did the first
day. And there he smote down the King with the Hundred Knights, and the
King of Scots. Then had La Beale Isoud ordained and well arrayed Sir
Tristram in white horse and harness. And right so she let put him out
at a privy postern, and so he came into the field as it had been a
bright angel. And anon Sir Palamides espied him, and therewith he
feutred a spear unto Sir Tramtrist, and he again unto him. And there
Sir Tristram smote down Sir Palamides unto the earth. And then there
was a great noise of people: some said Sir Palamides had a fall, some
said the Knight with the Black Shield had a fall. And wit you well La
Beale Isoud was passing glad. And then Sir Gawaine and his fellows nine
had marvel what knight it might be that had smitten down Sir Palamides.
Then would there none joust with Tramtrist, but all that there were
forsook him, most and least. Then Sir Tristram made Hebes a knight, and
caused him to put himself forth, and did right well that day. So after
Sir Hebes held him with Sir Tristram.

And when Sir Palamides had received this fall, wit ye well that he was
sore ashamed, and as privily as he might he withdrew him out of the
field. All that espied Sir Tristram, and lightly he rode after Sir
Palamides and overtook him, and bade him turn, for better he would
assay him or ever he departed. Then Sir Palamides turned him, and
either lashed at other with their swords. But at the first stroke Sir
Tristram smote down Palamides, and gave him such a stroke upon the head
that he fell to the earth. So then Tristram bade yield him, and do his
commandment, or else he would slay him. When Sir Palamides beheld his
countenance, he dread his buffets so, that he granted all his askings.
Well said, said Sir Tristram, this shall be your charge. First, upon
pain of your life that ye forsake my lady La Beale Isoud, and in no
manner wise that ye draw not to her. Also this twelvemonth and a day
that ye bear none armour nor none harness of war. Now promise me this,
or here shalt thou die. Alas, said Palamides, for ever am I ashamed.
Then he sware as Sir Tristram had commanded him. Then for despite and
anger Sir Palamides cut off his harness, and threw them away.

And so Sir Tristram turned again to the castle where was La Beale
Isoud; and by the way he met with a damosel that asked after Sir
Launcelot, that won the Dolorous Guard worshipfully; and this damosel
asked Sir Tristram what he was. For it was told her that it was he that
smote down Sir Palamides, by whom the ten knights of King Arthur’s were
smitten down. Then the damosel prayed Sir Tristram to tell her what he
was, and whether that he were Sir Launcelot du Lake, for she deemed
that there was no knight in the world might do such deeds of arms but
if it were Launcelot. Fair damosel, said Sir Tristram, wit ye well that
I am not Sir Launcelot, for I was never of such prowess, but in God is
all that he may make me as good a knight as the good knight Sir
Launcelot. Now, gentle knight, said she, put up thy visor; and when she
beheld his visage she thought she saw never a better man’s visage, nor
a better faring knight. And then when the damosel knew certainly that
he was not Sir Launcelot, then she took her leave, and departed from
him. And then Sir Tristram rode privily unto the postern, where kept
him La Beale Isoud, and there she made him good cheer, and thanked God
of his good speed. So anon, within a while the king and the queen
understood that it was Tramtrist that smote down Sir Palamides; then
was he much made of, more than he was before.



