CHAPTER XXII. How Sir Tristram fought for Sir Anguish and overcame his
adversary, and how his adversary would never yield him.

Now make your answer that your champion is ready, for I shall die in
your quarrel rather than to be recreant. I have no doubt of you, said
the king, that, an ye should have ado with Sir Launcelot du Lake— Sir,
said Sir Tristram, as for Sir Launcelot, he is called the noblest
knight of the world, and wit ye well that the knights of his blood are
noble men, and dread shame; and as for Bleoberis, brother unto Sir
Blamore, I have done battle with him, therefore upon my head it is no
shame to call him a good knight. It is noised, said the king, that
Blamore is the hardier knight. Sir, as for that let him be, he shall
never be refused, an as he were the best knight that now beareth shield
or spear.

So King Anguish departed unto King Carados and the kings that were that
time as judges, and told them that he had found his champion ready.
Then by the commandment of the kings Sir Blamore de Ganis and Sir
Tristram were sent for to hear the charge. And when they were come
before the judges there were many kings and knights beheld Sir
Tristram, and much speech they had of him because that he slew Sir
Marhaus, the good knight, and because he for-jousted Sir Palamides the
good knight. So when they had taken their charge they withdrew them to
make them ready to do battle.

Then said Sir Bleoberis unto his brother, Sir Blamore: Fair dear
brother, remember of what kin we be come of, and what a man is Sir
Launcelot du Lake, neither farther nor nearer but brother’s children,
and there was never none of our kin that ever was shamed in battle; and
rather suffer death, brother, than to be shamed. Brother, said Blamore,
have ye no doubt of me, for I shall never shame none of my blood;
howbeit I am sure that yonder knight is called a passing good knight as
of his time one of the world, yet shall I never yield me, nor say the
loath word: well may he happen to smite me down with his great might of
chivalry, but rather shall he slay me than I shall yield me as
recreant. God speed you well, said Sir Bleoberis, for ye shall find him
the mightiest knight that ever ye had ado withal, for I know him, for I
have had ado with him. God me speed, said Sir Blamore de Ganis; and
therewith he took his horse at the one end of the lists, and Sir
Tristram at the other end of the lists, and so they feutred their
spears and came together as it had been thunder; and there Sir Tristram
through great might smote down Sir Blamore and his horse to the earth.
Then anon Sir Blamore avoided his horse and pulled out his sword and
threw his shield afore him, and bade Sir Tristram alight: For though an
horse hath failed me, I trust to God the earth will not fail me. And
then Sir Tristram alighted, and dressed him unto battle; and there they
lashed together strongly as racing and tracing, foining and dashing,
many sad strokes, that the kings and knights had great wonder that they
might stand; for ever they fought like wood men, so that there was
never knights seen fight more fiercely than they did; for Sir Blamore
was so hasty that he would have no rest, that all men wondered that
they had breath to stand on their feet; and all the place was bloody
that they fought in. And at the last, Sir Tristram smote Sir Blamore
such a buffet upon the helm that he there fell down upon his side, and
Sir Tristram stood and beheld him.



CHAPTER XXIII. How Sir Blamore desired Tristram to slay him, and how
Sir Tristram spared him, and how they took appointment.

Then when Sir Blamore might speak, he said thus: Sir Tristram de
Liones, I require thee, as thou art a noble knight, and the best knight
that ever I found, that thou wilt slay me out, for I would not live to
be made lord of all the earth, for I have liefer die with worship than
live with shame; and needs, Sir Tristram, thou must slay me, or else
thou shalt never win the field, for I will never say the loath word.
And therefore if thou dare slay me, slay me, I require thee. When Sir
Tristram heard him say so knightly, he wist not what to do with him; he
remembering him of both parties, of what blood he was come, and for Sir
Launcelot’s sake he would be loath to slay him; and in the other party
in no wise he might not choose, but that he must make him to say the
loath word, or else to slay him.

Then Sir Tristram stert aback, and went to the kings that were judges,
and there he kneeled down to-fore them, and besought them for their
worships, and for King Arthur’s and Sir Launcelot’s sake, that they
would take this matter in their hands. For, my fair lords, said Sir
Tristram, it were shame and pity that this noble knight that yonder
lieth should be slain; for ye hear well, shamed will he not be, and I
pray to God that he never be slain nor shamed for me. And as for the
king for whom I fight for, I shall require him, as I am his true
champion and true knight in this field, that he will have mercy upon
this good knight. So God me help, said King Anguish, I will for your
sake; Sir Tristram, be ruled as ye will have me, for I know you for my
true knight; and therefore I will heartily pray the kings that be here
as judges to take it in their hands. And the kings that were judges
called Sir Bleoberis to them, and asked him his advice. My lords, said
Bleoberis, though my brother be beaten, and hath the worse through
might of arms, I dare say, though Sir Tristram hath beaten his body he
hath not beaten his heart, and I thank God he is not shamed this day;
and rather than he should be shamed I require you, said Bleoberis, let
Sir Tristram slay him out. It shall not be so, said the kings, for his
part adversary, both the king and the champion, have pity of Sir
Blamore’s knighthood. My lords, said Bleoberis, I will right well as ye
will.

Then the kings called the King of Ireland, and found him goodly and
treatable. And then, by all their advices, Sir Tristram and Sir
Bleoberis took up Sir Blamore, and the two brethren were accorded with
King Anguish, and kissed and made friends for ever. And then Sir
Blamore and Sir Tristram kissed together, and there they made their
oaths that they would never none of them two brethren fight with Sir
Tristram, and Sir Tristram made the same oath. And for that gentle
battle all the blood of Sir Launcelot loved Sir Tristram for ever.

Then King Anguish and Sir Tristram took their leave, and sailed into
Ireland with great noblesse and joy. So when they were in Ireland the
king let make it known throughout all the land how and in what manner
Sir Tristram had done for him. Then the queen and all that there were
made the most of him that they might. But the joy that La Beale Isoud
made of Sir Tristram there might no tongue tell, for of all men earthly
she loved him most.



