BOOK V.



CHAPTER I. How twelve aged ambassadors of Rome came to King Arthur to
demand truage for Britain.

When King Arthur had after long war rested, and held a royal feast and
Table Round with his allies of kings, princes, and noble knights all of
the Round Table, there came into his hall, he sitting in his throne
royal, twelve ancient men, bearing each of them a branch of olive, in
token that they came as ambassadors and messengers from the Emperor
Lucius, which was called at that time, Dictator or Procuror of the
Public Weal of Rome. Which said messengers, after their entering and
coming into the presence of King Arthur, did to him their obeisance in
making to him reverence, and said to him in this wise: The high and
mighty Emperor Lucius sendeth to the King of Britain greeting,
commanding thee to acknowledge him for thy lord, and to send him the
truage due of this realm unto the Empire, which thy father and other
to-fore thy precessors have paid as is of record, and thou as rebel not
knowing him as thy sovereign, withholdest and retainest contrary to the
statutes and decrees made by the noble and worthy Julius Cesar,
conqueror of this realm, and first Emperor of Rome. And if thou refuse
his demand and commandment know thou for certain that he shall make
strong war against thee, thy realms and lands, and shall chastise thee
and thy subjects, that it shall be ensample perpetual unto all kings
and princes, for to deny their truage unto that noble empire which
domineth upon the universal world. Then when they had showed the effect
of their message, the king commanded them to withdraw them, and said he
should take advice of council and give to them an answer. Then some of
the young knights, hearing this their message, would have run on them
to have slain them, saying that it was a rebuke to all the knights
there being present to suffer them to say so to the king. And anon the
king commanded that none of them, upon pain of death, to missay them
nor do them any harm, and commanded a knight to bring them to their
lodging, and see that they have all that is necessary and requisite for
them, with the best cheer, and that no dainty be spared, for the Romans
be great lords, and though their message please me not nor my court,
yet I must remember mine honour.

After this the king let call all his lords and knights of the Round
Table to counsel upon this matter, and desired them to say their
advice. Then Sir Cador of Cornwall spake first and said, Sir, this
message liketh me well, for we have many days rested us and have been
idle, and now I hope ye shall make sharp war on the Romans, where I
doubt not we shall get honour. I believe well, said Arthur, that this
matter pleaseth thee well, but these answers may not be answered, for
the demand grieveth me sore, for truly I will never pay truage to Rome,
wherefore I pray you to counsel me. I have understood that Belinus and
Brenius, kings of Britain, have had the empire in their hands many
days, and also Constantine the son of Heleine, which is an open
evidence that we owe no tribute to Rome but of right we that be
descended of them have right to claim the title of the empire.



CHAPTER II. How the kings and lords promised to King Arthur aid and
help against the Romans.

Then answered King Anguish of Scotland, Sir, ye ought of right to be
above all other kings, for unto you is none like nor pareil in
Christendom, of knighthood nor of dignity, and I counsel you never to
obey the Romans, for when they reigned on us they distressed our
elders, and put this land to great extortions and tallies, wherefore I
make here mine avow to avenge me on them; and for to strengthen your
quarrel I shall furnish twenty thousand good men of war, and wage them
on my costs, which shall await on you with myself when it shall please
you. And the king of Little Britain granted him to the same thirty
thousand; wherefore King Arthur thanked them. And then every man agreed
to make war, and to aid after their power; that is to wit, the lord of
West Wales promised to bring thirty thousand men, and Sir Uwaine, Sir
Ider his son, with their cousins, promised to bring thirty thousand.
Then Sir Launcelot with all other promised in likewise every man a
great multitude.

And when King Arthur understood their courages and good wills he
thanked them heartily, and after let call the ambassadors to hear their
answer. And in presence of all his lords and knights he said to them in
this wise: I will that ye return unto your lord and Procuror of the
Common Weal for the Romans, and say ye to him, Of his demand and
commandment I set nothing, and that I know of no truage nor tribute
that I owe to him, nor to none earthly prince, Christian nor heathen;
but I pretend to have and occupy the sovereignty of the empire, wherein
I am entitled by the right of my predecessors, sometime kings of this
land; and say to him that I am delibered and fully concluded, to go
with mine army with strength and power unto Rome, by the grace of God,
to take possession in the empire and subdue them that be rebel.
Wherefore I command him and all them of Rome, that incontinent they
make to me their homage, and to acknowledge me for their Emperor and
Governor, upon pain that shall ensue. And then he commanded his
treasurer to give to them great and large gifts, and to pay all their
dispenses, and assigned Sir Cador to convey them out of the land. And
so they took their leave and departed, and took their shipping at
Sandwich, and passed forth by Flanders, Almaine, the mountains, and all
Italy, until they came unto Lucius. And after the reverence made, they
made relation of their answer, like as ye to-fore have heard.

When the Emperor Lucius had well understood their credence, he was sore
moved as he had been all araged, and said, I had supposed that Arthur
would have obeyed to my commandment, and have served you himself, as
him well beseemed or any other king to do. O Sir, said one of the
senators, let be such vain words, for we let you wit that I and my
fellows were full sore afeard to behold his countenance; I fear me ye
have made a rod for yourself, for he intendeth to be lord of this
empire, which sore is to be doubted if he come, for he is all another
man than ye ween, and holdeth the most noble court of the world, all
other kings nor princes may not compare unto his noble maintenance. On
New Year’s Day we saw him in his estate, which was the royalest that
ever we saw, for he was served at his table with nine kings, and the
noblest fellowship of other princes, lords, and knights that be in the
world, and every knight approved and like a lord, and holdeth Table
Round: and in his person the most manly man that liveth, and is like to
conquer all the world, for unto his courage it is too little: wherefore
I advise you to keep well your marches and straits in the mountains;
for certainly he is a lord to be doubted. Well, said Lucius, before
Easter I suppose to pass the mountains, and so forth into France, and
there bereave him his lands with Genoese and other mighty warriors of
Tuscany and Lombardy. And I shall send for them all that be subjects
and allied to the empire of Rome to come to mine aid. And forthwith
sent old wise knights unto these countries following: first to Ambage
and Arrage, to Alexandria, to India, to Armenia, whereas the river of
Euphrates runneth into Asia, to Africa, and Europe the Large, to
Ertayne and Elamye, to Araby, Egypt, and to Damascus, to Damietta and
Cayer, to Cappadocia, to Tarsus, Turkey, Pontus and Pamphylia, to Syria
and Galatia. And all these were subject to Rome and many more, as
Greece, Cyprus, Macedonia, Calabria, Cateland, Portugal, with many
thousands of Spaniards. Thus all these kings, dukes, and admirals,
assembled about Rome, with sixteen kings at once, with great multitude
of people. When the emperor understood their coming he made ready his
Romans and all the people between him and Flanders.

Also he had gotten with him fifty giants which had been engendered of
fiends; and they were ordained to guard his person, and to break the
front of the battle of King Arthur. And thus departed from Rome, and
came down the mountains for to destroy the lands that Arthur had
conquered, and came unto Cologne, and besieged a castle thereby, and
won it soon, and stuffed it with two hundred Saracens or Infidels, and
after destroyed many fair countries which Arthur had won of King
Claudas. And thus Lucius came with all his host, which were disperplyd
sixty mile in breadth, and commanded them to meet with him in Burgoyne,
for he purposed to destroy the realm of Little Britain.



