CHAPTER XXVIII. How Sir Launcelot jousted with Palomides and overthrew
him, and after he was assailed with twelve knights.

Then Sir Palomides sent unto Sir Launcelot a squire, and required him
of jousts. Fair fellow, said Sir Launcelot, tell me thy lord’s name.
Sir, said the squire, my lord’s name is Sir Palomides, the good knight.
In good hour, said Sir Launcelot, for there is no knight that I saw
this seven years that I had liefer ado withal than with him. And so
either knights made them ready with two great spears. Nay, said Sir
Dinadan, ye shall see that Sir Palomides will quit him right well. It
may be so, said Sir Tristram, but I undertake that knight with the
shield of Cornwall shall give him a fall. I believe it not, said Sir
Dinadan. Right so they spurred their horses and feutred their spears,
and either hit other, and Sir Palomides brake a spear upon Sir
Launcelot, and he sat and moved not; but Sir Launcelot smote him so
lightly that he made his horse to avoid the saddle, and the stroke
brake his shield and the hauberk, and had he not fallen he had been
slain. How now, said Sir Tristram, I wist well by the manner of their
riding both that Sir Palomides should have a fall.

Right so Sir Launcelot rode his way, and rode to a well to drink and to
repose him, and they of Northgalis espied him whither he rode; and then
there followed him twelve knights for to have mischieved him, for this
cause that upon the morn at the tournament of the Castle of Maidens
that he should not win the victory. So they came upon Sir Launcelot
suddenly, and unnethe he might put upon him his helm and take his
horse, but they were in hands with him; and then Sir Launcelot gat his
spear, and rode through them, and there he slew a knight and brake a
spear in his body. Then he drew his sword and smote upon the right hand
and upon the left hand, so that within a few strokes he had slain other
three knights, and the remnant that abode he wounded them sore all that
did abide. Thus Sir Launcelot escaped from his enemies of North Wales,
and then Sir Launcelot rode his way till a friend, and lodged him till
on the morn; for he would not the first day have ado in the tournament
because of his great labour. And on the first day he was with King
Arthur thereas he was set on high upon a scaffold to discern who was
best worthy of his deeds. So Sir Launcelot was with King Arthur, and
jousted not the first day.



CHAPTER XXIX. How Sir Tristram behaved him the first day of the
tournament, and there he had the prize.

Now turn we unto Sir Tristram de Liones, that commanded Gouvernail, his
servant, to ordain him a black shield with none other remembrance
therein. And so Sir Persides and Sir Tristram departed from their host
Sir Pellounes, and they rode early toward the tournament, and then they
drew them to King Carados’ side, of Scotland; and anon knights began
the field what of King Northgalis’ part, and what of King Carados’
part, and there began great party. Then there was hurling and rashing.
Right so came in Sir Persides and Sir Tristram and so they did fare
that they put the King of Northgalis aback. Then came in Sir Bleoberis
de Ganis and Sir Gaheris with them of Northgalis, and then was Sir
Persides smitten down and almost slain, for more than forty horse men
went over him. For Sir Bleoberis did great deeds of arms, and Sir
Gaheris failed him not. When Sir Tristram beheld them, and saw them do
such deeds of arms, he marvelled what they were. Also Sir Tristram
thought shame that Sir Persides was so done to; and then he gat a great
spear in his hand, and then he rode to Sir Gaheris and smote him down
from his horse. And then was Sir Bleoberis wroth, and gat a spear and
rode against Sir Tristram in great ire; and there Sir Tristram met with
him, and smote Sir Bleoberis from his horse. So then the King with the
Hundred Knights was wroth, and he horsed Sir Bleoberis and Sir Gaheris
again, and there began a great medley; and ever Sir Tristram held them
passing short, and ever Sir Bleoberis was passing busy upon Sir
Tristram; and there came Sir Dinadan against Sir Tristram, and Sir
Tristram gave him such a buffet that he swooned in his saddle. Then
anon Sir Dinadan came to Sir Tristram and said: Sir, I know thee better
than thou weenest; but here I promise thee my troth I will never come
against thee more, for I promise thee that sword of thine shall never
come on mine helm.

With that came Sir Bleoberis, and Sir Tristram gave him such a buffet
that down he laid his head; and then he caught him so sore by the helm
that he pulled him under his horse’s feet. And then King Arthur blew to
lodging. Then Sir Tristram departed to his pavilion, and Sir Dinadan
rode with him; and Sir Persides and King Arthur then, and the kings
upon both parties, marvelled what knight that was with the black
shield. Many said their advice, and some knew him for Sir Tristram, and
held their peace and would nought say. So that first day King Arthur,
and all the kings and lords that were judges, gave Sir Tristram the
prize; howbeit they knew him not, but named him the Knight with the
Black Shield.



CHAPTER XXX. How Sir Tristram returned against King Arthur’s party
because he saw Sir Palomides on that party.

Then upon the morn Sir Palomides returned from the King of Northgalis,
and rode to King Arthur’s side, where was King Carados, and the King of
Ireland, and Sir Launcelot’s kin, and Sir Gawaine’s kin. So Sir
Palomides sent the damosel unto Sir Tristram that he sent to seek him
when he was out of his mind in the forest, and this damosel asked Sir
Tristram what he was and what was his name?

As for that, said Sir Tristram, tell Sir Palomides ye shall not wit as
at this time unto the time I have broken two spears upon him. But let
him wit thus much, said Sir Tristram, that I am the same knight that he
smote down in over evening at the tournament; and tell him plainly on
what party that Sir Palomides be I will be of the contrary party.

Sir, said the damosel, ye shall understand that Sir Palomides will be
on King Arthur’s side, where the most noble knights of the world be. In
the name of God, said Sir Tristram, then will I be with the King of
Northgalis, because Sir Palomides will be on King Arthur’s side, and
else I would not but for his sake. So when King Arthur was come they
blew unto the field; and then there began a great party, and so King
Carados jousted with the King of the Hundred Knights, and there King
Carados had a fall: then was there hurling and rushing, and right so
came in knights of King Arthur’s, and they bare aback the King of
Northgalis’ knights.

Then Sir Tristram came in, and began so roughly and so bigly that there
was none might withstand him, and thus Sir Tristram dured long. And at
the last Sir Tristram fell among the fellowship of King Ban, and there
fell upon him Sir Bors de Ganis, and Sir Ector de Maris, and Sir
Blamore de Ganis, and many other knights. And then Sir Tristram smote
on the right hand and on the left hand, that all lords and ladies spake
of his noble deeds. But at the last Sir Tristram should have had the
worse had not the King with the Hundred Knights been. And then he came
with his fellowship and rescued Sir Tristram, and brought him away from
those knights that bare the shields of Cornwall. And then Sir Tristram
saw another fellowship by themself, and there were a forty knights
together, and Sir Kay, the Seneschal, was their governor. Then Sir
Tristram rode in amongst them, and there he smote down Sir Kay from his
horse; and there he fared among those knights like a greyhound among
conies.

Then Sir Launcelot found a knight that was sore wounded upon the head.
Sir, said Sir Launcelot, who wounded you so sore? Sir, he said, a
knight that beareth a black shield, and I may curse the time that ever
I met with him, for he is a devil and no man. So Sir Launcelot departed
from him and thought to meet with Sir Tristram, and so he rode with his
sword drawn in his hand to seek Sir Tristram; and then he espied him
how he hurled here and there, and at every stroke Sir Tristram wellnigh
smote down a knight. O mercy Jesu! said the king, sith the times I bare
arms saw I never no knight do so marvellous deeds of arms. And if I
should set upon this knight, said Sir Launcelot to himself, I did shame
to myself, and therewithal Sir Launcelot put up his sword. And then the
King with the Hundred Knights and an hundred more of North Wales set
upon the twenty of Sir Launcelot’s kin: and they twenty knights held
them ever together as wild swine, and none would fail other. And so
when Sir Tristram beheld the noblesse of these twenty knights he
marvelled of their good deeds, for he saw by their fare and by their
rule that they had liefer die than avoid the field. Now Jesu, said Sir
Tristram, well may he be valiant and full of prowess that hath such a
sort of noble knights unto his kin, and full like is he to be a noble
man that is their leader and governor. He meant it by Sir Launcelot du
Lake. So when Sir Tristram had beholden them long he thought shame to
see two hundred knights battering upon twenty knights. Then Sir
Tristram rode unto the King with the Hundred Knights and said: Sir,
leave your fighting with those twenty knights, for ye win no worship of
them, ye be so many and they so few; and wit ye well they will not out
of the field I see by their cheer and countenance; and worship get ye
none an ye slay them. Therefore leave your fighting with them, for I to
increase my worship I will ride to the twenty knights and help them
with all my might and power. Nay, said the King with the Hundred
Knights, ye shall not do so; now I see your courage and courtesy I will
withdraw my knights for your pleasure, for evermore a good knight will
favour another, and like will draw to like.



