CHAPTER XXXI. How Sir Tristram found Palomides by a well, and brought
him with him to his lodging.

Then the King with the Hundred Knights withdrew his knights. And all
this while, and long to-fore, Sir Launcelot had watched upon Sir
Tristram with a very purpose to have fellowshipped with him. And then
suddenly Sir Tristram, Sir Dinadan, and Gouvernail, his man, rode their
way into the forest, that no man perceived where they went. So then
King Arthur blew unto lodging, and gave the King of Northgalis the
prize because Sir Tristram was upon his side. Then Sir Launcelot rode
here and there, so wood as lion that fauted his fill, because he had
lost Sir Tristram, and so he returned unto King Arthur. And then in all
the field was a noise that with the wind it might be heard two mile
thence, how the lords and ladies cried: The Knight with the Black
Shield hath won the field. Alas, said King Arthur, where is that knight
become? It is shame to all those in the field so to let him escape away
from you; but with gentleness and courtesy ye might have brought him
unto me to the Castle of Maidens. Then the noble King Arthur went unto
his knights and comforted them in the best wise that he could, and
said: My fair fellows, be not dismayed, howbeit ye have lost the field
this day. And many were hurt and sore wounded, and many were whole. My
fellows, said King Arthur, look that ye be of good cheer, for to-morn I
will be in the field with you and revenge you of your enemies. So that
night King Arthur and his knights reposed themself.

The damosel that came from La Beale Isoud unto Sir Tristram, all the
while the tournament was a-doing she was with Queen Guenever, and ever
the queen asked her for what cause she came into that country. Madam,
she answered, I come for none other cause but from my lady La Beale
Isoud to wit of your welfare. For in no wise she would not tell the
queen that she came for Sir Tristram’s sake. So this lady, Dame
Bragwaine, took her leave of Queen Guenever, and she rode after Sir
Tristram. And as she rode through the forest she heard a great cry;
then she commanded her squire to go into the forest to wit what was
that noise. And so he came to a well, and there he found a knight
bounden till a tree crying as he had been wood, and his horse and his
harness standing by him. And when he espied that squire, therewith he
abraid and brake himself loose, and took his sword in his hand, and ran
to have slain the squire. Then he took his horse and fled all that ever
he might unto Dame Bragwaine, and told her of his adventure. Then she
rode unto Sir Tristram’s pavilion, and told Sir Tristram what adventure
she had found in the forest. Alas, said Sir Tristram, upon my head
there is some good knight at mischief.

Then Sir Tristram took his horse and his sword and rode thither, and
there he heard how the knight complained unto himself and said: I,
woful knight Sir Palomides, what misadventure befalleth me, that thus
am defoiled with falsehood and treason, through Sir Bors and Sir Ector.
Alas, he said, why live I so long! And then he gat his sword in his
hands, and made many strange signs and tokens; and so through his
raging he threw his sword into that fountain. Then Sir Palomides wailed
and wrang his hands. And at the last for pure sorrow he ran into that
fountain, over his belly, and sought after his sword. Then Sir Tristram
saw that, and ran upon Sir Palomides, and held him in his arms fast.
What art thou, said Palomides, that holdeth me so? I am a man of this
forest that would thee none harm. Alas, said Sir Palomides, I may never
win worship where Sir Tristram is; for ever where he is an I be there,
then get I no worship; and if he be away for the most part I have the
gree, unless that Sir Launcelot be there or Sir Lamorak. Then Sir
Palomides said: Once in Ireland Sir Tristram put me to the worse, and
another time in Cornwall, and in other places in this land. What would
ye do, said Sir Tristram, an ye had Sir Tristram? I would fight with
him, said Sir Palomides, and ease my heart upon him; and yet, to say
thee sooth, Sir Tristram is the gentlest knight in this world living.
What will ye do, said Sir Tristram, will ye go with me to your lodging?
Nay, said he, I will go to the King with the Hundred Knights, for he
rescued me from Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Ector and else had I been
slain traitorly. Sir Tristram said him such kind words that Sir
Palomides went with him to his lodging. Then Gouvernail went to-fore,
and charged Dame Bragwaine to go out of the way to her lodging. And bid
ye Sir Persides that he make him no quarrels. And so they rode together
till they came to Sir Tristram’s pavilion, and there Sir Palomides had
all the cheer that might be had all that night. But in no wise Sir
Palomides might not know what was Sir Tristram; and so after supper
they yede to rest, and Sir Tristram for great travail slept till it was
day. And Sir Palomides might not sleep for anguish; and in the dawning
of the day he took his horse privily, and rode his way unto Sir Gaheris
and unto Sir Sagramore le Desirous, where they were in their pavilions;
for they three were fellows at the beginning of the tournament. And
then upon the morn the king blew unto the tournament upon the third
day.



CHAPTER XXXII. How Sir Tristram smote down Sir Palomides, and how he
jousted with King Arthur, and other feats.

So the King of Northgalis and the King with the Hundred Knights, they
two encountered with King Carados and with the King of Ireland; and
there the King with the Hundred Knights smote down King Carados, and
the King of Northgalis smote down the King of Ireland. With that came
in Sir Palomides, and when he came he made great work, for by his
indented shield he was well known. So came in King Arthur, and did
great deeds of arms together, and put the King of Northgalis and the
King with the Hundred Knights to the worse. With this came in Sir
Tristram with his black shield, and anon he jousted with Sir Palomides,
and there by fine force Sir Tristram smote Sir Palomides over his
horse’s croup. Then King Arthur cried: Knight with the Black Shield,
make thee ready to me, and in the same wise Sir Tristram smote King
Arthur. And then by force of King Arthur’s knights the King and Sir
Palomides were horsed again. Then King Arthur with a great eager heart
he gat a spear in his hand, and there upon the one side he smote Sir
Tristram over his horse. Then foot-hot Sir Palomides came upon Sir
Tristram, as he was upon foot, to have overridden him. Then Sir
Tristram was ware of him, and there he stooped aside, and with great
ire he gat him by the arm, and pulled him down from his horse. Then Sir
Palomides lightly arose, and then they dashed together mightily with
their swords; and many kings, queens, and lords, stood and beheld them.
And at the last Sir Tristram smote Sir Palomides upon the helm three
mighty strokes, and at every stroke that he gave him he said: This for
Sir Tristram’s sake. With that Sir Palomides fell to the earth
grovelling.

Then came the King with the Hundred Knights, and brought Sir Tristram
an horse, and so was he horsed again. By then was Sir Palomides horsed,
and with great ire he jousted upon Sir Tristram with his spear as it
was in the rest, and gave him a great dash with his sword. Then Sir
Tristram avoided his spear, and gat him by the neck with his both
hands, and pulled him clean out of his saddle, and so he bare him afore
him the length of ten spears, and then in the presence of them all he
let him fall at his adventure. Then Sir Tristram was ware of King
Arthur with a naked sword in his hand, and with his spear Sir Tristram
ran upon King Arthur; and then King Arthur boldly abode him and with
his sword he smote a-two his spear, and therewithal Sir Tristram
stonied; and so King Arthur gave him three or four strokes or he might
get out his sword, and at the last Sir Tristram drew his sword and
[either] assailed other passing hard. With that the great press
departed [them]. Then Sir Tristram rode here and there and did his
great pain, that eleven of the good knights of the blood of King Ban,
that was of Sir Launcelot’s kin, that day Sir Tristram smote down; that
all the estates marvelled of his great deeds and all cried upon the
Knight with the Black Shield.



