CHAPTER XI. How the queen espied that Sir Tristram had slain her
brother Sir Marhaus by his sword, and in what jeopardy he was.

Thus was Sir Tramtrist long there well cherished with the king and the
queen, and namely with La Beale Isoud. So upon a day the queen and La
Beale Isoud made a bain for Sir Tramtrist. And when he was in his bain
the queen and Isoud, her daughter, roamed up and down in the chamber;
and therewhiles Gouvernail and Hebes attended upon Tramtrist, and the
queen beheld his sword thereas it lay upon his bed. And then by unhap
the queen drew out his sword and beheld it a long while, and both they
thought it a passing fair sword; but within a foot and an half of the
point there was a great piece thereof out-broken of the edge. And when
the queen espied that gap in the sword, she remembered her of a piece
of a sword that was found in the brain-pan of Sir Marhaus, the good
knight that was her brother. Alas then, said she unto her daughter, La
Beale Isoud, this is the same traitor knight that slew my brother,
thine eme. When Isoud heard her say so she was passing sore abashed,
for passing well she loved Tramtrist, and full well she knew the
cruelness of her mother the queen.

Anon therewithal the queen went unto her own chamber, and sought her
coffer, and there she took out the piece or the sword that was pulled
out of Sir Marhaus’ head after that he was dead. And then she ran with
that piece of iron to the sword that lay upon the bed. And when she put
that piece of steel and iron unto the sword, it was as meet as it might
be when it was new broken. And then the queen gripped that sword in her
hand fiercely, and with all her might she ran straight upon Tramtrist
where he sat in his bain, and there she had rived him through had not
Sir Hebes gotten her in his arms, and pulled the sword from her, and
else she had thrust him through.

Then when she was let of her evil will she ran to the King Anguish, her
husband, and said on her knees: O my lord, here have ye in your house
that traitor knight that slew my brother and your servant, that noble
knight, Sir Marhaus. Who is that, said King Anguish, and where is he?
Sir, she said, it is Sir Tramtrist, the same knight that my daughter
healed. Alas, said the king, therefore am I right heavy, for he is a
full noble knight as ever I saw in field. But I charge you, said the
king to the queen, that ye have not ado with that knight, but let me
deal with him.

Then the king went into the chamber unto Sir Tramtrist, and then was he
gone unto his chamber, and the king found him all ready armed to mount
upon his horse. When the king saw him all ready armed to go unto
horseback, the king said: Nay, Tramtrist, it will not avail to compare
thee against me; but thus much I shall do for my worship and for thy
love; in so much as thou art within my court it were no worship for me
to slay thee: therefore upon this condition I will give thee leave for
to depart from this court in safety, so thou wilt tell me who was thy
father, and what is thy name, and if thou slew Sir Marhaus, my brother.



CHAPTER XII. How Sir Tristram departed from the king and La Beale Isoud
out of Ireland for to come into Cornwall.

Sir, said Tristram, now I shall tell you all the truth: my father’s
name is Sir Meliodas, King of Liones, and my mother hight Elizabeth,
that was sister unto King Mark of Cornwall; and my mother died of me in
the forest, and because thereof she commanded, or she died, that when I
were christened they should christen me Tristram; and because I would
not be known in this country I turned my name and let me call
Tramtrist; and for the truage of Cornwall I fought for my eme’s sake,
and for the right of Cornwall that ye had posseded many years. And wit
ye well, said Tristram unto the king, I did the battle for the love of
mine uncle, King Mark, and for the love of the country of Cornwall, and
for to increase mine honour; for that same day that I fought with Sir
Marhaus I was made knight, and never or then did I battle with no
knight, and from me he went alive, and left his shield and his sword
behind.

So God me help, said the king, I may not say but ye did as a knight
should, and it was your part to do for your quarrel, and to increase
your worship as a knight should; howbeit I may not maintain you in this
country with my worship, unless that I should displease my barons, and
my wife and her kin. Sir, said Tristram, I thank you of your good
lordship that I have had with you here, and the great goodness my lady,
your daughter, hath shewed me, and therefore, said Sir Tristram, it may
so happen that ye shall win more by my life than by my death, for in
the parts of England it may happen I may do you service at some season,
that ye shall be glad that ever ye shewed me your good lordship. With
more I promise you as I am true knight, that in all places I shall be
my lady your daughter’s servant and knight in right and in wrong, and I
shall never fail her, to do as much as a knight may do. Also I beseech
your good grace that I may take my leave at my lady, your daughter, and
at all the barons and knights. I will well, said the king.

Then Sir Tristram went unto La Beale Isoud and took his leave of her.
And then he told her all, what he was, and how he had changed his name
because he would not be known, and how a lady told him that he should
never be whole till he came into this country where the poison was
made, wherethrough I was near my death had not your ladyship been. O
gentle knight, said La Beale Isoud, full woe am I of thy departing, for
I saw never man that I owed so good will to. And therewithal she wept
heartily. Madam, said Sir Tristram, ye shall understand that my name is
Sir Tristram de Liones, gotten of King Meliodas, and born of his queen.
And I promise you faithfully that I shall be all the days of my life
your knight. Gramercy, said La Beale Isoud, and I promise you
there-against that I shall not be married this seven years but by your
assent; and to whom that ye will I shall be married to him will I have,
and he will have me if ye will consent.

And then Sir Tristram gave her a ring, and she gave him another; and
therewith he departed from her, leaving her making great dole and
lamentation; and he straight went unto the court among all the barons,
and there he took his leave at most and least, and openly he said among
them all: Fair lords, now it is so that I must depart: if there be any
man here that I have offended unto, or that any man be with me grieved,
let complain him here afore me or that ever I depart, and I shall amend
it unto my power. And if there be any that will proffer me wrong, or
say of me wrong or shame behind my back, say it now or never, and here
is my body to make it good, body against body. And all they stood
still, there was not one that would say one word; yet were there some
knights that were of the queen’s blood, and of Sir Marhaus’ blood, but
they would not meddle with him.



