CHAPTER IX. How Sir Tor rode after the knight with the brachet, and of
his adventure by the way.

When Sir Tor was ready, he mounted upon his horseback, and rode after
the knight with the brachet. So as he rode he met with a dwarf suddenly
that smote his horse on the head with a staff, that he went backward
his spear length. Why dost thou so? said Sir Tor. For thou shalt not
pass this way, but if thou joust with yonder knights of the pavilions.
Then was Tor ware where two pavilions were, and great spears stood out,
and two shields hung on trees by the pavilions. I may not tarry, said
Sir Tor, for I am in a quest that I must needs follow. Thou shalt not
pass, said the dwarf, and therewithal he blew his horn. Then there came
one armed on horseback, and dressed his shield, and came fast toward
Tor, and he dressed him against him, and so ran together that Tor bare
him from his horse. And anon the knight yielded him to his mercy. But,
sir, I have a fellow in yonder pavilion that will have ado with you
anon. He shall be welcome, said Sir Tor. Then was he ware of another
knight coming with great raundon, and each of them dressed to other,
that marvel it was to see; but the knight smote Sir Tor a great stroke
in midst of the shield that his spear all to-shivered. And Sir Tor
smote him through the shield below of the shield that it went through
the cost of the knight, but the stroke slew him not. And therewith Sir
Tor alighted and smote him on the helm a great stroke, and therewith
the knight yielded him and besought him of mercy. I will well, said Sir
Tor, but thou and thy fellow must go unto King Arthur, and yield you
prisoners unto him. By whom shall we say are we thither sent? Ye shall
say by the knight that went in the quest of the knight that went with
the brachet. Now, what be your two names? said Sir Tor. My name is,
said the one, Sir Felot of Langduk; and my name is, said the other, Sir
Petipase of Winchelsea. Now go ye forth, said Sir Tor, and God speed
you and me. Then came the dwarf and said unto Sir Tor, I pray you give
me a gift. I will well, said Sir Tor, ask. I ask no more, said the
dwarf, but that ye will suffer me to do you service, for I will serve
no more recreant knights. Take an horse, said Sir Tor, and ride on with
me. I wot ye ride after the knight with the white brachet, and I shall
bring you where he is, said the dwarf. And so they rode throughout a
forest, and at the last they were ware of two pavilions, even by a
priory, with two shields, and the one shield was enewed with white, and
the other shield was red.



CHAPTER X. How Sir Tor found the brachet with a lady, and how a knight
assailed him for the said brachet.

Therewith Sir Tor alighted and took the dwarf his glaive, and so he
came to the white pavilion, and saw three damosels lie in it, on one
pallet, sleeping, and so he went to the other pavilion, and found a
lady lying sleeping therein, but there was the white brachet that bayed
at her fast, and therewith the lady yede out of the pavilion and all
her damosels. But anon as Sir Tor espied the white brachet, he took her
by force and took her to the dwarf. What, will ye so, said the lady,
take my brachet from me? Yea, said Sir Tor, this brachet have I sought
from King Arthur’s court hither. Well, said the lady, knight, ye shall
not go far with her, but that ye shall be met and grieved. I shall
abide what adventure that cometh by the grace of God, and so mounted
upon his horse, and passed on his way toward Camelot; but it was so
near night he might not pass but little further. Know ye any lodging?
said Tor. I know none, said the dwarf, but here beside is an hermitage,
and there ye must take lodging as ye find. And within a while they came
to the hermitage and took lodging; and was there grass, oats and bread
for their horses; soon it was sped, and full hard was their supper; but
there they rested them all night till on the morn, and heard a mass
devoutly, and took their leave of the hermit, and Sir Tor prayed the
hermit to pray for him. He said he would, and betook him to God. And so
mounted upon horseback and rode towards Camelot a long while.

With that they heard a knight call loud that came after them, and he
said, Knight, abide and yield my brachet that thou took from my lady.
Sir Tor returned again, and beheld him how he was a seemly knight and
well horsed, and well armed at all points; then Sir Tor dressed his
shield, and took his spear in his hands, and the other came fiercely
upon him, and smote both horse and man to the earth. Anon they arose
lightly and drew their swords as eagerly as lions, and put their
shields afore them, and smote through the shields, that the cantels
fell off both parties. Also they tamed their helms that the hot blood
ran out, and the thick mails of their hauberks they carved and rove in
sunder that the hot blood ran to the earth, and both they had many
wounds and were passing weary. But Sir Tor espied that the other knight
fainted, and then he sued fast upon him, and doubled his strokes, and
gart him go to the earth on the one side. Then Sir Tor bade him yield
him. That will I not, said Abelleus, while my life lasteth and the soul
is within my body, unless that thou wilt give me the brachet. That will
I not do, said Sir Tor, for it was my quest to bring again thy brachet,
thee, or both.



CHAPTER XI. How Sir Tor overcame the knight, and how he lost his head
at the request of a lady.

With that came a damosel riding on a palfrey as fast as she might
drive, and cried with a loud voice unto Sir Tor. What will ye with me?
said Sir Tor. I beseech thee, said the damosel, for King Arthur’s love,
give me a gift; I require thee, gentle knight, as thou art a gentleman.
Now, said Tor, ask a gift and I will give it you. Gramercy, said the
damosel; now I ask the head of the false knight Abelleus, for he is the
most outrageous knight that liveth, and the greatest murderer. I am
loath, said Sir Tor, of that gift I have given you; let him make amends
in that he hath trespassed unto you. Now, said the damosel, he may not,
for he slew mine own brother before mine own eyes, that was a better
knight than he, an he had had grace; and I kneeled half an hour afore
him in the mire for to save my brother’s life, that had done him no
damage, but fought with him by adventure of arms, and so for all that I
could do he struck off his head; wherefore I require thee, as thou art
a true knight, to give me my gift, or else I shall shame thee in all
the court of King Arthur; for he is the falsest knight living, and a
great destroyer of good knights. Then when Abelleus heard this, he was
more afeard, and yielded him and asked mercy. I may not now, said Sir
Tor, but if I should be found false of my promise; for while I would
have taken you to mercy ye would none ask, but if ye had the brachet
again, that was my quest. And therewith he took off his helm, and he
arose and fled, and Sir Tor after him, and smote off his head quite.

Now sir, said the damosel, it is near night; I pray you come and lodge
with me here at my place, it is here fast by. I will well, said Sir
Tor, for his horse and he had fared evil since they departed from
Camelot, and so he rode with her, and had passing good cheer with her;
and she had a passing fair old knight to her husband that made him
passing good cheer, and well eased both his horse and him. And on the
morn he heard his mass, and brake his fast, and took his leave of the
knight and of the lady, that besought him to tell them his name. Truly,
he said, my name is Sir Tor that was late made knight, and this was the
first quest of arms that ever I did, to bring again that this knight
Abelleus took away from King Arthur’s court. O fair knight, said the
lady and her husband, an ye come here in our marches, come and see our
poor lodging, and it shall be always at your commandment. So Sir Tor
departed and came to Camelot on the third day by noon, and the king and
the queen and all the court was passing fain of his coming, and made
great joy that he was come again; for he went from the court with
little succour, but as King Pellinore his father gave him an old
courser, and King Arthur gave him armour and a sword, and else had he
none other succour, but rode so forth himself alone. And then the king
and the queen by Merlin’s advice made him to swear to tell of his
adventures, and so he told and made proofs of his deeds as it is afore
rehearsed, wherefore the king and the queen made great joy. Nay, nay,
said Merlin, these be but japes to that he shall do; for he shall prove
a noble knight of prowess, as good as any is living, and gentle and
courteous, and of good tatches, and passing true of his promise, and
never shall outrage. Wherethrough Merlin’s words King Arthur gave him
an earldom of lands that fell unto him. And here endeth the quest of
Sir Tor, King Pellinore’s son.



