CHAPTER III. How La Cote Male Taile overthrew Sir Dagonet the king’s
fool, and of the rebuke that he had of the damosel.

Then Sir Kay ordained Sir Dagonet, King Arthur’s fool, to follow after
La Cote Male Taile; and there Sir Kay ordained that Sir Dagonet was
horsed and armed, and bade him follow La Cote Male Taile and proffer
him to joust, and so he did; and when he saw La Cote Male Taile, he
cried and bade him make him ready to joust. So Sir La Cote Male Taile
smote Sir Dagonet over his horse’s croup. Then the damosel mocked La
Cote Male Taile, and said: Fie for shame! now art thou shamed in
Arthur’s court, when they send a fool to have ado with thee, and
specially at thy first jousts; thus she rode long, and chid. And within
a while there came Sir Bleoberis, the good knight, and there he jousted
with La Cote Male Taile, and there Sir Bleoberis smote him so sore,
that horse and all fell to the earth. Then La Cote Male Taile arose up
lightly, and dressed his shield, and drew his sword, and would have
done battle to the utterance, for he was wood wroth. Not so, said Sir
Bleoberis de Ganis, as at this time I will not fight upon foot. Then
the damosel Maledisant rebuked him in the foulest manner, and bade him:
Turn again, coward. Ah, damosel, he said, I pray you of mercy to missay
me no more, my grief is enough though ye give me no more; I call myself
never the worse knight when a mare’s son faileth me, and also I count
me never the worse knight for a fall of Sir Bleoberis.

So thus he rode with her two days; and by fortune there came Sir
Palomides and encountered with him, and he in the same wise served him
as did Bleoberis to-forehand. What dost thou here in my fellowship?
said the damosel Maledisant, thou canst not sit no knight, nor
withstand him one buffet, but if it were Sir Dagonet. Ah, fair damosel,
I am not the worse to take a fall of Sir Palomides, and yet great
disworship have I none, for neither Bleoberis nor yet Palomides would
not fight with me on foot. As for that, said the damosel, wit thou well
they have disdain and scorn to light off their horses to fight with
such a lewd knight as thou art. So in the meanwhile there came Sir
Mordred, Sir Gawaine’s brother, and so he fell in the fellowship with
the damosel Maledisant. And then they came afore the Castle Orgulous,
and there was such a custom that there might no knight come by that
castle but either he must joust or be prisoner, or at the least to lose
his horse and his harness. And there came out two knights against them,
and Sir Mordred jousted with the foremost, and that knight of the
castle smote Sir Mordred down off his horse. And then La Cote Male
Taile jousted with that other, and either of them smote other down,
horse and all, to the earth. And when they avoided their horses, then
either of them took other’s horses. And then La Cote Male Taile rode
unto that knight that smote down Sir Mordred, and jousted with him. And
there Sir La Cote Male Taile hurt and wounded him passing sore, and put
him from his horse as he had been dead. So he turned unto him that met
him afore, and he took the flight towards the castle, and Sir La Cote
Male Taile rode after him into the Castle Orgulous, and there La Cote
Male Taile slew him.



CHAPTER IV. How La Cote Male Taile fought against an hundred knights,
and how he escaped by the mean of a lady.

And anon there came an hundred knights about him and assailed him; and
when he saw his horse should be slain he alighted and voided his horse,
and put the bridle under his feet, and so put him out of the gate. And
when he had so done he hurled in among them, and dressed his back unto
a lady’s chamber-wall, thinking himself that he had liefer die there
with worship than to abide the rebukes of the damosel Maledisant. And
in the meantime as he stood and fought, that lady whose was the chamber
went out slily at her postern, and without the gates she found La Cote
Male Taile’s horse, and lightly she gat him by the bridle, and tied him
to the postern. And then she went unto her chamber slily again for to
behold how that one knight fought against an hundred knights. And when
she had beheld him long she went to a window behind his back, and said:
Thou knight, thou fightest wonderly well, but for all that at the last
thou must needs die, but, an thou canst through thy mighty prowess, win
unto yonder postern, for there have I fastened thy horse to abide thee:
but wit thou well thou must think on thy worship, and think not to die,
for thou mayst not win unto that postern without thou do nobly and
mightily. When La Cote Male Taile heard her say so he gripped his sword
in his hands, and put his shield fair afore him, and through the
thickest press he thrulled through them. And when he came to the
postern he found there ready four knights, and at two the first strokes
he slew two of the knights, and the other fled; and so he won his horse
and rode from them. And all as it was it was rehearsed in King Arthur’s
court, how he slew twelve knights within the Castle Orgulous; and so he
rode on his way.

And in the meanwhile the damosel said to Sir Mordred: I ween my foolish
knight be either slain or taken prisoner: then were they ware where he
came riding. And when he was come unto them he told all how he had sped
and escaped in despite of them all: And some of the best of them will
tell no tales. Thou liest falsely, said the damosel, that dare I make
good, but as a fool and a dastard to all knighthood they have let thee
pass. That may ye prove, said La Cote Male Taile. With that she sent a
courier of hers, that rode alway with her, for to know the truth of
this deed; and so he rode thither lightly, and asked how and in what
manner that La Cote Male Taile was escaped out of the castle. Then all
the knights cursed him, and said that he was a fiend and no man: For he
hath slain here twelve of our best knights, and we weened unto this day
that it had been too much for Sir Launcelot du Lake or for Sir Tristram
de Liones. And in despite of us all he is departed from us and maugre
our heads.

With this answer the courier departed and came to Maledisant his lady,
and told her all how Sir La Cote Male Taile had sped at the Castle
Orgulous. Then she smote down her head, and said little. By my head,
said Sir Mordred to the damosel, ye are greatly to blame so to rebuke
him, for I warn you plainly he is a good knight, and I doubt not but he
shall prove a noble knight; but as yet he may not yet sit sure on
horseback, for he that shall be a good horseman it must come of usage
and exercise. But when he cometh to the strokes of his sword he is then
noble and mighty, and that saw Sir Bleoberis and Sir Palomides, for wit
ye well they are wily men of arms, and anon they know when they see a
young knight by his riding, how they are sure to give him a fall from
his horse or a great buffet. But for the most part they will not light
on foot with young knights, for they are wight and strongly armed. For
in likewise Sir Launcelot du Lake, when he was first made knight, he
was often put to the worse upon horseback, but ever upon foot he
recovered his renown, and slew and defoiled many knights of the Round
Table. And therefore the rebukes that Sir Launcelot did unto many
knights causeth them that be men of prowess to beware; for often I have
seen the old proved knights rebuked and slain by them that were but
young beginners. Thus they rode sure talking by the way together.

Here leave we off a while of this tale, and speak we of Sir Launcelot
du Lake.



