CHAPTER XXVII. How King Arthur went to the tournament with his knights,
and how the lady received him worshipfully, and how the knights
encountered.

And then there came with King Arthur Sir Gawaine, Agravaine, Gaheris,
his brethren. And then his nephews Sir Uwaine le Blanchemains, and Sir
Aglovale, Sir Tor, Sir Percivale de Galis, and Sir Lamorak de Galis.
Then came Sir Launcelot du Lake with his brethren, nephews, and
cousins, as Sir Lionel, Sir Ector de Maris, Sir Bors de Ganis, and Sir
Galihodin, Sir Galihud, and many more of Sir Launcelot’s blood, and Sir
Dinadan, Sir La Cote Male Taile, his brother, a good knight, and Sir
Sagramore, a good knight; and all the most part of the Round Table.
Also there came with King Arthur these knights, the King of Ireland,
King Agwisance, and the King of Scotland, King Carados and King Uriens
of the land of Gore, and King Bagdemagus and his son Sir Meliaganus,
and Sir Galahault the noble prince. All these kings, princes, and
earls, barons, and other noble knights, as Sir Brandiles, Sir Uwaine
les Avoutres, and Sir Kay, Sir Bedivere, Sir Meliot de Logres, Sir
Petipase of Winchelsea, Sir Godelake: all these came with King Arthur,
and more that cannot be rehearsed.

Now leave we of these kings and knights, and let us speak of the great
array that was made within the castle and about the castle for both
parties. The Lady Dame Lionesse ordained great array upon her part for
her noble knights, for all manner of lodging and victual that came by
land and by water, that there lacked nothing for her party, nor for the
other, but there was plenty to be had for gold and silver for King
Arthur and his knights. And then there came the harbingers from King
Arthur for to harbour him, and his kings, dukes, earls, barons, and
knights. And then Sir Gareth prayed Dame Lionesse and the Red Knight of
the Red Launds, and Sir Persant and his brother, and Sir Gringamore,
that in no wise there should none of them tell not his name, and make
no more of him than of the least knight that there was, For, he said, I
will not be known of neither more nor less, neither at the beginning
neither at the ending. Then Dame Lionesse said unto Sir Gareth: Sir, I
will lend you a ring, but I would pray you as you love me heartily let
me have it again when the tournament is done, for that ring increaseth
my beauty much more than it is of himself. And the virtue of my ring is
that, that is green it will turn to red, and that is red it will turn
in likeness to green, and that is blue it will turn to likeness of
white, and that is white it will turn in likeness to blue, and so it
will do of all manner of colours. Also who that beareth my ring shall
lose no blood, and for great love I will give you this ring. Gramercy,
said Sir Gareth, mine own lady, for this ring is passing meet for me,
for it will turn all manner of likeness that I am in, and that shall
cause me that I shall not be known. Then Sir Gringamore gave Sir Gareth
a bay courser that was a passing good horse; also he gave him good
armour and sure, and a noble sword that sometime Sir Gringamore’s
father won upon an heathen tyrant. And so thus every knight made him
ready to that tournament. And King Arthur was come two days to-fore the
Assumption of our Lady. And there was all manner of royalty of all
minstrelsy that might be found. Also there came Queen Guenever and the
Queen of Orkney, Sir Gareth’s mother.

And upon the Assumption Day, when mass and matins were done, there were
heralds with trumpets commanded to blow to the field. And so there came
out Sir Epinogrus, the king’s son of Northumberland, from the castle,
and there encountered with him Sir Sagramore le Desirous, and either of
them brake their spears to their hands. And then came in Sir Palamides
out of the castle, and there encountered with him Gawaine, and either
of them smote other so hard that both the good knights and their horses
fell to the earth. And then knights of either party rescued their
knights. And then came in Sir Safere and Sir Segwarides, brethren to
Sir Palamides; and there encountered Sir Agravaine with Sir Safere and
Sir Gaheris encountered with Sir Segwarides. So Sir Safere smote down
Agravaine, Sir Gawaine’s brother; and Sir Segwarides, Sir Safere’s
brother. And Sir Malegrine, a knight of the castle, encountered with
Sir Uwaine le Blanchemains, and there Sir Uwaine gave Sir Malegrine a
fall, that he had almost broke his neck.



CHAPTER XXVIII. How the knights bare them in the battle.

Then Sir Brian de les Isles and Grummore Grummursum, knights of the
castle, encountered with Sir Aglovale, and Sir Tor smote down Sir
Grummore Grummursum to the earth. Then came in Sir Carados of the
dolorous tower, and Sir Turquine, knights of the castle; and there
encountered with them Sir Percivale de Galis and Sir Lamorak de Galis,
that were two brethren. And there encountered Sir Percivale with Sir
Carados, and either brake their spears unto their hands, and then Sir
Turquine with Sir Lamorak, and either of them smote down other’s horse
and all to the earth, and either parties rescued other, and horsed them
again. And Sir Arnold and Sir Gauter, knights of the castle,
encountered with Sir Brandiles and Sir Kay, and these four knights
encountered mightily, and brake their spears to their hands. Then came
in Sir Tristram, Sir Sadok, and Sir Dinas, knights of the castle, and
there encountered Sir Tristram with Sir Bedivere, and there Sir
Bedivere was smitten to the earth both horse and man. And Sir Sadok
encountered with Sir Petipase, and there Sir Sadok was overthrown. And
there Uwaine les Avoutres smote down Sir Dinas, the Seneschal. Then
came in Sir Persant of Inde, a knight of the castle, and there
encountered with him Sir Launcelot du Lake, and there he smote Sir
Persant, horse and man, to the earth. Then came Sir Pertolepe from the
castle, and there encountered with him Sir Lionel, and there Sir
Pertolepe, the Green Knight, smote down Sir Lionel, brother to Sir
Launcelot. All this was marked by noble heralds, who bare him best, and
their names.

And then came into the field Sir Perimones, the Red Knight, Sir
Persant’s brother, that was a knight of the castle, and he encountered
with Sir Ector de Maris, and either smote other so hard that both their
horses and they fell to the earth. And then came in the Red Knight of
the Red Launds, and Sir Gareth, from the castle, and there encountered
with them Sir Bors de Ganis and Sir Bleoberis, and there the Red Knight
and Sir Bors [either] smote other so hard that their spears brast, and
their horses fell grovelling to the earth. Then Sir Bleoberis brake his
spear upon Sir Gareth, but of that stroke Sir Bleoberis fell to the
earth. When Sir Galihodin saw that he bade Sir Gareth keep him, and Sir
Gareth smote him to the earth. Then Sir Galihud gat a spear to avenge
his brother, and in the same wise Sir Gareth served him, and Sir
Dinadan and his brother, La Cote Male Taile, and Sir Sagramore le
Desirous, and Sir Dodinas le Savage. All these he bare down with one
spear.

When King Agwisance of Ireland saw Sir Gareth fare so, he marvelled
what he might be that one time seemed green, and another time, at his
again coming, he seemed blue. And thus at every course that he rode to
and fro he changed his colour, so that there might neither king nor
knight have ready cognisance of him. Then Sir Agwisance, the King of
Ireland, encountered with Sir Gareth, and there Sir Gareth smote him
from his horse, saddle and all. And then came King Carados of Scotland,
and Sir Gareth smote him down horse and man. And in the same wise he
served King Uriens of the land of Gore. And then came in Sir
Bagdemagus, and Sir Gareth smote him down, horse and man, to the earth.
And Bagdemagus’ son, Meliganus, brake a spear upon Sir Gareth mightily
and knightly. And then Sir Galahault, the noble prince, cried on high:
Knight with the many colours, well hast thou jousted; now make thee
ready that I may joust with thee. Sir Gareth heard him, and he gat a
great spear, and so they encountered together, and there the prince
brake his spear; but Sir Gareth smote him upon the left side of the
helm that he reeled here and there, and he had fallen down had not his
men recovered him.

So God me help, said King Arthur, that same knight with the many
colours is a good knight. Wherefore the king called unto him Sir
Launcelot, and prayed him to encounter with that knight. Sir, said
Launcelot, I may well find in my heart for to forbear him as at this
time, for he hath had travail enough this day; and when a good knight
doth so well upon some day, it is no good knight’s part to let him of
his worship, and namely, when he seeth a knight hath done so great
labour; for peradventure, said Sir Launcelot, his quarrel is here this
day, and peradventure he is best beloved with this lady of all that be
here; for I see well he paineth him and enforceth him to do great
deeds, and therefore, said Sir Launcelot, as for me, this day he shall
have the honour; though it lay in my power to put him from it I would
not.



