CHAPTER XXIV. How Sir Tristram demanded La Beale Isoud for King Mark,
and how Sir Tristram and Isoud drank the love drink.

Then upon a day King Anguish asked Sir Tristram why he asked not his
boon, for whatsomever he had promised him he should have it without
fail. Sir, said Sir Tristram, now is it time; this is all that I will
desire, that ye will give me La Beale Isoud, your daughter, not for
myself, but for mine uncle, King Mark, that shall have her to wife, for
so have I promised him. Alas, said the king, I had liefer than all the
land that I have ye would wed her yourself. Sir, an I did then I were
shamed for ever in this world, and false of my promise. Therefore, said
Sir I Tristram, I pray you hold your promise that ye promised me; for
this is my desire, that ye will give me La Beale Isoud to go with me
into Cornwall for to be wedded to King Mark, mine uncle. As for that,
said King Anguish, ye shall have her with you to do with her what it
please you; that is for to say if that ye list to wed her yourself,
that is me liefest, and if ye will give her unto King Mark, your uncle,
that is in your choice. So, to make short conclusion, La Beale Isoud
was made ready to go with Sir Tristram, and Dame Bragwaine went with
her for her chief gentlewoman, with many other.

Then the queen, Isoud’s mother, gave to her and Dame Bragwaine, her
daughter’s gentlewoman, and unto Gouvernail, a drink, and charged them
that what day King Mark should wed, that same day they should give him
that drink, so that King Mark should drink to La Beale Isoud, and then,
said the queen, I undertake either shall love other the days of their
life. So this drink was given unto Dame Bragwaine, and unto Gouvernail.
And then anon Sir Tristram took the sea, and La Beale Isoud; and when
they were in their cabin, it happed so that they were thirsty, and they
saw a little flasket of gold stand by them, and it seemed by the colour
and the taste that it was noble wine. Then Sir Tristram took the
flasket in his hand, and said, Madam Isoud, here is the best drink that
ever ye drank, that Dame Bragwaine, your maiden, and Gouvernail, my
servant, have kept for themselves. Then they laughed and made good
cheer, and either drank to other freely, and they thought never drink
that ever they drank to other was so sweet nor so good. But by that
their drink was in their bodies, they loved either other so well that
never their love departed for weal neither for woe. And thus it happed
the love first betwixt Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud, the which love
never departed the days of their life.

So then they sailed till by fortune they came nigh a castle that hight
Pluere, and thereby arrived for to repose them, weening to them to have
had good harbourage. But anon as Sir Tristram was within the castle
they were taken prisoners; for the custom of the castle was such; who
that rode by that castle and brought any lady, he must needs fight with
the lord, that hight Breunor. And if it were so that Breunor won the
field, then should the knight stranger and his lady be put to death,
what that ever they were; and if it were so that the strange knight won
the field of Sir Breunor, then should he die and his lady both. This
custom was used many winters, for it was called the Castle Pluere, that
is to say the Weeping Castle.



CHAPTER XXV. How Sir Tristram and Isoud were in prison, and how he
fought for her beauty, and smote off another lady’s head.

Thus as Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud were in prison, it happed a
knight and a lady came unto them where they were, to cheer them. I have
marvel, said Tristram unto the knight and the lady, what is the cause
the lord of this castle holdeth us in prison: it was never the custom
of no place of worship that ever I came in, when a knight and a lady
asked harbour, and they to receive them, and after to destroy them that
be his guests. Sir, said the knight, this is the old custom of this
castle, that when a knight cometh here he must needs fight with our
lord, and he that is weaker must lose his head. And when that is done,
if his lady that he bringeth be fouler than our lord’s wife, she must
lose her head: and if she be fairer proved than is our lady, then shall
the lady of this castle lose her head. So God me help, said Sir
Tristram, this is a foul custom and a shameful. But one advantage have
I, said Sir Tristram, I have a lady is fair enough, fairer saw I never
in all my life-days, and I doubt not for lack of beauty she shall not
lose her head; and rather than I should lose my head I will fight for
it on a fair field. Wherefore, sir knight, I pray you tell your lord
that I will be ready as to-morn with my lady, and myself to do battle,
if it be so I may have my horse and mine armour. Sir, said that knight,
I undertake that your desire shall be sped right well. And then he
said: Take your rest, and look that ye be up betimes and make you ready
and your lady, for ye shall want no thing that you behoveth. And
therewith he departed, and on the morn betimes that same knight came to
Sir Tristram, and fetched him out and his lady, and brought him horse
and armour that was his own, and bade him make him ready to the field,
for all the estates and commons of that lordship were there ready to
behold that battle and judgment.

Then came Sir Breunor, the lord of that castle, with his lady in his
hand, muffled, and asked Sir Tristram where was his lady: For an thy
lady be fairer than mine, with thy sword smite off my lady’s head; and
if my lady be fairer than thine, with my sword I must strike off her
head. And if I may win thee, yet shall thy lady be mine, and thou shalt
lose thy head. Sir, said Tristram, this is a foul custom and horrible;
and rather than my lady should lose her head, yet had I liefer lose my
head. Nay, nay, said Sir Breunor, the ladies shall be first showed
together, and the one shall have her judgment. Nay, I will not so, said
Sir Tristram, for here is none that will give righteous judgment. But I
doubt not, said Sir Tristram, my lady is fairer than thine, and that
will I prove and make good with my hand. And whosomever he be that will
say the contrary I will prove it on his head. And therewith Sir
Tristram showed La Beale Isoud, and turned her thrice about with his
naked sword in his hand. And when Sir Breunor saw that, he did the same
wise turn his lady. But when Sir Breunor beheld La Beale Isoud, him
thought he saw never a fairer lady, and then he dread his lady’s head
should be off. And so all the people that were there present gave
judgment that La Beale Isoud was the fairer lady and the better made.
How now, said Sir Tristram, meseemeth it were pity that my lady should
lose her head, but because thou and she of long time have used this
wicked custom, and by you both have many good knights and ladies been
destroyed, for that cause it were no loss to destroy you both. So God
me help, said Sir Breunor, for to say the sooth, thy lady is fairer
than mine, and that me sore repenteth. And so I hear the people privily
say, for of all women I saw none so fair; and therefore, an thou wilt
slay my lady, I doubt not but I shall slay thee and have thy lady. Thou
shalt win her, said Sir Tristram, as dear as ever knight won lady. And
because of thine own judgment, as thou wouldst have done to my lady if
that she had been fouler, and because of the evil custom, give me thy
lady, said Sir Tristram. And therewithal Sir Tristram strode unto him
and took his lady from him, and with an awk stroke he smote off her
head clean. Well, knight, said Sir Breunor, now hast thou done me a
despite.



