CHAPTER XXVI. How damosel Bragwaine found Tristram sleeping by a well,
and how she delivered letters to him from La Beale Isoud.

And then he pulled off his helm and washed his visage and his hands,
and so he fell asleep. In the meanwhile came a damosel that had sought
Sir Tristram many ways and days within this land. And when she came to
the well she looked upon him, and had forgotten him as in remembrance
of Sir Tristram, but by his horse she knew him, that hight Passe-Brewel
that had been Sir Tristram’s horse many years. For when he was mad in
the forest Sir Fergus kept him. So this lady, Dame Bragwaine, abode
still till he was awake. So when she saw him wake she saluted him, and
he her again, for either knew other of old acquaintance; then she told
him how she had sought him long and broad, and there she told him how
she had letters from Queen La Beale Isoud. Then anon Sir Tristram read
them, and wit ye well he was glad, for therein was many a piteous
complaint. Then Sir Tristram said: Lady Bragwaine, ye shall ride with
me till that tournament be done at the Castle of Maidens, and then
shall bear letters and tidings with you. And then Sir Tristram took his
horse and sought lodging, and there he met with a good ancient knight
and prayed him to lodge with him. Right so came Gouvernail unto Sir
Tristram, that was glad of that lady. So this old knight’s name was Sir
Pellounes, and he told of the great tournament that should be at the
Castle of Maidens. And there Sir Launcelot and thirty-two knights of
his blood had ordained shields of Cornwall. And right so there came one
unto Sir Pellounes, and told him that Sir Persides de Bloise was come
home; then that knight held up his hands and thanked God of his coming
home. And there Sir Pellounes told Sir Tristram that in two years he
had not seen his son, Sir Persides. Sir, said Sir Tristram, I know your
son well enough for a good knight.

So on a time Sir Tristram and Sir Persides came to their lodging both
at once, and so they unarmed them, and put upon them their clothing.
And then these two knights each welcomed other. And when Sir Persides
understood that Sir Tristram was of Cornwall, he said he was once in
Cornwall: And there I jousted afore King Mark; and so it happed me at
that time to overthrow ten knights, and then came to me Sir Tristram de
Liones and overthrew me, and took my lady away from me, and that shall
I never forget, but I shall remember me an ever I see my time. Ah, said
Sir Tristram, now I understand that ye hate Sir Tristram. What deem ye,
ween ye that Sir Tristram is not able to withstand your malice? Yes,
said Sir Persides, I know well that Sir Tristram is a noble knight and
a much better knight than I, yet shall I not owe him my good will.
Right as they stood thus talking at a bay-window of that castle, they
saw many knights riding to and fro toward the tournament. And then was
Sir Tristram ware of a likely knight riding upon a great black horse,
and a black-covered shield. What knight is that, said Sir Tristram,
with the black horse and the black shield? he seemeth a good knight. I
know him well, said Sir Persides, he is one of the best knights of the
world. Then is it Sir Launcelot, said Tristram. Nay, said Sir Persides,
it is Sir Palomides, that is yet unchristened.



CHAPTER XXVII. How Sir Tristram had a fall with Sir Palomides, and how
Launcelot overthrew two knights.

Then they saw much people of the country salute Sir Palomides. And
within a while after there came a squire of the castle, that told Sir
Pellounes that was lord of that castle, that a knight with a black
shield had smitten down thirteen knights. Fair brother, said Sir
Tristram unto Sir Persides, let us cast upon us cloaks, and let us go
see the play. Not so, said Sir Persides, we will not go like knaves
thither, but we will ride like men and good knights to withstand our
enemies. So they armed them, and took their horses and great spears,
and thither they went thereas many knights assayed themself before the
tournament. And anon Sir Palomides saw Sir Persides, and then he sent a
squire unto him and said: Go thou to the yonder knight with the green
shield and therein a lion of gold, and say him I require him to joust
with me, and tell him that my name is Sir Palomides. When Sir Persides
understood that request of Sir Palomides, he made him ready, and there
anon they met together, but Sir Persides had a fall. Then Sir Tristram
dressed him to be revenged upon Sir Palomides, and that saw Sir
Palomides that was ready and so was not Sir Tristram, and took him at
an advantage and smote him over his horse’s tail when he had no spear
in his rest. Then stert up Sir Tristram and took his horse lightly, and
was wroth out of measure, and sore ashamed of that fall. Then Sir
Tristram sent unto Sir Palomides by Gouvernail, and prayed him to joust
with him at his request. Nay, said Sir Palomides, as at this time I
will not joust with that knight, for I know him better than he weeneth.
And if he be wroth he may right it to-morn at the Castle of Maidens,
where he may see me and many other knights.

With that came Sir Dinadan, and when he saw Sir Tristram wroth he list
not to jape. Lo, said Sir Dinadan, here may a man prove, be a man never
so good yet may he have a fall, and he was never so wise but he might
be overseen, and he rideth well that never fell. So Sir Tristram was
passing wroth, and said to Sir Persides and to Sir Dinadan: I will
revenge me. Right so as they stood talking there, there came by Sir
Tristram a likely knight riding passing soberly and heavily with a
black shield. What knight is that? said Sir Tristram unto Sir Persides.
I know him well, said Sir Persides, for his name is Sir Briant of North
Wales; so he passed on among other knights of North Wales. And there
came in Sir Launcelot du Lake with a shield of the arms of Cornwall,
and he sent a squire unto Sir Briant, and required him to joust with
him. Well, said Sir Briant, sithen I am required to joust I will do
what I may; and there Sir Launcelot smote down Sir Briant from his
horse a great fall. And then Sir Tristram marvelled what knight he was
that bare the shield of Cornwall. Whatsoever he be, said Sir Dinadan, I
warrant you he is of King Ban’s blood, the which be knights of the most
noble prowess in the world, for to account so many for so many. Then
there came two knights of Northgalis, that one hight Hew de la
Montaine, and the other Sir Madok de la Montaine, and they challenged
Sir Launcelot foot-hot. Sir Launcelot not refusing them but made him
ready, with one spear he smote them down both over their horses’
croups; and so Sir Launcelot rode his way. By the good lord, said Sir
Tristram, he is a good knight that beareth the shield of Cornwall, and
meseemeth he rideth in the best manner that ever I saw knight ride.

Then the King of Northgalis rode unto Sir Palomides and prayed him
heartily for his sake to joust with that knight that hath done us of
Northgalis despite. Sir, said Sir Palomides, I am full loath to have
ado with that knight, and cause why is, for as to-morn the great
tournament shall be; and therefore I will keep myself fresh by my will.
Nay, said the King of Northgalis, I pray you require him of jousts.
Sir, said Sir Palomides, I will joust at your request, and require that
knight to joust with me, and often I have seen a man have a fall at his
own request.



