CHAPTER IV. How the battle was finished or he came, and how King Arthur
founded an abbey where the battle was.

Therewithal came one to King Arthur, and told him that King Pellinore
was within three mile with a great host; and he said, Go unto him, and
let him understand how we have sped. So within a while King Pellinore
came with a great host, and saluted the people and the king, and there
was great joy made on every side. Then the king let search how much
people of his party there was slain; and there were found but little
past two hundred men slain and eight knights of the Table Round in
their pavilions. Then the king let rear and devise in the same place
whereat the battle was done a fair abbey, and endowed it with great
livelihood, and let it call the Abbey of La Beale Adventure. But when
some of them came into their countries, whereof the five kings were
kings, and told them how they were slain, there was made great dole.
And all King Arthur’s enemies, as the King of North Wales, and the
kings of the North, [when they] wist of the battle, they were passing
heavy. And so the king returned unto Camelot in haste.

And when he was come to Camelot he called King Pellinore unto him, and
said, Ye understand well that we have lost eight knights of the best of
the Table Round, and by your advice we will choose eight again of the
best we may find in this court. Sir, said Pellinore, I shall counsel
you after my conceit the best: there are in your court full noble
knights both of old and young; and therefore by mine advice ye shall
choose half of the old and half of the young. Which be the old? said
King Arthur. Sir, said King Pellinore, meseemeth that King Uriens that
hath wedded your sister Morgan le Fay, and the King of the Lake, and
Sir Hervise de Revel, a noble knight, and Sir Galagars, the fourth.
This is well devised, said King Arthur, and right so shall it be. Now,
which are the four young knights? said Arthur. Sir, said Pellinore, the
first is Sir Gawaine, your nephew, that is as good a knight of his time
as any is in this land; and the second as meseemeth best is Sir Griflet
le Fise de Dieu, that is a good knight and full desirous in arms, and
who may see him live he shall prove a good knight; and the third as
meseemeth is well to be one of the knights of the Round Table, Sir Kay
the Seneschal, for many times he hath done full worshipfully, and now
at your last battle he did full honourably for to undertake to slay two
kings. By my head, said Arthur, he is best worth to be a knight of the
Round Table of any that ye have rehearsed, an he had done no more
prowess in his life days.



CHAPTER V. How Sir Tor was made knight of the Round Table, and how
Bagdemagus was displeased.

Now, said King Pellinore, I shall put to you two knights, and ye shall
choose which is most worthy, that is Sir Bagdemagus, and Sir Tor, my
son. But because Sir Tor is my son I may not praise him, but else, an
he were not my son, I durst say that of his age there is not in this
land a better knight than he is, nor of better conditions and loath to
do any wrong, and loath to take any wrong. By my head, said Arthur, he
is a passing good knight as any ye spake of this day, that wot I well,
said the king; for I have seen him proved, but he saith little and he
doth much more, for I know none in all this court an he were as well
born on his mother’s side as he is on your side, that is like him of
prowess and of might: and therefore I will have him at this time, and
leave Sir Bagdemagus till another time. So when they were so chosen by
the assent of all the barons, so were there found in their sieges every
knights’ names that here are rehearsed, and so were they set in their
sieges; whereof Sir Bagdemagus was wonderly wroth, that Sir Tor was
advanced afore him, and therefore suddenly he departed from the court,
and took his squire with him, and rode long in a forest till they came
to a cross, and there alighted and said his prayers devoutly. The
meanwhile his squire found written upon the cross, that Bagdemagus
should never return unto the court again, till he had won a knight’s
body of the Round Table, body for body. So, sir, said the squire, here
I find writing of you, therefore I rede you return again to the court.
That shall I never, said Bagdemagus, till men speak of me great
worship, and that I be worthy to be a knight of the Round Table. And so
he rode forth, and there by the way he found a branch of an holy herb
that was the sign of the Sangreal, and no knight found such tokens but
he were a good liver.

So, as Sir Bagdemagus rode to see many adventures, it happed him to
come to the rock whereas the Lady of the Lake had put Merlin under the
stone, and there he heard him make great dole; whereof Sir Bagdemagus
would have holpen him, and went unto the great stone, and it was so
heavy that an hundred men might not lift it up. When Merlin wist he was
there, he bade leave his labour, for all was in vain, for he might
never be holpen but by her that put him there. And so Bagdemagus
departed and did many adventures, and proved after a full good knight,
and came again to the court and was made knight of the Round Table. So
on the morn there fell new tidings and other adventures.



CHAPTER VI. How King Arthur, King Uriens, and Sir Accolon of Gaul,
chased an hart, and of their marvellous adventures.

Then it befell that Arthur and many of his knights rode a-hunting into
a great forest, and it happed King Arthur, King Uriens, and Sir Accolon
of Gaul, followed a great hart, for they three were well horsed, and so
they chased so fast that within a while they three were then ten mile
from their fellowship. And at the last they chased so sore that they
slew their horses underneath them. Then were they all three on foot,
and ever they saw the hart afore them passing weary and enbushed. What
will we do? said King Arthur, we are hard bestead. Let us go on foot,
said King Uriens, till we may meet with some lodging. Then were they
ware of the hart that lay on a great water bank, and a brachet biting
on his throat, and more other hounds came after. Then King Arthur blew
the prise and dight the hart.

Then the king looked about the world, and saw afore him in a great
water a little ship, all apparelled with silk down to the water, and
the ship came right unto them and landed on the sands. Then Arthur went
to the bank and looked in, and saw none earthly creature therein. Sirs,
said the king, come thence, and let us see what is in this ship. So
they went in all three, and found it richly behanged with cloth of
silk. By then it was dark night, and there suddenly were about them an
hundred torches set upon all the sides of the ship boards, and it gave
great light; and therewithal there came out twelve fair damosels and
saluted King Arthur on their knees, and called him by his name, and
said he was right welcome, and such cheer as they had he should have of
the best. The king thanked them fair. Therewithal they led the king and
his two fellows into a fair chamber, and there was a cloth laid, richly
beseen of all that longed unto a table, and there were they served of
all wines and meats that they could think; of that the king had great
marvel, for he fared never better in his life as for one supper. And so
when they had supped at their leisure, King Arthur was led into a
chamber, a richer beseen chamber saw he never none, and so was King
Uriens served, and led into such another chamber, and Sir Accolon was
led into the third chamber passing richly and well beseen; and so they
were laid in their beds easily. And anon they fell asleep, and slept
marvellously sore all the night. And on the morrow King Uriens was in
Camelot abed in his wife’s arms, Morgan le Fay. And when he awoke he
had great marvel, how he came there, for on the even afore he was two
days’ journey from Camelot. And when King Arthur awoke he found himself
in a dark prison, hearing about him many complaints of woful knights.



