CHAPTER XVI. How Sir Launcelot at the request of a lady recovered a
falcon, by which he was deceived.

And so Sir Launcelot rode through many strange countries, over marshes
and valleys, till by fortune he came to a fair castle, and as he passed
beyond the castle him thought he heard two bells ring. And then was he
ware of a falcon came flying over his head toward an high elm, and long
lunes about her feet, and as she flew unto the elm to take her perch
the lunes over-cast about a bough. And when she would have taken her
flight she hung by the legs fast; and Sir Launcelot saw how she hung,
and beheld the fair falcon perigot, and he was sorry for her.

The meanwhile came a lady out of the castle and cried on high: O
Launcelot, Launcelot, as thou art flower of all knights, help me to get
my hawk, for an my hawk be lost my lord will destroy me; for I kept the
hawk and she slipped from me, and if my lord my husband wit it he is so
hasty that he will slay me. What is your lord’s name? said Sir
Launcelot. Sir, she said, his name is Sir Phelot, a knight that longeth
unto the King of Northgalis. Well, fair lady, since that ye know my
name, and require me of knighthood to help you, I will do what I may to
get your hawk, and yet God knoweth I am an ill climber, and the tree is
passing high, and few boughs to help me withal. And therewith Sir
Launcelot alighted, and tied his horse to the same tree, and prayed the
lady to unarm him. And so when he was unarmed, he put off all his
clothes unto his shirt and breech, and with might and force he clomb up
to the falcon, and tied the lines to a great rotten boyshe, and threw
the hawk down and it withal.

Anon the lady gat the hawk in her hand; and therewithal came out Sir
Phelot out of the groves suddenly, that was her husband, all armed and
with his naked sword in his hand, and said: O knight Launcelot, now
have I found thee as I would, and stood at the bole of the tree to slay
him. Ah, lady, said Sir Launcelot, why have ye betrayed me? She hath
done, said Sir Phelot, but as I commanded her, and therefore there nis
none other boot but thine hour is come that thou must die. That were
shame unto thee, said Sir Launcelot, thou an armed knight to slay a
naked man by treason. Thou gettest none other grace, said Sir Phelot,
and therefore help thyself an thou canst. Truly, said Sir Launcelot,
that shall be thy shame, but since thou wilt do none other, take mine
harness with thee, and hang my sword upon a bough that I may get it,
and then do thy best to slay me an thou canst. Nay, nay, said Sir
Phelot, for I know thee better than thou weenest, therefore thou
gettest no weapon, an I may keep you therefrom. Alas, said Sir
Launcelot, that ever a knight should die weaponless. And therewith he
waited above him and under him, and over his head he saw a rownsepyk, a
big bough leafless, and therewith he brake it off by the body. And then
he came lower and awaited how his own horse stood, and suddenly he
leapt on the further side of the horse, fro-ward the knight. And then
Sir Phelot lashed at him eagerly, weening to have slain him. But Sir
Launcelot put away the stroke with the rownsepyk, and therewith he
smote him on the one side of the head, that he fell down in a swoon to
the ground. So then Sir Launcelot took his sword out of his hand, and
struck his neck from the body. Then cried the lady, Alas! why hast thou
slain my husband? I am not causer, said Sir Launcelot, for with
falsehood ye would have had slain me with treason, and now it is fallen
on you both. And then she swooned as though she would die. And
therewithal Sir Launcelot gat all his armour as well as he might, and
put it upon him for dread of more resort, for he dreaded that the
knight’s castle was so nigh. And so, as soon as he might, he took his
horse and departed, and thanked God that he had escaped that adventure.



CHAPTER XVII. How Sir Launcelot overtook a knight which chased his wife
to have slain her, and how he said to him.

So Sir Launcelot rode many wild ways, throughout marches and many wild
ways. And as he rode in a valley he saw a knight chasing a lady, with a
naked sword, to have slain her. And by fortune as this knight should
have slain this lady, she cried on Sir Launcelot and prayed him to
rescue her. When Sir Launcelot saw that mischief, he took his horse and
rode between them, saying, Knight, fie for shame, why wilt thou slay
this lady? thou dost shame unto thee and all knights. What hast thou to
do betwixt me and my wife? said the knight. I will slay her maugre thy
head. That shall ye not, said Sir Launcelot, for rather we two will
have ado together. Sir Launcelot, said the knight, thou dost not thy
part, for this lady hath betrayed me. It is not so, said the lady,
truly he saith wrong on me. And for because I love and cherish my
cousin germain, he is jealous betwixt him and me; and as I shall answer
to God there was never sin betwixt us. But, sir, said the lady, as thou
art called the worshipfullest knight of the world, I require thee of
true knighthood, keep me and save me. For whatsomever ye say he will
slay me, for he is without mercy. Have ye no doubt, said Launcelot, it
shall not lie in his power. Sir, said the knight, in your sight I will
be ruled as ye will have me. And so Sir Launcelot rode on the one side
and she on the other: he had not ridden but a while, but the knight
bade Sir Launcelot turn him and look behind him, and said, Sir, yonder
come men of arms after us riding. And so Sir Launcelot turned him and
thought no treason, and therewith was the knight and the lady on one
side, and suddenly he swapped off his lady’s head.

And when Sir Launcelot had espied him what he had done, he said, and
called him, Traitor, thou hast shamed me for ever. And suddenly Sir
Launcelot alighted off his horse, and pulled out his sword to slay him,
and therewithal he fell flat to the earth, and gripped Sir Launcelot by
the thighs, and cried mercy. Fie on thee, said Sir Launcelot, thou
shameful knight, thou mayest have no mercy, and therefore arise and
fight with me. Nay, said the knight, I will never arise till ye grant
me mercy. Now will I proffer thee fair, said Launcelot, I will unarm me
unto my shirt, and I will have nothing upon me but my shirt, and my
sword and my hand. And if thou canst slay me, quit be thou for ever.
Nay, sir, said Pedivere, that will I never. Well, said Sir Launcelot,
take this lady and the head, and bear it upon thee, and here shalt thou
swear upon my sword, to bear it always upon thy back, and never to rest
till thou come to Queen Guenever. Sir, said he, that will I do, by the
faith of my body. Now, said Launcelot, tell me what is your name? Sir,
my name is Pedivere. In a shameful hour wert thou born, said Launcelot.

So Pedivere departed with the dead lady and the head, and found the
queen with King Arthur at Winchester, and there he told all the truth.
Sir knight, said the queen, this is an horrible deed and a shameful,
and a great rebuke unto Sir Launcelot; but notwithstanding his worship
is not known in many divers countries; but this shall I give you in
penance, make ye as good shift as ye can, ye shall bear this lady with
you on horseback unto the Pope of Rome, and of him receive your penance
for your foul deeds; and ye shall never rest one night whereas ye do
another; an ye go to any bed the dead body shall lie with you. This
oath there he made, and so departed. And as it telleth in the French
book, when he came to Rome, the Pope bade him go again unto Queen
Guenever, and in Rome was his lady buried by the Pope’s commandment.
And after this Sir Pedivere fell to great goodness, and was an holy man
and an hermit.



