CHAPTER IX. How Balin and his brother, by the counsel of Merlin, took
King Rience and brought him to King Arthur.

Then Merlin lodged them in a wood among leaves beside the highway, and
took off the bridles of their horses and put them to grass and laid
them down to rest them till it was nigh midnight. Then Merlin bade them
rise, and make them ready, for the king was nigh them, that was stolen
away from his host with a three score horses of his best knights, and
twenty of them rode to-fore to warn the Lady de Vance that the king was
coming; for that night King Rience should have lain with her. Which is
the king? said Balin. Abide, said Merlin, here in a strait way ye shall
meet with him; and therewith he showed Balin and his brother where he
rode.

Anon Balin and his brother met with the king, and smote him down, and
wounded him fiercely, and laid him to the ground; and there they slew
on the right hand and the left hand, and slew more than forty of his
men, and the remnant fled. Then went they again to King Rience and
would have slain him had he not yielded him unto their grace. Then said
he thus: Knights full of prowess, slay me not, for by my life ye may
win, and by my death ye shall win nothing. Then said these two knights,
Ye say sooth and truth, and so laid him on a horse-litter. With that
Merlin was vanished, and came to King Arthur aforehand, and told him
how his most enemy was taken and discomfited. By whom? said King
Arthur. By two knights, said Merlin, that would please your lordship,
and to-morrow ye shall know what knights they are. Anon after came the
Knight with the Two Swords and Balan his brother, and brought with them
King Rience of North Wales, and there delivered him to the porters, and
charged them with him; and so they two returned again in the dawning of
the day. King Arthur came then to King Rience, and said, Sir king, ye
are welcome: by what adventure come ye hither? Sir, said King Rience, I
came hither by an hard adventure. Who won you? said King Arthur. Sir,
said the king, the Knight with the Two Swords and his brother, which
are two marvellous knights of prowess. I know them not, said Arthur,
but much I am beholden to them. Ah, said Merlin, I shall tell you: it
is Balin that achieved the sword, and his brother Balan, a good knight,
there liveth not a better of prowess and of worthiness, and it shall be
the greatest dole of him that ever I knew of knight, for he shall not
long endure. Alas, said King Arthur, that is great pity; for I am much
beholden unto him, and I have ill deserved it unto him for his
kindness. Nay, said Merlin, he shall do much more for you, and that
shall ye know in haste. But, sir, are ye purveyed, said Merlin, for
to-morn the host of Nero, King Rience’s brother, will set on you or
noon with a great host, and therefore make you ready, for I will depart
from you.



CHAPTER X. How King Arthur had a battle against Nero and King Lot of
Orkney, and how King Lot was deceived by Merlin, and how twelve kings
were slain.

Then King Arthur made ready his host in ten battles and Nero was ready
in the field afore the Castle Terrabil with a great host, and he had
ten battles, with many more people than Arthur had. Then Nero had the
vanguard with the most part of his people, and Merlin came to King Lot
of the Isle of Orkney, and held him with a tale of prophecy, till Nero
and his people were destroyed. And there Sir Kay the seneschal did
passingly well, that the days of his life the worship went never from
him; and Sir Hervis de Revel did marvellous deeds with King Arthur, and
King Arthur slew that day twenty knights and maimed forty. At that time
came in the Knight with the Two Swords and his brother Balan, but they
two did so marvellously that the king and all the knights marvelled of
them, and all they that beheld them said they were sent from heaven as
angels, or devils from hell; and King Arthur said himself they were the
best knights that ever he saw, for they gave such strokes that all men
had wonder of them.

In the meanwhile came one to King Lot, and told him while he tarried
there Nero was destroyed and slain with all his people. Alas, said King
Lot, I am ashamed, for by my default there is many a worshipful man
slain, for an we had been together there had been none host under the
heaven that had been able for to have matched with us; this faiter with
his prophecy hath mocked me. All that did Merlin, for he knew well that
an King Lot had been with his body there at the first battle, King
Arthur had been slain, and all his people destroyed; and well Merlin
knew that one of the kings should be dead that day, and loath was
Merlin that any of them both should be slain; but of the twain, he had
liefer King Lot had been slain than King Arthur. Now what is best to
do? said King Lot of Orkney; whether is me better to treat with King
Arthur or to fight, for the greater part of our people are slain and
destroyed? Sir, said a knight, set on Arthur for they are weary and
forfoughten and we be fresh. As for me, said King Lot, I would every
knight would do his part as I would do mine. And then they advanced
banners and smote together and all to-shivered their spears; and
Arthur’s knights, with the help of the Knight with the Two Swords and
his brother Balan put King Lot and his host to the worse. But always
King Lot held him in the foremost front, and did marvellous deeds of
arms, for all his host was borne up by his hands, for he abode all
knights. Alas he might not endure, the which was great pity, that so
worthy a knight as he was one should be overmatched, that of late time
afore had been a knight of King Arthur’s, and wedded the sister of King
Arthur; and for King Arthur lay by King Lot’s wife, the which was
Arthur’s sister, and gat on her Mordred, therefore King Lot held
against Arthur. So there was a knight that was called the Knight with
the Strange Beast, and at that time his right name was called
Pellinore, the which was a good man of prowess, and he smote a mighty
stroke at King Lot as he fought with all his enemies, and he failed of
his stroke, and smote the horse’s neck, that he fell to the ground with
King Lot. And therewith anon Pellinore smote him a great stroke through
the helm and head unto the brows. And then all the host of Orkney fled
for the death of King Lot, and there were slain many mothers’ sons. But
King Pellinore bare the wite of the death of King Lot, wherefore Sir
Gawaine revenged the death of his father the tenth year after he was
made knight, and slew King Pellinore with his own hands. Also there
were slain at that battle twelve kings on the side of King Lot with
Nero, and all were buried in the Church of Saint Stephen’s in Camelot,
and the remnant of knights and of others were buried in a great rock.



