CHAPTER IX. How Sir Launcelot made La Cote Male Taile lord of the
Castle of Pendragon, and after was made knight of the Round Table.

And in the meanwhile came Sir Kay, the Seneschal, and Sir Brandiles,
and anon they fellowshipped with them. And then within ten days, then
departed those knights of Arthur’s court from these fortresses. And as
Sir Launcelot came by the Castle of Pendragon there he put Sir Brian de
les Isles from his lands, for cause he would never be withhold with
King Arthur; and all that Castle of Pendragon and all the lands thereof
he gave to Sir La Cote Male Taile. And then Sir Launcelot sent for
Nerovens that he made once knight, and he made him to have all the rule
of that castle and of that country, under La Cote Male Taile; and so
they rode to Arthur’s court all wholly together. And at Pentecost next
following there was Sir Plenorius and Sir La Cote Male Taile, called
otherwise by right Sir Breunor le Noire, both made Knights of the Table
Round; and great lands King Arthur gave them, and there Breunor le
Noire wedded that damosel Maledisant. And after she was called
Beauvivante, but ever after for the more part he was called La Cote
Male Taile; and he proved a passing noble knight, and mighty; and many
worshipful deeds he did after in his life; and Sir Plenorius proved a
noble knight and full of prowess, and all the days of their life for
the most part they awaited upon Sir Launcelot; and Sir Plenorius’
brethren were ever knights of King Arthur. And also, as the French book
maketh mention, Sir La Cote Male Taile avenged his father’s death.



CHAPTER X. How La Beale Isoud sent letters to Sir Tristram by her maid
Bragwaine, and of divers adventures of Sir Tristram.

Now leave we here Sir La Cote Male Taile, and turn we unto Sir Tristram
de Liones that was in Brittany. When La Beale Isoud understood that he
was wedded she sent to him by her maiden Bragwaine as piteous letters
as could be thought and made, and her conclusion was that, an it
pleased Sir Tristram, that he would come to her court, and bring with
him Isoud la Blanche Mains, and they should be kept as well as she
herself. Then Sir Tristram called unto him Sir Kehydius, and asked him
whether he would go with him into Cornwall secretly. He answered him
that he was ready at all times. And then he let ordain privily a little
vessel, and therein they went, Sir Tristram, Kehydius, Dame Bragwaine,
and Gouvernail, Sir Tristram’s squire. So when they were in the sea a
contrarious wind blew them on the coasts of North Wales, nigh the
Castle Perilous. Then said Sir Tristram: Here shall ye abide me these
ten days, and Gouvernail, my squire, with you. And if so be I come not
again by that day take the next way into Cornwall; for in this forest
are many strange adventures, as I have heard say, and some of them I
cast me to prove or I depart. And when I may I shall hie me after you.

Then Sir Tristram and Kehydius took their horses and departed from
their fellowship. And so they rode within that forest a mile and more;
and at the last Sir Tristram saw afore him a likely knight, armed,
sitting by a well, and a strong mighty horse passing nigh him tied to
an oak, and a man hoving and riding by him leading an horse laden with
spears. And this knight that sat at the well seemed by his countenance
to be passing heavy. Then Sir Tristram rode near him and said: Fair
knight, why sit ye so drooping? ye seem to be a knight-errant by your
arms and harness, and therefore dress you to joust with one of us, or
with both. Therewithal that knight made no words, but took his shield
and buckled it about his neck, and lightly he took his horse and leapt
upon him. And then he took a great spear of his squire, and departed
his way a furlong. Sir Kehydius asked leave of Sir Tristram to joust
first. Do your best, said Sir Tristram. So they met together, and there
Sir Kehydius had a fall, and was sore wounded on high above the paps.
Then Sir Tristram said: Knight, that is well jousted, now make you
ready unto me. I am ready, said the knight. And then that knight took a
greater spear in his hand, and encountered with Sir Tristram, and there
by great force that knight smote down Sir Tristram from his horse and
had a great fall. Then Sir Tristram was sore ashamed, and lightly he
avoided his horse, and put his shield afore his shoulder, and drew his
sword. And then Sir Tristram required that knight of his knighthood to
alight upon foot and fight with him. I will well, said the knight; and
so he alighted upon foot, and avoided his horse, and cast his shield
upon his shoulder, and drew his sword, and there they fought a long
battle together full nigh two hours. Then Sir Tristram said: Fair
knight, hold thine hand, and tell me of whence thou art, and what is
thy name. As for that, said the knight, I will be avised; but an thou
wilt tell me thy name peradventure I will tell thee mine.



CHAPTER XI. How Sir Tristram met with Sir Lamorak de Galis, and how
they fought, and after accorded never to fight together.

Now fair knight, he said, my name is Sir Tristram de Liones. Sir, said
the other knight, and my name is Sir Lamorak de Galis. Ah, Sir Lamorak,
said Sir Tristram, well be we met, and bethink thee now of the despite
thou didst me of the sending of the horn unto King Mark’s court, to the
intent to have slain or dishonoured my lady the queen, La Beale Isoud;
and therefore wit thou well, said Sir Tristram, the one of us shall die
or we depart. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, remember that we were together in
the Isle of Servage, and at that time ye promised me great friendship.
Then Sir Tristram would make no longer delays, but lashed at Sir
Lamorak; and thus they fought long till either were weary of other.
Then Sir Tristram said to Sir Lamorak: In all my life met I never with
such a knight that was so big and well breathed as ye be, therefore,
said Sir Tristram, it were pity that any of us both should here be
mischieved. Sir, said Sir Lamorak, for your renown and name I will that
ye have the worship of this battle, and therefore I will yield me unto
you. And therewith he took the point of his sword to yield him. Nay,
said Sir Tristram, ye shall not do so, for well I know your proffers,
and more of your gentleness than for any fear or dread ye have of me.
And therewithal Sir Tristram proffered him his sword and said: Sir
Lamorak, as an overcome knight I yield me unto you as to a man of the
most noble prowess that ever I met withal. Nay, said Sir Lamorak, I
will do you gentleness; I require you let us be sworn together that
never none of us shall after this day have ado with other. And
therewithal Sir Tristram and Sir Lamorak sware that never none of them
should fight against other, nor for weal nor for woe.



