CHAPTER XXIV. How Sir Tristram jousted with Sir Kay and Sir Sagramore
le Desirous, and how Sir Gawaine turned Sir Tristram from Morgan le
Fay.

But anon as the noble knight, Sir Launcelot, heard of the shield of
Cornwall, then wist he well that it was Sir Tristram that fought with
his enemies. And then Sir Launcelot praised Sir Tristram, and called
him the man of most worship in the world. So there was a knight in that
priory that hight Pellinore, and he desired to wit the name of Sir
Tristram, but in no wise he could not; and so Sir Tristram departed and
left Sir Dinadan in the priory, for he was so weary and so sore bruised
that he might not ride. Then this knight, Sir Pellinore, said to Sir
Dinadan: Sithen that ye will not tell me that knight’s name I will ride
after him and make him to tell me his name, or he shall die therefore.
Beware, sir knight, said Sir Dinadan, for an ye follow him ye shall
repent it. So that knight, Sir Pellinore, rode after Sir Tristram and
required him of jousts. Then Sir Tristram smote him down and wounded
him through the shoulder, and so he passed on his way. And on the next
day following Sir Tristram met with pursuivants, and they told him that
there was made a great cry of tournament between King Carados of
Scotland and the King of North Wales, and either should joust against
other at the Castle of Maidens; and these pursuivants sought all the
country after the good knights, and in especial King Carados let make
seeking for Sir Launcelot du Lake, and the King of Northgalis let seek
after Sir Tristram de Liones. And at that time Sir Tristram thought to
be at that jousts; and so by adventure they met with Sir Kay, the
Seneschal, and Sir Sagramore le Desirous; and Sir Kay required Sir
Tristram to joust, and Sir Tristram in a manner refused him, because he
would not be hurt nor bruised against the great jousts that should be
before the Castle of Maidens, and therefore thought to repose him and
to rest him. And alway Sir Kay cried: Sir knight of Cornwall, joust
with me, or else yield thee to me as recreant. When Sir Tristram heard
him say so he turned to him, and then Sir Kay refused him and turned
his back. Then Sir Tristram said: As I find thee I shall take thee.
Then Sir Kay turned with evil will, and Sir Tristram smote Sir Kay
down, and so he rode forth.

Then Sir Sagramore le Desirous rode after Sir Tristram, and made him to
joust with him, and there Sir Tristram smote down Sir Sagramore le
Desirous from his horse, and rode his way; and the same day he met with
a damosel that told him that he should win great worship of a knight
adventurous that did much harm in all that country. When Sir Tristram
heard her say so, he was glad to go with her to win worship. So Sir
Tristram rode with that damosel a six mile, and then met him Sir
Gawaine, and therewithal Sir Gawaine knew the damosel, that she was a
damosel of Queen Morgan le Fay. Then Sir Gawaine understood that she
led that knight to some mischief. Fair knight, said Sir Gawaine,
whither ride you now with that damosel? Sir, said Sir Tristram, I wot
not whither I shall ride but as the damosel will lead me. Sir, said Sir
Gawaine, ye shall not ride with her, for she and her lady did never
good, but ill. And then Sir Gawaine pulled out his sword and said:
Damosel, but if thou tell me anon for what cause thou leadest this
knight with thee thou shalt die for it right anon: I know all your
lady’s treason, and yours. Mercy, Sir Gawaine, she said, and if ye will
save my life I will tell you. Say on, said Sir Gawaine, and thou shalt
have thy life. Sir, she said, Queen Morgan le Fay, my lady, hath
ordained a thirty ladies to seek and espy after Sir Launcelot or Sir
Tristram, and by the trains of these ladies, who that may first meet
any of these two knights they should turn them unto Morgan le Fay’s
castle, saying that they should do deeds of worship; and if any of the
two knights came there, there be thirty knights lying and watching in a
tower to wait upon Sir Launcelot or upon Sir Tristram. Fie for shame,
said Sir Gawaine, that ever such false treason should be wrought or
used in a queen, and a king’s sister, and a king and queen’s daughter.



CHAPTER XXV. How Sir Tristram and Sir Gawaine rode to have foughten
with the thirty knights, but they durst not come out.

Sir, said Sir Gawaine, will ye stand with me, and we will see the
malice of these thirty knights. Sir, said Sir Tristram, go ye to them,
an it please you, and ye shall see I will not fail you, for it is not
long ago since I and a fellow met with thirty knights of that queen’s
fellowship; and God speed us so that we may win worship. So then Sir
Gawaine and Sir Tristram rode toward the castle where Morgan le Fay
was, and ever Sir Gawaine deemed well that he was Sir Tristram de
Liones, because he heard that two knights had slain and beaten thirty
knights. And when they came afore the castle Sir Gawaine spake on high
and said: Queen Morgan le Fay, send out your knights that ye have laid
in a watch for Sir Launcelot and for Sir Tristram. Now, said Sir
Gawaine, I know your false treason, and through all places where that I
ride men shall know of your false treason; and now let see, said Sir
Gawaine, whether ye dare come out of your castle, ye thirty knights.
Then the queen spake and all the thirty knights at once, and said: Sir
Gawaine, full well wottest thou what thou dost and sayest; for by God
we know thee passing well, but all that thou speakest and dost, thou
sayest it upon pride of that good knight that is there with thee. For
there be some of us that know full well the hands of that knight over
all well. And wit thou well, Sir Gawaine, it is more for his sake than
for thine that we will not come out of this castle. For wit ye well,
Sir Gawaine, the knight that beareth the arms of Cornwall, we know him
and what he is.

Then Sir Gawaine and Sir Tristram departed and rode on their ways a day
or two together; and there by adventure, they met with Sir Kay and Sir
Sagramore le Desirous. And then they were glad of Sir Gawaine, and he
of them, but they wist not what he was with the shield of Cornwall, but
by deeming. And thus they rode together a day or two. And then they
were ware of Sir Breuse Saunce Pité chasing a lady for to have slain
her, for he had slain her paramour afore. Hold you all still, said Sir
Gawaine, and show none of you forth, and ye shall see me reward yonder
false knight; for an he espy you he is so well horsed that he will
escape away. And then Sir Gawaine rode betwixt Sir Breuse and the lady,
and said: False knight, leave her, and have ado with me. When Sir
Breuse saw no more but Sir Gawaine he feutred his spear, and Sir
Gawaine against him; and there Sir Breuse overthrew Sir Gawaine, and
then he rode over him, and overthwart him twenty times to have
destroyed him; and when Sir Tristram saw him do so villainous a deed,
he hurled out against him. And when Sir Breuse saw him with the shield
of Cornwall he knew him well that it was Sir Tristram, and then he
fled, and Sir Tristram followed after him; and Sir Breuse Saunce Pité
was so horsed that he went his way quite, and Sir Tristram followed him
long, for he would fain have been avenged upon him. And so when he had
long chased him, he saw a fair well, and thither he rode to repose him,
and tied his horse till a tree.



