CHAPTER XI. How Sir Beaumains suffered great rebukes of the damosel,
and he suffered it patiently.

Damosel, said Beaumains, ye are uncourteous so to rebuke me as ye do,
for meseemeth I have done you good service, and ever ye threaten me I
shall be beaten with knights that we meet, but ever for all your boast
they lie in the dust or in the mire, and therefore I pray you rebuke me
no more; and when ye see me beaten or yielden as recreant, then may ye
bid me go from you shamefully; but first I let you wit I will not
depart from you, for I were worse than a fool an I would depart from
you all the while that I win worship. Well, said she, right soon there
shall meet a knight shall pay thee all thy wages, for he is the most
man of worship of the world, except King Arthur. I will well, said
Beaumains, the more he is of worship, the more shall be my worship to
have ado with him.

Then anon they were ware where was afore them a city rich and fair. And
betwixt them and the city a mile and an half there was a fair meadow
that seemed new mown, and therein were many pavilions fair to behold.
Lo, said the damosel, yonder is a lord that owneth yonder city, and his
custom is, when the weather is fair, to lie in this meadow to joust and
tourney. And ever there be about him five hundred knights and gentlemen
of arms, and there be all manner of games that any gentleman can
devise. That goodly lord, said Beaumains, would I fain see. Thou shalt
see him time enough, said the damosel, and so as she rode near she
espied the pavilion where he was. Lo, said she, seest thou yonder
pavilion that is all of the colour of Inde, and all manner of thing
that there is about, men and women, and horses trapped, shields and
spears were all of the colour of Inde, and his name is Sir Persant of
Inde, the most lordliest knight that ever thou lookedst on. It may well
be, said Beaumains, but be he never so stout a knight, in this field I
shall abide till that I see him under his shield. Ah, fool, said she,
thou wert better flee betimes. Why, said Beaumains, an he be such a
knight as ye make him, he will not set upon me with all his men, or
with his five hundred knights. For an there come no more but one at
once, I shall him not fail whilst my life lasteth. Fie, fie, said the
damosel, that ever such a stinking knave should blow such a boast.
Damosel, he said, ye are to blame so to rebuke me, for I had liefer do
five battles than so to be rebuked, let him come and then let him do
his worst.

Sir, she said, I marvel what thou art and of what kin thou art come;
boldly thou speakest, and boldly thou hast done, that have I seen;
therefore I pray thee save thyself an thou mayest, for thy horse and
thou have had great travail, and I dread we dwell over long from the
siege, for it is but hence seven mile, and all perilous passages we are
passed save all only this passage; and here I dread me sore lest ye
shall catch some hurt, therefore I would ye were hence, that ye were
not bruised nor hurt with this strong knight. But I let you wit that
Sir Persant of Inde is nothing of might nor strength unto the knight
that laid the siege about my lady. As for that, said Sir Beaumains, be
it as it be may. For sithen I am come so nigh this knight I will prove
his might or I depart from him, and else I shall be shamed an I now
withdraw me from him. And therefore, damosel, have ye no doubt by the
grace of God I shall so deal with this knight that within two hours
after noon I shall deliver him. And then shall we come to the siege by
daylight. O Jesu, marvel have I, said the damosel, what manner a man ye
be, for it may never be otherwise but that ye be come of a noble blood,
for so foul nor shamefully did never woman rule a knight as I have done
you, and ever courteously ye have suffered me, and that came never but
of a gentle blood.

Damosel, said Beaumains, a knight may little do that may not suffer a
damosel, for whatsomever ye said unto me I took none heed to your
words, for the more ye said the more ye angered me, and my wrath I
wreaked upon them that I had ado withal. And therefore all the
missaying that ye missaid me furthered me in my battle, and caused me
to think to show and prove myself at the end what I was; for
peradventure though I had meat in King Arthur’s kitchen, yet I might
have had meat enough in other places, but all that I did it for to
prove and assay my friends, and that shall be known another day; and
whether that I be a gentleman born or none, I let you wit, fair
damosel, I have done you gentleman’s service, and peradventure better
service yet will I do or I depart from you. Alas, she said, fair
Beaumains, forgive me all that I have missaid or done against thee.
With all my heart, said he, I forgive it you, for ye did nothing but as
ye should do, for all your evil words pleased me; and damosel, said
Beaumains, since it liketh you to say thus fair unto me, wit ye well it
gladdeth my heart greatly, and now meseemeth there is no knight living
but I am able enough for him.



CHAPTER XII. How Beaumains fought with Sir Persant of Inde, and made
him to be yielden.

With this Sir Persant of Inde had espied them as they hoved in the
field, and knightly he sent to them whether he came in war or in peace.
Say to thy lord, said Beaumains, I take no force, but whether as him
list himself. So the messenger went again unto Sir Persant and told him
all his answer. Well then will I have ado with him to the utterance,
and so he purveyed him and rode against him. And Beaumains saw him and
made him ready, and there they met with all that ever their horses
might run, and brast their spears either in three pieces, and their
horses rushed so together that both their horses fell dead to the
earth; and lightly they avoided their horses and put their shields
afore them, and drew their swords, and gave many great strokes that
sometime they hurtled together that they fell grovelling on the ground.
Thus they fought two hours and more, that their shields and their
hauberks were all forhewen, and in many steads they were wounded. So at
the last Sir Beaumains smote him through the cost of the body, and then
he retrayed him here and there, and knightly maintained his battle long
time. And at the last, though him loath were, Beaumains smote Sir
Persant above upon the helm, that he fell grovelling to the earth; and
then he leapt upon him overthwart and unlaced his helm to have slain
him.

Then Sir Persant yielded him and asked him mercy. With that came the
damosel and prayed to save his life. I will well, for it were pity this
noble knight should die. Gramercy, said Persant, gentle knight and
damosel. For certainly now I wot well it was ye that slew my brother
the Black Knight at the black thorn; he was a full noble knight, his
name was Sir Percard. Also I am sure that ye are he that won mine other
brother the Green Knight, his name was Sir Pertolepe. Also ye won my
brother the Red Knight, Sir Perimones. And now since ye have won these,
this shall I do for to please you: ye shall have homage and fealty of
me, and an hundred knights to be always at your commandment, to go and
ride where ye will command us. And so they went unto Sir Persant’s
pavilion and drank the wine, and ate spices, and afterward Sir Persant
made him to rest upon a bed until supper time, and after supper to bed
again. When Beaumains was abed, Sir Persant had a lady, a fair daughter
of eighteen year of age, and there he called her unto him, and charged
her and commanded her upon his blessing to go unto the knight’s bed,
and lie down by his side, and make him no strange cheer, but good
cheer, and take him in thine arms and kiss him, and look that this be
done, I charge you, as ye will have my love and my good will. So Sir
Persant’s daughter did as her father bade her, and so she went unto Sir
Beaumains’ bed, and privily she dispoiled her, and laid her down by
him, and then he awoke and saw her, and asked her what she was. Sir,
she said, I am Sir Persant’s daughter, that by the commandment of my
father am come hither. Be ye a maid or a wife? said he. Sir, she said,
I am a clean maiden. God defend, said he, that I should defoil you to
do Sir Persant such a shame; therefore, fair damosel, arise out of this
bed or else I will. Sir, she said, I came not to you by mine own will,
but as I was commanded. Alas, said Sir Beaumains, I were a shameful
knight an I would do your father any disworship; and so he kissed her,
and so she departed and came unto Sir Persant her father, and told him
all how she had sped. Truly, said Sir Persant, whatsomever he be, he is
come of a noble blood. And so we leave them there till on the morn.



