CHAPTER V. How Beaumains told to Sir Launcelot his name, and how he was
dubbed knight of Sir Launcelot, and after overtook the damosel.

In God’s name, said Sir Launcelot, for I promise you, by the faith of
my body, I had as much to do as I might to save myself from you
unshamed, and therefore have ye no doubt of none earthly knight. Hope
ye so that I may any while stand a proved knight? said Beaumains. Yea,
said Launcelot, do as ye have done, and I shall be your warrant. Then,
I pray you, said Beaumains, give me the order of knighthood. Then must
ye tell me your name, said Launcelot, and of what kin ye be born. Sir,
so that ye will not discover me I shall, said Beaumains. Nay, said Sir
Launcelot, and that I promise you by the faith of my body, until it be
openly known. Then, sir, he said, my name is Gareth, and brother unto
Sir Gawaine of father and mother. Ah, sir, said Sir Launcelot, I am
more gladder of you than I was; for ever me thought ye should be of
great blood, and that ye came not to the court neither for meat nor for
drink. And then Sir Launcelot gave him the order of knighthood, and
then Sir Gareth prayed him for to depart and let him go.

So Sir Launcelot departed from him and came to Sir Kay, and made him to
be borne home upon his shield, and so he was healed hard with the life;
and all men scorned Sir Kay, and in especial Sir Gawaine and Sir
Launcelot said it was not his part to rebuke no young man, for full
little knew he of what birth he is come, and for what cause he came to
this court; and so we leave Sir Kay and turn we unto Beaumains.

When he had overtaken the damosel, anon she said, What dost thou here?
thou stinkest all of the kitchen, thy clothes be bawdy of the grease
and tallow that thou gainest in King Arthur’s kitchen; weenest thou,
said she, that I allow thee, for yonder knight that thou killest. Nay
truly, for thou slewest him unhappily and cowardly; therefore turn
again, bawdy kitchen page, I know thee well, for Sir Kay named thee
Beaumains. What art thou but a lusk and a turner of broaches and a
ladle-washer? Damosel, said Beaumains, say to me what ye will, I will
not go from you whatsomever ye say, for I have undertaken to King
Arthur for to achieve your adventure, and so shall I finish it to the
end, either I shall die therefore. Fie on thee, kitchen knave, wilt
thou finish mine adventure? thou shalt anon be met withal, that thou
wouldest not for all the broth that ever thou suppest once look him in
the face. I shall assay, said Beaumains.

So thus as they rode in the wood, there came a man flying all that ever
he might. Whither wilt thou? said Beaumains. O lord, he said, help me,
for here by in a slade are six thieves that have taken my lord and
bound him, so I am afeard lest they will slay him. Bring me thither,
said Beaumains. And so they rode together until they came thereas was
the knight bounden; and then he rode unto them, and struck one unto the
death, and then another, and at the third stroke he slew the third
thief, and then the other three fled. And he rode after them, and he
overtook them; and then those three thieves turned again and assailed
Beaumains hard, but at the last he slew them, and returned and unbound
the knight. And the knight thanked him, and prayed him to ride with him
to his castle there a little beside, and he should worshipfully reward
him for his good deeds. Sir, said Beaumains, I will no reward have: I
was this day made knight of noble Sir Launcelot, and therefore I will
no reward have, but God reward me. And also I must follow this damosel.

And when he came nigh her she bade him ride from her, For thou smellest
all of the kitchen: weenest thou that I have joy of thee, for all this
deed that thou hast done is but mishapped thee: but thou shalt see a
sight shall make thee turn again, and that lightly. Then the same
knight which was rescued of the thieves rode after that damosel, and
prayed her to lodge with him all that night. And because it was near
night the damosel rode with him to his castle, and there they had great
cheer, and at supper the knight sat Sir Beaumains afore the damosel.
Fie, fie, said she, Sir knight, ye are uncourteous to set a kitchen
page afore me; him beseemeth better to stick a swine than to sit afore
a damosel of high parage. Then the knight was ashamed at her words, and
took him up, and set him at a sideboard, and set himself afore him, and
so all that night they had good cheer and merry rest.



CHAPTER VI. How Beaumains fought and slew two knights at a passage.

And on the morn the damosel and he took their leave and thanked the
knight, and so departed, and rode on their way until they came to a
great forest. And there was a great river and but one passage, and
there were ready two knights on the farther side to let them the
passage. What sayest thou, said the damosel, wilt thou match yonder
knights or turn again? Nay, said Sir Beaumains, I will not turn again
an they were six more. And therewithal he rushed into the water, and in
midst of the water either brake their spears upon other to their hands,
and then they drew their swords, and smote eagerly at other. And at the
last Sir Beaumains smote the other upon the helm that his head stonied,
and therewithal he fell down in the water, and there was he drowned.
And then he spurred his horse upon the land, where the other knight
fell upon him, and brake his spear, and so they drew their swords and
fought long together. At the last Sir Beaumains clave his helm and his
head down to the shoulders; and so he rode unto the damosel and bade
her ride forth on her way.

Alas, she said, that ever a kitchen page should have that fortune to
destroy such two doughty knights: thou weenest thou hast done
doughtily, that is not so; for the first knight his horse stumbled, and
there he was drowned in the water, and never it was by thy force, nor
by thy might. And the last knight by mishap thou camest behind him and
mishappily thou slew him.

Damosel, said Beaumains, ye may say what ye will, but with whomsomever
I have ado withal, I trust to God to serve him or he depart. And
therefore I reck not what ye say, so that I may win your lady. Fie,
fie, foul kitchen knave, thou shalt see knights that shall abate thy
boast. Fair damosel, give me goodly language, and then my care is past,
for what knights somever they be, I care not, nor I doubt them not.
Also, said she, I say it for thine avail, yet mayest thou turn again
with thy worship; for an thou follow me, thou art but slain, for I see
all that ever thou dost is but by misadventure, and not by prowess of
thy hands. Well, damosel, ye may say what ye will, but wheresomever ye
go I will follow you. So this Beaumains rode with that lady till
evensong time, and ever she chid him, and would not rest. And they came
to a black laund; and there was a black hawthorn, and thereon hung a
black banner, and on the other side there hung a black shield, and by
it stood a black spear great and long, and a great black horse covered
with silk, and a black stone fast by.



