CHAPTER XII. How Sir Launcelot rode disguised in Sir Kay’s harness, and
how he smote down a knight.

Now turn we unto Sir Launcelot that had ridden long in a great forest,
and at the last he came into a low country, full of fair rivers and
meadows. And afore him he saw a long bridge, and three pavilions stood
thereon, of silk and sendal of divers hue. And without the pavilions
hung three white shields on truncheons of spears, and great long spears
stood upright by the pavilions, and at every pavilion’s door stood
three fresh squires, and so Sir Launcelot passed by them and spake no
word. When he was passed the three knights said them that it was the
proud Kay; He weeneth no knight so good as he, and the contrary is
ofttime proved. By my faith, said one of the knights, his name was Sir
Gaunter, I will ride after him and assay him for all his pride, and ye
may behold how that I speed. So this knight, Sir Gaunter, armed him,
and hung his shield upon his shoulder, and mounted upon a great horse,
and gat his spear in his hand, and walloped after Sir Launcelot. And
when he came nigh him, he cried, Abide, thou proud knight Sir Kay, for
thou shalt not pass quit. So Sir Launcelot turned him, and either
feutred their spears, and came together with all their mights, and Sir
Gaunter’s spear brake, but Sir Launcelot smote him down horse and man.
And when Sir Gaunter was at the earth his brethren said each one to
other, Yonder knight is not Sir Kay, for he is bigger than he. I dare
lay my head, said Sir Gilmere, yonder knight hath slain Sir Kay and
hath taken his horse and his harness. Whether it be so or no, said Sir
Raynold, the third brother, let us now go mount upon our horses and
rescue our brother Sir Gaunter, upon pain of death. We all shall have
work enough to match that knight, for ever meseemeth by his person it
is Sir Launcelot, or Sir Tristram, or Sir Pelleas, the good knight.

Then anon they took their horses and overtook Sir Launcelot, and Sir
Gilmere put forth his spear, and ran to Sir Launcelot, and Sir
Launcelot smote him down that he lay in a swoon. Sir knight, said Sir
Raynold, thou art a strong man, and as I suppose thou hast slain my two
brethren, for the which raseth my heart sore against thee, and if I
might with my worship I would not have ado with you, but needs I must
take part as they do, and therefore, knight, he said, keep thyself. And
so they hurtled together with all their mights, and all to-shivered
both their spears. And then they drew their swords and lashed together
eagerly. Anon therewith arose Sir Gaunter, and came unto his brother
Sir Gilmere, and bade him, Arise, and help we our brother Sir Raynold,
that yonder marvellously matched yonder good knight. Therewithal, they
leapt on their horses and hurtled unto Sir Launcelot.

And when he saw them come he smote a sore stroke unto Sir Raynold, that
he fell off his horse to the ground, and then he struck to the other
two brethren, and at two strokes he struck them down to the earth. With
that Sir Raynold began to start up with his head all bloody, and came
straight unto Sir Launcelot. Now let be, said Sir Launcelot, I was not
far from thee when thou wert made knight, Sir Raynold, and also I know
thou art a good knight, and loath I were to slay thee. Gramercy, said
Sir Raynold, as for your goodness; and I dare say as for me and my
brethren, we will not be loath to yield us unto you, with that we knew
your name, for well we know ye are not Sir Kay. As for that be it as it
be may, for ye shall yield you unto dame Guenever, and look that ye be
with her on Whitsunday, and yield you unto her as prisoners, and say
that Sir Kay sent you unto her. Then they swore it should be done, and
so passed forth Sir Launcelot, and each one of the brethren holp other
as well as they might.



CHAPTER XIII. How Sir Launcelot jousted against four knights of the
Round Table and overthrew them.

So Sir Launcelot rode into a deep forest, and thereby in a slade, he
saw four knights hoving under an oak, and they were of Arthur’s court,
one was Sir Sagramour le Desirous, and Ector de Maris, and Sir Gawaine,
and Sir Uwaine. Anon as these four knights had espied Sir Launcelot,
they weened by his arms it had been Sir Kay. Now by my faith, said Sir
Sagramour, I will prove Sir Kay’s might, and gat his spear in his hand,
and came toward Sir Launcelot. Therewith Sir Launcelot was ware and
knew him well, and feutred his spear against him, and smote Sir
Sagramour so sore that horse and man fell both to the earth. Lo, my
fellows, said he, yonder ye may see what a buffet he hath; that knight
is much bigger than ever was Sir Kay. Now shall ye see what I may do to
him. So Sir Ector gat his spear in his hand and walloped toward Sir
Launcelot, and Sir Launcelot smote him through the shield and shoulder,
that man and horse went to the earth, and ever his spear held.

By my faith, said Sir Uwaine, yonder is a strong knight, and I am sure
he hath slain Sir Kay; and I see by his great strength it will be hard
to match him. And therewithal, Sir Uwaine gat his spear in his hand and
rode toward Sir Launcelot, and Sir Launcelot knew him well, and so he
met him on the plain, and gave him such a buffet that he was astonied,
that long he wist not where he was. Now see I well, said Sir Gawaine, I
must encounter with that knight. Then he dressed his shield and gat a
good spear in his hand, and Sir Launcelot knew him well; and then they
let run their horses with all their mights, and either knight smote
other in midst of the shield. But Sir Gawaine’s spear to-brast, and Sir
Launcelot charged so sore upon him that his horse reversed up-so-down.
And much sorrow had Sir Gawaine to avoid his horse, and so Sir
Launcelot passed on a pace and smiled, and said, God give him joy that
this spear made, for there came never a better in my hand.

Then the four knights went each one to other and comforted each other.
What say ye by this guest? said Sir Gawaine, that one spear hath felled
us all four. We commend him unto the devil, they said all, for he is a
man of great might. Ye may well say it, said Sir Gawaine, that he is a
man of might, for I dare lay my head it is Sir Launcelot, I know it by
his riding. Let him go, said Sir Gawaine, for when we come to the court
then shall we wit; and then had they much sorrow to get their horses
again.



