CHAPTER XIX. How Merlin buried them both in one tomb, and of Balin’s
sword.

In the morn came Merlin and let write Balin’s name on the tomb with
letters of gold, that Here lieth Balin le Savage that was the Knight
with the Two Swords, and he that smote the Dolorous Stroke. Also Merlin
let make there a bed, that there should never man lie therein but he
went out of his wit, yet Launcelot de Lake fordid that bed through his
noblesse. And anon after Balin was dead, Merlin took his sword, and
took off the pommel and set on another pommel. So Merlin bade a knight
that stood afore him handle that sword, and he assayed, and he might
not handle it. Then Merlin laughed. Why laugh ye? said the knight. This
is the cause, said Merlin: there shall never man handle this sword but
the best knight of the world, and that shall be Sir Launcelot or else
Galahad his son, and Launcelot with this sword shall slay the man that
in the world he loved best, that shall be Sir Gawaine. All this he let
write in the pommel of the sword. Then Merlin let make a bridge of iron
and of steel into that island, and it was but half a foot broad, and
there shall never man pass that bridge, nor have hardiness to go over,
but if he were a passing good man and a good knight without treachery
or villainy. Also the scabbard of Balin’s sword Merlin left it on this
side the island, that Galahad should find it. Also Merlin let make by
his subtilty that Balin’s sword was put in a marble stone standing
upright as great as a mill stone, and the stone hoved always above the
water and did many years, and so by adventure it swam down the stream
to the City of Camelot, that is in English Winchester. And that same
day Galahad the haut prince came with King Arthur, and so Galahad
brought with him the scabbard and achieved the sword that was there in
the marble stone hoving upon the water. And on Whitsunday he achieved
the sword as it is rehearsed in the book of Sangreal.

Soon after this was done Merlin came to King Arthur and told him of the
dolorous stroke that Balin gave to King Pellam, and how Balin and Balan
fought together the marvellest battle that ever was heard of, and how
they were buried both in one tomb. Alas, said King Arthur, this is the
greatest pity that ever I heard tell of two knights, for in the world I
know not such two knights. Thus endeth the tale of Balin and of Balan,
two brethren born in Northumberland, good knights.

Sequitur iii. liber.



BOOK III.



CHAPTER I. How King Arthur took a wife, and wedded Guenever, daughter
to Leodegrance, King of the Land of Cameliard, with whom he had the
Round Table.

In the beginning of Arthur, after he was chosen king by adventure and
by grace; for the most part of the barons knew not that he was Uther
Pendragon’s son, but as Merlin made it openly known. But yet many kings
and lords held great war against him for that cause, but well Arthur
overcame them all, for the most part the days of his life he was ruled
much by the counsel of Merlin. So it fell on a time King Arthur said
unto Merlin, My barons will let me have no rest, but needs I must take
a wife, and I will none take but by thy counsel and by thine advice. It
is well done, said Merlin, that ye take a wife, for a man of your
bounty and noblesse should not be without a wife. Now is there any that
ye love more than another? Yea, said King Arthur, I love Guenever the
king’s daughter, Leodegrance of the land of Cameliard, the which
holdeth in his house the Table Round that ye told he had of my father
Uther. And this damosel is the most valiant and fairest lady that I
know living, or yet that ever I could find. Sir, said Merlin, as of her
beauty and fairness she is one of the fairest alive, but, an ye loved
her not so well as ye do, I should find you a damosel of beauty and of
goodness that should like you and please you, an your heart were not
set; but there as a man’s heart is set, he will be loath to return.
That is truth, said King Arthur. But Merlin warned the king covertly
that Guenever was not wholesome for him to take to wife, for he warned
him that Launcelot should love her, and she him again; and so he turned
his tale to the adventures of Sangreal.

Then Merlin desired of the king for to have men with him that should
enquire of Guenever, and so the king granted him, and Merlin went forth
unto King Leodegrance of Cameliard, and told him of the desires of the
king that he would have unto his wife Guenever his daughter. That is to
me, said King Leodegrance, the best tidings that ever I heard, that so
worthy a king of prowess and noblesse will wed my daughter. And as for
my lands, I will give him, wist I it might please him, but he hath
lands enow, him needeth none; but I shall send him a gift shall please
him much more, for I shall give him the Table Round, the which Uther
Pendragon gave me, and when it is full complete, there is an hundred
knights and fifty. And as for an hundred good knights I have myself,
but I faute fifty, for so many have been slain in my days. And so
Leodegrance delivered his daughter Guenever unto Merlin, and the Table
Round with the hundred knights, and so they rode freshly, with great
royalty, what by water and what by land, till that they came nigh unto
London.



CHAPTER II. How the Knights of the Round Table were ordained and their
sieges blessed by the Bishop of Canterbury.

When King Arthur heard of the coming of Guenever and the hundred
knights with the Table Round, then King Arthur made great joy for her
coming, and that rich present, and said openly, This fair lady is
passing welcome unto me, for I have loved her long, and therefore there
is nothing so lief to me. And these knights with the Round Table please
me more than right great riches. And in all haste the king let ordain
for the marriage and the coronation in the most honourable wise that
could be devised. Now, Merlin, said King Arthur, go thou and espy me in
all this land fifty knights which be of most prowess and worship.
Within short time Merlin had found such knights that should fulfil
twenty and eight knights, but no more he could find. Then the Bishop of
Canterbury was fetched, and he blessed the sieges with great royalty
and devotion, and there set the eight and twenty knights in their
sieges. And when this was done Merlin said, Fair sirs, ye must all
arise and come to King Arthur for to do him homage; he will have the
better will to maintain you. And so they arose and did their homage,
and when they were gone Merlin found in every sieges letters of gold
that told the knights’ names that had sitten therein. But two sieges
were void. And so anon came young Gawaine and asked the king a gift.
Ask, said the king, and I shall grant it you. Sir, I ask that ye will
make me knight that same day ye shall wed fair Guenever. I will do it
with a good will, said King Arthur, and do unto you all the worship
that I may, for I must by reason ye are my nephew, my sister’s son.



