CHAPTER IX. Of the first war that King Arthur had, and how he won the
field.

Then King Arthur came out of his tower, and had under his gown a
jesseraunt of double mail, and there went with him the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Sir Baudwin of Britain, and Sir Kay, and Sir Brastias:
these were the men of most worship that were with him. And when they
were met there was no meekness, but stout words on both sides; but
always King Arthur answered them, and said he would make them to bow an
he lived. Wherefore they departed with wrath, and King Arthur bade keep
them well, and they bade the king keep him well. So the king returned
him to the tower again and armed him and all his knights. What will ye
do? said Merlin to the kings; ye were better for to stint, for ye shall
not here prevail though ye were ten times so many. Be we well advised
to be afeared of a dream-reader? said King Lot. With that Merlin
vanished away, and came to King Arthur, and bade him set on them
fiercely; and in the meanwhile there were three hundred good men, of
the best that were with the kings, that went straight unto King Arthur,
and that comforted him greatly. Sir, said Merlin to Arthur, fight not
with the sword that ye had by miracle, till that ye see ye go unto the
worse, then draw it out and do your best. So forthwithal King Arthur
set upon them in their lodging. And Sir Baudwin, Sir Kay, and Sir
Brastias slew on the right hand and on the left hand that it was
marvel; and always King Arthur on horseback laid on with a sword, and
did marvellous deeds of arms, that many of the kings had great joy of
his deeds and hardiness.

Then King Lot brake out on the back side, and the King with the Hundred
Knights, and King Carados, and set on Arthur fiercely behind him. With
that Sir Arthur turned with his knights, and smote behind and before,
and ever Sir Arthur was in the foremost press till his horse was slain
underneath him. And therewith King Lot smote down King Arthur. With
that his four knights received him and set him on horseback. Then he
drew his sword Excalibur, but it was so bright in his enemies’ eyes,
that it gave light like thirty torches. And therewith he put them
a-back, and slew much people. And then the commons of Carlion arose
with clubs and staves and slew many knights; but all the kings held
them together with their knights that were left alive, and so fled and
departed. And Merlin came unto Arthur, and counselled him to follow
them no further.



CHAPTER X. How Merlin counselled King Arthur to send for King Ban and
King Bors, and of their counsel taken for the war.

So after the feast and journey, King Arthur drew him unto London, and
so by the counsel of Merlin, the king let call his barons to council,
for Merlin had told the king that the six kings that made war upon him
would in all haste be awroke on him and on his lands. Wherefore the
king asked counsel at them all. They could no counsel give, but said
they were big enough. Ye say well, said Arthur; I thank you for your
good courage, but will ye all that loveth me speak with Merlin? ye know
well that he hath done much for me, and he knoweth many things, and
when he is afore you, I would that ye prayed him heartily of his best
advice. All the barons said they would pray him and desire him. So
Merlin was sent for, and fair desired of all the barons to give them
best counsel. I shall say you, said Merlin, I warn you all, your
enemies are passing strong for you, and they are good men of arms as be
alive, and by this time they have gotten to them four kings more, and a
mighty duke; and unless that our king have more chivalry with him than
he may make within the bounds of his own realm, an he fight with them
in battle, he shall be overcome and slain. What were best to do in this
cause? said all the barons. I shall tell you, said Merlin, mine advice;
there are two brethren beyond the sea, and they be kings both, and
marvellous good men of their hands; and that one hight King Ban of
Benwick, and that other hight King Bors of Gaul, that is France. And on
these two kings warreth a mighty man of men, the King Claudas, and
striveth with them for a castle, and great war is betwixt them. But
this Claudas is so mighty of goods whereof he getteth good knights,
that he putteth these two kings most part to the worse; wherefore this
is my counsel, that our king and sovereign lord send unto the kings Ban
and Bors by two trusty knights with letters well devised, that an they
will come and see King Arthur and his court, and so help him in his
wars, that he will be sworn unto them to help them in their wars
against King Claudas. Now, what say ye unto this counsel? said Merlin.
This is well counselled, said the king and all the barons.

Right so in all haste there were ordained to go two knights on the
message unto the two kings. So were there made letters in the pleasant
wise according unto King Arthur’s desire. Ulfius and Brastias were made
the messengers, and so rode forth well horsed and well armed and as the
guise was that time, and so passed the sea and rode toward the city of
Benwick. And there besides were eight knights that espied them, and at
a strait passage they met with Ulfius and Brastias, and would have
taken them prisoners; so they prayed them that they might pass, for
they were messengers unto King Ban and Bors sent from King Arthur.
Therefore, said the eight knights, ye shall die or be prisoners, for we
be knights of King Claudas. And therewith two of them dressed their
spears, and Ulfius and Brastias dressed their spears, and ran together
with great raundon. And Claudas’ knights brake their spears, and theirs
to-held and bare the two knights out of their saddles to the earth, and
so left them lying, and rode their ways. And the other six knights rode
afore to a passage to meet with them again, and so Ulfius and Brastias
smote other two down, and so passed on their ways. And at the fourth
passage there met two for two, and both were laid unto the earth; so
there was none of the eight knights but he was sore hurt or bruised.
And when they come to Benwick it fortuned there were both kings, Ban
and Bors.

And when it was told the kings that there were come messengers, there
were sent unto them two knights of worship, the one hight Lionses, lord
of the country of Payarne, and Sir Phariance a worshipful knight. Anon
they asked from whence they came, and they said from King Arthur, king
of England; so they took them in their arms and made great joy each of
other. But anon, as the two kings wist they were messengers of
Arthur’s, there was made no tarrying, but forthwith they spake with the
knights, and welcomed them in the faithfullest wise, and said they were
most welcome unto them before all the kings living; and therewith they
kissed the letters and delivered them. And when Ban and Bors understood
the letters, then they were more welcome than they were before. And
after the haste of the letters they gave them this answer, that they
would fulfil the desire of King Arthur’s writing, and Ulfius and
Brastias, tarry there as long as they would, they should have such
cheer as might be made them in those marches. Then Ulfius and Brastias
told the kings of the adventure at their passages of the eight knights.
Ha! ah! said Ban and Bors, they were my good friends. I would I had
wist of them; they should not have escaped so. So Ulfius and Brastias
had good cheer and great gifts, as much as they might bear away; and
had their answer by mouth and by writing, that those two kings would
come unto Arthur in all the haste that they might. So the two knights
rode on afore, and passed the sea, and came to their lord, and told him
how they had sped, whereof King Arthur was passing glad. At what time
suppose ye the two kings will be here? Sir, said they, afore All
Hallowmass. Then the king let purvey for a great feast, and let cry a
great jousts. And by All Hallowmass the two kings were come over the
sea with three hundred knights well arrayed both for the peace and for
the war. And King Arthur met with them ten mile out of London, and
there was great joy as could be thought or made. And on All Hallowmass
at the great feast, sat in the hall the three kings, and Sir Kay
seneschal served in the hall, and Sir Lucas the butler, that was Duke
Corneus’ son, and Sir Griflet, that was the son of Cardol, these three
knights had the rule of all the service that served the kings. And
anon, as they had washen and risen, all knights that would joust made
them ready; by then they were ready on horseback there were seven
hundred knights. And Arthur, Ban, and Bors, with the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Sir Ector, Kay’s father, they were in a place covered
with cloth of gold like an hall, with ladies and gentlewomen, for to
behold who did best, and thereon to give judgment.



