CHAPTER III. How the Lady of the Lake demanded the knight’s head that
had won the sword, or the maiden’s head.

The meanwhile, that this knight was making him ready to depart, there
came into the court a lady that hight the Lady of the Lake. And she
came on horseback, richly beseen, and saluted King Arthur, and there
asked him a gift that he promised her when she gave him the sword. That
is sooth, said Arthur, a gift I promised you, but I have forgotten the
name of my sword that ye gave me. The name of it, said the lady, is
Excalibur, that is as much to say as Cut-steel. Ye say well, said the
king; ask what ye will and ye shall have it, an it lie in my power to
give it. Well, said the lady, I ask the head of the knight that hath
won the sword, or else the damosel’s head that brought it; I take no
force though I have both their heads, for he slew my brother, a good
knight and a true, and that gentlewoman was causer of my father’s
death. Truly, said King Arthur, I may not grant neither of their heads
with my worship, therefore ask what ye will else, and I shall fulfil
your desire. I will ask none other thing, said the lady. When Balin was
ready to depart, he saw the Lady of the Lake, that by her means had
slain Balin’s mother, and he had sought her three years; and when it
was told him that she asked his head of King Arthur, he went to her
straight and said, Evil be you found; ye would have my head, and
therefore ye shall lose yours, and with his sword lightly he smote off
her head before King Arthur. Alas, for shame! said Arthur, why have ye
done so? ye have shamed me and all my court, for this was a lady that I
was beholden to, and hither she came under my safe-conduct; I shall
never forgive you that trespass. Sir, said Balin, me forthinketh of
your displeasure, for this same lady was the untruest lady living, and
by enchantment and sorcery she hath been the destroyer of many good
knights, and she was causer that my mother was burnt, through her
falsehood and treachery. What cause soever ye had, said Arthur, ye
should have forborne her in my presence; therefore, think not the
contrary, ye shall repent it, for such another despite had I never in
my court; therefore withdraw you out of my court in all haste ye may.

Then Balin took up the head of the lady, and bare it with him to his
hostelry, and there he met with his squire, that was sorry he had
displeased King Arthur and so they rode forth out of the town. Now,
said Balin, we must depart, take thou this head and bear it to my
friends, and tell them how I have sped, and tell my friends in
Northumberland that my most foe is dead. Also tell them how I am out of
prison, and what adventure befell me at the getting of this sword.
Alas! said the squire, ye are greatly to blame for to displease King
Arthur. As for that, said Balin, I will hie me, in all the haste that I
may, to meet with King Rience and destroy him, either else to die
therefore; and if it may hap me to win him, then will King Arthur be my
good and gracious lord. Where shall I meet with you? said the squire.
In King Arthur’s court, said Balin. So his squire and he departed at
that time. Then King Arthur and all the court made great dole and had
shame of the death of the Lady of the Lake. Then the king buried her
richly.



CHAPTER IV. How Merlin told the adventure of this damosel.

At that time there was a knight, the which was the king’s son of
Ireland, and his name was Lanceor, the which was an orgulous knight,
and counted himself one of the best of the court; and he had great
despite at Balin for the achieving of the sword, that any should be
accounted more hardy, or more of prowess; and he asked King Arthur if
he would give him leave to ride after Balin and to revenge the despite
that he had done. Do your best, said Arthur, I am right wroth with
Balin; I would he were quit of the despite that he hath done to me and
to my court. Then this Lanceor went to his hostelry to make him ready.
In the meanwhile came Merlin unto the court of King Arthur, and there
was told him the adventure of the sword, and the death of the Lady of
the Lake. Now shall I say you, said Merlin; this same damosel that here
standeth, that brought the sword unto your court, I shall tell you the
cause of her coming: she was the falsest damosel that liveth. Say not
so, said they. She hath a brother, a passing good knight of prowess and
a full true man; and this damosel loved another knight that held her to
paramour, and this good knight her brother met with the knight that
held her to paramour, and slew him by force of his hands. When this
false damosel understood this, she went to the Lady Lile of Avelion,
and besought her of help, to be avenged on her own brother.



CHAPTER V. How Balin was pursued by Sir Lanceor, knight of Ireland, and
how he jousted and slew him.

And so this Lady Lile of Avelion took her this sword that she brought
with her, and told there should no man pull it out of the sheath but if
he be one of the best knights of this realm, and he should be hard and
full of prowess, and with that sword he should slay her brother. This
was the cause that the damosel came into this court. I know it as well
as ye. Would God she had not come into this court, but she came never
in fellowship of worship to do good, but always great harm; and that
knight that hath achieved the sword shall be destroyed by that sword,
for the which will be great damage, for there liveth not a knight of
more prowess than he is, and he shall do unto you, my Lord Arthur,
great honour and kindness; and it is great pity he shall not endure but
a while, for of his strength and hardiness I know not his match living.

So the knight of Ireland armed him at all points, and dressed his
shield on his shoulder, and mounted upon horseback, and took his spear
in his hand, and rode after a great pace, as much as his horse might
go; and within a little space on a mountain he had a sight of Balin,
and with a loud voice he cried, Abide, knight, for ye shall abide
whether ye will or nill, and the shield that is to-fore you shall not
help. When Balin heard the noise, he turned his horse fiercely, and
said, Fair knight, what will ye with me, will ye joust with me? Yea,
said the Irish knight, therefore come I after you. Peradventure, said
Balin, it had been better to have holden you at home, for many a man
weeneth to put his enemy to a rebuke, and oft it falleth to himself. Of
what court be ye sent from? said Balin. I am come from the court of
King Arthur, said the knight of Ireland, that come hither for to
revenge the despite ye did this day to King Arthur and to his court.
Well, said Balin, I see well I must have ado with you, that me
forthinketh for to grieve King Arthur, or any of his court; and your
quarrel is full simple, said Balin, unto me, for the lady that is dead,
did me great damage, and else would I have been loath as any knight
that liveth for to slay a lady. Make you ready, said the knight
Lanceor, and dress you unto me, for that one shall abide in the field.
Then they took their spears, and came together as much as their horses
might drive, and the Irish knight smote Balin on the shield, that all
went shivers off his spear, and Balin hit him through the shield, and
the hauberk perished, and so pierced through his body and the horse’s
croup, and anon turned his horse fiercely, and drew out his sword, and
wist not that he had slain him; and then he saw him lie as a dead
corpse.



