CHAPTER XXXI. How Sir Tristram rode after Palamides, and how he found
him and fought with him, and by the means of Isoud the battle ceased.

Now turn we unto Sir Tristram, that when he was come home and wist La
Beale Isoud was gone with Sir Palamides, wit ye well he was wroth out
of measure. Alas, said Sir Tristram, I am this day shamed. Then he
cried to Gouvernail his man: Haste thee that I were armed and on
horseback, for well I wot Lambegus hath no might nor strength to
withstand Sir Palamides: alas that I have not been in his stead! So
anon as he was armed and horsed Sir Tristram and Gouvernail rode after
into the forest, and within a while he found his knight Lambegus almost
wounded to the death; and Sir Tristram bare him to a forester, and
charged him to keep him well. And then he rode forth, and there he
found Sir Adtherp sore wounded, and he told him how the queen would
have drowned herself had he not been, and how for her sake and love he
had taken upon him to do battle with Sir Palamides. Where is my lady?
said Sir Tristram. Sir, said the knight, she is sure enough within my
castle, an she can hold her within it. Gramercy, said Sir Tristram, of
thy great goodness. And so he rode till he came nigh to that castle;
and then Sir Tristram saw where Sir Palamides sat at the gate sleeping,
and his horse pastured fast afore him. Now go thou, Gouvernail, said
Sir Tristram, and bid him awake, and make him ready. So Gouvernail rode
unto him and said: Sir Palamides, arise, and take to thee thine
harness. But he was in such a study he heard not what Gouvernail said.
So Gouvernail came again and told Sir Tristram he slept, or else he was
mad. Go thou again, said Sir Tristram, and bid him arise, and tell him
that I am here, his mortal foe. So Gouvernail rode again and put upon
him the butt of his spear, and said: Sir Palamides, make thee ready,
for wit ye well Sir Tristram hoveth yonder, and sendeth thee word he is
thy mortal foe. And therewithal Sir Palamides arose stilly, without
words, and gat his horse, and saddled him and bridled him, and lightly
he leapt upon, and gat his spear in his hand, and either feutred their
spears and hurtled fast together; and there Tristram smote down Sir
Palamides over his horse’s tail. Then lightly Sir Palamides put his
shield afore him and drew his sword. And there began strong battle on
both parts, for both they fought for the love of one lady, and ever she
lay on the walls and beheld them how they fought out of measure, and
either were wounded passing sore, but Palamides was much sorer wounded.
Thus they fought tracing and traversing more than two hours, that
well-nigh for dole and sorrow La Beale Isoud swooned. Alas, she said,
that one I loved and yet do, and the other I love not, yet it were
great pity that I should see Sir Palamides slain; for well I know by
that time the end be done Sir Palamides is but a dead knight: because
he is not christened I would be loath that he should die a Saracen. And
therewithal she came down and besought Sir Tristram to fight no more.
Ah, madam, said he, what mean you, will ye have me shamed? Well ye know
I will be ruled by you. I will not your dishonour, said La Beale Isoud,
but I would that ye would for my sake spare this unhappy Saracen
Palamides. Madam, said Sir Tristram, I will leave fighting at this time
for your sake. Then she said to Sir Palamides: This shall be your
charge, that thou shalt go out of this country while I am therein. I
will obey your commandment, said Sir Palamides, the which is sore
against my will. Then take thy way, said La Beale Isoud, unto the court
of King Arthur, and there recommend me unto Queen Guenever, and tell
her that I send her word that there be within this land but four
lovers, that is, Sir Launcelot du Lake and Queen Guenever, and Sir
Tristram de Liones and Queen Isoud.



CHAPTER XXXII. How Sir Tristram brought Queen Isoud home, and of the
debate of King Mark and Sir Tristram.

And so Sir Palamides departed with great heaviness. And Sir Tristram
took the queen and brought her again to King Mark, and then was there
made great joy of her home-coming. Who was cherished but Sir Tristram!
Then Sir Tristram let fetch Sir Lambegus, his knight, from the
forester’s house, and it was long or he was whole, but at the last he
was well recovered. Thus they lived with joy and play a long while. But
ever Sir Andred, that was nigh cousin to Sir Tristram, lay in a watch
to wait betwixt Sir Tristram and La Beale Isoud, for to take them and
slander them. So upon a day Sir Tristram talked with La Beale Isoud in
a window, and that espied Sir Andred, and told it to the King. Then
King Mark took a sword in his hand and came to Sir Tristram, and called
him false traitor, and would have stricken him. But Sir Tristram was
nigh him, and ran under his sword, and took it out of his hand. And
then the King cried: Where are my knights and my men? I charge you slay
this traitor. But at that time there was not one would move for his
words. When Sir Tristram saw that there was not one would be against
him, he shook the sword to the king, and made countenance as though he
would have stricken him. And then King Mark fled, and Sir Tristram
followed him, and smote upon him five or six strokes flatling on the
neck, that he made him to fall upon the nose. And then Sir Tristram
yede his way and armed him, and took his horse and his man, and so he
rode into that forest.

And there upon a day Sir Tristram met with two brethren that were
knights with King Mark, and there he struck off the head of the one,
and wounded the other to the death; and he made him to bear his
brother’s head in his helm unto the king, and thirty more there he
wounded. And when that knight came before the king to say his message,
he there died afore the king and the queen. Then King Mark called his
council unto him, and asked advice of his barons what was best to do
with Sir Tristram. Sir, said the barons, in especial Sir Dinas, the
Seneschal, Sir, we will give you counsel for to send for Sir Tristram,
for we will that ye wit many men will hold with Sir Tristram an he were
hard bestead. And sir, said Sir Dinas, ye shall understand that Sir
Tristram is called peerless and makeless of any Christian knight, and
of his might and hardiness we knew none so good a knight, but if it be
Sir Launcelot du Lake. And if he depart from your court and go to King
Arthur’s court, wit ye well he will get him such friends there that he
will not set by your malice. And therefore, sir, I counsel you to take
him to your grace. I will well, said the king, that he be sent for,
that we may be friends. Then the barons sent for Sir Tristram under a
safe conduct. And so when Sir Tristram came to the king he was welcome,
and no rehearsal was made, and there was game and play. And then the
king and the queen went a-hunting, and Sir Tristram.



