CHAPTER XXXIII. How Sir Launcelot hurt Sir Tristram, and how after Sir
Tristram smote down Sir Palomides.

Then this cry was so large that Sir Launcelot heard it. And then he gat
a great spear in his hand and came towards the cry. Then Sir Launcelot
cried: The Knight with the Black Shield, make thee ready to joust with
me. When Sir Tristram heard him say so he gat his spear in his hand,
and either abashed down their heads, and came together as thunder; and
Sir Tristram’s spear brake in pieces, and Sir Launcelot by malfortune
struck Sir Tristram on the side a deep wound nigh to the death; but yet
Sir Tristram avoided not his saddle, and so the spear brake.
Therewithal Sir Tristram that was wounded gat out his sword, and he
rushed to Sir Launcelot, and gave him three great strokes upon the helm
that the fire sprang thereout, and Sir Launcelot abashed his head lowly
toward his saddle-bow. And therewithal Sir Tristram departed from the
field, for he felt him so wounded that he weened he should have died;
and Sir Dinadan espied him and followed him into the forest. Then Sir
Launcelot abode and did many marvellous deeds.

So when Sir Tristram was departed by the forest’s side he alighted, and
unlaced his harness and freshed his wound; then weened Sir Dinadan that
he should have died. Nay, nay, said Sir Tristram, Dinadan never dread
thee, for I am heart-whole, and of this wound I shall soon be whole, by
the mercy of God. By that Sir Dinadan was ware where came Palomides
riding straight upon them. And then Sir Tristram was ware that Sir
Palomides came to have destroyed him. And so Sir Dinadan gave him
warning, and said: Sir Tristram, my lord, ye are so sore wounded that
ye may not have ado with him, therefore I will ride against him and do
to him what I may, and if I be slain ye may pray for my soul; and in
the meanwhile ye may withdraw you and go into the castle, or in the
forest, that he shall not meet with you. Sir Tristram smiled and said:
I thank you, Sir Dinadan, of your good will, but ye shall wit that I am
able to handle him. And then anon hastily he armed him, and took his
horse, and a great spear in his hand, and said to Sir Dinadan: Adieu;
and rode toward Sir Palomides a soft pace. Then when Sir Palomides saw
that, he made countenance to amend his horse, but he did it for this
cause, for he abode Sir Gaheris that came after him. And when he was
come he rode toward Sir Tristram. Then Sir Tristram sent unto Sir
Palomides, and required him to joust with him; and if he smote down Sir
Palomides he would do no more to him; and if it so happened that Sir
Palomides smote down Sir Tristram, he bade him do his utterance. So
they were accorded. Then they met together, and Sir Tristram smote down
Sir Palomides that he had a grievous fall, so that he lay still as he
had been dead. And then Sir Tristram ran upon Sir Gaheris, and he would
not have jousted; but whether he would or not Sir Tristram smote him
over his horse’s croup, that he lay still as though he had been dead.
And then Sir Tristram rode his way and left Sir Persides’ squire within
the pavilions, and Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode to an old knight’s
place to lodge them. And that old knight had five sons at the
tournament, for whom he prayed God heartily for their coming home. And
so, as the French book saith, they came home all five well beaten.

And when Sir Tristram departed into the forest Sir Launcelot held alway
the stour like hard, as a man araged that took no heed to himself, and
wit ye well there was many a noble knight against him. And when King
Arthur saw Sir Launcelot do so marvellous deeds of arms he then armed
him, and took his horse and his armour, and rode into the field to help
Sir Launcelot; and so many knights came in with King Arthur. And to
make short tale in conclusion, the King of Northgalis and the King of
the Hundred Knights were put to the worse; and because Sir Launcelot
abode and was the last in the field the prize was given him. But Sir
Launcelot would neither for king, queen, nor knight, have the prize,
but where the cry was cried through the field: Sir Launcelot, Sir
Launcelot hath won the field this day, Sir Launcelot let make another
cry contrary: Sir Tristram hath won the field, for he began first, and
last he hath endured, and so hath he done the first day, the second,
and the third day.



CHAPTER XXXIV. How the prize of the third day was given to Sir
Launcelot, and Sir Launcelot gave it to Sir Tristram.

Then all the estates and degrees high and low said of Sir Launcelot
great worship, for the honour that he did unto Sir Tristram; and for
that honour doing to Sir Tristram he was at that time more praised and
renowned than an he had overthrown five hundred knights; and all the
people wholly for this gentleness, first the estates both high and low,
and after the commonalty cried at once: Sir Launcelot hath won the
field whosoever say nay. Then was Sir Launcelot wroth and ashamed, and
so therewithal he rode to King Arthur. Alas, said the king, we are all
dismayed that Sir Tristram is thus departed from us. By God, said King
Arthur, he is one of the noblest knights that ever I saw hold spear or
sword in hand, and the most courteoust knight in his fighting; for full
hard I saw him, said King Arthur, when he smote Sir Palomides upon the
helm thrice, that he abashed his helm with his strokes, and also he
said: Here is a stroke for Sir Tristram, and thus thrice he said. Then
King Arthur, Sir Launcelot, and Sir Dodinas le Savage took their horses
to seek Sir Tristram, and by the means of Sir Persides he had told King
Arthur where Sir Tristram was in his pavilion. But when they came
there, Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan were gone.

Then King Arthur and Sir Launcelot were heavy, and returned again to
the Castle of Maidens making great dole for the hurt of Sir Tristram,
and his sudden departing. So God me help, said King Arthur, I am more
heavy that I cannot meet with him than for all the hurts that all my
knights have had at the tournament. Right so came Sir Gaheris and told
King Arthur how Sir Tristram had smitten down Sir Palomides, and it was
at Sir Palomides’ own request. Alas, said King Arthur, that was great
dishonour to Sir Palomides, inasmuch as Sir Tristram was sore wounded,
and now may we all, kings, and knights, and men of worship, say that
Sir Tristram may be called a noble knight, and one of the best knights
that ever I saw the days of my life. For I will that ye all, kings and
knights, know, said King Arthur, that I never saw knight do so
marvellously as he hath done these three days; for he was the first
that began and that longest held on, save this last day. And though he
was hurt, it was a manly adventure of two noble knights, and when two
noble men encounter needs must the one have the worse, like as God will
suffer at that time. As for me, said Sir Launcelot, for all the lands
that ever my father left me I would not have hurt Sir Tristram an I had
known him at that time; that I hurt him was for I saw not his shield.
For an I had seen his black shield, I would not have meddled with him
for many causes; for late he did as much for me as ever did knight, and
that is well known that he had ado with thirty knights, and no help
save Sir Dinadan. And one thing shall I promise, said Sir Launcelot,
Sir Palomides shall repent it as in his unkindly dealing for to follow
that noble knight that I by mishap hurted thus. Sir Launcelot said all
the worship that might be said by Sir Tristram. Then King Arthur made a
great feast to all that would come. And thus we let pass King Arthur,
and a little we will turn unto Sir Palomides, that after he had a fall
of Sir Tristram, he was nigh-hand araged out of his wit for despite of
Sir Tristram. And so he followed him by adventure. And as he came by a
river, in his woodness he would have made his horse to have leapt over;
and the horse failed footing and fell in the river, wherefore Sir
Palomides was adread lest he should have been drowned; and then he
avoided his horse, and swam to the land, and let his horse go down by
adventure.



