CHAPTER XVII. How that knight slew his love and a knight lying by her,
and after, how he slew himself with his own sword, and how Balin rode
toward a castle where he lost his life.

And when Garnish beheld her so lying, for pure sorrow his mouth and
nose burst out a-bleeding, and with his sword he smote off both their
heads, and then he made sorrow out of measure, and said, O Balin, much
sorrow hast thou brought unto me, for hadst thou not shewed me that
sight I should have passed my sorrow. Forsooth, said Balin, I did it to
this intent that it should better thy courage, and that ye might see
and know her falsehood, and to cause you to leave love of such a lady;
God knoweth I did none other but as I would ye did to me. Alas, said
Garnish, now is my sorrow double that I may not endure, now have I
slain that I most loved in all my life; and therewith suddenly he rove
himself on his own sword unto the hilts. When Balin saw that, he
dressed him thenceward, lest folk would say he had slain them; and so
he rode forth, and within three days he came by a cross, and thereon
were letters of gold written, that said, It is not for no knight alone
to ride toward this castle. Then saw he an old hoar gentleman coming
toward him, that said, Balin le Savage, thou passest thy bounds to come
this way, therefore turn again and it will avail thee. And he vanished
away anon; and so he heard an horn blow as it had been the death of a
beast. That blast, said Balin, is blown for me, for I am the prize and
yet am I not dead. Anon withal he saw an hundred ladies and many
knights, that welcomed him with fair semblant, and made him passing
good cheer unto his sight, and led him into the castle, and there was
dancing and minstrelsy and all manner of joy. Then the chief lady of
the castle said, Knight with the Two Swords, ye must have ado and joust
with a knight hereby that keepeth an island, for there may no man pass
this way but he must joust or he pass. That is an unhappy custom, said
Balin, that a knight may not pass this way but if he joust. Ye shall
not have ado but with one knight, said the lady.

Well, said Balin, since I shall thereto I am ready, but travelling men
are oft weary and their horses too, but though my horse be weary my
heart is not weary, I would be fain there my death should be. Sir, said
a knight to Balin, methinketh your shield is not good, I will lend you
a bigger. Thereof I pray you. And so he took the shield that was
unknown and left his own, and so rode unto the island, and put him and
his horse in a great boat; and when he came on the other side he met
with a damosel, and she said, O knight Balin, why have ye left your own
shield? alas ye have put yourself in great danger, for by your shield
ye should have been known; it is great pity of you as ever was of
knight, for of thy prowess and hardiness thou hast no fellow living. Me
repenteth, said Balin, that ever I came within this country, but I may
not turn now again for shame, and what adventure shall fall to me, be
it life or death, I will take the adventure that shall come to me. And
then he looked on his armour, and understood he was well armed, and
therewith blessed him and mounted upon his horse.



CHAPTER XVIII. How Balin met with his brother Balan, and how each of
them slew other unknown, till they were wounded to death.

Then afore him he saw come riding out of a castle a knight, and his
horse trapped all red, and himself in the same colour. When this knight
in the red beheld Balin, him thought it should be his brother Balin by
cause of his two swords, but by cause he knew not his shield he deemed
it was not he. And so they aventryd their spears and came marvellously
fast together, and they smote each other in the shields, but their
spears and their course were so big that it bare down horse and man,
that they lay both in a swoon. But Balin was bruised sore with the fall
of his horse, for he was weary of travel. And Balan was the first that
rose on foot and drew his sword, and went toward Balin, and he arose
and went against him; but Balan smote Balin first, and he put up his
shield and smote him through the shield and tamed his helm. Then Balin
smote him again with that unhappy sword, and well-nigh had felled his
brother Balan, and so they fought there together till their breaths
failed. Then Balin looked up to the castle and saw the towers stand
full of ladies. So they went unto battle again, and wounded everych
other dolefully, and then they breathed ofttimes, and so went unto
battle that all the place there as they fought was blood red. And at
that time there was none of them both but they had either smitten other
seven great wounds, so that the least of them might have been the death
of the mightiest giant in this world.

Then they went to battle again so marvellously that doubt it was to
hear of that battle for the great blood-shedding, and their hauberks
unnailed that naked they were on every side. At last Balan the younger
brother withdrew him a little and laid him down. Then said Balin le
Savage, What knight art thou? for or now I found never no knight that
matched me. My name is, said he, Balan, brother unto the good knight,
Balin. Alas, said Balin, that ever I should see this day, and therewith
he fell backward in a swoon. Then Balan yede on all four feet and
hands, and put off the helm off his brother, and might not know him by
the visage it was so ful hewn and bled; but when he awoke he said, O
Balan, my brother, thou hast slain me and I thee, wherefore all the
wide world shall speak of us both. Alas, said Balan, that ever I saw
this day, that through mishap I might not know you, for I espied well
your two swords, but by cause ye had another shield I deemed ye had
been another knight. Alas, said Balin, all that made an unhappy knight
in the castle, for he caused me to leave my own shield to our both’s
destruction, and if I might live I would destroy that castle for ill
customs. That were well done, said Balan, for I had never grace to
depart from them since that I came hither, for here it happed me to
slay a knight that kept this island, and since might I never depart,
and no more should ye, brother, an ye might have slain me as ye have,
and escaped yourself with the life.

Right so came the lady of the tower with four knights and six ladies
and six yeomen unto them, and there she heard how they made their moan
either to other, and said, We came both out of one tomb, that is to say
one mother’s belly, and so shall we lie both in one pit. So Balan
prayed the lady of her gentleness, for his true service, that she would
bury them both in that same place there the battle was done. And she
granted them, with weeping, it should be done richly in the best
manner. Now, will ye send for a priest, that we may receive our
sacrament, and receive the blessed body of our Lord Jesus Christ? Yea,
said the lady, it shall be done; and so she sent for a priest and gave
them their rights. Now, said Balin, when we are buried in one tomb, and
the mention made over us how two brethren slew each other, there will
never good knight, nor good man, see our tomb but they will pray for
our souls. And so all the ladies and gentlewomen wept for pity. Then
anon Balan died, but Balin died not till the midnight after, and so
were they buried both, and the lady let make a mention of Balan how he
was there slain by his brother’s hands, but she knew not Balin’s name.



