CHAPTER V. How Sir Launcelot came to the court and heard of La Cote
Male Taile, and how he followed after him, and how La Cote Male Taile
was prisoner.

That when he was come to the court of King Arthur, then heard he tell
of the young knight La Cote Male Taile, how he slew the lion, and how
he took upon him the adventure of the black shield, the which was named
at that time the hardiest adventure of the world. So God me save, said
Sir Launcelot unto many of his fellows, it was shame to all the noble
knights to suffer such a young knight to take such adventure upon him
for his destruction; for I will that ye wit, said Sir Launcelot, that
that damosel Maledisant hath borne that shield many a day for to seek
the most proved knights, and that was she that Breuse Saunce Pité took
that shield from her, and after Tristram de Liones rescued that shield
from him and gave it to the damosel again, a little afore that time
that Sir Tristram fought with my nephew Sir Blamore de Ganis, for a
quarrel that was betwixt the King of Ireland and him. Then many knights
were sorry that Sir La Cote Male Taile was gone forth to that
adventure. Truly, said Sir Launcelot, I cast me to ride after him. And
within seven days Sir Launcelot overtook La Cote Male Taile, and then
he saluted him and the damosel Maledisant. And when Sir Mordred saw Sir
Launcelot, then he left their fellowship; and so Sir Launcelot rode
with them all a day, and ever that damosel rebuked La Cote Male Taile;
and then Sir Launcelot answered for him, then she left off, and rebuked
Sir Launcelot.

So this meantime Sir Tristram sent by a damosel a letter unto Sir
Launcelot, excusing him of the wedding of Isoud la Blanche Mains; and
said in the letter, as he was a true knight he had never ado fleshly
with Isoud la Blanche Mains; and passing courteously and gentily Sir
Tristram wrote unto Sir Launcelot, ever beseeching him to be his good
friend and unto La Beale Isoud of Cornwall, and that Sir Launcelot
would excuse him if that ever he saw her. And within short time by the
grace of God, said Sir Tristram, that he would speak with La Beale
Isoud, and with him right hastily. Then Sir Launcelot departed from the
damosel and from Sir La Cote Male Taile, for to oversee that letter,
and to write another letter unto Sir Tristram de Liones.

And in the meanwhile La Cote Male Taile rode with the damosel until
they came to a castle that hight Pendragon; and there were six knights
stood afore him, and one of them proffered to joust with La Cote Male
Taile. And there La Cote Male Taile smote him over his horse’s croup.
And then the five knights set upon him all at once with their spears,
and there they smote La Cote Male Taile down, horse and man. And then
they alighted suddenly, and set their hands upon him all at once, and
took him prisoner, and so led him unto the castle and kept him as
prisoner.

And on the morn Sir Launcelot arose, and delivered the damosel with
letters unto Sir Tristram, and then he took his way after La Cote Male
Taile; and by the way upon a bridge there was a knight proffered Sir
Launcelot to joust, and Sir Launcelot smote him down, and then they
fought upon foot a noble battle together, and a mighty; and at the last
Sir Launcelot smote him down grovelling upon his hands and his knees.
And then that knight yielded him, and Sir Launcelot received him fair.
Sir, said the knight, I require thee tell me your name, for much my
heart giveth unto you. Nay, said Sir Launcelot, as at this time I will
not tell you my name, unless then that ye tell me your name. Certainly,
said the knight, my name is Sir Nerovens, that was made knight of my
lord Sir Launcelot du Lake. Ah, Nerovens de Lile, said Sir Launcelot, I
am right glad that ye are proved a good knight, for now wit ye well my
name is Sir Launcelot du Lake. Alas, said Sir Nerovens de Lile, what
have I done! And therewithal flatling he fell to his feet, and would
have kissed them, but Sir Launcelot would not let him; and then either
made great joy of other. And then Sir Nerovens told Sir Launcelot that
he should not go by the Castle of Pendragon: For there is a lord, a
mighty knight, and many knights with him, and this night I heard say
that they took a knight prisoner yesterday that rode with a damosel,
and they say he is a Knight of the Round Table.



CHAPTER VI. How Sir Launcelot fought with six knights, and after with
Sir Brian, and how he delivered the prisoners.

Ah, said Sir Launcelot, that knight is my fellow, and him shall I
rescue or else I shall lose my life therefore. And therewithal he rode
fast till he came before the Castle of Pendragon; and anon therewithal
there came six knights, and all made them ready to set upon Sir
Launcelot at once; then Sir Launcelot feutred his spear, and smote the
foremost that he brake his back in-sunder, and three of them hit and
three failed. And then Sir Launcelot passed through them, and lightly
he turned in again, and smote another knight through the breast and
throughout the back more than an ell, and therewithal his spear brake.
So then all the remnant of the four knights drew their swords and
lashed at Sir Launcelot. And at every stroke Sir Launcelot bestowed so
his strokes that at four strokes sundry they avoided their saddles,
passing sore wounded; and forthwithal he rode hurling into that castle.

And anon the lord of the castle, that was that time cleped Sir Brian de
les Isles, the which was a noble man and a great enemy unto King
Arthur, within a while he was armed and upon horseback. And then they
feutred their spears and hurled together so strongly that both their
horses rashed to the earth. And then they avoided their saddles, and
dressed their shields, and drew their swords, and flang together as
wood men, and there were many strokes given in a while. At the last Sir
Launcelot gave to Sir Brian such a buffet that he kneeled upon his
knees, and then Sir Launcelot rashed upon him, and with great force he
pulled off his helm; and when Sir Brian saw that he should be slain he
yielded him, and put him in his mercy and in his grace. Then Sir
Launcelot made him to deliver all his prisoners that he had within his
castle, and therein Sir Launcelot found of Arthur’s knights thirty, and
forty ladies, and so he delivered them; and then he rode his way. And
anon as La Cote Male Taile was delivered he gat his horse, and his
harness, and his damosel Maledisant.

The meanwhile Sir Nerovens, that Sir Launcelot had foughten withal
afore at the bridge, he sent a damosel after Sir Launcelot to wit how
he sped at the Castle of Pendragon. And then they within the castle
marvelled what knight he was, when Sir Brian and his knights delivered
all those prisoners. Have ye no marvel, said the damosel, for the best
knight in this world was here, and did this journey, and wit ye well,
she said, it was Sir Launcelot. Then was Sir Brian full glad, and so
was his lady, and all his knights, that such a man should win them. And
when the damosel and La Cote Male Taile understood that it was Sir
Launcelot du Lake that had ridden with them in fellowship, and that she
remembered her how she had rebuked him and called him coward, then was
she passing heavy.



