CHAPTER XXXVII. How King Mark was sorry for the good renown of Sir
Tristram. Some of King Arthur’s knights jousted with knights of
Cornwall.

Now will we speak, and leave Sir Tristram, Sir Palomides, and Sir
Dinadan in prison, and speak we of other knights that sought after Sir
Tristram many divers parts of this land. And some yede into Cornwall;
and by adventure Sir Gaheris, nephew unto King Arthur, came unto King
Mark, and there he was well received and sat at King Mark’s own table
and ate of his own mess. Then King Mark asked Sir Gaheris what tidings
there were in the realm of Logris. Sir, said Sir Gaheris, the king
reigneth as a noble knight; and now but late there was a great jousts
and tournament as ever I saw any in the realm of Logris, and the most
noble knights were at that jousts. But there was one knight that did
marvellously three days, and he bare a black shield, and of all knights
that ever I saw he proved the best knight. Then, said King Mark, that
was Sir Launcelot, or Sir Palomides the paynim. Not so, said Sir
Gheris, for both Sir Launcelot and Sir Palomides were on the contrary
party against the Knight with the Black Shield. Then was it Sir
Tristram, said the king. Yea, said Sir Gaheris. And therewithal the
king smote down his head, and in his heart he feared sore that Sir
Tristram should get him such worship in the realm of Logris
wherethrough that he himself should not be able to withstand him. Thus
Sir Gaheris had great cheer with King Mark, and with Queen La Beale
Isoud, the which was glad of Sir Gaheris’ words; for well she wist by
his deeds and manners that it was Sir Tristram. And then the king made
a feast royal, and to that feast came Sir Uwaine le Fise de Roy Ureine,
and some called him Uwaine le Blanchemains. And this Sir Uwaine
challenged all the knights of Cornwall. Then was the king wood wroth
that he had no knights to answer him. Then Sir Andred, nephew unto King
Mark, leapt up and said: I will encounter with Sir Uwaine. Then he yede
and armed him and horsed him in the best manner. And there Sir Uwaine
met with Sir Andred, and smote him down that he swooned on the earth.
Then was King Mark sorry and wroth out of measure that he had no knight
to revenge his nephew, Sir Andred.

So the king called unto him Sir Dinas, the Seneschal, and prayed him
for his sake to take upon him to joust with Sir Uwaine. Sir, said Sir
Dinas, I am full loath to have ado with any knight of the Round Table.
Yet, said the king, for my love take upon thee to joust. So Sir Dinas
made him ready, and anon they encountered together with great spears,
but Sir Dinas was overthrown, horse and man, a great fall. Who was
wroth but King Mark! Alas, he said, have I no knight that will
encounter with yonder knight? Sir, said Sir Gaheris, for your sake I
will joust. So Sir Gaheris made him ready, and when he was armed he
rode into the field. And when Sir Uwaine saw Sir Gaheris’ shield he
rode to him and said: Sir, ye do not your part. For, sir, the first
time ye were made Knight of the Round Table ye sware that ye should not
have ado with your fellowship wittingly. And pardie, Sir Gaheris, ye
knew me well enough by my shield, and so do I know you by your shield,
and though ye would break your oath I would not break mine; for there
is not one here, nor ye, that shall think I am afeard of you, but I
durst right well have ado with you, and yet we be sisters’ sons. Then
was Sir Gaheris ashamed, and so therewithal every knight went their
way, and Sir Uwaine rode into the country.

Then King Mark armed him, and took his horse and his spear, with a
squire with him. And then he rode afore Sir Uwaine, and suddenly at a
gap he ran upon him as he that was not ware of him, and there he smote
him almost through the body, and there left him. So within a while
there came Sir Kay and found Sir Uwaine, and asked him how he was hurt.
I wot not, said Sir Uwaine, why nor wherefore, but by treason I am sure
I gat this hurt; for here came a knight suddenly upon me or that I was
ware, and suddenly hurt me. Then there was come Sir Andred to seek King
Mark. Thou traitor knight, said Sir Kay, an I wist it were thou that
thus traitorly hast hurt this noble knight thou shouldst never pass my
hands. Sir, said Sir Andred, I did never hurt him, and that I will
report me to himself. Fie on you false knight, said Sir Kay, for ye of
Cornwall are nought worth. So Sir Kay made carry Sir Uwaine to the
Abbey of the Black Cross, and there he was healed. And then Sir Gaheris
took his leave of King Mark, but or he departed he said: Sir king, ye
did a foul shame unto you and your court, when ye banished Sir Tristram
out of this country, for ye needed not to have doubted no knight an he
had been here. And so he departed.



CHAPTER XXVIII. Of the treason of King Mark, and how Sir Gaheris smote
him down and Andred his cousin.

Then there came Sir Kay, the Seneschal, unto King Mark, and there he
had good cheer showing outward. Now, fair lords, said he, will ye prove
any adventure in the forest of Morris, in the which I know well is as
hard an adventure as I know any. Sir, said Sir Kay, I will prove it.
And Sir Gaheris said he would be avised for King Mark was ever full of
treason: and therewithal Sir Gaheris departed and rode his way. And by
the same way that Sir Kay should ride he laid him down to rest,
charging his squire to wait upon Sir Kay; And warn me when he cometh.
So within a while Sir Kay came riding that way, and then Sir Gaheris
took his horse and met him, and said: Sir Kay, ye are not wise to ride
at the request of King Mark, for he dealeth all with treason. Then said
Sir Kay: I require you let us prove this adventure. I shall not fail
you, said Sir Gaheris. And so they rode that time till a lake that was
that time called the Perilous Lake, and there they abode under the shaw
of the wood.

The meanwhile King Mark within the castle of Tintagil avoided all his
barons, and all other save such as were privy with him were avoided out
of his chamber. And then he let call his nephew Sir Andred, and bade
arm him and horse him lightly; and by that time it was midnight. And so
King Mark was armed in black, horse and all; and so at a privy postern
they two issued out with their varlets with them, and rode till they
came to that lake. Then Sir Kay espied them first, and gat his spear,
and proffered to joust. And King Mark rode against him, and smote each
other full hard, for the moon shone as the bright day. And there at
that jousts Sir Kay’s horse fell down, for his horse was not so big as
the king’s horse, and Sir Kay’s horse bruised him full sore. Then Sir
Gaheris was wroth that Sir Kay had a fall. Then he cried: Knight, sit
thou fast in thy saddle, for I will revenge my fellow. Then King Mark
was afeard of Sir Gaheris, and so with evil will King Mark rode against
him, and Sir Gaheris gave him such a stroke that he fell down. So then
forthwithal Sir Gaheris ran unto Sir Andred and smote him from his
horse quite, that his helm smote in the earth, and nigh had broken his
neck. And therewithal Sir Gaheris alighted, and gat up Sir Kay. And
then they yode both on foot to them, and bade them yield them, and tell
their names outher they should die. Then with great pain Sir Andred
spake first, and said: It is King Mark of Cornwall, therefore be ye
ware what ye do, and I am Sir Andred, his cousin. Fie on you both, said
Sir Gaheris, for a false traitor, and false treason hast thou wrought
and he both, under the feigned cheer that ye made us! it were pity,
said Sir Gaheris, that thou shouldst live any longer. Save my life,
said King Mark, and I will make amends; and consider that I am a king
anointed. It were the more shame, said Sir Gaheris, to save thy life;
thou art a king anointed with cream, and therefore thou shouldst hold
with all men of worship; and therefore thou art worthy to die. With
that he lashed at King Mark without saying any more, and covered him
with his shield and defended him as he might. And then Sir Kay lashed
at Sir Andred, and therewithal King Mark yielded him unto Sir Gaheris.
And then he kneeled adown, and made his oath upon the cross of the
sword, that never while he lived he would be against errant-knights.
And also he sware to be good friend unto Sir Tristram if ever he came
into Cornwall.

By then Sir Andred was on the earth, and Sir Kay would have slain him.
Let be, said Sir Gaheris, slay him not I pray you. It were pity, said
Sir Kay, that he should live any longer, for this is nigh cousin unto
Sir Tristram, and ever he hath been a traitor unto him, and by him he
was exiled out of Cornwall, and therefore I will slay him, said Sir
Kay. Ye shall not, said Sir Gaheris; sithen I have given the king his
life, I pray you give him his life. And therewithal Sir Kay let him go.
And so Sir Kay and Sir Gaheris rode their way unto Dinas, the
Seneschal, for because they heard say that he loved well Sir Tristram.
So they reposed them there, and soon after they rode unto the realm of
Logris. And so within a little while they met with Sir Launcelot that
always had Dame Bragwaine with him, to that intent he weened to have
met the sooner with Sir Tristram; and Sir Launcelot asked what tidings
in Cornwall, and whether they heard of Sir Tristram or not. Sir Kay and
Sir Gaheris answered and said, that they heard not of him. Then they
told Sir Launcelot word by word of their adventure. Then Sir Launcelot
smiled and said: Hard it is to take out of the flesh that is bred in
the bone; and so made them merry together.



