CHAPTER XXII. How a damosel sought help to help Sir Launcelot against
thirty knights, and how Sir Tristram fought with them.

And at the next landing, fast by the sea, there met with Sir Tristram
and with Sir Dinadan, Sir Ector de Maris and Sir Bors de Ganis; and
there Sir Ector jousted with Sir Dinadan, and he smote him and his
horse down. And then Sir Tristram would have jousted with Sir Bors, and
Sir Bors said that he would not joust with no Cornish knights, for they
are not called men of worship; and all this was done upon a bridge. And
with this came Sir Bleoberis and Sir Driant, and Sir Bleoberis
proffered to joust with Sir Tristram, and there Sir Tristram smote down
Sir Bleoberis. Then said Sir Bors de Ganis: I wist never Cornish knight
of so great valour nor so valiant as that knight that beareth the
trappings embroidered with crowns. And then Sir Tristram and Sir
Dinadan departed from them into a forest, and there met them a damosel
that came for the love of Sir Launcelot to seek after some noble
knights of King Arthur’s court for to rescue Sir Launcelot. And so Sir
Launcelot was ordained, for-by the treason of Queen Morgan le Fay to
have slain Sir Launcelot, and for that cause she ordained thirty
knights to lie in await for Sir Launcelot, and this damosel knew this
treason. And for this cause the damosel came for to seek noble knights
to help Sir Launcelot. For that night, or the day after, Sir Launcelot
should come where these thirty knights were. And so this damosel met
with Sir Bors and Sir Ector and with Sir Driant, and there she told
them all four of the treason of Morgan le Fay; and then they promised
her that they would be nigh where Sir Launcelot should meet with the
thirty knights. And if so be they set upon him we will do rescues as we
can.

So the damosel departed, and by adventure the damosel met with Sir
Tristram and with Sir Dinadan, and there the damosel told them all the
treason that was ordained for Sir Launcelot. Fair damosel, said Sir
Tristram, bring me to that same place where they should meet with Sir
Launcelot. Then said Sir Dinadan: What will ye do? it is not for us to
fight with thirty knights, and wit you well I will not thereof; as to
match one knight two or three is enough an they be men, but for to
match fifteen knights that will I never undertake. Fie for shame, said
Sir Tristram, do but your part. Nay, said Sir Dinadan, I will not
thereof but if ye will lend me your shield, for ye bear a shield of
Cornwall; and for the cowardice that is named to the knights of
Cornwall, by your shields ye be ever forborne. Nay, said Sir Tristram,
I will not depart from my shield for her sake that gave it me. But one
thing, said Sir Tristram, I promise thee, Sir Dinadan, but if thou wilt
promise me to abide with me, here I shall slay thee, for I desire no
more of thee but answer one knight. And if thy heart will not serve
thee, stand by and look upon me and them. Sir, said Sir Dinadan, I
promise you to look upon and to do what I may to save myself, but I
would I had not met with you.

So then anon these thirty knights came fast by these four knights, and
they were ware of them, and either of other. And so these thirty
knights let them pass, for this cause, that they would not wrath them,
if case be that they had ado with Sir Launcelot; and the four knights
let them pass to this intent, that they would see and behold what they
would do with Sir Launcelot. And so the thirty knights passed on and
came by Sir Tristram and by Sir Dinadan, and then Sir Tristram cried on
high: Lo, here is a knight against you for the love of Sir Launcelot.
And there he slew two with one spear and ten with his sword. And then
came in Sir Dinadan and he did passing well, and so of the thirty
knights there went but ten away, and they fled. All this battle saw Sir
Bors de Ganis and his three fellows, and then they saw well it was the
same knight that jousted with them at the bridge; then they took their
horses and rode unto Sir Tristram, and praised him and thanked him of
his good deeds, and they all desired Sir Tristram to go with them to
their lodging; and he said: Nay, he would not go to no lodging. Then
they all four knights prayed him to tell them his name. Fair lords,
said Sir Tristram, as at this time I will not tell you my name.



CHAPTER XXIII. How Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan came to a lodging where
they must joust with two knights.

Then Sir Tristram and Sir Dinadan rode forth their way till they came
to the shepherds and to the herdmen, and there they asked them if they
knew any lodging or harbour there nigh hand. Forsooth, sirs, said the
herdmen, hereby is good lodging in a castle; but there is such a custom
that there shall no knight be harboured but if he joust with two
knights, and if he be but one knight he must joust with two. And as ye
be therein soon shall ye be matched. There is shrewd harbour, said Sir
Dinadan; lodge where ye will, for I will not lodge there. Fie for
shame, said Sir Tristram, are ye not a knight of the Table Round?
wherefore ye may not with your worship refuse your lodging. Not so,
said the herdmen, for an ye be beaten and have the worse ye shall not
be lodged there, and if ye beat them ye shall be well harboured. Ah,
said Sir Dinadan, they are two sure knights. Then Sir Dinadan would not
lodge there in no manner but as Sir Tristram required him of his
knighthood; and so they rode thither. And to make short tale, Sir
Tristram and Sir Dinadan smote them down both, and so they entered into
the castle and had good cheer as they could think or devise.

And when they were unarmed, and thought to be merry and in good rest,
there came in at the gates Sir Palomides and Sir Gaheris, requiring to
have the custom of the castle. What array is this? said Sir Dinadan, I
would have my rest. That may not be, said Sir Tristram; now must we
needs defend the custom of this castle, insomuch as we have the better
of the lords of this castle, and therefore, said Sir Tristram, needs
must ye make you ready. In the devil’s name, said Sir Dinadan, came I
into your company. And so they made them ready; and Sir Gaheris
encountered with Sir Tristram, and Sir Gaheris had a fall; and Sir
Palomides encountered with Sir Dinadan, and Sir Dinadan had a fall:
then was it fall for fall. So then must they fight on foot. That would
not Sir Dinadan, for he was so sore bruised of the fall that Sir
Palomides gave him. Then Sir Tristram unlaced Sir Dinadan’s helm, and
prayed him to help him. I will not, said Sir Dinadan, for I am sore
wounded of the thirty knights that we had but late ago to do withal.
But ye fare, said Sir Dinadan unto Sir Tristram, as a madman and as a
man that is out of his mind that would cast himself away, and I may
curse the time that ever I saw you, for in all the world are not two
such knights that be so wood as is Sir Launcelot and ye Sir Tristram;
for once I fell in the fellowship of Sir Launcelot as I have done now
with you, and he set me a work that a quarter of a year I kept my bed.
Jesu defend me, said Sir Dinadan, from such two knights, and specially
from your fellowship. Then, said Sir Tristram, I will fight with them
both. Then Sir Tristram bade them come forth both, for I will fight
with you. Then Sir Palomides and Sir Gaheris dressed them, and smote at
them both. Then Dinadan smote at Sir Gaheris a stroke or two, and
turned from him. Nay, said Sir Palomides, it is too much shame for us
two knights to fight with one. And then he did bid Sir Gaheris stand
aside with that knight that hath no list to fight. Then they rode
together and fought long, and at the last Sir Tristram doubled his
strokes, and drove Sir Palomides aback more than three strides. And
then by one assent Sir Gaheris and Sir Dinadan went betwixt them, and
departed them in-sunder. And then by assent of Sir Tristram they would
have lodged together. But Sir Dinadan would not lodge in that castle.
And then he cursed the time that ever he came in their fellowship, and
so he took his horse, and his harness, and departed.

Then Sir Tristram prayed the lords of that castle to lend him a man to
bring him to a lodging, and so they did, and overtook Sir Dinadan, and
rode to their lodging two mile thence with a good man in a priory, and
there they were well at ease. And that same night Sir Bors and Sir
Bleoberis, and Sir Ector and Sir Driant, abode still in the same place
thereas Sir Tristram fought with the thirty knights; and there they met
with Sir Launcelot the same night, and had made promise to lodge with
Sir Colgrevance the same night.



