CHAPTER XXI. How Sir Gareth, otherwise called Beaumains, came to the
presence of his lady, and how they took acquaintance, and of their
love.

And then came forth Dame Lionesse arrayed like a princess, and there
she made him passing good cheer, and he her again; and they had goodly
language and lovely countenance together. And Sir Gareth thought many
times, Jesu, would that the lady of the Castle Perilous were so fair as
she was. There were all manner of games and plays, of dancing and
singing. And ever the more Sir Gareth beheld that lady, the more he
loved her; and so he burned in love that he was past himself in his
reason; and forth toward night they yede unto supper, and Sir Gareth
might not eat, for his love was so hot that he wist not where he was.

All these looks espied Sir Gringamore, and then at-after supper he
called his sister Dame Lionesse into a chamber, and said: Fair sister,
I have well espied your countenance betwixt you and this knight, and I
will, sister, that ye wit he is a full noble knight, and if ye can make
him to abide here I will do him all the pleasure that I can, for an ye
were better than ye are, ye were well bywaryd upon him. Fair brother,
said Dame Lionesse, I understand well that the knight is good, and come
he is of a noble house. Notwithstanding, I will assay him better,
howbeit I am most beholden to him of any earthly man; for he hath had
great labour for my love, and passed many a dangerous passage.

Right so Sir Gringamore went unto Sir Gareth, and said, Sir, make ye
good cheer, for ye shall have none other cause, for this lady, my
sister, is yours at all times, her worship saved, for wit ye well she
loveth you as well as ye do her, and better if better may be. An I wist
that, said Sir Gareth, there lived not a gladder man than I would be.
Upon my worship, said Sir Gringamore, trust unto my promise; and as
long as it liketh you ye shall sojourn with me, and this lady shall be
with us daily and nightly to make you all the cheer that she can. I
will well, said Sir Gareth, for I have promised to be nigh this country
this twelvemonth. And well I am sure King Arthur and other noble
knights will find me where that I am within this twelvemonth. For I
shall be sought and found, if that I be alive. And then the noble
knight Sir Gareth went unto the Dame Lionesse, which he then much
loved, and kissed her many times, and either made great joy of other.
And there she promised him her love certainly, to love him and none
other the days of her life. Then this lady, Dame Lionesse, by the
assent of her brother, told Sir Gareth all the truth what she was, and
how she was the same lady that he did battle for, and how she was lady
of the Castle Perilous, and there she told him how she caused her
brother to take away his dwarf.



CHAPTER XXII. How at night came an armed knight, and fought with Sir
Gareth, and he, sore hurt in the thigh, smote off the knight’s head.

For this cause, to know the certainty what was your name, and of what
kin ye were come.

And then she let fetch to-fore him Linet, the damosel that had ridden
with him many wildsome ways. Then was Sir Gareth more gladder than he
was to-fore. And then they troth-plight each other to love, and never
to fail whiles their life lasteth. And so they burnt both in love, that
they were accorded to abate their lusts secretly. And there Dame
Lionesse counselled Sir Gareth to sleep in none other place but in the
hall. And there she promised him to come to his bed a little afore
midnight.

This counsel was not so privily kept but it was understood; for they
were but young both, and tender of age, and had not used none such
crafts to-fore. Wherefore the damosel Linet was a little displeased,
and she thought her sister Dame Lionesse was a little over-hasty, that
she might not abide the time of her marriage; and for saving their
worship, she thought to abate their hot lusts. And so she let ordain by
her subtle crafts that they had not their intents neither with other,
as in their delights, until they were married. And so it passed on.
At-after supper was made clean avoidance, that every lord and lady
should go unto his rest. But Sir Gareth said plainly he would go no
farther than the hall, for in such places, he said, was convenient for
an errant-knight to take his rest in; and so there were ordained great
couches, and thereon feather beds, and there laid him down to sleep;
and within a while came Dame Lionesse, wrapped in a mantle furred with
ermine, and laid her down beside Sir Gareth. And therewithal he began
to kiss her. And then he looked afore him, and there he apperceived and
saw come an armed knight, with many lights about him; and this knight
had a long gisarm in his hand, and made grim countenance to smite him.
When Sir Gareth saw him come in that wise, he leapt out of his bed, and
gat in his hand his sword, and leapt straight toward that knight. And
when the knight saw Sir Gareth come so fiercely upon him, he smote him
with a foin through the thick of the thigh that the wound was a
shaftmon broad and had cut a-two many veins and sinews. And therewithal
Sir Gareth smote him upon the helm such a buffet that he fell
grovelling; and then he leapt over him and unlaced his helm, and smote
off his head from the body. And then he bled so fast that he might not
stand, but so he laid him down upon his bed, and there he swooned and
lay as he had been dead.

Then Dame Lionesse cried aloud, that her brother Sir Gringamore heard,
and came down. And when he saw Sir Gareth so shamefully wounded he was
sore displeased, and said: I am shamed that this noble knight is thus
honoured. Sir, said Sir Gringamore, how may this be, that ye be here,
and this noble knight wounded? Brother, she said, I can not tell you,
for it was not done by me, nor by mine assent. For he is my lord and I
am his, and he must be mine husband; therefore, my brother, I will that
ye wit I shame me not to be with him, nor to do him all the pleasure
that I can. Sister, said Sir Gringamore, and I will that ye wit it, and
Sir Gareth both, that it was never done by me, nor by my assent that
this unhappy deed was done. And there they staunched his bleeding as
well as they might, and great sorrow made Sir Gringamore and Dame
Lionesse.

And forthwithal came Dame Linet, and took up the head in the sight of
them all, and anointed it with an ointment thereas it was smitten off;
and in the same wise she did to the other part thereas the head stuck,
and then she set it together, and it stuck as fast as ever it did. And
the knight arose lightly up, and the damosel Linet put him in her
chamber. All this saw Sir Gringamore and Dame Lionesse, and so did Sir
Gareth; and well he espied that it was the damosel Linet, that rode
with him through the perilous passages. Ah well, damosel, said Sir
Gareth, I weened ye would not have done as ye have done. My lord
Gareth, said Linet, all that I have done I will avow, and all that I
have done shall be for your honour and worship, and to us all. And so
within a while Sir Gareth was nigh whole, and waxed light and jocund,
and sang, danced, and gamed; and he and Dame Lionesse were so hot in
burning love that they made their covenant at the tenth night after,
that she should come to his bed. And because he was wounded afore, he
laid his armour and his sword nigh his bed’s side.



