CHAPTER XXXIII. How Sir Lamorak jousted with thirty knights, and Sir
Tristram at the request of King Mark smote his horse down.

The king and the queen made their pavilions and their tents in that
forest beside a river, and there was daily hunting and jousting, for
there were ever thirty knights ready to joust unto all them that came
in at that time. And there by fortune came Sir Lamorak de Galis and Sir
Driant; and there Sir Driant jousted right well, but at the last he had
a fall. Then Sir Lamorak proffered to joust. And when he began he fared
so with the thirty knights that there was not one of them but that he
gave him a fall, and some of them were sore hurt. I marvel, said King
Mark, what knight he is that doth such deeds of arms. Sir, said Sir
Tristram, I know him well for a noble knight as few now be living, and
his name is Sir Lamorak de Galis. It were great shame, said the king,
that he should go thus away, unless that some of you meet with him
better. Sir, said Sir Tristram, meseemeth it were no worship for a
noble man to have ado with him: and for because at this time he hath
done over much for any mean knight living, therefore, as meseemeth, it
were great shame and villainy to tempt him any more at this time,
insomuch as he and his horse are weary both; for the deeds of arms that
he hath done this day, an they be well considered, it were enough for
Sir Launcelot du Lake. As for that, said King Mark, I require you, as
ye love me and my lady the queen, La Beale Isoud, take your arms and
joust with Sir Lamorak de Galis. Sir, said Sir Tristram, ye bid me do a
thing that is against knighthood, and well I can deem that I shall give
him a fall, for it is no mastery, for my horse and I be fresh both, and
so is not his horse and he; and wit ye well that he will take it for
great unkindness, for ever one good knight is loath to take another at
disadvantage; but because I will not displease you, as ye require me so
will I do, and obey your commandment.

And so Sir Tristram armed him and took his horse, and put him forth,
and there Sir Lamorak met him mightily, and what with the might of his
own spear, and of Sir Tristram’s spear, Sir Lamorak’s horse fell to the
earth, and he sitting in the saddle. Then anon as lightly as he might
he avoided the saddle and his horse, and put his shield afore him and
drew his sword. And then he bade Sir Tristram: Alight, thou knight, an
thou durst. Nay, said Sir Tristram, I will no more have ado with thee,
for I have done to thee over much unto my dishonour and to thy worship.
As for that, said Sir Lamorak, I can thee no thank; since thou hast
for-jousted me on horseback I require thee and I beseech thee, an thou
be Sir Tristram, fight with me on foot. I will not so, said Sir
Tristram; and wit ye well my name is Sir Tristram de Liones, and well I
know ye be Sir Lamorak de Galis, and this that I have done to you was
against my will, but I was required thereto; but to say that I will do
at your request as at this time, I will have no more ado with you, for
me shameth of that I have done. As for the shame, said Sir Lamorak, on
thy part or on mine, bear thou it an thou wilt, for though a mare’s son
hath failed me, now a queen’s son shall not fail thee; and therefore,
an thou be such a knight as men call thee, I require thee, alight, and
fight with me. Sir Lamorak, said Sir Tristram, I understand your heart
is great, and cause why ye have, to say thee sooth; for it would grieve
me an any knight should keep him fresh and then to strike down a weary
knight, for that knight nor horse was never formed that alway might
stand or endure. And therefore, said Sir Tristram, I will not have ado
with you, for me forthinketh of that I have done. As for that, said Sir
Lamorak, I shall quit you, an ever I see my time.



CHAPTER XXXIV. How Sir Lamorak sent an horn to King Mark in despite of
Sir Tristram, and how Sir Tristram was driven into a chapel.

So he departed from him with Sir Driant, and by the way they met with a
knight that was sent from Morgan le Fay unto King Arthur; and this
knight had a fair horn harnessed with gold, and the horn had such a
virtue that there might no lady nor gentlewoman drink of that horn but
if she were true to her husband, and if she were false she should spill
all the drink, and if she were true to her lord she might drink
peaceable. And because of the Queen Guenever, and in the despite of Sir
Launcelot, this horn was sent unto King Arthur; and by force Sir
Lamorak made that knight to tell all the cause why he bare that horn.
Now shalt thou bear this horn, said Lamorak, unto King Mark, or else
choose thou to die for it; for I tell thee plainly, in despite and
reproof of Sir Tristram thou shalt bear that horn unto King Mark, his
uncle, and say thou to him that I sent it him for to assay his lady,
and if she be true to him he shall prove her. So the knight went his
way unto King Mark, and brought him that rich horn, and said that Sir
Lamorak sent it him, and thereto he told him the virtue of that horn.
Then the king made Queen Isoud to drink thereof, and an hundred ladies,
and there were but four ladies of all those that drank clean. Alas,
said King Mark, this is a great despite, and sware a great oath that
she should be burnt and the other ladies.

Then the barons gathered them together, and said plainly they would not
have those ladies burnt for an horn made by sorcery, that came from as
false a sorceress and witch as then was living. For that horn did never
good, but caused strife and debate, and always in her days she had been
an enemy to all true lovers. So there were many knights made their
avow, an ever they met with Morgan le Fay, that they would show her
short courtesy. Also Sir Tristram was passing wroth that Sir Lamorak
sent that horn unto King Mark, for well he knew that it was done in the
despite of him. And therefore he thought to quite Sir Lamorak.

Then Sir Tristram used daily and nightly to go to Queen Isoud when he
might, and ever Sir Andred his cousin watched him night and day for to
take him with La Beale Isoud. And so upon a night Sir Andred espied the
hour and the time when Sir Tristram went to his lady. Then Sir Andred
gat unto him twelve knights, and at midnight he set upon Sir Tristram
secretly and suddenly and there Sir Tristram was taken naked abed with
La Beale Isoud, and then was he bound hand and foot, and so was he kept
until day. And then by the assent of King Mark, and of Sir Andred, and
of some of the barons, Sir Tristram was led unto a chapel that stood
upon the sea rocks, there for to take his judgment: and so he was led
bounden with forty knights. And when Sir Tristram saw that there was
none other boot but needs that he must die, then said he: Fair lords,
remember what I have done for the country of Cornwall, and in what
jeopardy I have been in for the weal of you all; for when I fought for
the truage of Cornwall with Sir Marhaus, the good knight, I was
promised for to be better rewarded, when ye all refused to take the
battle; therefore, as ye be good gentle knights, see me not thus
shamefully to die, for it is shame to all knighthood thus to see me
die; for I dare say, said Sir Tristram, that I never met with no knight
but I was as good as he, or better. Fie upon thee, said Sir Andred,
false traitor that thou art, with thine avaunting; for all thy boast
thou shalt die this day. O Andred, Andred, said Sir Tristram, thou
shouldst be my kinsman, and now thou art to me full unfriendly, but an
there were no more but thou and I, thou wouldst not put me to death.
No! said Sir Andred, and therewith he drew his sword, and would have
slain him.

When Sir Tristram saw him make such countenance he looked upon both his
hands that were fast bounden unto two knights, and suddenly he pulled
them both to him, and unwrast his hands, and then he leapt unto his
cousin, Sir Andred, and wrested his sword out of his hands; then he
smote Sir Andred that he fell to the earth, and so Sir Tristram fought
till that he had killed ten knights. So then Sir Tristram gat the
chapel and kept it mightily. Then the cry was great, and the people
drew fast unto Sir Andred, mo than an hundred. When Sir Tristram saw
the people draw unto him, he remembered he was naked, and sperd fast
the chapel door, and brake the bars of a window, and so he leapt out
and fell upon the crags in the sea. And so at that time Sir Andred nor
none of his fellows might get to him, at that time.



