CHAPTER VIII. How Sir Launcelot and Sir Turquine fought together.

And then they put their spears in the rests, and came together with
their horses as fast as they might run, and either smote other in midst
of their shields, that both their horses’ backs brast under them, and
the knights were both stonied. And as soon as they might avoid their
horses, they took their shields afore them, and drew out their swords,
and came together eagerly, and either gave other many strong strokes,
for there might neither shields nor harness hold their strokes. And so
within a while they had both grimly wounds, and bled passing
grievously. Thus they fared two hours or more trasing and rasing either
other, where they might hit any bare place.

Then at the last they were breathless both, and stood leaning on their
swords. Now fellow, said Sir Turquine, hold thy hand a while, and tell
me what I shall ask thee. Say on. Then Turquine said, Thou art the
biggest man that ever I met withal, and the best breathed, and like one
knight that I hate above all other knights; so be it that thou be not
he I will lightly accord with thee, and for thy love I will deliver all
the prisoners that I have, that is three score and four, so thou wilt
tell me thy name. And thou and I we will be fellows together, and never
to fail thee while that I live. It is well said, said Sir Launcelot,
but sithen it is so that I may have thy friendship, what knight is he
that thou so hatest above all other? Faithfully, said Sir Turquine, his
name is Sir Launcelot du Lake, for he slew my brother, Sir Carados, at
the dolorous tower, that was one of the best knights alive; and
therefore him I except of all knights, for may I once meet with him,
the one of us shall make an end of other, I make mine avow. And for Sir
Launcelot’s sake I have slain an hundred good knights, and as many I
have maimed all utterly that they might never after help themselves,
and many have died in prison, and yet have I three score and four, and
all shall be delivered so thou wilt tell me thy name, so be it that
thou be not Sir Launcelot.

Now, see I well, said Sir Launcelot, that such a man I might be, I
might have peace, and such a man I might be, that there should be war
mortal betwixt us. And now, sir knight, at thy request I will that thou
wit and know that I am Launcelot du Lake, King Ban’s son of Benwick,
and very knight of the Table Round. And now I defy thee, and do thy
best. Ah, said Turquine, Launcelot, thou art unto me most welcome that
ever was knight, for we shall never depart till the one of us be dead.
Then they hurtled together as two wild bulls rushing and lashing with
their shields and swords, that sometime they fell both over their
noses. Thus they fought still two hours and more, and never would have
rest, and Sir Turquine gave Sir Launcelot many wounds that all the
ground thereas they fought was all bespeckled with blood.



CHAPTER IX. How Sir Turquine was slain, and how Sir Launcelot bade Sir
Gaheris deliver all the prisoners.

Then at the last Sir Turquine waxed faint, and gave somewhat aback, and
bare his shield low for weariness. That espied Sir Launcelot, and leapt
upon him fiercely and gat him by the beaver of his helmet, and plucked
him down on his knees, and anon he raced off his helm, and smote his
neck in sunder. And when Sir Launcelot had done this, he yode unto the
damosel and said, Damosel, I am ready to go with you where ye will have
me, but I have no horse. Fair sir, said she, take this wounded knight’s
horse and send him into this manor, and command him to deliver all the
prisoners. So Sir Launcelot went unto Gaheris, and prayed him not to be
aggrieved for to lend him his horse. Nay, fair lord, said Gaheris, I
will that ye take my horse at your own commandment, for ye have both
saved me and my horse, and this day I say ye are the best knight in the
world, for ye have slain this day in my sight the mightiest man and the
best knight except you that ever I saw, and, fair sir, said Gaheris, I
pray you tell me your name. Sir, my name is Sir Launcelot du Lake, that
ought to help you of right for King Arthur’s sake, and in especial for
my lord Sir Gawaine’s sake, your own dear brother; and when that ye
come within yonder manor, I am sure ye shall find there many knights of
the Round Table, for I have seen many of their shields that I know on
yonder tree. There is Kay’s shield, and Sir Brandel’s shield, and Sir
Marhaus’ shield, and Sir Galind’s shield, and Sir Brian de Listnois’
shield, and Sir Aliduke’s shield, with many more that I am not now
advised of, and also my two brethren’s shields, Sir Ector de Maris and
Sir Lionel; wherefore I pray you greet them all from me, and say that I
bid them take such stuff there as they find, and that in any wise my
brethren go unto the court and abide me there till that I come, for by
the feast of Pentecost I cast me to be there, for as at this time I
must ride with this damosel for to save my promise.

And so he departed from Gaheris, and Gaheris yede in to the manor, and
there he found a yeoman porter keeping there many keys. Anon withal Sir
Gaheris threw the porter unto the ground and took the keys from him,
and hastily he opened the prison door, and there he let out all the
prisoners, and every man loosed other of their bonds. And when they saw
Sir Gaheris, all they thanked him, for they weened that he was wounded.
Not so, said Gaheris, it was Launcelot that slew him worshipfully with
his own hands. I saw it with mine own eyes. And he greeteth you all
well, and prayeth you to haste you to the court; and as unto Sir Lionel
and Ector de Maris he prayeth you to abide him at the court. That shall
we not do, says his brethren, we will find him an we may live. So shall
I, said Sir Kay, find him or I come at the court, as I am true knight.

Then all those knights sought the house thereas the armour was, and
then they armed them, and every knight found his own horse, and all
that ever longed unto him. And when this was done, there came a
forester with four horses laden with fat venison. Anon, Sir Kay said,
Here is good meat for us for one meal, for we had not many a day no
good repast. And so that venison was roasted, baken, and sodden, and so
after supper some abode there all night, but Sir Lionel and Ector de
Maris and Sir Kay rode after Sir Launcelot to find him if they might.



