CHAPTER VI. How King Arthur sent Sir Gawaine and other to Lucius, and
how they were assailed and escaped with worship.

Then the king did do call Sir Gawaine, Sir Bors, Sir Lionel, and Sir
Bedivere, and commanded them to go straight to Sir Lucius, and say ye
to him that hastily he remove out of my land; and if he will not, bid
him make him ready to battle and not distress the poor people. Then
anon these noble knights dressed them to horseback, and when they came
to the green wood, they saw many pavilions set in a meadow, of silk of
divers colours, beside a river, and the emperor’s pavilion was in the
middle with an eagle displayed above. To the which tent our knights
rode toward, and ordained Sir Gawaine and Sir Bors to do the message,
and left in a bushment Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere. And then Sir
Gawaine and Sir Bors did their message, and commanded Lucius, in
Arthur’s name to avoid his land, or shortly to address him to battle.
To whom Lucius answered and said, Ye shall return to your lord, and say
ye to him that I shall subdue him and all his lands. Then Sir Gawaine
was wroth and said, I had liefer than all France fight against thee;
and so had I, said Sir Bors, liefer than all Brittany or Burgoyne.

Then a knight named Sir Gainus, nigh cousin to the emperor, said, Lo,
how these Britons be full of pride and boast, and they brag as though
they bare up all the world. Then Sir Gawaine was sore grieved with
these words, and pulled out his sword and smote off his head. And
therewith turned their horses and rode over waters and through woods
till they came to their bushment, whereas Sir Lionel and Sir Bedivere
were hoving. The Romans followed fast after, on horseback and on foot,
over a champaign unto a wood; then Sir Bors turned his horse and saw a
knight come fast on, whom he smote through the body with a spear that
he fell dead down to the earth; then came Caliburn one of the strongest
of Pavie, and smote down many of Arthur’s knights. And when Sir Bors
saw him do so much harm, he addressed toward him, and smote him through
the breast, that he fell down dead to the earth. Then Sir Feldenak
thought to revenge the death of Gainus upon Sir Gawaine, but Sir
Gawaine was ware thereof, and smote him on the head, which stroke
stinted not till it came to his breast. And then he returned and came
to his fellows in the bushment. And there was a recounter, for the
bushment brake on the Romans, and slew and hew down the Romans, and
forced the Romans to flee and return, whom the noble knights chased
unto their tents.

Then the Romans gathered more people, and also footmen came on, and
there was a new battle, and so much people that Sir Bors and Sir Berel
were taken. But when Sir Gawaine saw that, he took with him Sir Idrus
the good knight, and said he would never see King Arthur but if he
rescued them, and pulled out Galatine his good sword, and followed them
that led those two knights away; and he smote him that led Sir Bors,
and took Sir Bors from him and delivered him to his fellows. And Sir
Idrus in likewise rescued Sir Berel. Then began the battle to be great,
that our knights were in great jeopardy, wherefore Sir Gawaine sent to
King Arthur for succour, and that he hie him, for I am sore wounded,
and that our prisoners may pay goods out of number. And the messenger
came to the king and told him his message. And anon the king did do
assemble his army, but anon, or he departed the prisoners were come,
and Sir Gawaine and his fellows gat the field and put the Romans to
flight, and after returned and came with their fellowship in such wise
that no man of worship was lost of them, save that Sir Gawaine was sore
hurt. Then the king did do ransack his wounds and comforted him. And
thus was the beginning of the first journey of the Britons and Romans,
and there were slain of the Romans more than ten thousand, and great
joy and mirth was made that night in the host of King Arthur. And on
the morn he sent all the prisoners into Paris under the guard of Sir
Launcelot, with many knights, and of Sir Cador.



CHAPTER VII. How Lucius sent certain spies in a bushment for to have
taken his knights being prisoners, and how they were letted.

Now turn we to the Emperor of Rome, which espied that these prisoners
should be sent to Paris, and anon he sent to lie in a bushment certain
knights and princes with sixty thousand men, for to rescue his knights
and lords that were prisoners. And so on the morn as Launcelot and Sir
Cador, chieftains and governors of all them that conveyed the
prisoners, as they should pass through a wood, Sir Launcelot sent
certain knights to espy if any were in the woods to let them. And when
the said knights came into the wood, anon they espied and saw the great
embushment, and returned and told Sir Launcelot that there lay in await
for them three score thousand Romans. And then Sir Launcelot with such
knights as he had, and men of war to the number of ten thousand, put
them in array, and met with them and fought with them manly, and slew
and detrenched many of the Romans, and slew many knights and admirals
of the party of the Romans and Saracens; there was slain the king of
Lyly and three great lords, Aladuke, Herawd, and Heringdale. But Sir
Launcelot fought so nobly that no man might endure a stroke of his
hand, but where he came he showed his prowess and might, for he slew
down right on every side; and the Romans and Saracens fled from him as
the sheep from the wolf or from the lion, and put them, all that abode
alive, to flight.

And so long they fought that tidings came to King Arthur, and anon he
graithed him and came to the battle, and saw his knights how they had
vanquished the battle, he embraced them knight by knight in his arms,
and said, Ye be worthy to wield all your honour and worship; there was
never king save myself that had so noble knights. Sir, said Cador,
there was none of us failed other, but of the prowess and manhood of
Sir Launcelot were more than wonder to tell, and also of his cousins
which did that day many noble feats of war. And also Sir Cador told who
of his knights were slain, as Sir Berel, and other Sir Moris and Sir
Maurel, two good knights. Then the king wept, and dried his eyes with a
kerchief, and said, Your courage had near-hand destroyed you, for
though ye had returned again, ye had lost no worship; for I call it
folly, knights to abide when they be overmatched. Nay, said Launcelot
and the other, for once shamed may never be recovered.



