CHAPTER VI. How King Arthur pulled out the sword divers times.

Now assay, said Sir Ector unto Sir Kay. And anon he pulled at the sword
with all his might; but it would not be. Now shall ye assay, said Sir
Ector to Arthur. I will well, said Arthur, and pulled it out easily.
And therewithal Sir Ector knelt down to the earth, and Sir Kay. Alas,
said Arthur, my own dear father and brother, why kneel ye to me? Nay,
nay, my lord Arthur, it is not so; I was never your father nor of your
blood, but I wot well ye are of an higher blood than I weened ye were.
And then Sir Ector told him all, how he was betaken him for to nourish
him, and by whose commandment, and by Merlin’s deliverance.

Then Arthur made great dole when he understood that Sir Ector was not
his father. Sir, said Ector unto Arthur, will ye be my good and
gracious lord when ye are king? Else were I to blame, said Arthur, for
ye are the man in the world that I am most beholden to, and my good
lady and mother your wife, that as well as her own hath fostered me and
kept. And if ever it be God’s will that I be king as ye say, ye shall
desire of me what I may do, and I shall not fail you; God forbid I
should fail you Sir, said Sir Ector, I will ask no more of you, but
that ye will make my son, your foster brother, Sir Kay, seneschal of
all your lands. That shall be done, said Arthur, and more, by the faith
of my body, that never man shall have that office but he, while he and
I live. Therewithal they went unto the Archbishop, and told him how the
sword was achieved, and by whom; and on Twelfth-day all the barons came
thither, and to assay to take the sword, who that would assay. But
there afore them all, there might none take it out but Arthur;
wherefore there were many lords wroth, and said it was great shame unto
them all and the realm, to be overgoverned with a boy of no high blood
born. And so they fell out at that time that it was put off till
Candlemas and then all the barons should meet there again; but always
the ten knights were ordained to watch the sword day and night, and so
they set a pavilion over the stone and the sword, and five always
watched. So at Candlemas many more great lords came thither for to have
won the sword, but there might none prevail. And right as Arthur did at
Christmas, he did at Candlemas, and pulled out the sword easily,
whereof the barons were sore aggrieved and put it off in delay till the
high feast of Easter. And as Arthur sped before, so did he at Easter;
yet there were some of the great lords had indignation that Arthur
should be king, and put it off in a delay till the feast of Pentecost.

Then the Archbishop of Canterbury by Merlin’s providence let purvey
then of the best knights that they might get, and such knights as Uther
Pendragon loved best and most trusted in his days. And such knights
were put about Arthur as Sir Baudwin of Britain, Sir Kay, Sir Ulfius,
Sir Brastias. All these, with many other, were always about Arthur, day
and night, till the feast of Pentecost.



CHAPTER VII. How King Arthur was crowned, and how he made officers.

And at the feast of Pentecost all manner of men assayed to pull at the
sword that would assay; but none might prevail but Arthur, and pulled
it out afore all the lords and commons that were there, wherefore all
the commons cried at once, We will have Arthur unto our king, we will
put him no more in delay, for we all see that it is God’s will that he
shall be our king, and who that holdeth against it, we will slay him.
And therewithal they kneeled at once, both rich and poor, and cried
Arthur mercy because they had delayed him so long, and Arthur forgave
them, and took the sword between both his hands, and offered it upon
the altar where the Archbishop was, and so was he made knight of the
best man that was there. And so anon was the coronation made. And there
was he sworn unto his lords and the commons for to be a true king, to
stand with true justice from thenceforth the days of this life. Also
then he made all lords that held of the crown to come in, and to do
service as they ought to do. And many complaints were made unto Sir
Arthur of great wrongs that were done since the death of King Uther, of
many lands that were bereaved lords, knights, ladies, and gentlemen.
Wherefore King Arthur made the lands to be given again unto them that
owned them.

When this was done, that the king had stablished all the countries
about London, then he let make Sir Kay seneschal of England; and Sir
Baudwin of Britain was made constable; and Sir Ulfius was made
chamberlain; and Sir Brastias was made warden to wait upon the north
from Trent forwards, for it was that time the most party the king’s
enemies. But within few years after Arthur won all the north, Scotland,
and all that were under their obeissance. Also Wales, a part of it,
held against Arthur, but he overcame them all, as he did the remnant,
through the noble prowess of himself and his knights of the Round
Table.



CHAPTER VIII. How King Arthur held in Wales, at a Pentecost, a great
feast, and what kings and lords came to his feast.

Then the king removed into Wales, and let cry a great feast that it
should be holden at Pentecost after the incoronation of him at the city
of Carlion. Unto the feast came King Lot of Lothian and of Orkney, with
five hundred knights with him. Also there came to the feast King Uriens
of Gore with four hundred knights with him. Also there came to that
feast King Nentres of Garlot, with seven hundred knights with him. Also
there came to the feast the king of Scotland with six hundred knights
with him, and he was but a young man. Also there came to the feast a
king that was called the King with the Hundred Knights, but he and his
men were passing well beseen at all points. Also there came the king of
Carados with five hundred knights. And King Arthur was glad of their
coming, for he weened that all the kings and knights had come for great
love, and to have done him worship at his feast; wherefore the king
made great joy, and sent the kings and knights great presents. But the
kings would none receive, but rebuked the messengers shamefully, and
said they had no joy to receive no gifts of a beardless boy that was
come of low blood, and sent him word they would none of his gifts, but
that they were come to give him gifts with hard swords betwixt the neck
and the shoulders: and therefore they came thither, so they told to the
messengers plainly, for it was great shame to all them to see such a
boy to have a rule of so noble a realm as this land was. With this
answer the messengers departed and told to King Arthur this answer.
Wherefore, by the advice of his barons, he took him to a strong tower
with five hundred good men with him. And all the kings aforesaid in a
manner laid a siege to-fore him, but King Arthur was well victualed.
And within fifteen days there came Merlin among them into the city of
Carlion. Then all the kings were passing glad of Merlin, and asked him,
For what cause is that boy Arthur made your king? Sirs, said Merlin, I
shall tell you the cause, for he is King Uther Pendragon’s son, born in
wedlock, gotten on Igraine, the duke’s wife of Tintagil. Then is he a
bastard, they said all. Nay, said Merlin, after the death of the duke,
more than three hours, was Arthur begotten, and thirteen days after
King Uther wedded Igraine; and therefore I prove him he is no bastard.
And who saith nay, he shall be king and overcome all his enemies; and,
or he die, he shall be long king of all England, and have under his
obeissance Wales, Ireland, and Scotland, and more realms than I will
now rehearse. Some of the kings had marvel of Merlin’s words, and
deemed well that it should be as he said; and some of them laughed him
to scorn, as King Lot; and more other called him a witch. But then were
they accorded with Merlin, that King Arthur should come out and speak
with the kings, and to come safe and to go safe, such surance there was
made. So Merlin went unto King Arthur, and told him how he had done,
and bade him fear not, but come out boldly and speak with them, and
spare them not, but answer them as their king and chieftain; for ye
shall overcome them all, whether they will or nill.



