CHAPTER XXIV. How Merlin saved Arthur’s life, and threw an enchantment
on King Pellinore and made him to sleep.

Therewithal came Merlin and said, Knight, hold thy hand, for an thou
slay that knight thou puttest this realm in the greatest damage that
ever was realm: for this knight is a man of more worship than thou
wotest of. Why, who is he? said the knight. It is King Arthur. Then
would he have slain him for dread of his wrath, and heaved up his
sword, and therewith Merlin cast an enchantment to the knight, that he
fell to the earth in a great sleep. Then Merlin took up King Arthur,
and rode forth on the knight’s horse. Alas! said Arthur, what hast thou
done, Merlin? hast thou slain this good knight by thy crafts? There
liveth not so worshipful a knight as he was; I had liefer than the
stint of my land a year that he were alive. Care ye not, said Merlin,
for he is wholer than ye; for he is but asleep, and will awake within
three hours. I told you, said Merlin, what a knight he was; here had ye
been slain had I not been. Also there liveth not a bigger knight than
he is one, and he shall hereafter do you right good service; and his
name is Pellinore, and he shall have two sons that shall be passing
good men; save one they shall have no fellow of prowess and of good
living, and their names shall be Percivale of Wales and Lamerake of
Wales, and he shall tell you the name of your own son, begotten of your
sister, that shall be the destruction of all this realm.



CHAPTER XXV. How Arthur by the mean of Merlin gat Excalibur his sword
of the Lady of the Lake.

Right so the king and he departed, and went unto an hermit that was a
good man and a great leech. So the hermit searched all his wounds and
gave him good salves; so the king was there three days, and then were
his wounds well amended that he might ride and go, and so departed. And
as they rode, Arthur said, I have no sword. No force, said Merlin,
hereby is a sword that shall be yours, an I may. So they rode till they
came to a lake, the which was a fair water and broad, and in the midst
of the lake Arthur was ware of an arm clothed in white samite, that
held a fair sword in that hand. Lo! said Merlin, yonder is that sword
that I spake of. With that they saw a damosel going upon the lake. What
damosel is that? said Arthur. That is the Lady of the Lake, said
Merlin; and within that lake is a rock, and therein is as fair a place
as any on earth, and richly beseen; and this damosel will come to you
anon, and then speak ye fair to her that she will give you that sword.
Anon withal came the damosel unto Arthur, and saluted him, and he her
again. Damosel, said Arthur, what sword is that, that yonder the arm
holdeth above the water? I would it were mine, for I have no sword. Sir
Arthur, king, said the damosel, that sword is mine, and if ye will give
me a gift when I ask it you, ye shall have it. By my faith, said
Arthur, I will give you what gift ye will ask. Well! said the damosel,
go ye into yonder barge, and row yourself to the sword, and take it and
the scabbard with you, and I will ask my gift when I see my time. So
Sir Arthur and Merlin alighted and tied their horses to two trees, and
so they went into the ship, and when they came to the sword that the
hand held, Sir Arthur took it up by the handles, and took it with him,
and the arm and the hand went under the water. And so [they] came unto
the land and rode forth, and then Sir Arthur saw a rich pavilion. What
signifieth yonder pavilion? It is the knight’s pavilion, said Merlin,
that ye fought with last, Sir Pellinore; but he is out, he is not
there. He hath ado with a knight of yours that hight Egglame, and they
have foughten together, but at the last Egglame fled, and else he had
been dead, and he hath chased him even to Carlion, and we shall meet
with him anon in the highway. That is well said, said Arthur, now have
I a sword, now will I wage battle with him, and be avenged on him. Sir,
you shall not so, said Merlin, for the knight is weary of fighting and
chasing, so that ye shall have no worship to have ado with him; also he
will not be lightly matched of one knight living, and therefore it is
my counsel, let him pass, for he shall do you good service in short
time, and his sons after his days. Also ye shall see that day in short
space, you shall be right glad to give him your sister to wed. When I
see him, I will do as ye advise, said Arthur.

Then Sir Arthur looked on the sword, and liked it passing well. Whether
liketh you better, said Merlin, the sword or the scabbard? Me liketh
better the sword, said Arthur. Ye are more unwise, said Merlin, for the
scabbard is worth ten of the swords, for whiles ye have the scabbard
upon you, ye shall never lose no blood, be ye never so sore wounded;
therefore keep well the scabbard always with you. So they rode unto
Carlion, and by the way they met with Sir Pellinore; but Merlin had
done such a craft, that Pellinore saw not Arthur, and he passed by
without any words. I marvel, said Arthur, that the knight would not
speak. Sir, said Merlin, he saw you not, for an he had seen you, ye had
not lightly departed. So they came unto Carlion, whereof his knights
were passing glad. And when they heard of his adventures, they
marvelled that he would jeopard his person so, alone. But all men of
worship said it was merry to be under such a chieftain, that would put
his person in adventure as other poor knights did.



CHAPTER XXVI. How tidings came to Arthur that King Rience had overcome
eleven kings, and how he desired Arthur’s beard to trim his mantle.

This meanwhile came a messenger from King Rience of North Wales, and
king he was of all Ireland, and of many isles. And this was his
message, greeting well King Arthur in this manner wise, saying that
King Rience had discomfited and overcome eleven kings, and everych of
them did him homage, and that was this, they gave him their beards
clean flayed off, as much as there was; wherefore the messenger came
for King Arthur’s beard. For King Rience had purfled a mantle with
kings’ beards, and there lacked one place of the mantle; wherefore he
sent for his beard, or else he would enter into his lands, and burn and
slay, and never leave till he have the head and the beard. Well, said
Arthur, thou hast said thy message, the which is the most villainous
and lewdest message that ever man heard sent unto a king; also thou
mayest see my beard is full young yet to make a purfle of it. But tell
thou thy king this: I owe him none homage, nor none of mine elders; but
or it be long to, he shall do me homage on both his knees, or else he
shall lose his head, by the faith of my body, for this is the most
shamefulest message that ever I heard speak of. I have espied thy king
met never yet with worshipful man, but tell him, I will have his head
without he do me homage. Then the messenger departed.

Now is there any here, said Arthur, that knoweth King Rience? Then
answered a knight that hight Naram, Sir, I know the king well; he is a
passing good man of his body, as few be living, and a passing proud
man, and Sir, doubt ye not he will make war on you with a mighty
puissance. Well, said Arthur, I shall ordain for him in short time.



