CHAPTER XXIX. Yet of the said tournament.

Then when this was done there was drawing of swords, and then there
began a sore tournament. And there did Sir Lamorak marvellous deeds of
arms; and betwixt Sir Lamorak and Sir Ironside, that was the Red Knight
of the Red Launds, there was strong battle; and betwixt Sir Palamides
and Bleoberis there was a strong battle; and Sir Gawaine and Sir
Tristram met, and there Sir Gawaine had the worse, for he pulled Sir
Gawaine from his horse, and there he was long upon foot, and defouled.
Then came in Sir Launcelot, and he smote Sir Turquine, and he him; and
then came Sir Carados his brother, and both at once they assailed him,
and he as the most noblest knight of the world worshipfully fought with
them both, that all men wondered of the noblesse of Sir Launcelot. And
then came in Sir Gareth, and knew that it was Sir Launcelot that fought
with the two perilous knights. And then Sir Gareth came with his good
horse and hurtled them in-sunder, and no stroke would he smite to Sir
Launcelot. That espied Sir Launcelot, and deemed it should be the good
knight Sir Gareth: and then Sir Gareth rode here and there, and smote
on the right hand and on the left hand, and all the folk might well
espy where that he rode. And by fortune he met with his brother Sir
Gawaine, and there he put Sir Gawaine to the worse, for he put off his
helm, and so he served five or six knights of the Round Table, that all
men said he put him in the most pain, and best he did his devoir. For
when Sir Tristram beheld him how he first jousted and after fought so
well with a sword, then he rode unto Sir Ironside and to Sir Persant of
Inde, and asked them, by their faith, What manner a knight is yonder
knight that seemeth in so many divers colours? Truly, meseemeth, said
Tristram, that he putteth himself in great pain, for he never ceaseth.
Wot ye not what he is? said Sir Ironside. No, said Sir Tristram. Then
shall ye know that this is he that loveth the lady of the castle, and
she him again; and this is he that won me when I besieged the lady of
this castle, and this is he that won Sir Persant of Inde, and his three
brethren. What is his name, said Sir Tristram, and of what blood is he
come? He was called in the court of King Arthur, Beaumains, but his
right name is Sir Gareth of Orkney, brother to Sir Gawaine. By my head,
said Sir Tristram, he is a good knight, and a big man of arms, and if
he be young he shall prove a full noble knight. He is but a child, they
all said, and of Sir Launcelot he was made knight. Therefore he is
mickle the better, said Tristram. And then Sir Tristram, Sir Ironside,
Sir Persant, and his brother, rode together for to help Sir Gareth; and
then there were given many strong strokes.

And then Sir Gareth rode out on the one side to amend his helm; and
then said his dwarf: Take me your ring, that ye lose it not while that
ye drink. And so when he had drunk he gat on his helm, and eagerly took
his horse and rode into the field, and left his ring with his dwarf;
and the dwarf was glad the ring was from him, for then he wist well he
should be known. And then when Sir Gareth was in the field all folks
saw him well and plainly that he was in yellow colours; and there he
rased off helms and pulled down knights, that King Arthur had marvel
what knight he was, for the king saw by his hair that it was the same
knight.



CHAPTER XXX. How Sir Gareth was espied by the heralds, and how he
escaped out of the field.

But before he was in so many colours, and now he is but in one colour;
that is yellow. Now go, said King Arthur unto divers heralds, and ride
about him, and espy what manner knight he is, for I have spered of many
knights this day that be upon his party, and all say they know him not.

And so an herald rode nigh Gareth as he could; and there he saw written
about his helm in gold, This helm is Sir Gareth of Orkney.

Then the herald cried as he were wood, and many heralds with him:—This
is Sir Gareth of Orkney in the yellow arms; that by all kings and
knights of Arthur’s beheld him and awaited; and then they pressed all
to behold him, and ever the heralds cried: This is Sir Gareth of
Orkney, King Lot’s son.

And when Sir Gareth espied that he was discovered, then he doubled his
strokes, and smote down Sir Sagramore, and his brother Sir Gawaine.

O brother, said Sir Gawaine, I weened ye would not have stricken me.

So when he heard him say so he thrang here and there, and so with great
pain he gat out of the press, and there he met with his dwarf. O boy,
said Sir Gareth, thou hast beguiled me foul this day that thou kept my
ring; give it me anon again, that I may hide my body withal; and so he
took it him. And then they all wist not where he was become; and Sir
Gawaine had in manner espied where Sir Gareth rode, and then he rode
after with all his might. That espied Sir Gareth, and rode lightly into
the forest, that Sir Gawaine wist not where he was become. And when Sir
Gareth wist that Sir Gawaine was passed, he asked the dwarf of best
counsel. Sir, said the dwarf, meseemeth it were best, now that ye are
escaped from spying, that ye send my lady Dame Lionesse her ring. It is
well advised, said Sir Gareth; now have it here and bear it to her, and
say that I recommend me unto her good grace, and say her I will come
when I may, and I pray her to be true and faithful to me as I will be
to her. Sir, said the dwarf, it shall be done as ye command: and so he
rode his way, and did his errand unto the lady. Then she said, Where is
my knight, Sir Gareth? Madam, said the dwarf, he bade me say that he
would not be long from you. And so lightly the dwarf came again unto
Sir Gareth, that would full fain have had a lodging, for he had need to
be reposed. And then fell there a thunder and a rain, as heaven and
earth should go together. And Sir Gareth was not a little weary, for of
all that day he had but little rest, neither his horse nor he. So this
Sir Gareth rode so long in that forest until the night came. And ever
it lightened and thundered, as it had been wood. At the last by fortune
he came to a castle, and there he heard the waits upon the walls.



