CHAPTER IX. How the damosel again rebuked Beaumains, and would not
suffer him to sit at her table, but called him kitchen boy.

And ever she rebuked Beaumains, and would not suffer him to sit at her
table, but as the Green Knight took him and sat him at a side table.
Marvel methinketh, said the Green Knight to the damosel, why ye rebuke
this noble knight as ye do, for I warn you, damosel, he is a full noble
knight, and I know no knight is able to match him; therefore ye do
great wrong to rebuke him, for he shall do you right good service, for
whatsomever he maketh himself, ye shall prove at the end that he is
come of a noble blood and of king’s lineage. Fie, fie, said the
damosel, it is shame for you to say of him such worship. Truly, said
the Green Knight, it were shame for me to say of him any disworship,
for he hath proved himself a better knight than I am, yet have I met
with many knights in my days, and never or this time have I found no
knight his match. And so that night they yede unto rest, and all that
night the Green Knight commanded thirty knights privily to watch
Beaumains, for to keep him from all treason.

And so on the morn they all arose, and heard their mass and brake their
fast; and then they took their horses and rode on their way, and the
Green Knight conveyed them through the forest; and there the Green
Knight said, My lord Beaumains, I and these thirty knights shall be
always at your summons, both early and late, at your calling and
whither that ever ye will send us. It is well said, said Beaumains;
when that I call upon you ye must yield you unto King Arthur, and all
your knights. If that ye so command us, we shall be ready at all times,
said the Green Knight. Fie, fie upon thee, in the devil’s name, said
the damosel, that any good knights should be obedient unto a kitchen
knave. So then departed the Green Knight and the damosel. And then she
said unto Beaumains, Why followest thou me, thou kitchen boy? Cast away
thy shield and thy spear, and flee away; yet I counsel thee betimes or
thou shalt say right soon, alas; for wert thou as wight as ever was
Wade or Launcelot, Tristram, or the good knight Sir Lamorak, thou shalt
not pass a pass here that is called the Pass Perilous. Damosel, said
Beaumains, who is afeard let him flee, for it were shame to turn again
sithen I have ridden so long with you. Well, said the damosel, ye shall
soon, whether ye will or not.



CHAPTER X. How the third brother, called the Red Knight, jousted and
fought against Beaumains, and how Beaumains overcame him.

So within a while they saw a tower as white as any snow, well
matchecold all about, and double dyked. And over the tower gate there
hung a fifty shields of divers colours, and under that tower there was
a fair meadow. And therein were many knights and squires to behold,
scaffolds and pavilions; for there upon the morn should be a great
tournament: and the lord of the tower was in his castle and looked out
at a window, and saw a damosel, a dwarf, and a knight armed at all
points. So God me help, said the lord, with that knight will I joust,
for I see that he is a knight-errant. And so he armed him and horsed
him hastily. And when he was on horseback with his shield and his
spear, it was all red, both his horse and his harness, and all that to
him longeth. And when that he came nigh him he weened it had been his
brother the Black Knight; and then he cried aloud, Brother, what do ye
in these marches? Nay, nay, said the damosel, it is not he; this is but
a kitchen knave that was brought up for alms in King Arthur’s court.
Nevertheless, said the Red Knight, I will speak with him or he depart.
Ah, said the damosel, this knave hath killed thy brother, and Sir Kay
named him Beaumains, and this horse and this harness was thy brother’s,
the Black Knight. Also I saw thy brother the Green Knight overcome of
his hands. Now may ye be revenged upon him, for I may never be quit of
him.

With this either knights departed in sunder, and they came together
with all their might, and either of their horses fell to the earth, and
they avoided their horses, and put their shields afore them and drew
their swords, and either gave other sad strokes, now here, now there,
rasing, tracing, foining, and hurling like two boars, the space of two
hours. And then she cried on high to the Red Knight, Alas, thou noble
Red Knight, think what worship hath followed thee, let never a kitchen
knave endure thee so long as he doth. Then the Red Knight waxed wroth
and doubled his strokes, and hurt Beaumains wonderly sore, that the
blood ran down to the ground, that it was wonder to see that strong
battle. Yet at the last Sir Beaumains struck him to the earth, and as
he would have slain the Red Knight, he cried mercy, saying, Noble
knight, slay me not, and I shall yield me to thee with fifty knights
with me that be at my commandment. And I forgive thee all the despite
that thou hast done to me, and the death of my brother the Black
Knight. All this availeth not, said Beaumains, but if my damosel pray
me to save thy life. And therewith he made semblant to strike off his
head. Let be, thou Beaumains, slay him not, for he is a noble knight,
and not so hardy, upon thine head, but thou save him.

Then Beaumains bade the Red Knight, Stand up, and thank the damosel now
of thy life. Then the Red Knight prayed him to see his castle, and to
be there all night. So the damosel then granted him, and there they had
merry cheer. But always the damosel spake many foul words unto
Beaumains, whereof the Red Knight had great marvel; and all that night
the Red Knight made three score knights to watch Beaumains, that he
should have no shame nor villainy. And upon the morn they heard mass
and dined, and the Red Knight came before Beaumains with his three
score knights, and there he proffered him his homage and fealty at all
times, he and his knights to do him service. I thank you, said
Beaumains, but this ye shall grant me: when I call upon you, to come
afore my lord King Arthur, and yield you unto him to be his knights.
Sir, said the Red Knight, I will be ready, and my fellowship, at your
summons. So Sir Beaumains departed and the damosel, and ever she rode
chiding him in the foulest manner.



