CHAPTER III. How four queens found Launcelot sleeping, and how by
enchantment he was taken and led into a castle.

Now leave we these knights prisoners, and speak we of Sir Launcelot du
Lake that lieth under the apple-tree sleeping. Even about the noon
there came by him four queens of great estate; and, for the heat should
not annoy them, there rode four knights about them, and bare a cloth of
green silk on four spears, betwixt them and the sun, and the queens
rode on four white mules. Thus as they rode they heard by them a great
horse grimly neigh, then were they ware of a sleeping knight, that lay
all armed under an apple-tree; anon as these queens looked on his face,
they knew it was Sir Launcelot. Then they began for to strive for that
knight, everych one said they would have him to her love. We shall not
strive, said Morgan le Fay, that was King Arthur’s sister, I shall put
an enchantment upon him that he shall not awake in six hours, and then
I will lead him away unto my castle, and when he is surely within my
hold, I shall take the enchantment from him, and then let him choose
which of us he will have unto paramour.

So this enchantment was cast upon Sir Launcelot, and then they laid him
upon his shield, and bare him so on horseback betwixt two knights, and
brought him unto the castle Chariot, and there they laid him in a
chamber cold, and at night they sent unto him a fair damosel with his
supper ready dight. By that the enchantment was past, and when she came
she saluted him, and asked him what cheer. I cannot say, fair damosel,
said Sir Launcelot, for I wot not how I came into this castle but it be
by an enchantment. Sir, said she, ye must make good cheer, and if ye be
such a knight as it is said ye be, I shall tell you more to-morn by
prime of the day. Gramercy, fair damosel, said Sir Launcelot, of your
good will I require you. And so she departed. And there he lay all that
night without comfort of anybody. And on the morn early came these four
queens, passingly well beseen, all they bidding him good morn, and he
them again.

Sir knight, the four queens said, thou must understand thou art our
prisoner, and we here know thee well that thou art Sir Launcelot du
Lake, King Ban’s son, and because we understand your worthiness, that
thou art the noblest knight living, and as we know well there can no
lady have thy love but one, and that is Queen Guenever, and now thou
shalt lose her for ever, and she thee, and therefore thee behoveth now
to choose one of us four. I am the Queen Morgan le Fay, queen of the
land of Gore, and here is the queen of Northgalis, and the queen of
Eastland, and the queen of the Out Isles; now choose one of us which
thou wilt have to thy paramour, for thou mayest not choose or else in
this prison to die. This is an hard case, said Sir Launcelot, that
either I must die or else choose one of you, yet had I liefer to die in
this prison with worship, than to have one of you to my paramour maugre
my head. And therefore ye be answered, I will none of you, for ye be
false enchantresses, and as for my lady, Dame Guenever, were I at my
liberty as I was, I would prove it on you or on yours, that she is the
truest lady unto her lord living. Well, said the queens, is this your
answer, that ye will refuse us. Yea, on my life, said Sir Launcelot,
refused ye be of me. So they departed and left him there alone that
made great sorrow.



CHAPTER IV. How Sir Launcelot was delivered by the mean of a damosel.

Right so at the noon came the damosel unto him with his dinner, and
asked him what cheer. Truly, fair damosel, said Sir Launcelot, in my
life days never so ill. Sir, she said, that me repenteth, but an ye
will be ruled by me, I shall help you out of this distress, and ye
shall have no shame nor villainy, so that ye hold me a promise. Fair
damosel, I will grant you, and sore I am of these queen-sorceresses
afeard, for they have destroyed many a good knight. Sir, said she, that
is sooth, and for the renown and bounty that they hear of you they
would have your love, and Sir, they say, your name is Sir Launcelot du
Lake, the flower of knights, and they be passing wroth with you that ye
have refused them. But Sir, an ye would promise me to help my father on
Tuesday next coming, that hath made a tournament betwixt him and the
King of Northgalis—for the last Tuesday past my father lost the field
through three knights of Arthur’s court—an ye will be there on Tuesday
next coming, and help my father, to-morn or prime, by the grace of God,
I shall deliver you clean. Fair maiden, said Sir Launcelot, tell me
what is your father’s name, and then shall I give you an answer. Sir
knight, she said, my father is King Bagdemagus, that was foul rebuked
at the last tournament. I know your father well, said Sir Launcelot,
for a noble king and a good knight, and by the faith of my body, ye
shall have my body ready to do your father and you service at that day.
Sir, she said, gramercy, and to-morn await ye be ready betimes and I
shall be she that shall deliver you and take you your armour and your
horse, shield and spear, and hereby within this ten mile, is an abbey
of white monks, there I pray you that ye me abide, and thither shall I
bring my father unto you. All this shall be done, said Sir Launcelot as
I am true knight.

And so she departed, and came on the morn early, and found him ready;
then she brought him out of twelve locks, and brought him unto his
armour, and when he was clean armed, she brought him until his own
horse, and lightly he saddled him and took a great spear in his hand
and so rode forth, and said, Fair damosel, I shall not fail you, by the
grace of God. And so he rode into a great forest all that day, and
never could find no highway and so the night fell on him, and then was
he ware in a slade, of a pavilion of red sendal. By my faith, said Sir
Launcelot, in that pavilion will I lodge all this night, and so there
he alighted down, and tied his horse to the pavilion, and there he
unarmed him, and there he found a bed, and laid him therein and fell
asleep sadly.



