CHAPTER XXVII. How all the children were sent for that were born on
May-day, and how Mordred was saved.

Then King Arthur let send for all the children born on May-day,
begotten of lords and born of ladies; for Merlin told King Arthur that
he that should destroy him should be born on May-day, wherefore he sent
for them all, upon pain of death; and so there were found many lords’
sons, and all were sent unto the king, and so was Mordred sent by King
Lot’s wife, and all were put in a ship to the sea, and some were four
weeks old, and some less. And so by fortune the ship drave unto a
castle, and was all to-riven, and destroyed the most part, save that
Mordred was cast up, and a good man found him, and nourished him till
he was fourteen year old, and then he brought him to the court, as it
rehearseth afterward, toward the end of the Death of Arthur. So many
lords and barons of this realm were displeased, for their children were
so lost, and many put the wite on Merlin more than on Arthur; so what
for dread and for love, they held their peace. But when the messenger
came to King Rience, then was he wood out of measure, and purveyed him
for a great host, as it rehearseth after in the book of Balin le
Savage, that followeth next after, how by adventure Balin gat the
sword.

Explicit liber primus.



BOOK II.



CHAPTER I. Of a damosel which came girt with a sword for to find a man
of such virtue to draw it out of the scabbard.

After the death of Uther Pendragon reigned Arthur his son, the which
had great war in his days for to get all England into his hand. For
there were many kings within the realm of England, and in Wales,
Scotland, and Cornwall. So it befell on a time when King Arthur was at
London, there came a knight and told the king tidings how that the King
Rience of North Wales had reared a great number of people, and were
entered into the land, and burnt and slew the king’s true liege people.
If this be true, said Arthur, it were great shame unto mine estate but
that he were mightily withstood. It is truth, said the knight, for I
saw the host myself. Well, said the king, let make a cry, that all the
lords, knights, and gentlemen of arms, should draw unto a castle called
Camelot in those days, and there the king would let make a
council-general and a great jousts.

So when the king was come thither with all his baronage, and lodged as
they seemed best, there was come a damosel the which was sent on
message from the great lady Lile of Avelion. And when she came before
King Arthur, she told from whom she came, and how she was sent on
message unto him for these causes. Then she let her mantle fall that
was richly furred; and then was she girt with a noble sword whereof the
king had marvel, and said, Damosel, for what cause are ye girt with
that sword? it beseemeth you not. Now shall I tell you, said the
damosel; this sword that I am girt withal doth me great sorrow and
cumbrance, for I may not be delivered of this sword but by a knight,
but he must be a passing good man of his hands and of his deeds, and
without villainy or treachery, and without treason. And if I may find
such a knight that hath all these virtues, he may draw out this sword
out of the sheath, for I have been at King Rience’s it was told me
there were passing good knights, and he and all his knights have
assayed it and none can speed. This is a great marvel, said Arthur, if
this be sooth; I will myself assay to draw out the sword, not presuming
upon myself that I am the best knight, but that I will begin to draw at
your sword in giving example to all the barons that they shall assay
everych one after other when I have assayed it. Then Arthur took the
sword by the sheath and by the girdle and pulled at it eagerly, but the
sword would not out.

Sir, said the damosel, you need not to pull half so hard, for he that
shall pull it out shall do it with little might. Ye say well, said
Arthur; now assay ye all my barons; but beware ye be not defiled with
shame, treachery, nor guile. Then it will not avail, said the damosel,
for he must be a clean knight without villainy, and of a gentle strain
of father side and mother side. Most of all the barons of the Round
Table that were there at that time assayed all by row, but there might
none speed; wherefore the damosel made great sorrow out of measure, and
said, Alas! I weened in this court had been the best knights without
treachery or treason. By my faith, said Arthur, here are good knights,
as I deem, as any be in the world, but their grace is not to help you,
wherefore I am displeased.



CHAPTER II. How Balin, arrayed like a poor knight, pulled out the
sword, which afterward was the cause of his death.

Then fell it so that time there was a poor knight with King Arthur,
that had been prisoner with him half a year and more for slaying of a
knight, the which was cousin unto King Arthur. The name of this knight
was called Balin, and by good means of the barons he was delivered out
of prison, for he was a good man named of his body, and he was born in
Northumberland. And so he went privily into the court, and saw this
adventure, whereof it raised his heart, and he would assay it as other
knights did, but for he was poor and poorly arrayed he put him not far
in press. But in his heart he was fully assured to do as well, if his
grace happed him, as any knight that there was. And as the damosel took
her leave of Arthur and of all the barons, so departing, this knight
Balin called unto her, and said, Damosel, I pray you of your courtesy,
suffer me as well to assay as these lords; though that I be so poorly
clothed, in my heart meseemeth I am fully assured as some of these
others, and meseemeth in my heart to speed right well. The damosel
beheld the poor knight, and saw he was a likely man, but for his poor
arrayment she thought he should be of no worship without villainy or
treachery. And then she said unto the knight, Sir, it needeth not to
put me to more pain or labour, for it seemeth not you to speed there as
other have failed. Ah! fair damosel, said Balin, worthiness, and good
tatches, and good deeds, are not only in arrayment, but manhood and
worship is hid within man’s person, and many a worshipful knight is not
known unto all people, and therefore worship and hardiness is not in
arrayment. By God, said the damosel, ye say sooth; therefore ye shall
assay to do what ye may. Then Balin took the sword by the girdle and
sheath, and drew it out easily; and when he looked on the sword it
pleased him much. Then had the king and all the barons great marvel
that Balin had done that adventure, and many knights had great despite
of Balin. Certes, said the damosel, this is a passing good knight, and
the best that ever I found, and most of worship without treason,
treachery, or villainy, and many marvels shall he do. Now, gentle and
courteous knight, give me the sword again. Nay, said Balin, for this
sword will I keep, but it be taken from me with force. Well, said the
damosel, ye are not wise to keep the sword from me, for ye shall slay
with the sword the best friend that ye have, and the man that ye most
love in the world, and the sword shall be your destruction. I shall
take the adventure, said Balin, that God will ordain me, but the sword
ye shall not have at this time, by the faith of my body. Ye shall
repent it within short time, said the damosel, for I would have the
sword more for your avail than for mine, for I am passing heavy for
your sake; for ye will not believe that sword shall be your
destruction, and that is great pity. With that the damosel departed,
making great sorrow.

Anon after, Balin sent for his horse and armour, and so would depart
from the court, and took his leave of King Arthur. Nay, said the king,
I suppose ye will not depart so lightly from this fellowship, I suppose
ye are displeased that I have shewed you unkindness; blame me the less,
for I was misinformed against you, but I weened ye had not been such a
knight as ye are, of worship and prowess, and if ye will abide in this
court among my fellowship, I shall so advance you as ye shall be
pleased. God thank your highness, said Balin, your bounty and highness
may no man praise half to the value; but at this time I must needs
depart, beseeching you alway of your good grace. Truly, said the king,
I am right wroth for your departing; I pray you, fair knight, that ye
tarry not long, and ye shall be right welcome to me, and to my barons,
and I shall amend all miss that I have done against you; God thank your
great lordship, said Balin, and therewith made him ready to depart.
Then the most part of the knights of the Round Table said that Balin
did not this adventure all only by might, but by witchcraft.



