PART II

LOGIC, THE SCIENCE OF THE MANIFOLD, AND MATHEMATICS


=19. The Most General Concept.= If we try to conceive the whole
structure of science according to the principle of the increasing
complexity of concepts, the first question which confronts us is, What
concept is the _most general_ of all possible concepts, so general that
it enters into every concept formation and acts as a decisive factor? In
order to find this concept let us go back to the psycho-physical basis
of concept formation, namely, _memory_, and let us investigate what is
the general characteristic determining memory. We soon perceive that if
a being were to lead an absolutely uniform existence, _no_ memories
could be evoked. There would be nothing by which the past could be
distinguished from the present, hence nothing by which to compare them.
So the "primal phenomenon" of conscious thought is the realization of a
_difference_, a difference between memory and the present, or, to put
the same idea still more generally, between two memories.

Our experiences, therefore, are divided into two parts, distinguished
from each other. In order to predicate something of a perfectly general
nature concerning those parts, without regard to their particular
content, we must, in accordance with the means employed in human
intercourse, designate them by a _name_. Now in all human languages
there is a great deal of arbitrariness and indefiniteness in the
relations between the concepts and the names applied to them, which
render all accurate work in the study of concepts extremely difficult.
It is necessary, therefore, to state definitely in each particular
instance with what conceptual content a given name is to be connected.
Every experience in so far as it is differentiated from other
experiences we shall call simply an _experience_ without making a
distinction between a so-called inner or outer experience.

Many of the experiences remain isolated, because they are not repeated
in a similar form, and so do not remain in our memory. They depart from
our psychic life once for all and leave no further consequences or
associations. But some experiences recur with greater or less
uniformity, and become permanent parts of psychic life. Their duration
is by no means unlimited. For even memories fade and disappear. However,
they extend through a considerable part of life, and that suffices to
give them their character.

The aggregate of similar experiences, hence of experiences conceptually
generalized, we shall call _things_. _A thing, therefore, is an
experience which has been repeated_, and is "recognized" by us. That
is, it is felt as repeated and conceptually comprehended. In other
words, all experiences of which we have formed concepts are things, and
_the concept of thing itself is the most general concept_, since,
according to its definition, it includes all possible concepts. Its
"essence," or determining characteristic, lies in the possibility of
differentiating any one thing from another. Things we do not
differentiate we call _the same_, or _identical_. Here we shall leave
undecided the question whether this lack of differentiation occurs
because we _cannot_, or because we _would not_, differentiate. All
experiences generalized into one concept are therefore felt or regarded
as the same in reference to this concept. Now, since concepts arise
unconsciously as well as consciously, the first is a case of identities
which had been directly felt as such. On the other hand, in the second
case, the process is that of consciously disregarding or abstracting the
existing differences in order to form a concept into which these do not
enter. This last process is applied in the highest degree possible in
obtaining the concept _thing_.


=20. Association.= The experience of the _connection_ or _relation_
between various things is also derived from the nature of our
experiences in the most general sense. When we recall a thing A, another
thing B comes to our mind, the memory of which is called forth by A, and
_vice versa_. The cause of this invariably lies in some experiences in
which A and B occur together. In fact, A and B must have occurred
together a number of times. Otherwise they would have disappeared from
memory. In other words, it is the fact of the _complex concept_ which
appears in such connections between various things. Two things, A and B,
which are connected with each other in such a way, are said to be
associated. Association in the most general sense means nothing more
than that when we think of B we also have A in our consciousness, and
_vice versa_. However, we can at will make the association more
definite, so that quite definite thoughts or actions will be connected
with the association of B. These thoughts and actions are then the same
for all the individual cases occurring under the concept A and B.

If we associate with the thing B another thing C, we obtain a relation
of the same nature as that obtained by the association of A and B. But
at the same time a new relation arises which was not directly sought,
namely, the association of A to C. If A recalls B, and B recalls C, A
must inevitably recall C also. This psychologic law of nature is
productive of numberless special results. For we can apply it directly
to still another case, the association of a fourth thing D to the thing
C, whereby new relations are necessarily established also between A and
D as well as between B and D. By positing the _one_ relation C : D there
arise two new relations not immediately given, namely, A : D and B : D.
The reason the other relations arise is because C was not taken free
from all relations, but had already attached to it the relations to A
and B. These relations of C, therefore, brought A and B into the new
relation with D.

By this simplest and most general example we recognize the type of the
deductive process (p. 41), namely, the discovery of relations which, it
is true, have already been established by the accepted premises, but
which do not directly appear in undertaking the corresponding
operations. In the present case, to be sure, the deduction is so
apparent that the recognition of the relations in question offers not
the slightest difficulty. But we can easily imagine more complicated
cases in which it is much more difficult to find the actually existing
relations, and so in certain circumstances we may search for them a long
time in vain.


=21. The Group.= The aggregate of all individual things occurring in a
definite concept, or the common characteristics of which make up this
concept, is called a group. Such a group may consist of a limited or
finite number of members, or may be unlimited, according to the nature
of the concepts that characterize it. Thus, all the integers form an
unlimited or infinite group, while the integers between ten and one
hundred (or the two-digit numbers) form a limited or finite group.

From the definition of the group concept follows the so-called classic
_process of argumentation_ of the syllogism. Its form is: _Group A is
distinguished by the characteristic of B_. _The thing C belongs to group
A. Therefore C has the characteristic of B._ The prominent part ascribed
by _Aristotle_ and his successors to this process is based upon the
_certainty_ which its results possess. Nevertheless, it has been pointed
out, especially by _Kant_, that judgments or conclusions of such a
nature (which he called analytic) have no significance at all for the
progress of science, since they express only what is already known. For
in order to enable us to say that the thing C belongs to group A, we
must already have recognized or proved the presence of the group
characteristic B in C, and in that case the conclusion only repeats what
is already contained in the second or minor premise.

This is evident in the classic example: All men are mortal. Caius is a
man. Therefore Caius is mortal. For if Caius's mortality were not known
(here we are not concerned how this knowledge was obtained), we should
have no right to call him a man.

At the same time the character of the really scientific conclusion based
upon the incomplete induction becomes clear. It proceeds according to
the following form. The attributes of the group A are the
characteristics of a, b, c, d. We find in the thing C the
characteristics a, b, c. Therefore we presume that the characteristic d
will also be found in C. The ground for this presumption is that we
have learned by experience that the characteristics mentioned have
always been found together. It is for this reason, and for this reason
only, that we may assume from the presence of a, b, c the presence of d.
In the case of an arbitrary combination, in which it is possible to
combine other characteristics, the conclusion is unfounded. But if, on
the other hand, the formation of the concept A with the characteristics
of a, b, c, d has been caused by repeated and habitual experience, then
the conclusion is well founded; that is, it is probable.

As a matter of fact, however, that classic example which is supposed to
prove the absolute certainty of the regular syllogism turns out to be a
hidden inductive conclusion of the incomplete kind. The premise, Caius
is a man, is based on the attributes a, b, c (for example, erect
bearing, figure, language), while the attribute d (mortality) cannot be
brought under observation so long as Caius remains alive. In the sense
of the classic logic, therefore, we are not justified in the minor
premise, Caius is a man, while Caius is alive. The utter futility of the
syllogism is apparent, since, according to it, it is only of dead men
that we can assert that they are mortal.

From these observations it becomes further apparent that logic, whether
it is the superfluous classic logic or modern effective inductive logic,
is nothing but a part of the group theory, or science of manifoldness,
which appears as the first, because it is the most general member of
the mathematical sciences (this word taken in its widest significance).
But according to the hierarchic system in harmony with which the scheme
of all the sciences had been consciously projected, we cannot expect
anything else than that those sciences which are needful for the pursuit
of all other sciences (and logic has always been regarded as such an
indispensable science, or, at least, art) should be found collected and
classified in the first science.


=22. Negation.= When the characteristics a, b, c, d of a group have been
determined, then the aggregate of all things existing can be divided
into two parts, namely, the things which belong to the group A and those
which do not belong to it. This second aggregate may then be regarded as
a group by itself. If we call this group "not-A," it follows from the
definition of this group that the two groups, A and not-A, together form
the aggregate of all things.

This is the meaning and the significance of the linguistic form of
_negation_. It excludes the thing negated from any group given in a
proposition, and this relegates it to the second or complementary group.

The characteristic of such a group is the common absence of the
characteristics of the positive group. We must note here that the
absence of even _one_ of the characteristics a, b, c, d excludes the
incorporation of the thing into the group A, while the mere absence of
this characteristic suffices to include it in the group not-A. We can
therefore by no means predicate of group not-A that each one of its
members must lack _all_ the characteristics a, b, c, d. We can only say
that each of its members lacks at least one of the characteristics, but
that one or some may be present, and several or all may be absent. From
this follows a certain asymmetry of the two groups, which we must bear
in mind.

The consideration of this subject is especially important in the
treatment of negation in the conclusions of formal logic. As we shall
make no special use of formal logic, we need not enter into it in
detail.


=23. Artificial and Natural Groups.= The combination of the
characteristics which are to serve for the definition of a group is at
first purely arbitrary. Thus, when we have chosen such an arbitrary
combination, a, b, c, d, we can eliminate one of the characteristics,
as, for example, c, and form a group with the characteristics a, b, d.
Such a group, which is _poorer in characteristics_, will, in general, be
_richer in members_, for to it belong, in the first place, all the
things with the characteristics a, b, c, d, of which the first group
consisted, and in addition all the things which, though not possessing
c, possess a, b, and d.

If we call such groups related as contain common characteristics, though
containing them in different members and combinations, so that the
definition of the one group can be derived from the other by the
elimination or incorporation of individual characteristics, then we can
postulate the general thesis _that in related groups those must be
richer in members which are poorer in characteristics, and inversely_.
This is the precise statement of the proposition of the less definite
thesis stated above.

For the purposes of systematization we have assumed that we can
arbitrarily eliminate one or another characteristic of a group. In
experience, however, this often proves inadmissible. As a rule we find
that the things which lack one of the characteristics of a group will
also lack a number of other characteristics; in other words, that the
characteristics are not all independent of one another, but that a
certain number of them go together, so that they are present in a thing
either in common or not at all.

This case, however, can be referred to the general one first described,
by treating the characteristics belonging together as being _one_
characteristic, so that the group is defined solely by the independent
characteristics. Then, according to the definition, we can, without
losing our connection with experience, carry out that formal
manifoldness of all possible related groups which yields what is called
a _classification_ of the corresponding things.

If for the determination of a group a definite number of independent
characteristics is taken, say, a, b, c, d, and e, then we have at first
the narrowest or poorest group abcde. By the elimination of one
characteristic we obtain the five groups, bcde, acde, abde, abce, and
abcd. If we omit one other characteristic we get ten different groups
abc, abd, abe, acd, ace, ade, bcd, bce, bde, cde. Likewise, there are
ten groups with two characteristics each, and finally five groups with
one characteristic each. All these groups are related. There is a
science, the Theory of Combinations, which gives the rules by which, in
given elements or characteristics, the kind and number of the possible
groups can be found. The theory of combinations enables us to obtain a
complete table and survey of all possible complex concepts which can be
formed from given simple ones (whether they be really elementary
concepts, or only relatively so). When in any field of science the
fundamental concepts have been combined in this manner, a complete
survey can be had of all the possible parts of this science by means of
the theory of combinations.

In order to present this process vividly to our minds, let us take as an
example the science of the chemical combination of substances which form
an important part of chemistry. There are about eighty elements in
chemistry, and this science has to treat of

  a) each of the eighty elements by itself
  b) all substances containing two elements and no more
  c) all substances containing three elements
  d, e, f, etc.) the substances containing four, five, and six, etc.,
    elements,

until finally we reach a group (not existing in experience) embracing
substances formed of _all_ the elements. That there is no such substance
in the present scope of human knowledge has, of course, no significance
for the structure of the scheme. What is significant is the fact that
the scheme really embraces and arranges all possible substances in such
a way that we cannot conceive of any case in which a newly discovered
substance cannot after examination immediately be classed with one of
the existing groups.

To cite an example from another science. Physics, it will be recalled,
may be considered to be the science of the different kinds of energy.
This science, accordingly, is divided first into the study of the
properties of each energy, and then into the study of the relations of
two energies, of three energies, of four energies, etc. Here, too, we
may say that in the end there can be no physical phenomenon which cannot
be placed in one of the groups so obtained.

Of course, neither in chemistry nor in physics does this mean that each
_new_ case will fall within the scheme obtained by the exhaustive
combination of elementary concepts (whether chemical elements or kinds
of energy) _known_ at the time. It is quite possible that a new thing
under investigation contains a _new_ elementary concept, so that on
account of it the scheme must be enlarged through the embodiment of
this new element. But simultaneously a corresponding number of new
groups appear in the scheme, and the investigator's attention is
directed to the fact that he still has a reasonable prospect, in
favorable circumstances, of discovering these new things also. Thus
combinatory schematization serves not only to bring the existing content
of science into such order that each single thing has its assigned
place, but the groups which have thereby been found to be vacant, to
which as yet nothing of experience corresponds, also point to the places
in which science can be completed by new discoveries.

From the above presentation it is apparent how from the two concepts
"thing" and "association" alone a great manifoldness of various and
regular forms can be developed. They are purely empirical relations, for
the fact that several things can be combined in the graded series
described above according to a fixed rule does not follow merely from
the two concepts, but must be _experienced_. But, on the other hand,
both concepts are so general that the experiences obtained in some cases
can be applied to all possible experiences and may serve the purpose of
classifying and making a general survey of them.

The above statements, however, have by no means exhausted the
possibilities. For it has been tacitly assumed that in the combination
of several things the _sequence_ according to which this combination
takes place should not condition a difference of the result. This is
true of a number of things, but not of all. In order, therefore, to
exhaust the possibilities the theory of combinations must be extended
also to cases in which the sequence is to be taken account of, so that
the form ab is regarded as different from ba.

We will not undertake to work out the results of this assumption. It is
obvious that the manifoldness of the various cases is much greater than
if we neglect the sequence. On this point we have one more observation
to make, that further causes for diversity exist. It is true that a
chemical combination is not influenced by the sequence in which its
elements enter the combination, but there do occur with the same
elements differences in their _quantitative relations_, and thereby a
new complexity is introduced into the system, so that two or more
similar elements can form different combinations according to the
difference in the quantitative relations. Still, even with this, the
actual manifoldness is not exhausted, for from the same elements and
with the same quantitative relations there can arise different
substances called _isomeric_, which, for all their similarity, possess
different energy contents. But the first scheme is not demolished, nor
does it become impracticable because of this increase of manifoldness.
What simply happens is that _several_ different things instead of one
appear in the same group of the original scheme, the systematic
classification of which necessitates a further schematization by the use
of other characteristics.


=24. Arrangement of the Members.= Since we have started from the
proposition that all members of a group are different from one another,
we have perfect liberty to arrange them. The most obvious arrangement
according to which some _one_ definite member is followed by a _single_
other member and so forth (as, for example, the arrangement of the
letters of the alphabet) is by no means the only mode of arrangement,
though it is the simplest. Besides this _linear_ arrangement, there is
also, for instance, the one in which two new members follow
simultaneously upon each previous one, or the members may be disposed
like a number of balls heaped up in a pyramid. However, we shall not
have much occasion to occupy ourselves with these complex types of
arrangement, and can therefore limit our considerations at first to the
simplest, that is, to the linear arrangement.

This simplest of all possible forms expresses itself in the fact _that
the immediately experienced things of our consciousness are arranged in
this way_. In point of fact, the contents of our consciousness proceed
in linear order, one single new member always attaching itself to an
existing member. This law, however, is not strictly and invariably
adhered to. It sometimes happens that our consciousness continues for a
while to pursue the direction of thought it has once taken, although a
branching off had already taken place at a former point, at which a new
chain of thought had begun. Nevertheless, one of these chains usually
breaks off very soon, and the linear character of the inner experience
is immediately restored. Of certain specially powerful intellects it is
recorded that they could keep up several lines of thought for a
considerable length of time--Julius Cæsar, for instance.

The biologic peculiarity here mentioned of the linear juxtaposition of
the contents of our consciousness has led to the concept of _time_,
which has been appropriately called a _form of inner life_. That all our
experiences succeed each other in time is equivalent to saying that our
thought processes represent a group in linear arrangement. As appears
from the above observations, this is by no means an absolute form,
unalterable for all times. On the contrary, a few highly developed
individuals have already begun to emancipate themselves from it. But the
existing form is so firmly fixed through heredity and habit that it
still seems impracticable for most men to imagine the succession of the
inner experiences in a different way than by a line or by _one
dimension_. Since, on the other hand, we have all learned to feel space
as _tri-dimensional_, although optically it appears to possess only two
dimensions (we see length and breadth, and only infer thickness from
secondary characteristics), we come to recognize that the linear form by
which we represent the succession of our experiences is a matter of
adaptation, and that because the change has been extremely slight in the
course of centuries it produces the impression of being unalterable.[D]

[D] Mathematicians who busy themselves a great deal with the formal
theory of four-dimensional space, seem to acquire a capacity for
imagining this form as easily as the three-dimensional form with which
we are all familiar. Therefore, despite the oft-repeated statements to
the contrary, it is not impossible to imagine four-dimensional space.
Only, we must not attempt to represent to ourselves four-dimensional
space in three-dimensional space, especially not without a knowledge of
its properties.

These discussions lead to a further difference that can exist in groups
of linear arrangement. While in the first example we chose, the
alphabet, the sequence was quite _arbitrary_, since any other sequence
is just as possible, the same cannot be said of experiences into which
the element of time enters. These are not arbitrary, but are arranged by
special circumstances depending upon the aggregate of things which
co-operate in the given experiences.

While, therefore, a group with free members, that is, members not
determined in their arrangement by special circumstances, can be brought
into linear order in very different ways, there are groups in which only
one of those orders actually occurs. We see at once that in free groups
the number of different orders possible is the greater, the greater the
group itself. The theory of combinations teaches how to calculate these
numbers which play a very important rôle in the various provinces of
mathematics. The naturally ordered groups always represent a single
instance out of these possibilities, the source of which always lies
outside the group concept, that is, it proceeds from the things
themselves which are united into a group.


=25. Numbers.= An especially important group in the linear order is that
of the _integral numbers_. Its origin is as follows:

First we abstract the difference of the things found in the group, that
is, we determine, although they are different, to disregard their
differences. Then we begin with some member of the group and form it
into a group by itself. It does not matter which member is chosen, since
all are regarded as equivalent. Then another member is added, and the
group thus obtained is again characterized as a special type. Then one
more member is added, and the corresponding type formed, and so on.
Experience teaches that never has a hindrance arisen to the formation of
new types of this kind by the addition of a single member at a time, so
that the operation of this peculiar group formation may be regarded as
_unlimited_ or _infinite_.

The groups or types thus obtained are called the _integral numbers_.
From the description of the process it follows that every number has two
neighbors, the one the number from which it arose by the addition of a
member, and the other the number which arose from it by the addition of
a member. In the case of the number one with which the series begins,
this characteristic is present in a peculiar form, the preceding group
being _group zero_, that is, a group without content. This number in
consequence reveals certain peculiarities into which we cannot enter
here.

Now, according to a previous observation (p. 64), not only does the
order bring every number into relation with the preceding one, but since
this last for its part already possesses a great number of relations to
all preceding, these relations exert their influence also upon the new
relation. This fact gives rise to extraordinarily manifold relations
between the various numbers and to manifold laws governing these
relations. The elucidation of them forms the subject of an extensive
science.


=26. Arithmetic, Algebra, and the Theory of Numbers.= From this regular
form of the number series numerous special characteristics can be
established. The investigations leading to the discovery of these
characteristics are purely scientific, that is, they have no special
technical aim. But they have the uncommonly great practical significance
that they provide for all possible arrangements and divisions of
numbered things, and so have instruments at hand ready for application
to each special case as it arises. I have already pointed out that in
this lies the positive importance of the theoretical sciences. For
_practical_ reasons the study of them must be as _general_ as possible.
This science is called _arithmetic_.

Arithmetic undergoes an important generalization if the individual
numbers in a calculation are disregarded and _abstract signs_ standing
for any number at all are used in their place. At first glance this
seems superfluous, since in every real numerical calculation the numbers
must be reintroduced. The advantage lies in this, that in calculations
of the same form, the required steps are formally disposed of once for
all, so that the numerical values need be introduced only at the
conclusion and need not be calculated at each step. Moreover, the
general laws of numerical combination appear much more clearly if the
signs are kept, since the result is immediately seen to be composed of
the participating members. Thus, _algebra_, that is, calculation with
abstract or general quantities, has developed as an extensive and
important field of general mathematics.

By the theory of numbers we understand the most general part of
arithmetic which treats of the properties of the "numerical bodies"
formed in some regular way.


=27. Co-ordination.= So far our discussion has confined itself to the
_individual_ groups and to the properties which each one of them
exhibits _by itself_. We shall now investigate the relations which exist
_between two or more groups_, both with regard to their several members
and to their aggregate.

If at first we have two groups the members of which are all
differentiated from one another, then any one member of the one group
can be co-ordinated with any one member of the other group. This means
that we determine that the same should be done with every member of the
second group as is done with the corresponding member of the first
group. That such a rule may be carried out we must be able to do with
the members of all the groups whatever we do with the members of one
group. In other words, no properties peculiar to individual members may
be utilized, but only the properties that each member possesses as a
member of a group. As we have seen, these are the properties of
_association_.

First, the co-ordination is _mutual_, that is, it is immaterial to which
of the two groups the processes are applied. The relation of the two
groups is reciprocal or symmetrical.

Further, the process of co-ordination can be extended to a third and a
fourth group and so on, with the result that what has been done in one
of the co-ordinated groups must happen in all. If hereby the third group
is co-ordinated with the second, the effects are quite the same as if it
were co-ordinated directly with the first instead of indirectly through
the second. And the same is true for the fourth and the fifth groups,
etc. Thus, co-ordination can be extended to any number of groups we
please, and each single group proves to be co-ordinated with every
other.

Finally, a group can be co-ordinated with itself, each of its members
corresponding to a certain definite other member. It is not impossible
that individual members should correspond to themselves, in which case
the group has _double members_, or _double points_. The limit-case is
_identity_, in which every member corresponds to _itself_. This last
case cannot supply any special knowledge in itself, but may be applied
profitably to throw light on those observations for which it represents
the extreme possibility.


=28. Comparison.= If we have two groups A and B, and if we co-ordinate
their members severally, three cases may arise. Either group A is
exhausted while there are members remaining in B, or B is exhausted
before A, or, finally, both groups allow of a mutual co-ordination of
_all_ their members. In the first case A is called, in the broader sense
of the word, _smaller_ than B, in the second B is called smaller than A,
in the third the two groups are said to be of _equal magnitude_. The
expression, "B is greater than A," is equivalent to the expression, "A
is smaller than B," and inversely.

It is to be noted that the relations mentioned above are true, whether
the members are considered as individually different from one another or
whether the difference of the members is disregarded, and they are
treated as alike. This comes from the fact that every definite
co-ordination of a group can be translated into every other possible
co-ordination by exchanging two members at a time in pairs. Since in
this process one member is each time substituted for another, and a gap
therefore can never occur in its place, the group in the new arrangement
can be co-ordinated with the other group as successfully as in the old
arrangement. At the same time we learn from this that in every
co-ordination of a group with itself, independently of the arrangement
of its members, it must prove equal to itself.

By carrying out the co-ordination proof is further supplied of the
following propositions:

                  { greater than }
    If group A is { equal to     } group B
                  { smaller than }

                  { greater than }
   and group B is { equal to     } group C
                  { smaller than }

                  { greater than }
  then group A is { equal to     } group C
                  { smaller than }

From this it follows that any collection of finite groups whatsoever, of
which no one is equal to the other, can always be so arranged that the
series should begin with the smallest and end with the greatest, and
that a larger should always follow a smaller. _This order would be
unequivocal_, that is, there is only one series of the given groups
which has this peculiarity. As we shall soon see, the series of integers
is the purest type of a series so arranged.

In comparing two infinitely large groups by co-ordination, it may be
said on the one hand that never will one group be exhausted while the
other still contains members. Accordingly, it is possible to designate
two unlimited or infinite groups (or as many such groups as we please)
as _equal_ to each other. On the other hand, the statement that in both
groups each member of the one is co-ordinated with a member of the other
has no definite meaning on account of the infinitely large number of
members. _The definition of equality is therefore not completely
fulfilled_, and we must not loosely apply a principle valid for finite
groups to infinite groups. This consideration, which may assume very
different forms according to circumstances, explains the "paradoxes of
the infinite," that is, the contradictions which arise when concepts of
a definite content are applied to cases possessing in part a different
content. If we wish to attempt such an application, we must in each
instance make a special investigation as to the manner in which the
relations on their part change by the change of those contents (or
premises). As a general rule we must expect that the former relations
will not remain valid in these circumstances without any change at all.

In the course of these observations we have learned how co-ordination
can be used for obtaining a number of fundamental and multifariously
applied principles. From this alone the great importance of
co-ordination is evident, and later we shall see that its significance
is even more far-reaching. _The entire methodology of all the sciences
is based upon the most manifold and many-sided application of the
process of co-ordination_, and we shall have occasion to make use of it
repeatedly. Its significance may be briefly characterized by stating
that it is the most general means of bringing connection into the
aggregate of our experiences.


=29. Counting.= The group of integral numbers, because of its
fundamental simplicity and regularity, is by far the best basis of
co-ordination. For while arithmetic and the theory of numbers give us a
most thorough acquaintance with the peculiarities of this group, we
secure by the process of co-ordination the right to presuppose these
peculiarities and the possibility of finding them again in every other
group which we have co-ordinated with the numerical group. The carrying
out of such co-ordination is called _counting_, and from the premises
made it follows _that we can count all things in so far as we disregard
their differences_.

We count when we co-ordinate in turn one member of a group after another
with the members of the number series that succeed one another until
the group to be counted is exhausted. The last number required for the
co-ordination is called the _sum_ of the members of the counted group.
Since the number series continues indefinitely, every given group can be
counted.

Numerals have been co-ordinated with _names_ as well as with _signs_.
The former are different in the different languages, the latter are
international, that is, they have the same form in all languages. From
this proceeds the remarkable fact that the written numbers are
understood by all educated men, while the spoken numbers are
intelligible only within the various languages.

The purpose of counting is extremely manifold. Its most frequent and
most important application lies in the fact that the amount affords a
_measure for the effectiveness or the value_ of the corresponding group,
both increasing and decreasing simultaneously. A further number serves
as a basis for divisions and arrangements of all kinds to be carried out
within the group, whereby liberal use is made of the principle that
everything that can be effected in the given number group can also be
effected in the co-ordinated counted group.


=30. Signs and Names.= The co-ordination of names and signs with numbers
calls for a few general remarks on co-ordination of this nature.

The possibility of carrying out the formal operations effected in one of
the groups upon the co-ordinated group itself facilitates to an
extraordinary extent the practical shaping of the reality for definite
purposes. If by counting we have ascertained that a group of people
numbers sixty, we can infer without actually executing the steps that it
is possible to form these men in six rows of ten, or in five rows of
twelve, or in four rows of fifteen, but that we cannot obtain complete
rows if we try to arrange them in sevens or elevens. These and
numberless other peculiarities we can learn of the group of men from its
amount, that is, from its co-ordination with the numerical group of
sixty. In co-ordination, therefore, we have a means of acquainting
ourselves with facts without having to deal directly with the
corresponding realities.

It is clear that men will very soon notice and avail themselves of so
enormous an advantage for the mastery and shaping of life. Thus, we see
the process of co-ordination in general use among the most primitive
men. Even the higher animals know how to utilize co-ordination
consciously. When the dog learns to answer to his name, when the horse
responds to the "Whoa" and the "Gee" of his driver there is in each case
a co-ordination of a definite action or series of actions, that is, of a
concept with a sign, or, in other words, of a concept with a member of
another group; and in this there need not be the least similarity
between the things co-ordinated with each other. The only requirement is
that on the one hand the co-ordinated sign should be easily and
definitely expressed and be to the point, and that, on the other hand,
it should be easily "understood," that is, _comprehended_ by the senses
and unmistakably _differentiated_ from other signs co-ordinated with
other things.

Thus, we find that the most frequent concepts of co-ordinated sound
signs form the beginnings of _language_ in the narrower sense. It is
very difficult to ascertain for what reasons the particular forms of
sound signs have been chosen, nor is it a matter of great importance. In
the course of time the original causes have disappeared from our
consciousness and the present connection is purely external. This is
evident from the enormous difference of languages in which hundreds of
different signs are employed for the same concept.

Now it would be quite possible to solve the problem of co-ordinating
with each group of concepts a corresponding group of sounds, so that
each concept should have its own sound, or, in other words, that the
_co-ordination should be unambiguous_. It would not by any means be
beyond human power to accomplish this, if it were not for the fact that
the concepts themselves are still in so chaotic a state as they are at
present. We have seen that the attempts of Leibnitz and Locke to draw up
a system of concepts, if only in broad outline, have undergone no
further development since. Even the most regulated concepts as well as
the familiar concepts of daily life are in ceaseless flux, while the
co-ordinated signs are comparatively more stable. But they, too,
undergo a slow change, as the history of languages shows, and in
accordance with quite different laws from those which govern the change
of concepts. The consequence is that in language the co-ordination of
concepts and words is far from being unambiguous. The science of
language designates the presence of several names for the same concept
and of several concepts for the same name by the words synonym and
homonym. These forms, which have arisen accidentally, signify so many
_fundamental defects_ of language, since they destroy the _principle of
unambiguity_ upon which language is based. In consequence of the false
conception of its nature we have until now positively shrunk from
consciously developing language in such a way that it should more and
more approach the ideal of unambiguity. Such an ideal is in fact
scarcely known, much less recognized.


=31. The Written Language.= Sound signs, to be sure, possess the
advantage of being produced easily and without any apparatus, and of
being communicable over a not inconsiderable distance. But they suffer
under the disadvantage of transitoriness. They suffice for the purpose
of temporary understanding and are constantly being used for that. If,
on the other hand, it is necessary to make communications over greater
distances or longer periods of time, sound signs must be replaced by
more permanent forms.

For this we turn to another sense, the sense of sight. Since optic
signs can travel much greater distances than sound signs without
becoming indistinguishable, we first have the optical telegraphs, which
find application, though rather limited application, in very varying
forms, the most efficient being the heliotrope. The other sort of optic
signs is much more generally used. These are objectively put on
appropriate solid bodies, and last and are understood as long as the
object in question lasts. Such signs form the _written language_ in the
widest sense, and here, too, it is a question of co-ordinating signs and
concepts.

What I have said concerning the very imperfect state of our present
concept system is true also of these two groups. On the other hand, the
written signs are not subject to such great change as the sound signs,
because the sound signs must be produced anew each time, whereas the
written signs inscribed on the right material may survive hundreds, even
thousands of years. Hence it is that the written languages are, upon the
whole, much better developed than the spoken languages. In fact, there
are isolated instances in which it may be said that the ideal has
well-nigh been reached.

As we have already pointed out, such a case is furnished by the _written
signs_ of numbers. By a systematic manipulation of the ten signs 0 1 2 3
4 5 6 7 8 9 it is not only possible to co-ordinate a written sign with
any number whatsoever, but this co-ordination is strictly unambiguous,
that is, each number can be written in only one way, and each numerical
sign has only one numerical significance. This has been obtained in the
following manner:

First, a special sign is co-ordinated to each of the group of numbers
from zero to nine. The same signs are co-ordinated with the next group,
ten to nineteen, containing as many numbers as the first. To distinguish
the second from the first group, the sign one is used as a prefix. The
third group is marked by the prefixed sign two, and so on, until we
reach group nine. The following group, in accordance with the principle
adopted, has as its prefix the sign ten, which contains two digits. All
the succeeding numbers are indicated accordingly. From this the
following result is assured: First, no number in its sequence escapes
designation; second, never is an aggregate sign used for two or more
different numbers. Both these circumstances suffice to secure
unambiguity of co-ordination.

It is known that the system of rotation just described is by no means
the only possible one. But of all systems hitherto tried it is the
simplest and most logical, so that it has never had a serious rival, and
the clumsy notation with which the Greeks and Romans had to plague
themselves in their day was immediately crowded out, never to return
again upon the introduction of the Indo-Arabic notation, which has made
its way in the same form among all the civilized nations and constitutes
a uniform part of all their written languages.

The comparison of the spoken and the written languages offers a very
illuminating proof of the much greater imperfection of the language of
_words_. The number 18654 is expressed in the English language by
eighteen thousand six hundred and fifty-four, that is, the second figure
is named first, then the first, the third, the fourth, and the fifth. In
addition, four different designations are used to indicate the place of
the figures, -teen, -thousand, -hundred, and -ty. A more aimless
confusion can scarcely be conceived. It would be much clearer to name
the figures simply in their sequence, as one-eight-six-five-four.
Besides, this would be unambiguous. If we should desire to indicate the
_place value_ in advance, we could do so in some conventional way, for
example, by stating the number of digits in advance. This, however,
would be superfluous, and ordinarily should be omitted.[E]

[E] The usual designation of the larger groups, ten, hundred, thousand,
million, billion, etc., is also quite irrational. If it is our object to
secure expressions for place values in as few words as possible, we find
that the numbers of the form 10^{2n}, in which n is a whole number, must
receive their own names, that is, 10, 100, 10,000, 100,000,000 etc. In
this way the problem of designating as many numbers as possible by as
few words as possible is solved.


=32. Pasigraphy and Sound Writing.= There are two possibilities for
co-ordination between concepts and written signs. Either the
co-ordination is _direct_, so that it is only a matter of providing
every concept with a corresponding sign, or it is indirect, the signs
serving only the purpose of expressing the _language sound_. In the
latter case the written language is based entirely upon the sound
language, and the only problem, comparatively easy to solve, is to
construct _an unambiguous co-ordination between sound and sign_. The
Chinese script follows the direct process, but all the scripts of the
European-American civilized peoples are based on the indirect process.

This, it is true, is the case only in ordinary, non-scientific language,
while for science the European nations also have to a large extent built
up a direct concept writing. One example of this we have seen in the
number signs. Musical notation furnishes another instance, though by far
not so perfect. The use of the different keys destroys the unambiguous
connection between the pitch and the note sign, and the signatures
placed at the beginning of a whole staff have the defect of removing the
sign from the place where it is applied. Despite this imperfection
musical notation is quite international, and every one who understands
European music also understands its signs.[F]

[F] It is not difficult to perfect musical notation with a view to
unambiguity, a thing which would greatly facilitate the study of music.

Fundamentally we need not hesitate to recognize in _concept writing_ or
_pasigraphy_ a more complete solution of the problem of sign
arrangement. Even the very incomplete Chinese pasigraphy renders
possible written intercourse, especially for mercantile purposes,
between the various East-Asiatic peoples who speak some dozens of
different languages. But each language community translates the common
signs into its own words, just as we do in the case of the number signs.
But in order that such a system of representation should be complete it
must fulfil a whole series of conditions for which scarcely a remote
possibility is to be discerned at present.

At first the concepts could simply be taken as found in the words and
grammatical forms of the various languages, and each one provided with
an arbitrary sign. Such approximately is the Chinese system. But a
system of that sort entails an extreme burdening of the memory, which
results both from the great number of words and from the necessity of
keeping the signs within certain bounds of simplicity. If we consider
that the complex concepts are formed according to laws, to a large
extent still unknown, from a relatively small number of _elementary_
concepts, we may attempt to build up the signs of the complex concepts
by the combination of those of the elementary concepts according to
corresponding rules. Then it would only be necessary to learn the signs
for the elementary concepts and the rules of combination in order for us
to be able to represent all the possible concepts. This would provide
even for the natural enlargement of the concept world, since every new
elementary concept would receive its sign and would then serve as the
basis from which to deduce all the complex concepts dependent upon it.
In fact, even should a concept hitherto regarded as elementary prove to
be complex, it would not be difficult to declare that its sign, like the
name of an extinct race, is dead, and after the lapse of sufficient time
to use it for other purposes.

The numerical signs offer an excellent example for the elucidation of
this subject, and at the same time serve as a proof that in limited
provinces the ideal has already been attained. Another very instructive
example is furnished by the chemical formulas, which, though they use
the letters of the European languages, do not associate with them sound
concepts, but chemical concepts. Since the chemical concepts are
co-ordinated with certain letters, it is possible, in the first place,
to denote the composition of all combinations qualitatively by the
combination of the corresponding letters. But since quantitative
composition proceeds according to definite relations which are
determined by a variety of specific numbers peculiar to each element and
called its combining weight, we need only add to the sign of the element
the concept of the combining weight in order to represent in the second
place the quantitative composition. Further, the multiples mentioned can
also be given. Since, moreover, there are various substances which,
despite equal composition, possess different properties, the attempt
has been made to express this new manifoldness by the position of the
element signs on the paper, and in more recent times also by space
representation. And here, too, rules have been worked out in which the
scheme affords a close approach to experience. This example shows how,
by the constant increase of the complexity of a concept (here the
chemical composition), ever greater and more manifold demands are made
upon the co-ordinated scheme. The form of expression first chosen is not
always adequate to keep pace with the progress of science. In this case
it must be radically changed and formed anew to meet the new demands.


=33. Sound Writing.= In point of unambiguity of co-ordination _phonetic
writing_ is far more imperfect than concept writing. It is obvious that
in phonetic writing all the faults already present in the co-ordination
between concept and sound are transferred to the written language. To
these are added the defects as regards unambiguity occurring in
co-ordination between sound and sign from which no language is free. In
some languages, in fact, notably in English, these defects amount to a
crying calamity. The principle of unambiguity would require that there
should never be a doubt as to the way in which a spoken word is written,
and as little doubt as to the way in which a written word is spoken. It
needs no proof to show how often the principle is violated in every
language. In the German language the same sound is represented by f, v,
and ph; in the English by f and ph. And in both German and English quite
different sounds are associated with c, g, s, and other letters. _The
fact that orthographic mistakes can be made in the writing of any
language is direct proof of its imperfection_, and the oftener this
possibility occurs the more imperfect is the language in this respect.
We know that the spelling reforms begun in Germany more than ten years
ago and recently in America and England, have for their object
unambiguity in the co-ordination between sign and sound. Still it must
be admitted that this tendency has not always been pursued
undeviatingly. A few innovations, in fact, undoubtedly represent a step
backward.


=34. The Science of Language.= A comparison of our investigations--which
we cannot present in detail but only indicate--with the science of
language or philology as taught in the universities and in a great
number of books, reveals a great difference between them. This academic
philology makes a most exhaustive study of relations, which from the
point of view of the purpose of language are of no consequence whatever,
such as most of the rules and usages of grammar. A study of this sort
must naturally confine itself to a mere determination of whether certain
individuals or groups of individuals have or have not conformed to these
rules. Even the chief subject of modern comparative philology, the study
of the relations of the word forms to one another and their changes in
the course of history, both within the language communities and when
transferred to other localities, appear to be quite useless from the
point of view of the theory of co-ordination. For it is indeed of little
moment to us to learn by what process of change, as a rule utterly
superficial, a certain word has come to be co-ordinated with a concept
entirely different from the one with which it had been previously
co-ordinated. Of incomparably greater importance would be investigations
concerning the gradual change of the concepts themselves, although by no
means as important as the real study of concepts. To be sure, such
investigations are much more difficult than the study of word forms set
down in writing.

Nevertheless, on account of a historical process, which it would lead us
too far afield to discuss, an idea of such word investigations has been
formed which is wholly disproportionate to their importance. And if we
ask ourselves what part such labors have taken in the progress of human
civilization, we are at a loss for an answer. Students of the _science_
of language make a sharp distinction between it and the _knowledge_ of
language, which is regarded as incomparably lower. But while a knowledge
of language is important in at least one respect, in that it presents to
us the cultural material set down in other languages, or makes them
accessible in translation to those who do not know foreign languages,
philology is of no service in this respect at all, and the pursuit of it
will seem as inconceivably futile to future science as the
scholasticism of the middle ages seems to us now.

The unwarranted importance attached to the historical study of language
forms is paralleled by the equally unwarranted importance ascribed to
grammatical and orthographic correctness in the use of language. This
perverse pedantry has been carried to such lengths that it is considered
almost dishonorable for any one to violate the usual forms of his mother
tongue, or even of a foreign language, like the French. We forget that
neither Shakespeare nor Luther nor Goethe spoke or wrote a "correct"
English or German, and we forget that it cannot be the object of a true
cultivation of language to _preserve_ as accurately as possible existing
linguistic usage, with its imperfections, amounting at times to
absurdities. Its real object lies rather in the appropriate
_development_ and _improvement_ of the language. We have already
mentioned the fact that in one department, orthography, the true
conception of the nature of language and of its development is gradually
beginning to assert itself. Among most nations efforts are being made to
improve orthography with a view to unambiguity, and when once sufficient
clearness is had as to the object aimed for in spelling, there will be
no special difficulty in finding the required means to attain it.

But in all the other departments of language we are still almost wholly
without a conception of the genuine needs. Though the example of the
English language proves that we can entirely dispense with the manifold
co-ordinations in the same sentence as appearing in the special plural
forms of the adjective, verb, pronoun, etc., yet the idea of consciously
applying to other languages the natural process of improvement
unconsciously evolved in the English language seems not to have occurred
even to the boldest language reformers. So strongly are we all under the
domination of the "schoolmaster" ideal, that is to say, the ideal of
preserving every linguistic absurdity and impracticability simply
because it is "good usage."

A twofold advantage will have been attained by the introduction of a
_universal auxiliary language_ (p. 183). Recently the efforts in that
direction have made considerable progress. In the first place it will
provide a general means of communication in all matters of common human
interest, especially the sciences. This will mean a saving of energy
scarcely to be estimated. In the second place, the superstitious awe of
language and our treatment of it will give way to a more appropriate
evaluation of its technical aim. And when by the help of the artificial
auxiliary language, we shall be able to convince ourselves daily how
much simpler and completer such a language can be made than are the
"natural" languages, then the need will irresistibly assert itself to
have these languages also participate in its advantages. The
consequences of such progress to human intellectual work in general
would be extraordinarily great. For it may be asserted that philosophy,
the most general of all the sciences, has hitherto made such extremely
limited progress only _because it was compelled to make use of the
medium of general language_. This is made obvious by the fact that the
science most closely related to it, mathematics, has made the greatest
progress of all, but that this progress began only after it had procured
both in the Indo-Arabic numerals and in the algebraic signs a language
which actually realizes very approximately the ideal of unambiguous
co-ordination between concept and sign.


=35. Continuity.= Up to this point our discussions have been based on
the general concept of the _thing_, that is, of the individual
experience differentiated from other experiences. Here the fact of
_being different_, which, as a general experience, led to the
corresponding elementary concept, appeared in the foreground in
accordance with its generality. But in addition to it there is another
general fact of experience, which has led to just as general a concept.
It is the concept of _continuity_.

When, for example, we watch the diminution of light in our room as it
grows dark in the evening, we can by no means say that we find it darker
at the present moment than a moment before. We require a perceptibly
long time to be able to say with certainty that it is now darker than
before, and throughout the whole time _we have never felt the increase_
of darkness from moment to moment, although theoretically we are
absolutely convinced that this is the correct conception of the process.

This peculiar experience, our failure to perceive individual parts of a
change, the reality of which we realize when the difference reaches a
certain degree, is very general, and, like memory, is based upon a
fundamental physiological fact. It has already been noted by _Herbart_,
but its significance was first recognized by _Fechner_, and has since
then become generally known in physiology and psychology under the name
of _threshold_. _Next to memory the threshold determines the fundamental
lines of our psychic life._

The threshold therefore means that whatever state we are in _a certain
finite amount of difference or change must be stepped over_ before we
can perceive the difference or change. This peculiarity appears in all
our states or experiences. We have already given an example for the
phenomena of light and darkness. The same is true of differences in
color and of our judgments as to tone pitch and tone strength. Even the
transition from feeling well to feeling ill is usually imperceptible,
and it is only when the change occurs in a very brief time that we
become conscious of it.

The physical causes of these psychic phenomena need be indicated only in
brief. In all our experiences an existing chemico-physical state in our
sense organs and in the central organ undergoes a change. Now
experiments with physical apparatus have shown that such a process
always requires a finite, though sometimes a very small, quantity of
work, or, generally speaking, energy, before it can be brought about at
all. Even the finest scale, sensitive to a millionth of a gram, remains
stationary when only a tenth of a millionth is placed upon it, although
we can _see_ a body of such minute weight under the microscope. In the
same way it requires a definite expenditure of energy in order to bring
the sense organs, or the central organ, into action, and all stimuli
less than this limit or threshold produce no experience of their
presence.

By this the difficult concept of continuity is evoked in our experience.
The transition from the light of day to the darkness of evening proceeds
_continuously_, that is, at no point of the whole transition do we
notice that the state just passed is different from the present one,
while the difference over a wider extent of the experience is
unmistakable. If we wish to bring vividly to our minds the contradiction
to other habits of thought which this involves, we need only to
represent to ourselves the following instance. I will compare the thing
A at a certain time with the thing B, which is so constructed that
though objectively different from A, the difference has not yet reached
the threshold. From experience, therefore, I must take A to be equal to
B. Then I compare B with a thing C, which is objectively different from
B in the same way as A is from B, though here, too, the difference is
still within the threshold, though very near it. I shall also have to
take B as equal to C. But now if I compare A directly with C, the sum of
the two differences oversteps the threshold value, and I find that A is
different from C. This, then, is a contradiction of the fundamental
principle that if A = B and B = C, A = C. This principle is valid for
_counted_ things, which, in consequence, are discontinuous, but not for
continuous things susceptible by our senses. If in spite of this it is
applied to continuous things or _magnitudes_ in the narrower sense, we
must bear in mind that it is just as much a case of an _extrapolation to
the non-existing ideal instance_ (p. 46) as in the case of the other
general principles, which, though they are derived from experience,
nevertheless, for practical purposes, transcend experience in their use.

The examples cited above prove also that these relations are by no means
confined to the judgments we derive on the basis of immediate
sensations. When by means of the scale we compare three weights, the
differences of which lie within the limit of its sensitiveness but
approach closely to it, we can arrive in a purely empirical and
objective way also at the contradiction A = B, B = C, but A [Not=] C. In
weight and measurement, therefore, we hold fast to the principle that
the relations cited have no claim to validity outside the limit of their
possible errors. Accordingly, though the non-equation of A [Not=] C can
be observed, the difference of both values cannot be greater than at
utmost the sum of the two threshold values.

These considerations also give us a means of appraising the oft-repeated
statement that in contradistinction to the physical laws the
mathematical laws are absolutely accurate. The mathematical laws do not
refer to real things, but to imaginary ideal limit cases. Consequently
they cannot be tested by experience at all, and the demands science
makes on them lie in quite a different sphere. Their nature must be such
that _experience should approximate them infinitely_, if certain
definite well-known postulates are to be more and more fulfilled, and
that the various abstractions and idealizations should be so chosen as
not to contradict one another. Such contradictions have by no means
always been avoided. But we must not regard them as inherent in the
inner organization of our mind, as Kant did. These contradictions spring
from careless handling of the concept technique, by which postulates
elsewhere rejected are treated as valid. We have already come across an
instance of such relations in the application of the concept of equality
to unlimited groups (p. 84).

We must be guided by the same rules of precaution in answering the
question whether the things felt as continuous--for example, space and
time--are "truly" continuous, or whether in the last analysis they must
not be conceived of as discontinuous. The various sense organs, and
still more, the various physical apparatus with which we examine given
states, are of very varying degrees of "sensibility," that is, the
threshold for distinguishing the differences may be of very different
magnitudes. Therefore, a thing which is discontinuous for a sensitive
apparatus will behave as if it were continuous with a less sensitive
apparatus. Accordingly, we shall find so many the more things continuous
the less sharply developed our ability is to differentiate.

While this circumstance makes it possible that we should regard
discontinuous things as continuous, time relations in certain
circumstances produce the opposite effect. Even if in a process the
change is continuous but very rapid, and the new state remains unchanged
for a certain time, we easily conceive of this sequence as
discontinuous. We cannot resist this view of the process when the change
occurs in a shorter time than the threshold time of our mind for each
step in the process. But since this threshold changes with our general
condition, one and the same process can appear to us both continuous and
discontinuous according to circumstances. Here, therefore, we have a
cause through the operation of which, with advancing knowledge, more and
more things will become recognized as _continuous_.

Now if we turn to _experience_, we find, as the sum total of our
knowledge, that for the sake of expediency we approach everything with
the presumption that it is _continuous_. This aggregate experience
finds its expression in such sayings as "Nature makes no jumps," and
similar proverbial generalizations. But we must emphasize the fact once
more that in deciding matters in this way we deal solely with questions
of expediency, not with questions of the nature of our mental capacity.


=36. Measurement.= Measuring is in a certain way the opposite of
counting. While, in counting, the things are regarded in advance as
_individual_, and the group, therefore, is a body compounded of
discontinuous elements, measuring, on the other hand, consists in
_co-ordinating numbers with continuous things_, that is, in applying to
continuous things a concept formed upon the hypothesis of discontinuity.

It lies in the nature of such a problem that the difficulty of
adaptation must crop out somewhere in the course of its attempted
solution. This is actually shown by the fact that measurement proves to
be an unconcluded and inconcludable operation. If, in spite of this,
measurement may and must justly be denoted as one of the most important
advances in human thought, it follows that those fundamental
difficulties can practically be rendered harmless.

Let us picture to ourselves some process of measurement--for example,
the determination of the length of a strip of paper. We place a rule
divided into millimeters (or some other unit) on the strip, and then we
determine the unit-mark at which the strip ends. It turns out that the
strip does not end exactly at a unit-mark, but _between_ two
unit-marks. And even if the rule is provided with divisions ten or a
hundred times finer, the case remains the same. In most cases a
microscopic examination will show that the end of the strip does not
coincide with a division. All that can be said, therefore, is that the
length must lie _between n and n + 1 units_, and even if a definite
number is given, the scientifically trained person will supplement this
number by the sign ± _f_, in which _f_ denotes the possible errors, that
is, the limit within which the given number may be false.

We see at once how the characteristic concept of threshold, which has
led to the conception of the continuous, immediately asserts itself when
in connection with discontinuous numbers. The adaptation of the
threshold to numbers can be carried as far as it is possible to reduce
the threshold, but the latter can never be made to disappear entirely.

The significance of measurement therefore lies in the fact that it
applies the operation of counting with all its advantages (see p. 85) to
_continuous_ things, which as such do not at first lend themselves to
enumeration. By the application of the unit measure a discontinuity is
at first artificially established through dividing the thing into
pieces, each piece equal to the unit, or imagining it to be so divided.
Then we count the pieces. When a quantity of liquid is _measured_ with a
liter this general process is carried out physically. In all other less
direct methods of measurement the physical process is substituted by an
easier process equally good. Thus, in the example of the strip of paper
we need not cut it up into pieces a millimeter in length. The divided
rule is available for comparing the length of any number of millimeters
that happen to come under consideration, and we need only read off from
the figures on the rule the quantity of millimeters equal to the length
of the strip, in order to infer that the strip can be cut up into an
equal number of pieces each a millimeter in length.

After it has been made possible to count continuous things in this way,
the numeration of them can then be subjected to all the mathematical
operations first developed only for discrete, directly countable things.
When we reflect that our knowledge of things has given them to us
_preponderatingly as continuous_, we at once see what an important step
forward has been made through the invention of measurement in the
intellectual domination of our experience.


=37. The Function.= The concept of continuity makes possible the
development of another concept of greater universality, which can be
characterized as an extension of the concept of causation (p. 31). The
latter is an expression of the experience, if A is, B is also, in which
A is understood to be a definite thing at first conceived of as
immutable. Now it may happen that A is not immutable, but represents a
concept with continuously changing characteristics. Then, as a rule, B
will also be of that nature, so that _every special value or state of B
corresponds to every special value or state of A_.

Here, in place of the reciprocal relation of two definite things, we
have the reciprocal relation of two more or less extended groups of
similar things. If these things are continuous, as is assumed here (and
which is extremely often the case), both groups or series, even though
they are finite, contain an endless quantity of individual cases. Such a
relation between two variable things is called a function. Although this
concept is used chiefly for the reciprocal relation of _continuous_
things, there is nothing to hinder its application to discrete things,
and accordingly we distinguish between continuous and discontinuous
functions.

The intellectual progress involved in the conception of the reciprocal
relation of entire _series_ or groups to one another, as distinguished
from the conception of the relations between _individual_ things, is of
the utmost importance and in the most expressive manner characterizes
the difference between modern scientific thought and ancient thought.
Ancient geometry, for example, knew only the cases of the acute, right,
and obtuse angled triangle, and treated them separately, while the
modern geometrician represents the side of the triangle as starting from
the angle zero and traversing the entire field of possible angles.
Accordingly, unlike his colleague of old, he does not ask for the
particular principles bearing upon these particular cases, but he asks
in what continuous relation do the sides and angles stand to one
another, and he lets the particular cases develop from out of one
another. In this way he attains a much profounder and more effectual
insight into the whole of the existing relations.

It is in mathematics in especial that the introduction of the concept of
continuity and of the function concept arising from it has exercised an
extraordinarily deep influence. The so-called _Higher Analysis_, or
_Infinitesimal Analysis_, was the first result of this radical advance,
and the _Theory of Functions_, in the most general sense, was the later
result. This progress rests on the fact that the magnitudes appearing in
the mathematical formulas were no longer regarded as certain definite
values (or values to be arbitrarily determined), but as _variable_, that
is, values which may range through all possible quantities. If we
represent the relation between two things by the formula B = f(A),
expressed in spoken language by B _is a function_ of A, then in the old
conception A and B are each individual things, while in the modern
conception A and B represent an inexhaustible series of possibilities
embracing every conceivable individual case that may be co-ordinated
with a corresponding case.

Herein lies the essential advantage of the concept of continuity. It is
true that it also introduces into calculation the above-mentioned
contradictions which crop up in the ever-recurring discussions
concerning the infinitely great and the infinitely small. The system
introduced by Leibnitz of calculating with _differentials_, that is,
with infinitely small quantities, which in most relations, however,
still preserve the character of finite quantities from which they are
considered to have been derived, has proved to be as fruitful of
practical results as it is difficult of intellectual mastery. We can
best conceive of these differentials as the expression of the law of the
threshold, which law gave rise to, or made possible, the relation
between the continuous and the discrete.


=38. The Application of the Functional Relation.= I have already shown
(p. 34) how the first formulation of a causal relation which experience
yields can be purified and elaborated by the multiplication of the
experience. The method described was based upon the fact that the
necessary and adequate factors of the result were obtained by
eliminating successively from the "cause" the various factors of which
its concept was or could be compounded, and by concluding from the
result, that is, the presence or absence of the "effect," as to the
necessity or superfluity of each factor.

Obviously the application of this process presupposes the possibility of
eliminating each factor in turn. Very often it is not possible, and then
in place of the inadequate method of the individual case the _method of
the continuous functional relation_ steps in with its infinitely
greater effectiveness. If in most cases we cannot _eliminate_ the
factors one by one, there are very few instances in which it is not
possible to _change_ them, or to observe the result in the automatically
changed values of the factors. But then we have the principle that for
the causal relation _all such factors are essential the change of which
involves a change of the result_.

It is clear that this signifies a generalization of the former and more
limited method. For the elimination of the factor means that its value
is reduced to zero. But now it is no longer necessary to go to this
extreme limit; it suffices merely to influence in some way the factor to
be investigated.

It is true that here the difference in the result cannot be expressed
with a "yes" or a "no," as before. It can only be said that it has
changed _partly_, more or less. From this it can be seen that the
application of this process requires more refined methods of
observation, especially for measuring, that is, for determining values
or magnitudes. On the other hand, we must recognize how much deeper we
can penetrate into the knowledge of things by the application of the
measuring process. Each advance in precision of measurement signifies
the discovery of a new stratum of scientific truth previously
inaccessible.


=39. The Law of Continuity.= From the fact that natural phenomena in
general proceed continuously we can deduce a number of important and
generally applicable conclusions which are constantly used for the
development of science.

When a relation of two continuously varying values of the form A = f(B)
is conjectured, we convince ourselves of its truth by observing for
different values of A the corresponding values of B, or reversely. If we
find that changes in the one correspond to changes in the other, the
existence of such a relation is proved, at first only for the observed
values, though we never hesitate to conclude that for the values of A
lying between the observed values, but themselves not yet observed, the
corresponding values of B will also lie between the observed values. For
example, if the temperature at a given place has been observed at
intervals of two hours, we assume without hesitancy that in the hours
between when no observations were made, the values lie between the
observed values. If we indicate the time in the usual manner by
horizontal lines and the temperature for the general periods of time by
longitudinal lines, the law of continuity asserts that all these
temperature points lie in a steady line, so that when a number of points
lying sufficiently near one another is known, the points between can be
derived from the steady line which may be drawn through the known
points. This very commonly applied process will yield the more accurate
results the nearer the known points are to one another, and the simpler
the line.

The application of the law of continuity or steadiness, therefore,
means no less than that it is possible, from a finite, frequently not
even a very large, number of individual results, to obtain the means of
predicting the result for an infinitely large number of unexamined
cases. The instrument derived from this law, therefore, is an eminently
_scientific_ one.

The value of this instrument is still greater if it succeeds in
expressing the relation A = f(B) in strict mathematical form. First, the
result of the determination of a number of individual values of that
function is represented as a table of co-ordinated values. By the
graphic process above described, or by its equivalent, the mathematical
process of interpolation, this table is so extended that it also
supplies all the intermediate values. But this is still a case of a
mechanical co-ordination of the corresponding values. Often we succeed,
especially in the relation of simple or pure concepts, in finding a
general mathematical rule by which the magnitude A can be derived from
the magnitude B, and reversely. This is the only instance in which we
speak of a natural law in the quantitative sense.

Thus, for example, we can observe what volume a given quantity of air
occupies when successively subjected to different pressures. If we
arrange all these values together in a table, we can also calculate
the volume for all the intermediate pressures. But on close inspection
of the corresponding numbers of pressure and volume we notice that
they are in inverse ratio, or that when multiplied by one another
their products will be the same. If we denote the space by v and the
pressure by p, this fact assumes the mathematical form p·v = K, in
which K is a definite number depending upon the quantity of air, the
unit of pressure, etc., but remaining unchanged in an experimental
series in which these factors stay the same. The general functional
equation A = f(B) becomes the definite p = K/v. And this formula
enables us to determine by a simple calculation the volume for any
degree of pressure, provided the value of K has been once ascertained
by experiment.

At first we have a right to such a calculation only within the province
in which the experiments have been made, and the simple mathematical
expression of the natural law has for the time being no further
significance than that of a specially convenient rule for interpolation.
But such a form immediately evokes a question which demands an
experimental answer. How far can the form be extended? That there must
be a limit is to be directly inferred from the consideration of the
formula itself. For if we let p = 0, then v = infinity, both of which
lie beyond the field of possible experience.

Similar considerations obtain in all such mathematically formulated
natural laws, and each time, therefore, we must ask what the _range of
validity_ of such an expression is, and answer the question by
experiment.

While in this discussion the mathematically formulated natural law seems
to have the nature only of a convenient formula of interpolation, we are
nevertheless in the habit of regarding the discovery of such a formula
as a great intellectual accomplishment, which so impresses us that we
frequently call it by the name of the discoverer. Now, wherein lies the
more significant value of such formulations?

It lies in the fact that simple formulas are discovered only _when the
conceptual analysis of the phenomenon has advanced far enough_. The very
simplicity of the formula shows that the concept formation which is at
the basis of it is especially serviceable. In Ptolemy's theory of the
motion of the planets the means for calculating their positions in
advance was given just as in the theory of Copernicus. But Ptolemy's
theory was based on the assumption that the earth stands still, and that
the sun and the other planets move. The assumption that the sun stands
still and that the earth and the other planets move greatly facilitates
the calculation of the position of the planets. In this lay the primary
value of the advance made by Copernicus. It was not until much later
that it was found that a number of other actual relations could be
represented much more fittingly by means of the same hypothesis, and
thus the Copernican theory has come to be generally recognized and
applied.

The significance of the law of continuity and its field of application
have by no means been exhausted by what has been said above. But later
we shall have a number of occasions to point out its application in
special instances, and so cause its use to become a steady mental habit
with the beginner in scientific research.


=40. Time and Space.= Time and space are two very general concepts,
though without doubt not elementary concepts. For besides the elementary
concept of continuity which both contain, time has the further character
of being one-seried or one-dimensional, of not admitting of the
possibility of return to a past point of time (absence of double points)
and of absolute onesidedness, that is, of the fundamental difference
between before and after. This last quality is the very one not found in
the space concept, which is in every sense symmetrical. On the other
hand, owing to the three dimensions it has a _three_fold manifoldness.

That despite this radical distinction in the properties of space and
time all of our experiences can be expressed or represented within the
concepts of space and time, is very clear proof that experience is much
more limited than the formal manifoldness of the conceivable. In this
sense space and time can be conceived as natural laws which may be
applied to all our experiences. Here at the same time the
subjective-human element of the natural law becomes very clear.

The properties of time are of so simple and obvious a nature that there
is no special science of time. What we need to know about it appears as
part of physics, especially of mechanics. Nevertheless time plays an
essential rôle in _phoronomy_, a subject which we shall consider
presently. In phoronomy, however, time appears only in its simplest form
as a one-seried continuous manifoldness.

As for space, the presence of the three dimensions conditions a great
manifoldness of possible relations, and hence the existence of a very
extensive science of bodies in space, of _geometry_. Geometry is divided
into various parts depending upon whether or not the concept of
measurement enters. When dealing with purely spacial relations apart
from the concept of measurement it is called geometry of position. In
order to introduce the element of measurement a certain hypothesis is
necessary which is undemonstrable, and therefore appears to be arbitrary
and can be justified only because it is the simplest of all possible
hypotheses. This hypothesis takes for granted that a rigid body can be
moved in all directions in space without changing in measure. Or, to
state the inverse of this hypothesis, in space those parts are called
equal which a rigid body occupies, no matter how it is moved about.

We are not conscious of the extreme arbitrariness of this assumption
simply because we have become accustomed to it in school. But if we
reflect that in daily experience the space occupied by a rigid body, say
a stick, seems to the eye to undergo radical changes as it shifts its
position in space and that we can maintain that hypothesis only by
declaring these changes to be "apparent," we recognize the arbitrariness
which really resides in that assumption. We could represent all the
relations just as well if we were to assume that those changes are real,
and that they are successively undone when we restore the stick to its
former relation to our eye. But though such a conception is
fundamentally practicable in so far as it deals merely with the space
picture of the stick, we nevertheless find that it would lead to such
extreme complications with regard to other relations (for example, the
fact that the weight of the stick is not affected by the change of the
optic picture) that we do better if we adhere to the usual assumption
that the optical changes are merely apparent.

In this connection we learn what an enormous influence the various parts
of experience exert upon one another in the development of science. In
every special generalization of experiences, that is, in every
individual scientific theory, our aim is not only to generalize this
special group of experiences in themselves, but at the same time to join
such other experiences to them as expedience demands. If the effect of
this necessity is on the one hand to render the elaboration of an
appropriate theory more difficult, it has on the other hand the great
advantage of affording a choice among several theories of apparently
like value, and thus making possible a more precise notion of the
reality. For example, for the understanding of the mutual movements of
the sun and the earth it is the same whether we assume that the sun
moves about the earth or the earth about the sun. It is not until we try
to represent theoretically the position of the other planets that we see
the economic advantage of the second conception, and facts like
Foucault's experiment with a pendulum can be represented only according
to this second conception in our present state of knowledge.

Likewise, the assumption on which scientific geometry goes, that space
has the same properties in all directions, conflicts with immediate
experience. In immediate experience we make a sharp distinction between
below and above, although we are prepared to admit the "homogeneity" of
space in the horizontal direction. This is due, as physics teaches, to
the fact that we are placed in a field of gravitation which acts only
from above downward and which permits free horizontal turnings, although
it imparts a characteristic difference to the third direction. Since
considerations of another kind enable us to place ourselves in a
position in which we ignore this field of gravitation in the
investigation of space, geometry abstracts this element and disregards
the corresponding manifoldness. In the theory of the gravitation
potential, on the other hand, this very manifoldness is made the subject
of scientific investigation.

The common application of the concepts of space and time results in the
concept of _motion_, the science of which is called phoronomics. In
order to make this new variable subject to measurement we must arrive at
an agreement or convention as to the way in which to measure time. For
since past time can never be reproduced we actually experience only
unextended moments, and have no means of recognizing or defining the
equality of two periods of time by placing them side by side, as we can
in the case of spacial magnitudes. We help ourselves by saying _that in
uninfluenced motions equal periods of time must correspond to the equal
changes in space_. We regard the rotation of the earth on its axis and
its revolution about the sun as such uninfluenced motions. The two
depend upon dissimilar conditions, and the empirical fact that the
relation of the two motions, or the relation between the day and the
year, remains practically the same, sustains that assumption, and at the
same time shows the expediency of the given definition of time.

_Analytic geometry_, the application of algebra to geometric relations,
occupies a noteworthy position, from the point of view of method, in the
science of space. It yields geometric results by means of calculation,
that is, by the application of the _algebraic_ material of symbols we
can obtain data concerning unknown _spacial_ relations. An explanation
is necessary of how by a method apparently so extraneous such results as
these can be attained.

The answer lies again in the general principle of co-ordination, which
in this very case receives a particularly cogent illustration. Three
algebraic signs, x, y, and z, are co-ordinated with the three variable
dimensions of space. First, the same independent and constant
variability is ascribed to these signs, and, further, the same mutual
relations are assumed to subsist between them as actually exist between
the three-spacial dimensions. In other words, precisely the same kind of
manifoldness is imparted to these algebraic signs as the spacial
dimensions possess to which they are co-ordinated, and we may therefore
expect that all the conclusions arising from these assumptions will find
their corresponding parts in the spacial manifoldness. Accordingly, a
co-ordinated spacial relation corresponds to every change of those
algebraic formulas resulting from calculation, and if such changes lead
to an algebraically simple form, then the spacial form corresponding to
it must show an analogous simplicity. Here, therefore, we have a case
such as was described under simpler conditions on p. 86 of operations
undertaken with one group and repeated correspondingly in the
co-ordinated group. And it is only the great difference in the things
of which in this case the two groups are composed--spacial relations on
the one side and algebraic signs on the other--that creates the
impression of astonishment which was felt very strongly at the invention
of this method, and which is still felt by students with talent for
mathematics when they first become acquainted with analytical geometry.


=41. Recapitulation.= Before we proceed to consider the fundamentals of
other sciences, it is well to make a general résumé of the field so far
traversed. Since the later sciences, as we have already observed, make
use of the entire apparatus of the earlier sciences, the mastery of them
must be assured in order to render their special application possible.

This does not mean that one must have complete command of the entire
range of those earlier sciences in order to pursue a later one. Mere
human limitations would prevent the fulfilment of such a demand. As a
matter of fact, successful work can be done in one of the later sciences
even if only the most general features of the earlier ones have been
clearly grasped. Nevertheless, the rapidity and certainty of the results
are very considerably increased by a more thorough knowledge of the
earlier sciences, and the investigator, accordingly, should seek a
middle road between the danger of insufficient preparation for his
special science and the danger of never getting to it from sheer
preparation. In any circumstances he must be prepared always, even
though it be in later age, to acquire those fundamental aids so soon as
he feels the need of them for carrying out any special work. It is
generally acceded that without logic the adequate pursuit of science is
impossible. Nevertheless, the opinion is widely current, even among men
of science, that everybody has command of the needful logic without
having studied it. No more than a man can learn of himself to use the
calculus, even if he may have discovered unaided some of its elementary
principles, can he acquire certainty and readiness in the use of the
logical rules generally necessary, unless he has made the necessary
studies. It is true that the scientific works of the great pioneers and
leaders in the special sciences furnish practical examples of such
logical activity. But complete freedom and security are acquired only on
the basis of conscious knowledge.

We have now seen how, from the physiological construction of our mental
apparatus, the process of concept formation and the experience of
concept connections are the basis of the whole of mental life. The laws
of the mutual interaction of the most general or elementary concepts
operated in the formation of the concepts, _thing_, _group_,
_co-ordination_. Here were found the fundamentals of logic or the
science of concepts. A special process of abstraction yielded the
concept of _number_, and with it the corresponding field of
_mathematics_, arithmetic, algebra, and the theory of numbers.

By means of the second fundamental fact of physiology, the _threshold_,
another elementary fact was explained, that of _continuity_. The
co-ordination of individual things under the influence of this concept
was expanded into the _co-ordination of continuous phenomena-series_,
and yielded the correspondingly more general concept of the _function_.
From the application of the number concept to continuous things, the
idea of _measurement_ resulted. In mathematics the concept of continuity
led to higher _analysis_ and the _theory of functions_. Finally, the
concept of continuity proved to be an inexhaustible aid for the
extension of scientific knowledge and for the formulation of natural
laws in mathematical form.




