CHAPTER II.—A Review of the Deluge and the confusion of Tongues at the
Tower of Babel.

CHAPTER III.—From the Confusion of Tongues to the Birth of Moses.

CHAPTER IV.—From the Birth of Moses to the Death of Joshua.

CHAPTER V.—From the Death of Joshua to the Reign of Saul.

CHAPTER VI.—The Reigns of Saul, David, and Solomon.

CHAPTER VII.—The Reign of Jeroboam, and the separation of Israel from
Judah.

CHAPTER VIII.—On Divine Inspiration.

NEW TESTAMENT

INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.—Jehovah’s dealings with the Jews—His failure to
make them a pattern to the rest of the human family—The coming of
Christ—The manner of his introduction—his associates; language; and
conduct—Miracles—The Jews had sufficient reason, for rejecting Jesus as
the Messiah.

CHAPTER I.—Jesus the pretended Saviour of the world, not sent from
God—Moses wrote the most minute things Connected with die system
established by himself, but Jesus left no writings whatever-—Vagueness
and want of authenticity of the writings of the Evangelists—General
ignorance among Christians of what is the true Gospel—No proof of the
heavenly origin of Jesus—His baptism by John—His temptation by the
Devil—Its absurdity—Abusive language of Jesus to the Jews—His unfitness
for his mission, and failure to prove himself sent from God.

CHAPTER II.—Casting out Devils—The case of Mary Magdalene—The doctrine
of demoniacal possession, a heathen dogma—Miracles of Jesus no proof of
his Divine origin—Evidence from the New Testament that no miracles ever
took place—Inconsistent conduct and abusive language of Jesus—The
miracle at his baptism—Moses and Elijah talking with Jesus from the
clouds—Folly of miracles and their injurious consequence.

CHAPTER III.—Peter—Disingenuous mode adopted by Jesus to prove his
Messiahship—The introduction of his mission to the Jews—His obscure
doctrines, and disrespectful Language—Survey of his teaching, and mode
of life—Inutility of his object—His betrayal—Judas Iscariot.

CHAPTER IV.—The Almighty Power that governs the universe not the author
of the Christian Religion—Destructive saying of Jesus—The power given to
Peter; its disastrous results—Institution of the Sacrament—Intolerance
and persecution of Sectarianism—Folly of religious teaching.

CHAPTER V.—Orthodox views of Christianity—Remarks on the bad effects of
believing in the existence of the Devil, and in witchcraft, doctrines
taught in the Bible—Trial and execution of two women for witchcraft in
England, in 1664—Account of the witchcraft that prevailed in England and
Scotland, in the days of Elizabeth—Anecdote of Cromwell’s bargain with
the Devil.

CHAPTER VI.—Continuation of remarks upon the supposed influence of
Satanic agency—Dreadful effects of human credulity—Sketch of the life
and tragical fate of Joan of Arc, the Maid of Orleans—Temptation of
Jesus.

CHAPTER VII.—God and the Devil—Probable origin of the belief in their
existence—Mode of reasoning in ancient times by the
ignorant—Theology—Christian Religion—Account of Witchcraft in Sweden, in
1670—Reflections.

CHAPTER VIII.—Comprehensive view of the mission of Christ to the Jewish
nation—Plan of redemption—Willingness of the Jews to welcome the long
expected Messiah—The violence and abuse they received from Jesus—Their
condition not improved by his coming—Obscurity of his teaching—The Jews
put him to death because they believed him an impostor—Judas, in
betraying Jesus, was but the instrument to accomplish the plan of human
redemption—Unfortunate condition of the Jews—Reflections upon their past
and present treatment by Christians.

CHAPTER IX.—Object of Christ’s coming into the world, uncertain and of
doubtful utility—His obvious omission to convince the Jews that he was
the Messiah, and his neglect to order his apostles to write a history of
his life, show the Christian Religion deficient in the proof of its
Divine origin—Jesus, according to the Gospels, was a moral
reformer—Ignorance of his disciples of his Divine mission, as manifested
by Peter, at the betrayal—The Resurrection of Jesus—Sudden departure
afterward—Religious quarrels—Difficulty of defining
Christianity-Reflections on the want of proof of Christ’s Divine
mission, and its insufficiency to reform the world—The Jesus of the New
Testament an imaginary being.

CONCLUSION.—Remarks on the Morality of Nature—Pernicious effect of
religious faith—Its failure to moralize the world—Its intolerance and
persecution—Infidel morality founded in reason and the laws that govern
human beings—Its superiority over faith in promoting good works,
inducing correct conduct, and insuring human happiness and improvement.




A LEGACY TO THE FRIENDS OF FREE DISCUSSION




GOD’S CHOSEN PEOPLE


BEFORE reviewing the facts and personages, as recorded in the Old and
New Testaments, it will be in order to notice the Jews, as Jehovah’s
_chosen race_. The subject will not admit of demonstration; it must be
approached and examined in the same manner as the Alkoran of Mahomet.

In order to get at the truth, so as to arrive at something like
certainty, and as Infinite Wisdom makes the choice, we must inquire—For
what end were they chosen? and did they answer the end of such choice?
If they were really chosen by the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe, they
must, however strange they acted as a nation, have fulfilled the purpose
of their choice; because, whatever they did, was known to Jehovah before
the choice was made. How, then, can we reconcile expressions of regret
and disappointment by Jehovah after he had selected them as his own
peculiar people—such as, “_I have nourished and brought up children, and
they have rebelled against me?”_ And again—“_He hated his own
inheritance,_”—and also his stirring up and supporting heathen kings to
subjugate them as slaves. Is this not the language of disappointment and
regret? In fact, no learned divine can get over this striking truth that
the Bible fully holds out in the plainest manner, that Jehovah was
disappointed in his choice of the Jews as his favorite people. Were
they, then, chosen to raise up and support the religion given to them by
God himself? No, impossible! they continually rebelled against Jehovah
and worshipped strange Gods; and even Solomon himself built temples for
idolatry, contrary to express command. Jehovah says of the Jewish
nation—that he did not choose them because they were better than others,
for they were always a stiff-necked people; but because he loved their
fathers. Poor, miserable reasoning, indeed; to choose one of the most
contemptible races of men, because their ancestors, some hundreds of
years before, had superior qualities to their degenerate race.

Again, another reason given why Jehovah continued to protect them, is,
that the promises before made to Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, bound him in
honor so to do. Did not Infinite Wisdom foresee that the seed of Abram
would not follow in the faithful footsteps of their great progenitor? If
this was not foreseen, then we can discover clearly the reason why
Jehovah complains of their rebellious conduct. It will be a vain attempt
in ministers of the gospel, to reconcile those complaints, if Jehovah
had foresight of what the seed of Abram would do. If “_God is the same
yesterday, to-day, and forever,_” how did it happen that he appeared so
regardless of the fate of mankind, as to allow some hundreds of years to
pass away from the time of the confusion of tongues at the tower of
Babel, till his visit to the tent of Abram, during which time, according
to Bible history, Jehovah had no worshippers on earth? The whole of
mankind were left to make the best of their deserted situation; to
worship the Gods of their imagination; and they founded mighty empires,
and became powerful on the earth.

Before the Lord called on Abram and Sarah in their tent, something like
the following mode of reasoning probably took place in the mind of the
Jewish God:—

“I have made a world and peopled it with inhabitants; Adam and Eve
rebelled against me; their descendants followed in the footsteps of
their progenitors; I have destroyed them all (eight only excepted,) from
whom I expected better things. But, alas! they have also sinned against
me; and to such a height of wickedness did they arrive, that they began
to build a tower to reach my holy habitation. I have sent them off in
confusion: and now I have no church, no worshippers,—not even a song of
praise to my name. I possess universal empire, without even one single
subject to obey me. What is to be done? A thought has struck me:—I will
call on honest old Abram.”

And here let me remind the reader, that the Bible clearly represents the
Jewish God as being as changeable in his disposition and mode of acting
as mortals. Like man, he is sometimes in a state of inaction, towards
the fate of his offspring: at other times, he arouses from this torpor,
and is the most sensitive and active. Sometimes he appears to repent of
some failure in the calculations he has made concerning his creatures;
attempts to rectify the error, and again blunders. He at one time says:
“_fury is not in me,_” then again he is all fury. No truth is more
striking than this,—that the Jehovah of the Bible is not, cannot be, the
universal governor of the universe, but merely a creature of the
imagination, whose power is confined, having no existence without the
covers of the Bible.

But to return to Abram:—Jehovah either goes to him, or sends to him
delegates, to acquaint him of the choice he is about to make of “_Abram
and his seed forever._” This is but the beginning of a new experiment on
the human race. And here does it not plainly appear, that Jehovah’s mode
of acting, in this case, is unworthy of the governor of the world? Does
it not prove his total disregard for the welfare of the rest of mankind?
Good heavens! the believers, one and all, of such absurdities, have ever
been, and are still insane.

These heavenly visiters find Abram and Sarah living comfortably in their
tent, watching flocks and herds. They (the angels) are treated with the
hospitality common in pastoral life. They have their feet washed; they
are invited to dine on the best; the calf is immediately killed; and
Sarah, was not slow on her part, in the cooking department, from which,
one might be induced to think, that over the door of the tent was
written: “Dinners Dressed at the Shortest Notice.”—Soon after being
seated, the messengers make known their errand; Abram was much pleased;
Sarah laughed outright. The promise was now ratified that had before
been made to Abram, that _his seed should be as the sand of the sea in
number,_ for that Sarah should have _a son in her old age_. This, to say
the least of it, was good pay for a good dinner.

Here, then, the reader will please to notice, was the final settlement
as it regards the Jews being the chosen people of God. And here the
following ceremony took place:—Three men, angels, or messengers, came
from Heaven; they had their feet washed, agreeably to eastern custom;
they sat down and did eat, and we may suppose did also drink with Abram
and Sarah; one of the three was called the Lord.

I have here strictly adhered to the Bible history of this surprising
account; and if it be not literally true, the choice of the Jews, and
also the whole of the Jewish and Christian theology, falls prostrate.
The account winds up with the departure of the angels to Sodom; where,
after having dined with Abram, they took supper with Lot. The day
following, Sodom was burnt by fire from Heaven; Lot’s wife (by way of
making the most of her) was turned into a _pillar of salt_, because she
looked back on her old habitation. What became of the angels, Heaven
only knows!

But to return to the Jews, as a nation. For what purpose were they
chosen? It could not be to establish and support the only true religion
on earth, whereby they became the constant and obedient servants of the
Most High, because they continued to rebel against Jehovah; and in spite
of all his commands to the contrary, to worship other gods, which
conduct provoked the Lord to anger, and the most dreadful punishment
followed for their disobedience. They were not chosen to convert other
nations to the faith and worship of the God of Israel, because they were
ordered to take the property and destroy the inhabitants of towns and
cities, with whom they had not the most distant quarrel. Once more,—Were
they chosen for the purpose that Jehovah should be their God, and that
they should be his people? No, because they, time after time, rejected
his authority as their God, and worshipped strange gods, unknown to
their fathers; for which He sent “prophets and holy men” to remonstrate
with them. But they killed the prophets; and, as a nation, never were
for any length of time converted to, nor obeyed, the _God of Israel._

It was promised to Abram, “_In thee and in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed.” When and how_ have the nations ever
been blessed? As for the poor Jews, no curse ever fell so heavy on
mortals as fell on them, in consequence of their considering themselves
God’s chosen people, and other nations treating them as such. For
eighteen hundred years, Christians have plundered and murdered them,
because they have faithfully worshipped (since He cast them off) the God
of their fathers, against whom (when under his protection) they
continued to rebel.

The Jews are a strange people. Strange and hard has been their fate; and
it can be easily accounted for, from their being originally cheated into
the fact that they were _God’s chosen people_ to the exclusion of the
rest of the human race. Christians ask how it could have been possible
for Moses or any other person to induce them to believe that they were
so chosen, when miracles and wonders were performed in their behalf, if
no such things did in reality take place? The answer is easy:—Christians
suppose that the books of the Old Testament were written at the time the
generation lived, before whose eyes those wonders were performed. This
is a fatal mistake. Those miracles and wonders, no doubt, were
ante-dated, and brought forward to the Jews in after times, as proofs of
what Jehovah had done for their forefathers; for it clearly appears from
the internal evidence of Jewish history, that the five books said to
have been written by Moses, were not known to the Jews, as a nation,
till after the reigns of David, Solomon, and many others. At what time
the five books were first made known to the descendants of Abram, is not
ascertained; but, whenever it was, they contained the history of the
Abrahamic family, including all the miracles and wonders performed by
Jehovah in their behalf.

It is easy to perceive, how the Jews might be brought to believe all
that was written concerning God’s choice of them, as his peculiar
people. An ambitious leader and legislator could, without much
difficulty, soon establish them firmly in the conviction that they were
Jehovah’s chosen people. It would flatter their vanity; and the
credulity of the human mind is such, even now, that we need not wonder
that the Jews, as a nation, gave credence to the tales of former times
concerning their being the especial favorites of Jehovah. The Jews,
then, no doubt were cheated into the firm conviction (by their early
leaders) that _they_, of all people on earth, were the chosen of Heaven.
This will account for their keeping themselves as a separate people—the
heaviest curse that could befal them, and which remains on them till
this day.

According to the Bible, the dealings of Jehovah towards mankind in
general, and of the Jews in particular, will bear out the following
remarks:—That, after the confusion of tongues at Babel, and the
descendants of Noah were dispersed abroad on the earth, the Bible God
forsook the earth for some hundred years. He had no worshippers on
earth. He then descends and selects one family to be called after his
name. From that moment, Jehovah appears to direct his whole attention to
the family concerns of his new choice. Troubles come on in quick
succession; Abram’s domestic jars claim his attention and
superintendence. Sarah and her maid servant quarrel; the maid is turned
out of doors, about a child who claimed Sarah’s husband as its father.

The Lord interfered and matters were made up. But soon another
misunderstanding arose between Sarah and Hagar about the child who had
ill-behaved himself towards Abram’s wife. Sarah became enraged, and got
the better of the Lord; and Abram and she drove Hagar and her son out of
the house for good and all. The Lord again made the best of the matter
by sending an angel who took charge of Hagar’s son; and Abram and Sarah
lived happy, and directed all their attention to little Isaac.

To return to the Jews, as a nation. Did they answer the end for which
they were chosen? Most undoubtedly they did. For, as “known unto the
Lord are all his works from the beginning” whatever his dealings were
towards them, in punishing them for their rebellion and disobedience,
and whatever suffering they endured in consequence of their departure
from his commands, are included in his choice; and are the ends for
which they were chosen. Here, then, we have arrived at the ends for
which they were selected,—he knowing that they would continue to
transgress, and also that such transgression would call forth his anger;
and that punishment would follow from their disobedience. These are the
only ends that we can discover by their being chosen, and these ends
were fully answered.

And as Jehovah is represented as acting the same as men act under
similar circumstances, the following remarks are in accordance with his
dealings with the people of his choice, namely: that after Jehovah had
driven the inhabitants of Babel abroad on the face of the earth, and not
having any church or worshippers in the world, he became weary of this
state of inaction, and, sighing for something to do, he chose the
descendants of Abram for his future operations on the earth. And from
that moment, the Jews required all his attention; his anger was always
raging: he had no repose whatever.

In the course of his watching over them, he occasionally stirred up the
heathen against them, and suffered them to become bondmen and slaves.
Then, again, they had arms put into their hands, and he marched out in
aid of their victories; and then the “Lord of Hosts was his name.” Then,
as if he had forgotten the promises made to their forefathers, he
repents of the neglect shown to them; again renews the combat and orders
them to war against nations, and _to spare neither old age nor infancy_.
So that, by turns, hating them and showing them no mercy; then again,
repenting of his severe conduct towards them, proclaiming to the world
that the Lord of Hosts or battle is his name,—the Bible account of
Jehovah confirms us, in concluding, that, he chose the family of Abram
for no other purpose than to disturb and brutalize the rest of the
world.

The Jews, and their God, seem to be objects of pity and contempt. Pity
for the poor Jews, for their unfortunate fate; and as for Jehovah, if
the Bible be true, from the moment he adopted them as his favorites, he
became subject to rage, furious anger, grief, repenting of the choice he
had made; and finally casting them off. These, then, are some of the
glorious ends for which they were chosen. To conclude—Of all the
impositions that ever have been palmed on the inhabitants of the earth,
destructive of “peace on earth and good will towards men” that of the
Jews being God’s chosen people, is one of the greatest; the Jehovah of
the Bible, being nothing but an imaginary God, to cheat the World into
the faith of his being the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe.




THE OLD TESTAMENT




