CHAPTER IV. FROM THE BIRTH OF MOSES TO THE DEATH OF JOSHUA


THIS chapter will put beyond dispute all connection between the Jehovah
of Moses and the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe. Whoever drew the
picture of Jehovah, as it is recorded in the Bible, made him, in every
sense of the word, a mere man; and put him under the same necessity of
re-sorting to means for obtaining information, when the subject of
inquiry is involved in doubt. For instance: Jehovah informs Abram that
the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah were reported to be wicked in the
extreme; and that he (the Lord) came down to get information on that
subject. Again, when the builders of Babel were about to commence their
lofty tower, the Lord came down to see what they were doing; and, not
being pleased with their intentions, put a stop to the work, and
performed a miracle, whereby they were driven abroad on the face of the
earth. Besides, the Lord’s coming from a certain place to another place
for information, implies that, without such movement, the information
sought for could not be obtained. These instances, and hundreds of
others of the same kind, imply also that the Jewish God had a local
habitation. Again, to say that the Lord came to a place, staid there,
and then returned back again,—these are movements which are common with
men, but cannot be applied to the omnipresent God. The free access that
Moses and the Old Testament prophets had to their God will warrant the
idea that he resided next door to them, and that the Lord was obedient
to their every call.

The children of Israel, after the death of Joseph, began to multiply so
fast that the Egyptians feared for their own safety in the event of a
war with other nations; and in consequence, ordered the mid wives to
destroy all the male children, but to save the females alive. But Moses
was saved, according to the Bible, in consequence of Pharaoh’s daughter
discovering him in the river; and when he came to maturity, the Lord
selected him to go to Egypt to demand of Pharaoh, the king, to let the
Israelites go out from that state of bondage in which, for four hundred
years, they had been held.

The departure of Moses from Egypt was not very honorable for a future
ambassador; for before his departure he murdered a man, and buried him.
To escape justice, he then fled to Midian, and became acquainted with a
pagan priest, who took him into his house, and ultimately gave him one
of his daughters in marriage, and he became his father-in-law’s
shepherd; and the Lord made himself known to Moses. It was while tending
the flocks that he was chosen go to Egypt to demand the release of his
brethren, then in cruel bondage. After the Lord had given him his
instructions, and, to all appearance, Moses had started on his mission,
a remarkable circumstance took place, that must puzzle Bible
commentators to explain. It is recorded in Exodus iv., 24, “_And it came
to pass, by the way in the inn, that the Lord met him and sought to kill
him._” This meeting appears to have been accidental, for no mention is
made of the business of either of them. Here, again, we observe that the
writer, whoever he was, has spoken of the Lord as a man. It is not
possible for men of sound understandings to conceive of the reality of
the Lord’s meeting Moses at an inn, if by the Lord, We understand the
Almighty Power that governs all Worlds.

On the account as it stands recorded, and as Christians take it as
really having happened, the following remarks may reasonably be made,
namely: that after Moses had been ordered to proceed to Egypt on his
important mission, he loitered his time away in a tavern; and that the
Lord surprised him in that place, and showed anger for his contempt of
orders, given to and accepted by him. But the cause of a meeting so
extraordinary, it is difficult to unravel. It is easily conceived why
Moses might visit a tavern; but that the Lord of heaven and earth should
follow a creature into a pot-house, and show signs of anger, and a
quarrel should be the result, is very hard to believe; for it said, the
“_Lord sought to kill him_.” Again, if the Lord sought to kill him, it
must be in appearance only, for he could have done it. However, Moses
started off.

The account warrants us in supposing, that Moses had staid in the inn
long enough for his wife to overtake him, and to upbraid him with
neglect. Something is said about his son’s being uncircumcised; and
taking a sharp stone, she performed that operation with a very clumsy
instrument; after which, she exclaimed, in an angry tone, “_A bloody
husband thou art, because of the circumcision_;” as if she meant to
say—“Shame on you! to leave it to me to do that which is so revolting to
my feelings!” Moses then departed for Egypt, and obeyed the Lord in his
journey to his brethren.

We can discover neither justice nor humanity in the course that was
taken by the God of Israel, in bringing the Jews out of bondage. On the
contrary, the greatest inhumanity and injustice are discoverable in
every movement that Moses made under the authority of the Lord; which
fully proves, that Infinite Wisdom and Goodness had nothing to do in the
mighty fuss of liberating the seed of Abram from bondage. The plagues
that were inflicted on the inhabitants of Egypt, if true, make the
conduct of Jehovah more vindictive than any thing we have heard of as
proceeding from the Devil himself for the Lord had told Moses
beforehand, that he had hardened Pharaoh’s heart that the people might
know the power of the Hebrew God to afflict the nation. It might have
been sport to the man made God of Moses, but not very pleasant and
comfortable to the Egyptians, to be lousy, to be stunk to death with
putrid carcasses, having frogs for bed-mates, when the Lord had hardened
the King’s heart. But the worst and most infamous of all the judgments,
was the destruction of the first-born. This act would have disgraced the
very devil: to institute the Feast of the Passover.

We may indulge in a little mirth in reference to the destroying angel
going round the streets, finding out the doors marked with the blood of
your paschal lamb, and taking care not to wring the neck of a little
Hebrew. Wonder if the destroying angel had a lantern? But, perhaps, he
had cat’s eyes, and could see as well by night as at noon-day! No
wonder, ye Jews, that the inhabitants of Egypt so willingly gave you
their gold and silver ornaments to get rid of a people so detestable,
and, with them, a more detestable God.

In a short time after the Jews had left the house of bondage, they began
to upbraid Moses that they had changed for the worse; and in the course
of their journeying, they quarrelled with him, and the Lord had
continually to interfere, and to feed them by miracles. At Mount Sinai,
Moses halted; and, according to the command of the Lord, the law was
given to the nation, as recorded in Exodus, chapter xx. And this boasted
law is said to have been given by the Lord, in the hearing of all the
Children of Israel. The first commandment contains a spirit of
intolerance, which, whether he gave it or not, has never failed to
generate in Jews and Christians a spirit of religious persecution which
has deluged the earth with blood.

The ten commandments, given by Moses to the Children of Israel, contain,
in general, good moral precepts, with the exception of the first. The
first begins by the Lord’s speaking in a language which all the people
could understand:—“_I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no
other Gods before me._” This command, which by both Jews and Christians
is considered so just and reasonable, contains in it the germ of
intolerance. Had this command been given immediately after the recorded
fall of Adam, its influence would have had a very different bearing on
the peace and happiness of society, than it had at the time, and has had
ever since it was given. It would have been both just and right in the
Lord of all to demand of his creatures to worship him, and him alone, in
the way and manner he saw fit; since in that case, no evil consequences
could have followed from a command so just and proper, as for the
creature to obey his Creator.

But at the time the Lord gave the first commandment, the whole world
were in the practice of worshipping the gods of their forefathers: the
origin of which worship was then lost, and the worshippers were no doubt
as sincere in their devotion as the most pious Jew or Christian of the
present day. By the publication, then, of the first commandment, at a
time when every nation had its particular god, and the worshippers lived
in peace, the spirit of intolerance and religious persecution being
unknown, the great I am declared a religious war against all the gods,
and their worshippers on the face of the earth. But according to Bible
history, Jehovah permitted his creatures to wander on earth, and
appeared regardless as to what gods were worshipped; and then, after
some thousand years, he all at once began to rage against all the
religious systems then known.

But it was otherwise with what are called heathen nations. Each had its
peculiar god, and also its different forms of worship; and they lived
happily with each other on the score of theology. And here we may
observe, how unfortunate it has been for the human race, that the Lord
did not either give his law sooner, or not at all; for it is plainly to
be seen, that if the first commandment had been given by the Lord before
men had followed other gods, idolatry would have been prevented, and
Jehovah’s watchfulness over the worship he had established, would have
been productive of universal happiness. But, on the contrary, the
command being given so long after, and that, too, when religious systems
were flourishing, and temples crowded with devout worshippers, the worst
consequences have followed.

The worshippers of Jehovah, whether Jews or Christians, have, by the
Bible itself, become intolerant and persecuting; and never have they
failed, when power would admit, to destroy the enemies of their God
without mercy: so that the first commandment, by coming too late, has
proved the greatest curse that ever afflicted the human family. And
hence the folly in believing that Infinite Wisdom and Goodness would
permit false religion to progress so long before the true one was made
known to the human race. After the moral law, or the ten commandments,
had been given by the Jewish God, on the mount, amid thunder and
lightning, we have it recorded that Moses was ordered to go up to the
top of the mount, and there, with the Lord, he staid forty days and
nights; during which time Aaron, his brother, remained with the whole of
the Children of Israel in camp, at the foot of Mount Sinai.

And now, candid reader, prepare your mind for an account of what took
place on the mount, between Jehovah and Moses; and when you have read
it, and maturely reflected on what is recorded, then I say, ask yourself
whether there is one word of truth in the account of this strange
interview between Moses and his God? Compare it with any of the
absurdities to be found in the _Koran_ of Mahomet, and discover, if you
can, whether the latter is less true than the former.

The Bible record states, that Moses was ordered to ascend the mount, on
private business with the Lord, and to leave Aaron in charge of his
chosen people till his return. The account clearly states, that Moses
was then and there to receive instruction how to fit up and ornament the
Tabernacle that was to accompany the Children of Israel in their journey
to the promised land. And here we may notice, “_That in six days the
Lord made heaven and earth, and all things therein_”; yet it required
forty days to plan and fit up this moveable church; and before it was
finished, the chosen people, with Aaron at their head, became idolators;
so that before the Lord and Moses (both hard at work) had completed the
church, they lost the congregation. This, to make the best of it, was a
dreadful blunder.

After the forty days had run out, during which time Moses and his God
were hard at work, and Moses had often received the precaution, “_See
that you make all things according to the pattern given on the
mount,_”—all at once, the Lord said to Moses, “Do you know what is going
on below?” Poor Moses, full of thought, and over-joyed at the prospect
of so fine a fit-out, was altogether ignorant of the Lord’s meaning.
“Why, Moses, that stubborn race you brought out of Egypt, have set up
strange gods, and have turned their backs on both you and me”! If this
story was strictly true, how Moses must feel on hearing this unfortunate
news! We must suppose he would exclaim and say, “Oh! Lord, our forty
days’ labor is all knocked on the head. Is it possible, Oh! Lord, that
they have forgotten what you did for them in Egypt? What a pity it is,
Oh! Lord, that they ever got rid of the lice when they left the house of
bondage, for if they were now tormented by those nibblers, it would
remind them of the lousy miracle you performed for them in the presence
of Pharaoh. Those lice, if not destroyed, would have been ‘a
forget-me-not.’” And the Lord said unto Moses, “Now let me alone, that
my wrath may wax hot against this people, for I know that they are a
stiff-necked race. I will destroy them, and from you shall a great
nation spring up.” But Moses, not having at this time lost his temper,
said, “Oh! Lord God, now do not destroy them; besides, what will the
Egyptians say? And also remember what you promised to Abram, Isaac, and
Jacob: how you swore that you would give it to Abram and his seed
forever.” “Well, Moses, you reason correctly. I own I was rather too
hasty; upon a second thought, I retract; I will take your advice; but go
down and see what you can make of them.”

Moses, not well pleased, left the Lord, and went down from the mount;
and when he came to the camp, he lost all patience, and, in a passion,
not knowing what he did, threw down the stones on which were written the
commandments—and written, too, with the finger of God—and they were
broken asunder. No wonder that Moses lost his temper: forty days’ labor
lost; having had, during the whole time, nothing to eat; and having lost
his church members before the moveable church was complete! No one can
be surprised that he acted as he did. Moses reasoned so correctly with
the Lord, that he cooled Jehovah down, but was not so fortunate with
himself.

Aaron, finding himself in a dilemma, excused himself by charging the
people with the fault. But Aaron’s story was but a lame tale; for, when
the people demanded a god, to whom they might pay divine honors, Aaron
could have told them to have patience, and Moses would return with
proper instructions from their God. But poor, silly Aaron told Moses,
that when he threw the rings and bracelets into the fire, out came the
calf. At any rate, between the Lord, Moses, and Aaron, a sad blunder was
made; and to finish off, Moses commanded the Levites to go sword in hand
and kill every man his brother and neighbor; and three thousand were
slain, who, if things had been conducted properly, might have been
faithful worshippers of Jehovah. Finally, nothing can exceed in folly
this foolish story of Jehovah, Moses, and Aaron, except it be the folly
of believing it to contain one word of truth.

After Moses had slain the people for their idolatry, not having been
reproved by the Lord, he was commanded to prepare two tables of stone,
in place of those that were broken, and the next morning to go up again
to the Lord, on the mount. It is then said that the Lord descended on
the mount to meet Moses; so it appears that the Lord (after the
departure of Moses to the bottom of the mount) departed also, into
heaven or to some unknown place; for it is recorded that he came down
again to meet Moses with the two new tables prepared by him. The whole
account of the Lord’s interview with Moses, on the mount, implies that
Jehovah labored, talked, and acted in concert with Moses, as one man
acts with another; and that they remained together forty days and as
many nights. Whether they continued their work through the night, we
have no account; nor whether they needed candles. At all events, if it
be considered literally as a matter of fact, it was a long time for
Moses to be without food or sleep; but as Christians are compelled to
believe it to be matter of fact, we will remark on it as such.

We begin, then, by asking if the Children of Israel were indeed the
Lord’s chosen people, how can we account for the neglect in not giving
Aaron proper instruction respecting the business of Moses on the mount,
so as to prevent the people from seeking after other gods? And, also,
how came it to pass that the Lord did not inform Moses sooner of the
people’s revolt, so that the three thousand that Moses caused to be
murdered, might have been saved? And lastly, is it consistent with the
attributes of the Governor of the Universe to resolve, in wrath, to do
any thing, and then repent and not perform it?

If nothing had been recorded in the Old Testament of the sayings and
doings of the Jewish God, but that which is related concerning him in
giving the law on Mount Sinai, and of his giving instruction to Moses
how to fit out the Tabernacle, it is of itself sufficient to show the
absurdity of Jehovah’s being the God of Nature. To unite in one person
the attributes of the great and all-powerful God, with the contemptible
arrangement of giving patterns for curtains, and a thousand trifling
things of no importance whatever, and to take forty days to garnish his
church, and, while so doing, to let, from sheer neglect, his people lose
sight of Moses, and then to destroy three thousand persons in
consequence of such want of foresight, is too much for credulity to
digest.

When we notice the importance attached to rites and ceremonies the most
unimportant, and then again how lavish the Jewish God is of human life,
and totally regardless of human suffering, we dare not for a moment give
credence to the strange stories and foolish whims of the Bible God, and
palm them upon the all-bountiful Author of Nature. Moses, after coming
down the last time from the mount, begins to prepare for the priesthood,
by saying, that the firstlings of cattle, whether of the ox, or the
sheep which are of the male kind, belong to the Lord; but the firstling
of the ass was to be redeemed by substituting a lamb! But if the owner
had no lamb to offer, the neck of the ass was to be broken; as if the
Lord had said—if you have nothing better to give, I will not accept of a
young jack-ass!

Whoever wrote the Book of Exodus, has made the God of Israel appear like
unto an old clothes-man, giving orders for a thousand ornaments for his
worship, which would disgrace a heathen temple; such as giving orders
for all kinds of brass work; likewise, gold and silver ornaments; all
kinds of oils and spices; particular patterns of cabinet work; what kind
of leather skins, and, also, of what particular color, to grace his
house withal: and even down to the cut and color of the garments: not
forgetting to give instruction concerning the making of breeches for
Aaron and his sons! In the present day, it is no uncommon thing for
ladies to wear the breeches; but in those days, when breeches were cut
by inspiration, it would have been no small crime for a woman to have
stepped into Aaron’s inexpressibles, or those of his sons. How is the
dignity of the Governor of the World disgraced, by ascribing to him an
employment fitting only for a pedler in old clothes!

Let’ us compare the majestic grandeur of Jupiter, the supreme god of the
Greeks, to the peddling, gossipping concerns that the writers of the Old
Testament have palmed on Jehovah, the God of the Jews! Hear what the
poet says of Jupiter, when challenging all the gods to oppose his
power:—:

    “Let down our golden, everlasting chain,
    Whose strong embrace holds heaven and earth and main;
    Strive all, of mortal or immortal birth,
    By this to drag the thunderer down to earth;
    Ye strive in vain; if I but lift this hand,
    I heave the heaven, the ocean, and the land;
    ’T is thus I reign, supremely and above;
    Such are men and gods compar’d to Jove!”

The contradictions, as recorded in the Bible, concerning Jehovah, are so
barefaced, that it is impossible to reconcile them. It is said in many
parts of the Old, and also in the New Testament, that no man can see God
and live; but we are told that Moses conversed with Jehovah, face to
face, as one conversing with his friend. It is in many places recorded
that God never repents—“_For he (God) cannot lie nor repent_.” In many
other places it is recorded that Jehovah has repented and taken a
contrary course in his dealings with the sons of men. I again repeat,
that if no other account had been recorded of the conduct of the Jewish
God, but what we have mentioned, it is impossible to believe Jehovah to
be any thing but a _man-made God._

After the death of Moses, Joshua was appointed as his successor. His
business was to complete what Moses had left undone, in subjugating or
destroying the nations on the other side of Jordan. The first exploit of
Joshua was to send spies to Jericho to examine the strength of the city.
These spies entered the house of Rahab, the harlot, where they were
treated with kindness; it being such a house as would in modern times be
termed a house of _bad fame_. That it was a house of ill-fame, the proof
is positive; because the harlot’s father, mother, and all the family,
were saved when Joshua took the city, because Rahab had concealed the
spies: so no doubt remains as to the character of the house, and that it
was entirely under her control and that the whole family were supported
from the wages of prostitution.

Viewing this account as having actually taken place, as Christians must
do, as believers in the Bible, it was a very proper house at which the
spies would resort; for it was a house at which all were welcome; where
all sorts of news could be collected. After the spies had become
somewhat familiar with Mrs. Rahab, they informed her who they were, and
the nature of their errand. All on a sudden, they were about to be
arrested by the city authorities; and when forced to depart, Rahab
extorted a promise from the spies that her whole family should be saved
when Jericho should fall. Such a promise, the spies could not well deny,
after having been so kindly treated. Rahab, consequently, let them out
by a private way; and, on returning to Joshua, they praised the Lord for
having directed them to so hospitable and honorable a mansion as the
house of the virtuous Rahab. This was the Lord’s doings, as also the
exploit of the seven rams’-horn trumpets that threw down the walls of
Jericho; and it is marvellous in our eyes—_praised be his name!_

Here, serious reader, pause and wonder how Infinite Wisdom can bring
good out of apparent evil, by taking into his employment murderers,
thieves, and harlots! and also, how such characters have immortalized
their names, when their actions have been connected with faith in the
Jehovah of Israel! For this noble act of betraying the city of Jericho,
and giving the spies comfortable lodging, and no doubt, also, very
agreeable bedmates, Rahab secured the favor of Jehovah, and her name is
recorded in connection with many others of equal virtue; for Paul says,
in Hebrews xi., 31,—“_By faith, the harlot Rahab perished not with them
that believed not, when she had received the spies in peace._” Nothing
is acceptable to the Lord, without faith,—that faith “which keeps the
souls of sinners as sweet as salt does meat.”

After the taking of Jericho and destroying every thing that had life,
(the family of Rahab excepted,) Joshua followed in the same destructive
course as had been commanded by Moses, which command Jehovah gave on the
other side of Jordan. If the warfare pursued by Moses and Joshua did
really take place, and Jehovah gave the orders, it is idle prate to talk
of a God of justice. And when the Lord is made to say that _he (the
Lord) hardened the hearts of those Kings on either side of Jordan_, that
a plausible appearance of justice in their destruction might be made
out,—for Christians to sing of a God of mercy, is horrible indeed.
Whether a God ever commanded or encouraged the Jews in their wars of
extermination, under Moses, Joshua, or any other of their generals, or
not, Christian nations, as well as individuals, have drank deep of the
spirit of religious warfare. A Lord of hosts, a fighting God, has given
a sort of license to mortals to torment each other for his glory.

Every Infidel ought to oppose this spirit, and vindicate the Author of
Nature from the imputation of cruelty and carnage—an imputation that, is
opposed to every idea of justice, and contrary to every thing we can
conceive of the Supreme Ruler of all worlds. And hence, nothing can be
more honorable to a man or woman of good sense and kindness of heart,
than to assert that the God of the Bible is unworthy to be worshipped as
the Governor of the Universe; which in fact is to say, that to all
pretended divine revelations, they are no less than avowed Infidels—a
name that will eventually be as honorable as is now the name of
Christian.

According to Bible history, the nations on the other side of Jordan were
so alarmed at the frightful news they received of the Jewish army, and
the ravages they committed, that five Kings, with their armies, came out
to stop their progress; and in this account, we have the climax of
divine interference on the part of Jehovah. After a desperate effort was
made by the five Kings to stop the progress of Joshua, and after
fighting the whole day, until _towards the going down of the sun_, they
retreated. At that moment Jehovah is said to have given support to his
chosen people, by causing a hail-storm to descend, and more were slain
by the hail than fell by the sword. But when the hail was exhausted,
something more was requisite to be done; Divine aid was still wanting.
Then Joshua, in sight of his army, said, “_Sun stand thou still upon
Gibeon, and thou, moon, in the valley of Ajalon_,” and they obeyed his
command. So that, according to this miracle, the hostile armies were
completely destroyed, and the sun and moon (we suppose) were ordered to
pursue their courses.

And now, reader, to believe this improbable, or rather impossible tale,
and hundreds of others of the same sort, even in our day, will make a
man respectable, and fit to fill any office where intelligence and
honesty are required. But to doubt it, and publicly express the doubt,
will cause him to be considered infamous, and unfit for “public trust or
private care.” And this will be the case until men shall be bold enough
to express their honest convictions that it is a libel to charge the
Sovereign Ruler of the Universe with being the direct, or the indirect,
author of the Bible, or having ever chosen the Jews to be his peculiar
people.

But to return to Joshua, who appears to be more highly favored with
miracles than Moses, as the miracle of the sun and moon standing still,
to give time to Joshua to complete his victory over the Kings that came
against him, exceeds every thing of the kind on record. The writer,
whoever he was, that mentions the sun and moon standing still in the
heavens, evidently knew nothing of astronomy; for admitting the truth of
the story, and that the sun and moon appeared to stand fixed in the
heavens, it was in reality the earth that instantly obeyed the command
of Joshua. And another miracle must have followed immediately, to
prevent the dreadful consequences of the earth’s ceasing from turning
round on its axis: for we have but to consider the effects of the
earth’s instantly ceasing to turn round; the shock would have been so
great that trees and houses and the armies would have been thrown high
in the air, and the battle would have immediately ended, the combatants
being destroyed. But the tale is too foolish to be credited; and it
furnishes another proof that the Jehovah of the Jews is not the Author
of Nature. In this battle, Balaam, the soothsayer, was slain; and before
finishing this chapter, we will give the account as recorded, with some
remarks on that celebrated fortune-teller.

When the Children of Israel had left Egypt, and were marching to the
land of promise, they had to go through different kingdoms and
provinces; and their numbers, connected with the depredations they
committed in the name of Jehovah, caused the inhabitants of those
regions to be greatly alarmed; and understanding that their God fought
for them and that they were about to pass through the land of Moab,
Balak, King of Moab, having learned what had been done by them to the
Amorites, sent to Balaam to consult with him, intending, if possible, to
stop their progress, or at least, to find out what the Jewish God had
destined his people to perform.

In the Book of Numbers, chapter xxii., the account commences. Balaam, it
appears, was then what now would be called a celebrated conjuror, or, as
country people say, a _cunning man_, by which he made a living, and a
good one, too: for, from the Bible story, he appears to be a man well
known by princes, and was attended by two servants as out-riders. Like
our present lawyers, he never gave his services until he had received a
handsome fee; for the King sent off the elders to Balaam, with the
rewards of “_divination in their hand._” Balaam received them, and
invited them to stay with him till the next day, for, (as he told them,)
he would first inquire of the Lord.

It is then recorded, that “_God came unto Balaam, and said, what men are
those with thee?_” This inquiry of the Jewish God appears strange, when
he must have known all about it without asking; but here, as in hundreds
of other passages, the _man-made God_ appears. But, for the information
of the Lord, Balaam gives a suitable answer. The Lord then informs the
fortune-teller that he must not go to Balak, _nor curse them, for they
are blessed_. The elders then returned to the King, to inform him that
Balaam could not come, because the God of Israel had forbid him so to
do. Again, Balak sent others, more honorable than the first, with
promises of riches and honor. The Lord came again to Balaam, and told
him to go with the men to Balak, King of the Moabites, but to mind what
the Lord had said to him. Balaam went off with the princes of Moab; but
the Devil, or something else, got into the jack-ass on which the old
fortune-teller rode, and he became skittish; and although then dumb, he
seemed to say to his master, “I shall go no further.” Balaam became
enraged, and laid some heavy stripes on poor jack; but still the animal
refused to go on, until neither the Lord nor jack could bear it any
longer. The beast then broke silence, and reasoned with the old prophet
on his brutality. All of a sudden, Balaam saw an angel with a drawn
sword in his hand, who told him if it had not been for jack’s superior
eye-sight, he would have been a dead man. The angel then told Balaam to
go on, but to mind what he did against Israel. What contemptible humbug
is all this! two miracles performed to do nothing! The first, to send an
angel down from nobody knows where; and the second, to make a dumb ass
reprove his owner. And what was Balaam’s fault? He was going on as the
Lord commanded; and to complete this solemn farce, an apostle quotes it
as a real fact that actually took place, by saying—“And the dumb ass
spake with man’s voice, and forbade the madness of the prophet.”

After returning to Balak, Balaam ordered seven altars to be built, on
which were to be offered seven bullocks and seven rams: and again, the
Lord came to see the process, and in private conversation with the
fortune-teller, told him that it would not answer; Israel must not be
cursed. This was repeated by Balaam three times; so that twenty-one
bullocks, and as many rams, were offered up to no purpose: and at each
offering, the Lord came down and conversed in private with Balaam. Is it
possible that men possessed of reason can believe that in this account
there is one word of truth, as it respects the Governor of the Universe
having any thing to do with it? If this account, or any one like it, was
recorded in any other book than the Bible, no man of a sound mind would
give the least credit to it. But yet the Christian dares not doubt it;
for even the apostles of Jesus speak of it as a real fact that took
place with the miracles attending it.

To conclude this chapter of absurdities, we beg the reader to bear in
mind—first, that Balaam was not a prophet of Jehovah, but a conjuror;
and if he professed any religion, it was that of heathenism. But he
(Balaam) had heard of the manner of sacrificing to the Jewish God, and
accordingly began by slaying seven bullocks and an equal number of rams;
and while the altars were smoking, (if the Bible be true,) the Lord of
the whole earth left his throne, and came down to see what was going on.
The old fortune-teller was hard at work, and the princes of Moab
standing by to hear the result; when lo, and behold! the Lord descends,
and we may suppose him to say—“Balaam! why, you are cooking for a large
party! Come, Balaam, before you go any further, a word with you, if you
please. Come this way. What does all this mean? We must have some
private talk about this affair.” “Why, my Lord, you know my business. I
must do all I can for my employers; I thought that if sacrifice is made,
agreeably to your order of worship, you might be induced to alter your
mind towards your people: for we have heard that at times, when the fit
comes on, you give them a severe thrashing.” “Yes, Balaam, there is some
truth in the report; but I tell you, once for all, that if you offer all
the bullocks in the world, and all the rams beside, you cannot, must
not, curse Israel.”

No lawyer ever stuck closer to a rich client than did Balaam to the King
of Moab; for again and again did he sacrifice to the Lord of Hosts.
Another trial, on a mountain, was made, and again Jehovah descends and
tells Balaam the same as before. The third and last effort being made,
which would incline us to think that the patience of Heaven must have
been tired out, was enough to make the doorkeeper exclaim, “Here is
Monsieur Tonson come again!” The last descent is made by the Lord, and
the prophet gives in, reluctantly. I challenge any minister of the
gospel to produce a more absurd story, in any system of theology, than
the account of Balaam, his ass, and the Lord of Hosts.

I will not insult the reader by saying, _do not believe it;_ but rather
say, _believe it who can!_




