CHAPTER VIII. ON DIVINE INSPIRATION


I INTENDED to conclude the review of the Old Testament by examining the
passages supposed to be prophetical of Jesus Christ, and, as such,
quoted by the writers of the New Testament; but as that has already been
done, in a masterly manner, by Mr. ---------- (Name crossed out by a
former reader. ED) and as his opinion respecting them coincides entirely
with my own, I beg leave to refer my readers to the work of that able
writer on the subject. Professing Christians believe that what are
called the five Books of Moses were given by divine inspiration. I
shall, therefore, in this chapter, consider what is to be understood by
divine inspiration, abstractly considered, and also with reference to
prophecy and miracles. It is contended that Moses wrote the account of
the Creation, and that it is true. If so, then all the particulars of
that remote age must have been given to the writer by nothing short of
Supreme Intelligence. I ask, how was this information communicated? The
Christian answers—by inspiration. This does not solve the difficulty. I
therefore ask, what is inspiration?

Divine inspiration, according to the Christian’s idea of it, must have
been the source of prophecy and miracles, and implies infinite knowledge
and power. Now, as Adam could not have given an account of his own
origin, whoever wrote the history of the creation of the world, and of
our first parents, must, if divinely inspired, have had all the
particulars of the past clearly made known to him. We are told, by the
New Testament writers, that “_all Scripture is given by inspiration_”;
and again, that “_Holy men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost._” Still, divine inspiration remains an inscrutable mystery as to
what it is abstractly considered; and, also, with respect to the manner
in which it is communicated. It seems strange, to say the least, that
divine revelation should be given to the human race by the means of
inspiration, and yet the mode of communication be enveloped in profound
mystery. As divine inspiration and divine revelation are closely
connected, the first being the avenue of conveyance, and the latter
being the subject communicated, I shall define, as clearly as I can,
what constitutes divine revelation; but in order, if possible, to
prevent mistake, I shall first point out what it is not.

The developments and improvements which man effects by the exercise of
his perceptive and reflective faculties, are results which are not
obtained through the medium of divine revelation. From being a savage,
and wandering in a state of destitution in the forests, he has, by the
use of his varied faculties, made advances in civilization and the arts,
which at first sight appear superhuman, but which were, nevertheless,
unaided by divine revelation. Contrasting the present state of the
wonderful and awe-inspiring science of astronomy with that when the best
informed of the human race were but ignorant star-gazers, we can but
feel proud that we are a part of the human family. Again, when we look
back at the period when the frail little bark could not venture out of
sight of land, and then contemplate the improvements in naval
architecture of our present times, which have presented us with that
splendid floating palace, the _Great Britain steamships_ we can but see
that all this has been effected without any assistance from divine
revelation. If, at some future time, by means of improvements in the
telescope, inhabitants should be discovered in the moon, we should not
be indebted for the discovery to divine revelation. But, the discovery
not having been made, should an angel be sent from heaven to make known
the fact, such information would undoubtedly constitute a divine
revelation. So, then, it is dear that whatever improvement man may make,
by the unaided exercise of his faculties, cannot be considered as the
result of divine revelation. Divine revelation is that which man cannot
know, consequently never has known, and never will know by the aid of
his reasoning powers The Old and New Testaments collectively are called
a divine revelation; and that the information these books contain,
respecting man’s duty to his Maker, came from the Almighty; Ruler of the
universe, is the Christian’s view of the matter.

We will now examine the various inlets, or avenues, by which divine
revelation is said to have been communicated to man. According to the
scriptures, the first in order is that God himself conversed with
men;—secondly, by the medium of angels;—thirdly, by inspired
prophets;—fourthly, by dreams;—fifthly, by visions;—and lastly, by his
son. These are the principal inlets. We will examine these different
modes, and make such remarks as are applicable to each. First, then, as
to the assumption that God himself, conversed with men. It is recorded
that he appeared to and conversed with, our first parents; also with
Noah, Abram, Moses, and even Balaam. The Deity’s conversing with Adam
and Eve may be considered as the commencement of divine revelation. With
respect to the truth of these conversations, and the remarkable
appearances connected with them, no positive testimony can be adduced
either for or against; we must therefore take reason for our guide in
the examination. We begin, then, by observing, that if such events did
actually occur, it is clear that God was accessible to man in those
days, and that in a manner very different to what he is in our own
times; and, also, that the unknown and invisible being could be
approached on the most trifling occasions.

No good having ever resulted to man from such visits from the Great
Author of all things, is proof presumptive that they never took place.
So far from any moral good having resulted to Adam and Eve from their
daily intercourse with Jehovah, we find in the case, of Eve, that, being
seduced, either, by the serpent, or her own vicious inclination, she ate
the forbidden fruit The ejectment of our first parents from the garden
of Eden, would seem to warrant us in believing that the Lord watched
over them for evil, and not for good. A pair of human beings brought
into existence without experience of the past, or knowledge of the
future, must stand much in need of instruction from their Creator; and
yet the result of all the recorded intercourse was, they became
disobedient; and were driven out of the garden provided for them by no
less a being than the Author of the universe. Had the Bible-makers
arranged the story so as to have made the conversations and intercourse
result in the continuance of our first parents in the garden, the
account would have borne some resemblance to truth: but to represent it
as having ended in their expulsion, is by far too large a draft upon
human credulity, unless they can believe that God is what Christians
declare the Devil to be.

If the advocates for the authenticity of the Bible contend that the
recorded intercourse between the Lord and our first parents is literally
true, that view of the subject is attended with so many difficulties
that it is almost impossible to give credit to it But if they contend
that it is an allegory, then the probability is that the account of the
creation is altogether a fabulous tradition, consequently not a divine
inspiration. When the Lord is represented as having appeared to Abram,
or any of the renowned men of old, such appearances are not spoken of as
being of uncommon occurrence, nor is any surprise manifested. The Lord
is always represented as having appeared in a human form. Before the
sceptic can believe in the reality of these visitations, he must know
for what end they took place; and, also, why the Lord should in the
olden times be always ready to appear to, and converse with, his
favorites, and in modern times altogether discontinue his visits, as if
there were now nothing on earth worthy of his particular notice.

The Bible informs us that three angels in the form of men appeared to
Abram, and that one of them was called the Lord, the _Judge of all the
earth_. They must have been in the likeness of men: for, they had their
feet washed; they dined with Abram, and the particular kind of food is
mentioned, which in our day would be denominated veal and griddle-cake.
And at this dinner the promise was confirmed that Abram and Sarah should
be blessed with a son in their old age, and that from his descendants
one should arise who should be for the healing of the nations. After
dinner the Lord informed Abram that he had heard that Abram’s neighbors
were extremely wicked, and that he and his companions had come to
ascertain if the report were correct, and that the vengeance of Heaven
was about to fall on Sodom and Gomorrah for their crimes. The good old
man plead hard for the inhabitants, saying, “_Far be it from the Lord to
slay the righteous with the wicked,_” and thereby in a slight degree
averted the dreadful doom. The reader can peruse the account (Genesis,
chapter xviii.,) and make his own comments. The writer could as soon
believe that the moon is a large cheese, suspended in the firmament, as
give credit to this contemptible story. If it should be asked, how Moses
obtained his information as to what Abram had for dinner, the answer is,
by inspiration.

We will here notice two remarkable appearances of the Lord: one of them
to Balaam, the other to Moses, A few remarks on each will suffice.
Balaam was a conjuror, and a person of no small consequence in his day.
He was applied to by the princes of Moab to prophesy evil against the
Israelites, That whole nation, under the guidance of Moses, being in the
act of marching through the land of Moab on their route to the land of
promise, and having the character of making too free with other people’s
property, the princes of Moab hired Balaam to curse them. We are told
that the heathen prophet judged it best to procure the permission of
Jehovah, the God of the Jews, before he cursed his people. He,
therefore, erected an altar on the top of a hill, and on it sacrificed
seven bullocks and seven sheep. During the sacrifice, the Lord of heaven
and earth came down, and called the prophet aside from the presence of
the princes of Moab, and forbade him to curse his people. The sacrifice
was repeated thrice. On each occasion the Lord appeared to Balaam,
giving him leave to go with the princes, but forbidding him on any
account to curse the Israelites. The remainder of the tale is to be
found in the history of Balaam.

Now, can it be possible, that this account contains a particle of truth?
Can we suppose, that the unknown power, whom man calls God, presented
himself at the altar of a heathen necromancer, and, whispering in his
ear, forbade him to perform his monkey tricks to the detriment of his
chosen people? And that three times he should descend from heaven to
overawe the old trickster, as if he thought him capable of doing harm to
the Israelites? This account is rendered more contemptible by being
referred to by New Testament writers, although the scripture declares in
many places that “no man can see God and live.” Christians little think
how largely their credulity is taxed when they are taught to believe
that such accounts were given by divine inspiration.

It is written in the book of Exodus, (chapter xxiv.,) that After the
giving of the moral law on Mount Sinai, the Lord called Moses to the top
of that remarkable place to give him instructions respecting the
tabernacle and its paraphernalia. Moses remained there forty days,
attending to the commands of Jehovah. The Lord, on a sudden, informed
Moses that the Israelites had forsaken him, had set up a golden calf,
and were in the act of worshipping before it and dancing for joy. Moses
was ordered to go down. Before he left the mount, however, the Lord’s
anger waxed hot, and he told Moses not to plead for the wicked people.
Jehovah, being about to destroy them, Moses besought him not to cut them
off, and reminded him that, by so doing, the Egyptians would triumph and
say that their God led them into the wilderness to destroy them.

Moses also reminded Jehovah of the promises made to Abram, Isaac, and
Jacob, respecting their posterity; and by the arguments he made use of
in favor of showing mercy to the Jewish people, at length prevailed on
the Lord to suppress his anger. Having descended from the mount, Moses
found the people half-naked, and dancing in a state of joyful excitement
before the Golden Calf. The man who had but just before plead the cause
of his brethren, and thereby prevented Jehovah’s destroying the whole of
the seed of Abram, found it less difficult to quiet the fury of an angry
God, than to keep his own temper; for, when he saw their idolatrous
dancing and revelry, he lost all patience, and, throwing down the tables
of stone on which the laws were written, made the inquiry, “_Who is on
the Lord’s side?_” The Levites instantly came forward and declared for
the Lord. Moses ordered every man to take his sword and slay his
neighbor and friends who had rebelled against Jehovah,—a shocking
slaughter ensued, for three thousand were slain on that day!

If this account could be credited, it would be truly harrowing to the
reflecting mind. To believers in Christianity, we would say, can you
expect persons who depend on the exercise of their reason for the
discovery of truth and the detection of error, to believe the account of
the transactions of Jehovah and Moses on the mountain? Surely, you
cannot. We give the following reasons why it is out of our power to
believe it:—The narrative represents the Almighty Ruler of the Universe
as possessing the same frailties as his creature, man. The Creator is
forty days contriving (assisted by Moses) ornaments and decorations for
his own worship. Before these were completed, the people, who were to be
the worshippers, deserted their God, and either commenced a new religion
or revived an old one. For a considerable time, Jehovah allows Moses to
remain in ignorance of what is going on at the foot of the mountain;
then, all of a sudden, informs him of it; in a burst of passion tells
him to stand out of his way, so as to be no hindrance to him in pouring
out his wrath; and seems determined to exterminate the whole race.
Moses, less passionate than the Deity, argued strenuously in favor of
his brethren, and pointed out to Jehovah two reasons why he ought to
spare them:—first, that their extermination would break the promise made
to Abram; and secondly, that the Egyptians would exult in the
destruction of their former slaves, Jehovah losing all the honor of
having brought them out of bondage with _a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm_.

Having thus cooled down Divine vengeance, Moses himself became the Jack
Ketch, or executioner of his brethren.

If this account had been found in any book but the Bible, not one person
in a thousand would have believed it. It destroys the attributes of the
God of all worlds, gives the lie to his foreknowledge and immutability,
and then invests him with all the weakness, folly, and mutability of
poor, frail, erring man.

With respect to the dreams and visions, of which we find so many
accounts in the Old and New Testaments, they are spoken of by the
prophets as being the medium of divine inspiration. One of them thus
expresses himself:—“_It shall come to pass in the last days, saith the
Lord, that I will pour out my spirit on all flesh, and your sons and
your daughters shall prophesy, your old mm shall dream dreams, your
young men shall see visions._” (Joel, chapter ii.) Now we know that
dreams are not the result of divine inspiration. When we read that an
angel appeared to a man of God, no more can be made of it than this:—the
priest, or pretended prophet, dreamed that an angel appeared to him, and
conversed with him.

I have many times dreamed of seeing my first wife, who died upwards of
forty years ago. If I were to insist that the dream was a reality, it
would be considered by my friends that my mind was disordered; in short,
that I was insane. From dreams, we can obtain no correct ideas of
realities. If persons, who are much subject to dreams, were to imagine
that their dreams pointed to realities, they would be all their lifetime
in pursuit of shadows. Dreams and visions would be very uncertain
channels for the conveyance of divine revelations, for the supposed
angel might be the servant of the Devil instead of a messenger from
heaven.

The writings in the Old Testament which are called prophecies, generally
relate to the Jewish nation. How are we to know that they are
prophecies? In order that there may be no uncertainty with respect to a
prophet’s pretensions, he should foretell something to come to pass in
the lifetime of the persons to whom he declares the prophecy, stating
the precise time and place, so that when fulfilled, it should be a
million to one against its being the result of guess-work. It would then
carry with it a convincing proof of being the result of divine
inspiration.

To show the dependence that can be placed on prophecies, we may refer to
the Millerite delusion. The pretensions and extravagances of that sect
were based on the prophecies of Daniel. I have heard many preachers, of
acknowledged learning and talent, attempt to explain Daniel’s prophecies
with regard to the time of the second advent; but they generally
differed in their views. About the year 1803, a preacher in London,
(England,) of first rate abilities, told his congregation, a very large
one, to keep, in mind the year 1833, for that he had, after the most
laborious calculations, arrived at the conclusion that about that
period, signs and wonders would indicate the near approach of him who is
to come again in _power and great glory_.

There is no doubt but hundreds of learned men have, since the time that
Jesus is said to have left this world, consumed the “midnight oil” in
their researches to discover the time of the second advent, but to no
purpose. To no purpose, did I say? I mistook. In the case of Miller, it
was to a most unfortunate purpose. Thousands of his followers have been
in a state of partial insanity; many have been absolutely deranged; some
have committed suicide; others sold their lands, abandoned their
occupations, neglected their wives and children, and will never regain
their former happy homes. Can we suppose that the all-wise Ruler of the
Universe would promulgate prophecies so uncertain with respect to their
fulfilment, and so disastrous in the effects arising from their
uncertainty? I repeat, that prophecy, to answer any good purpose, should
be fulfilled in the lifetime of the persons to whom it is addressed;
otherwise, the uncertainty attending it renders it worse than useless.

If Daniel had been divinely inspired to foretell any thing relating to
Christ, common sense suggests that it would have reference to his first
appearance on earth. Instead of this being the burden of his prophecy,
he makes no allusion to his first coming, but, according to Christian
expositors, his dreams and visions refer to the _second_ coming of
Christ, and the final judgment. Father Miller’s bubble having burst, his
sincere but deluded followers are in a state of extreme wretchedness;
all of them injured either in mind or circumstances, and most of them in
both. Many of them will doubtless reject religion altogether. So much,
then, for depending on divine inspiration.

The power to perform miracles is included in the idea of divine
inspiration, and implies the possession of a power superior to all human
power. The exhibition of a power by an individual, superior to what the
united exertions of a whole nation could perform, ought to be credited
to the exhibiter as a power _received from on high_,—a conclusion drawn
by Christian commentators, and also by Jesus himself, with respect to
his recorded miracles; for, he says—“_If I had not done among them the
works which no other man did, they would not have had sin; but now_
[they having seen his miracles, and yet rejected him] _their sin
remaineth._”

Miracles are uncertain evidences of divine inspiration. What an ignorant
man might deem to be a miracle, a man of intelligence and education
might know to be the result of combined natural causes. What in one age
has been currently believed to have been the effect of supernatural
agency, a succeeding and more enlightened age has known as the result of
certain operations of nature. Nothing can justly be regarded as a
miracle unless it be, past all dispute, beyond human power to perform.
To suppose that the Deity makes use of means to promote the improvement
of his creatures, which are calculated to mislead them, is to impeach
his wisdom and goodness.

Miracles could not have been evidences of divine interposition to the
Jewish people, at the time of Christ’s appearance among them, owing to
the prevailing belief that supernatural beings, called devils, could
perform wonderful things, far above man’s power or comprehension; and
that some of them, more powerful than the rest, could invest mortals
with the power of performing-miracles of the same nature as those
ascribed to Jesus Christ.

Most of the religious sects at the present day affect to be influenced
by something almost amounting to divine inspiration—their religion
consisting of feelings, not of action. In the Scriptures we read, “_If
any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his._” I have often
noticed the variety of modes in which the spirit operates on different
sects. The Methodists, while seeking the Lord, as they term it, will
sigh, moan, and howl, and immediately after be in ecstasies bordering on
insanity, and bawl so loud that a passer-by might reasonably conclude
that some dreadful accident had befallen them. Passing to the other
extreme, the Friends, or Quakers, are as dumb as mutes, and will not
allow their speakers to open their lips until impelled to do so by the
spirit. But the Jumpers, in Wales, (Great Britain,) go ahead of all, for
they often perform the journey from their homes to their churches, by
the same kind of evolution as frogs make when on their peregrinations in
search of water. All these monkey tricks are of much easier performance
than feeding the hungry, or clothing the destitute. Can, or, presuming
that they can, will the preachers please inform us, which of these three
modes of spiritual manifestation will be practised in heaven?

In concluding this chapter, I shall make some remarks on the Mormons,
that being one of the last sects, of any importance, which have arisen,
professing the Christian faith. They also profess, or their leaders, at
least, to be specially moved by the Holy Spirit; in other words, that
they are the recipients of divine inspiration. Whatever other
denominations of Christians may think of their claims to supernatural
gifts, they are founded on quite as reasonable grounds as were the
pretensions of the prophets of old, not even excepting Moses, the Jewish
legislator; as a brief history of their rise and progress will prove.
The following account, the writer had from some of the principal
preachers of the Mormon faith:—“About the year 1827, or ’28, Joseph
Smith, a young man of obscure parentage, presented to the world a
production which he called the Book of Mormon, or the Golden Bible; and
of which, according to his own account, he became possessed in the
following manner:—When about fifteen years of age, being under religious
impressions, he used to retire to the fields and thickets in the
neighborhood of his home, to exercise himself in prayer. One day, while
thus engaged, an angel appeared to him, and informed him that the Lord
had a great and important work for him to perform, but that the time had
not yet arrived for its consummation. Then, after telling him that he
would be again visited, and urging him to pursue a godly life,
disappeared. A few years after this, the angel re-visited Joseph,
repeating his declaration respecting the contemplated work, and
disappeared as before. At length, on a third appearance, the angel
directed Joseph to go to a certain spot and dig in the earth, telling
him that he would there find something of vast importance. Joseph did as
the angel commanded, and found a number of golden plates, on which were
impressed characters in a language to him altogether unknown. Having
copied a portion of the characters, he sent the copy, by a friend, to a
teacher of the dead languages, in New York, in order to ascertain the
meaning; but his friend returned without having obtained the desired
information. The Holy Spirit then enabled Joseph to translate the
inscriptions, and the translation is, denominated the ‘Book of Mormon,’
being named after the person who, fourteen hundred years before, had, by
Divine command, deposited it in the earth.” This book can be obtained of
the Mormon preachers.

The progress of the Mormons, or Latter-Day Saints, as they designate
themselves, has been astonishingly rapid, their number being computed at
no less than two hundred thousand, of whom about ten thousand are
congregated in the city of Nauvoo, (or Joseph,) in the State of
Illinois. This portion of the Mormons had previously located themselves
in the State of Missouri, but after suffering great persecution, were
driven out of that State by the inhabitants. They then settled in the
western part of Illinois, and built the city of Nauvoo, and have nearly
completed a splendid temple of unique architecture. They, like the Jews,
believe that they are God’s chosen people, and that, as _the earth is
the Lord’s_, they shall have the honor of calling together the Jews, the
former chosen people of God, and that all who have not then embraced the
Mormon faith will be speedily cut off. As the Mormons make the Bible the
ground-work of their religious belief, and are sparing in their
allusions to the Book of Mormon, they are likely to become permanently
established, as a portion of the Christian world, and will probably
become not only a very numerous, but also a powerful sect.

But the demon of religious persecution—let me pause for a moment. I
would not knowingly libel any thing, not even religion. Am I not
mistaken? Not in the personage, most certainly, but I may be in error
with respect to his official character. Perhaps I owe an apology to the
religious world. It may be the demon of fraud. At all events, a demon of
some description is hovering over this remarkable people, and
threatening them with vengeance. Their smoking and desolate homesteads
will furnish matter for the future historian, who, with indignation,
will record, that in the nineteenth century, in the favored land of
Illinois, the ennobling principles of liberty could boast of no better
recognition than an empty name. Give ear, ye advocates of liberty in the
down-trodden nations of Europe! A voice would address you from the land
of promise. Ten thousand men, women, and children in the State of
Illinois, can receive no protection from the Genius of Liberty, but in
the coming spring are to be driven from their peaceful happy homes, to
wend their way through a dreary wilderness, and seek a resting place on
the shores of the Pacific Ocean. “Oh! shame! where is thy blush!” Cannot
even tottering age, and helpless infancy, arrest the fell purpose?

The present position of the Mormons, with respect to the rest of the
world, so nearly resembles that of the Jews when they were leaving
Egypt, that it is not unlikely for them to assimilate their movements in
a measure to those of the Israelites, and, believing, as they do, that
they are influenced by the Holy Ghost, their historians some centuries
hence will probably record miracles as having been performed by the
Mormons, similar to what are said to have taken place among the Jews,
when travelling under the guidance of Moses, to the promised land.
Feebleness of body reminds me that Death is shaking his arrow over me,
but surely my mind remains unclouded. Am I really living in the
enlightened nineteenth century? And if so, am I on the free soil of
America, or in barbarous Russia, and a subject of the Emperor Nicholas?

The Mormons are to be driven out of the United States. Why? “Because
they believe themselves to be God’s chosen people, and that all other
nations must become subject to them.” Indeed! and do not the Jews
entertain the same belief with respect to their nation? Are they to be
driven out along with the Mormons? The Mormons are to be driven out.
Why? “Because they speak in an unknown tongue.” But a few years ago, the
disciples of Irving, a celebrated preacher in London, spoke in an
unknown tongue; but so far from their being driven out of the country in
consequence, the ministrations of Irving were attended by the principal
nobility and statesmen of Great Britain. The Mormons are to be driven
out. Why? “Not on account of their religious faith, but because they are
a community of thieves.” In the English navy the seamen have a very
contemptuous idea of the marines, and when a very improbable story is
told by any one, they say, “Tell that to the marines,” intimating that
_they_ are weak enough to believe any thing.

We are told that a religious community which numbers ten thousand
persons is composed of incorrigible rogues. And yet it is well known
that they are very industrious, have well cultivated farms, have built a
city, and nearly completed a splendid temple. What says the experience
of the world with respect to thieves—that they have been usually found
among the industrious, or the idle? What are we called upon to believe?
That a highly industrious religious sect, numbering ten thousand souls,
manifests such a total disregard of all moral principle that its
existence cannot be allowed in civilized society? Tell it not in Gath!
Oh! no; better tell it to the marines.

I do believe that I am in America, and not in Russia, after all. The
film is departing from my mental vision. An idea strikes me. It is this.
In this country, under certain circumstances, _well_ understood by the
public, bills of _exceptions_ are frequently filed. Aye, now I have it
This is a Republic; and a Republic is a government intended for the
benefit of _all_, with the _exception_ of the Mormons to-day, and of
some other religious sect to-morrow; and so on, as avarice, or bigotry,
or the tyranny of a moneyed aristocracy may dictate, to the end of the
chapter.

The republicans of the State of Illinois have determined that the
Mormons shall not remain among them. “Oh! consistency, thou art indeed a
jewel” For the benefit of persons visiting Illinois, I shall close with
a quotation from the Old Testament, not remarkable, perhaps, for
elegance of diction, but having a claim to attention for its
truthfulness. It is this:—-“It is useless to search for a _jewel_ in a
swine’s snout.”

END OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.




THE NEW TESTAMENT




INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER on THE FACTS AND PERSONAGES OF THE NEW TESTAMENT


TO these persons who can take, without fear, a correct view of Jehovah’s
dealings with his chosen people, as recorded in the Old Testament, it
must appear, that the Jews, as a nation, did not, in any way, do honor
to his choice; for, as it regards religion, they neither were at any
length of time faithful to Jehovah, nor did they obey his laws. The
dreadful punishments inflicted on them, together with the teaching of
the Prophets, did not cure them, so as to prevent them from worshipping
other gods.

To men of common sense, it is clear that the Jewish God undertook to
make of the seed of Abram that which never took place. The attempts to
keep them as true worshippers of Jehovah, continually failed; and he, in
the language of regret and complaint, says:—“I have nourished and
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me.” And here we may
inquire, how were they brought up? The answer is at hand. They were
taught to consider themselves, as a nation, more valuable than any
people on earth; and this pride caused them to act with hostility in
their intercourse with, the Gentiles, and to rob and murder all nations
less powerful than themselves; for doing which, they had from the Lord a
direct order. To _show mercy_ was forbidden, and they were punished for
so doing. The command was—“_Thou shall do no murder._” This command had
to do with Jews only. To others it was said, “_Spare not a soul alive_.”
Again, “_Thou shall not steal,_”—that is, from Jews: from all heathens,
steal all you can. “_Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife,_” &c.
Remember!—the wife of a Jew; but when the Lord commands, you must murder
other men’s wives, and take their daughters for the most wicked
purposes. This is the manner the seed of Abram were brought up; and, in
these particulars, they seldom disobeyed the Lord.

In this manner the Jews were educated by the Lord of Hosts. Can we then
wonder that they, in a moral point of view, should have been the most
cruel and wicked of any nation on earth? It follows, that they were a
disgrace to that God who selected them as his own; and the Jewish
dispensation ended in a complete failure: so that it is recorded, that
the Lord “_hateth his own inheritance._” Jehovah failed to rear up and
protect a nation who should serve as a pattern to the rest of the human
family. They axe acknowledged, by both God and man, to have been the
worst people on earth.

We are now about to consider another attempt, on the part of the God of
Israel, to recover and convert his disobedient people to the new
covenant, or dispensation, by sending the long-expected Saviour of the
seed of Abram, according to the flesh. Here we ought to expect that a
double degree of caution will be manifest on the part of the Jewish God,
so that no mistake may happen to the Jewish nation in their reception
of, and obedience to, his Son, as an ambassador of peace and
reconciliation; because, if the mission of Jesus was not clearly
understood by the Jews, another scene of trouble, more dreadful than
their former disobedience, would follow as a consequence. We ought to
expect that Christ would be instructed so to present himself to his
brethren, that his person and his plans for their recovery would be
self-evident. No guess-work can be allowed, as it respects the vast
importance of his mission, or the identity of his person. It needs no
argument to show, that, when an end or object is to be fully obtained,
the means must be adapted to answer the end intended, or a failure is
the consequence.

Here we may ask, for what purpose did Christ come to the Jews? Was it to
fulfil the promises made to them by Jehovah, _that he would make a new
covenant with them, and write his laws on their hearts; not according to
the covenant he made with their fathers, when he brought them out of
Egypt, but that he would write his laws on their hearts, and their sins
and iniquities remember no more, and that they should be to him a
people, and that he would be to them a God?_ In fact, we cannot admit of
the possibility of any mistake or failure to happen in Jehovah’s plan of
salvation, when we consider that the seed of Abram longed for and
expected the Great Deliverer of Israel. No trickery or deception ought
to be resorted to in a case involving such dreadful consequences. It is
highly dishonorable to the God of the Universe, to admit of any
double-dealing on his part, when his people were prepared to receive the
Messiah.

The situation of the Jews, as a nation, at the time it is said that
Christ made his appearance among them, ought to be kept in view, in
reading this introduction. They expected a king, or a deliverer, to
arrive, agreeably to what they had learned from the Old Testament.
Hence, their inquiry was, “_Art thou he that should come, or do we, or
are we, to look for another?_” As much as to say, we long for his
appearance, but we have had false Christs; and the repeated impositions
practised on our nation makes us cautious as to giving credence to any
pretender, without full proof of his being the true, the very anointed
of God. No inquiry could be more reasonable; for it is clear that the
Jewish nation were open to conviction, and ready to receive with joy the
sent of Jehovah; but repeated deception and disappointment had made them
slow to believe in the pretensions of any that came to them in the name
of the Lord.

We need not be surprised that the seed of Abram should have been so
scrupulous in believing, until they had incontrovertible proof that the
hope of Israel had arrived. They considered that event as the end of all
their troubles; and relying on the promises made, to God’s chosen people
by the prophets,—that the “_sun of, righteousness should arise with
healing in his wings_” that his identity would be as clearly known, and
all obscurity entirely removed as to his being the true Christ, the hope
and expectation of Israel. The Jews, as a nation, were not prepared for
any thing short of a full manifestation of Jehovah’s promises in the
person of the Messiah, that he would be their “_Prophet, Priest, and
King_” It is not possible to conceive that a single Jew could be found
who would stretch forth his hand against the Lord’s anointed. This,
then, was the feeling and expectation of the Jews, at the time it is
recorded that Christ came as the deliverer of Israel. It follows, then,
that the only thing the Jews required, in order to receive and obey
Christ, was, unerring proof that Jesus was the promised Messiah; for
they were earnestly waiting for that glorious event.

We will now inquire, whether or not his introduction to the Jewish
nation was the most probable way to convince them that the long-desired,
the long-expected Redeemer of Israel was come? It must ever be kept in
mind, that the coming of Christ was to the Israelites of vast
importance, when we consider their former troubles, how they had been
forsaken by their God, sold, as it were, into severe bondage, and
scattered over the face of the earth, in consequence of their departure
from the God of their fathers. To all which, it may be added, that they
had been deceived by false Christs: so that, as a nation, they ought to,
and doubtless did, fully expect that the true Messiah, on his arrival,
would convince every real Jew that he was the sent of God, and that the
evidence would be different, in all respects, from what had before
attended impostors and cheats. Of all the embassies ever sent by one
nation to another, none ever equalled in importance the one where the
Son, the only Son of God, was the ambassador.

In the intercourse between nations, and when a minister is sent out from
one nation to another, one thing is always provided for, and on no
account is it ever omitted, namely:—proper credentials are always
prepared and sent by one nation to another, so that the identity of the
ambassador is indisputable. This indispensable qualification appears to
have been omitted in sending Christ to the Jewish nation, and it proved
most unfortunate to those ill-fated people; for it is evident, from
Scripture, that they mistook Jesus for an impostor, since one of the
apostles admits, that if they (the Jews) had known him, “_they would not
have killed the Lord of life and glory_.”

Here, then, was the fatal mistake, the unfortunate error; and now we may
ask, for what was Jesus sent? Jehovah knew that they would not receive
him, and that a failure would be the consequence. But if Jehovah did not
know of his rejection, what then are we to say of the attributes of the
God of Israel? Taking either side, involves the greatest absurdity, and
is shocking to every idea we can have of infinite wisdom, power, and
goodness.

If Jesus, on his arrival to the Jews as a nation, intended to prove his
divine mission by the performance of miracles, he appears to have taken
the wrong course to carry conviction to the minds of his fellow
countrymen. Instead of performing signs and wonders before the most
learned of his nation, he associated with the most ignorant classes of
society. These were chiefly fishermen, who could be easily imposed on by
any sleight of hand, performed by a dexterous juggler. It was to the
most learned and competent men of that day to whom his appeals ought to
have been made; but on the contrary, he employed such vulgar abuse
as—“_O, generation of vipers! how can ye escape the damnation of hell?_”
It may safely be inferred, that such abusive language as this would be
considered by the priests and rulers sufficient to stamp its author as a
man of low character and violent temper.

Again, instead of opening his mission with the declaration of Jehovah’s
former promises to the Jewish nation, _that the God of their fathers had
sent him to recover the lost sheep of the home of Israel_, he tells them
that the holy temple was then _a den of thieves_; and at another time,
commences with a cord, or rattan, (like a drunken man,) to drive men
from the temple. Is it possible to conceive that such could be the
conduct of him who was proclaimed to be “_Peace on earth and good will
towards men_”?

Again, miracles, as proofs of Christ’s divine mission, ought to have
been performed before the most learned and talented men among the Jews.
On the contrary, it was the ignorant and unlettered part of society who
were the witnesses of his mighty deeds; for it is impossible for men who
are unacquainted with the laws and phenomena of nature, to form any
thing like a correct judgment of those laws, so as to know what were
their natural operations, to the exclusion of divine power. So that a
performance of any thing, however wonderful to ignorant and untaught
men, would, to others, who were better acquainted with the laws of the
universe, be no miracle at all.

In conclusion, then, so far as miracles are concerned, a miracle must be
something performed by another, that is impossible to take place without
superhuman aid; and before persons who are so fully acquainted with the
laws of the universe, that imposition would be impossible. Now the Jews,
at the time of the coming of Christ, if he did come at all, had no such
knowledge. In that age, many strange things were believed, that never
had any real existence. For instance, it was fully believed by the Jews,
and nearly throughout the world, that evil spirits or demons took
possession of the bodies of men, and ceased, not to torment them in a
thousand ways; and the casting out of these was considered a miracle.
Jesus is said to have performed many miracles of this kind. Mary
Magdalene had seven of them ejected by the Saviour. So it is recorded.

But now, no man of science gives the least credit to such tales; so that
the fact is, no devils ever were cast out, because none ever entered the
human body. If Jesus, then, pretended to cast out devils, when he knew
there were none possessed of them, how can we exempt him from the charge
of being a deceiver? If, on the other hand, he believed that Mary
Magdalene had seven, and that they left her by his orders, in that case,
what shall we say as to his knowledge?

At the present day, should a person apply for medical aid to cast out a
devil, such person would be considered a lunatic. This is proof positive
that Jesus partook of the superstition of the age in which he lived; and
that his pretensions to cast out devils by the power of God, were
incompatible with his mission as the Son of God, the Redeemer of Israel.

The history of Jesus, as recorded in the four Gospels, fully represents
him as acting like most reformers in all ages and nations, namely, by
abusing men of wealth and power. But, unlike most others, Jesus
represented himself as the only Son of God, by whose authority he
(Jesus) called the priests and the rulers of Israel by names the most
offensive, thereby exciting their opposition to his mode of teaching and
acting. At the same time, the lower grades of society did then, as they
do at the present day. They considered him as a reformer, the friend of
the people, in proportion as he was lavish in his abuse of the most
violent nature.

In concluding this chapter, we may safely infer, that if Jesus was sent
into the world to be put to death as a sacrifice for sin, his manner of
preaching to his countrymen, and his violent abuse and denunciations
against the then rulers of Israel, were calculated to bring about his
tragical end. But, on the contrary, if Jesus came from God, To _restore
the lost sheep of the home of Israel_, as the Jews, one and all,
expected the Messiah would do, it then follows, that the Jews, as a
nation, were deceived, and in putting him to death, they thought him a
blasphemer, having no claim to be considered as the true deliverer of
his nation. If Jesus came from God to the Jews, as their long-expected
Saviour and Deliverer, and every blessing, as it respected them,
depended on their giving him an obedience agreeable to his mission as an
ambassador of peace, to mistake him for an impostor, was a misfortune
more deplorable than all the misfortunes, as a nation, the Jews had ever
experienced from the call of Abram until the time that Christ is said to
have arrived in the land of Judea. If, in reality and truth, he came
from the Jehovah of that people, as they had for ages expected, then,
instead of his collecting together a few fishermen, common sense would
instruct us to suppose, that the Lord’s anointed would go direct to the
priests and Jewish, rulers, and accost them in the following way:—“The
long-expected, the long-desired, is now in the midst of you. I am the
true, the very Christ, the anointed of Jehovah, of the seed of Abram. My
beloved mother will lift her hand, and swear on the altar of her God and
my God, the Father of us all, that I am the offspring of God, and that
in the absence of all earthly intercourse, she brought me forth, and
that angels announced her miraculous conception, before I saw the light;
and that I am endowed with power from on high, to do before your longing
eyes miracles and wonders, such as all former pretenders could not
perform. But, as you have before been deceived by impostors who have
forged my name, and assumed my character, believe me not for my word,
but for my works’ sake. Mark well my deportment Give credit to my mighty
deeds only when they are openly addressed to your senses, that no doubts
may remain as to the identity of my person, and the high commission of
which I am the bearer; and being fully convinced of my Messiahship, obey
me as the earthly representative of your heavenly Father, while I unfold
the blessings that await you, in the fulfilment of the promises made to
Abram and his seed forever.” Instead, however, of thus openly and
frankly making known the object of his message to his nation, Jesus
begins by making use of expressions the most insulting, charging the
priests and rulers with crimes of the basest description, in the worst
language possible; the direct tendency of which was, to arouse their
worst feelings, leaving them in doubt what to think of one who arrogated
to himself authority over the Mosaic law, and whose teaching was so
obscure as not to be understood even by his own disciples. In speaking
of himself and the kingdom he was about to set up, he said that his
death formed a part of the divine arrangement included in his mission;
as much as to say, I must be put to death before my plane can be
developed. At times, in the course of his preaching, Jesus referred to
his future exaltation, as the “Judge of quick and dead.” At other times
he represented himself as the only true light that enlightens every man
that cometh into the world; and yet, he courted obscurity in most of his
preaching, so much so, that one of his most intimate friends (Judas) was
bribed to inform the rulers who this extraordinary man was, and where he
could be found.

What would be thought of an ambassador, sent from America to England on
business of the first importance, if, instead of proceeding to the Court
of St. James, at London, he should be found lecturing to fishermen and
people in the lower walks of society, and at the same time, in language
of the most violent kind, abusing the British Government? In fine, such
was the preaching and acting of Jesus during his stay in the land of
Israel, that to me it appears impossible to discover the object or the
utility of his coming. No wonder, therefore, that the Jews rejected him
altogether.




