               A LEGACY TO THE FRIENDS OF FREE DISCUSSION


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost
no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Title: A Legacy to the Friends of Free Discussion

Author: Benjamin Offen

Release Date: April 04, 2012 [EBook #39371]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LEGACY TO THE FRIENDS OF
FREE DISCUSSION***




Produced by David Widger.




              *A LEGACY TO THE FRIENDS OF FREE DISCUSSION*

                                  _By_

                            *Benjamin Offen*

 _PRINCIPAL HISTORICAL FACTS AND PERSONAGES OF THE BOOKS KNOWN AS THE_
    _OLD AND NEW TESTAMENT; WITH REMARKS ON THE MORALITY OF NATURE_


                                 _1846_




CONTENTS


    PREFACE
    GENERAL INTRODUCTION
    DETAILED CONTENTS
    A LEGACY TO THE FRIENDS OF FREE DISCUSSION
    GOD’S CHOSEN PEOPLE
    THE OLD TESTAMENT
    CHAPTER I. FROM THE CREATION TO THE DELUGE
    CHAPTER II. A REVIEW OF THE DELUGE AND THE CONFUSION OF TONGUES AT
    THE TOWER OF BABEL
    CHAPTER III. FROM THE CONFUSION OF TONGUES TO THE BIRTH OF MOSES
    CHAPTER IV. FROM THE BIRTH OF MOSES TO THE DEATH OF JOSHUA
    CHAPTER V. FROM THE DEATH OF JOSHUA TO THE REIGN OF SAUL
    CHAPTER VI. THE REIGNS OF SAUL, DAVID, AND SOLOMON
    CHAPTER VII. THE REIGN OF JEROBOAM, AND THE SEPARATION OF ISRAEL
    FROM JUDAH
    CHAPTER VIII. ON DIVINE INSPIRATION
    THE NEW TESTAMENT
    INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER on THE FACTS AND PERSONAGES OF THE NEW
    TESTAMENT
    CHAPTER I.
    CHAPTER. II.
    CHAPTER III.
    CHAPTER IV.
    CHAPTER V.
    CHAPTER VI.
    CHAPTER VII.
    CHAPTER VIII.
    CHAPTER IX.
    REMARKS ON THE MORALITY OF NATURE




PREFACE


IN the following pages the author has freely discussed the claims of the
books called the Old and New Testaments, to be considered Divine
revelations. He had a _right_ so to do; and in presenting the work to
the public he gives the result of his exercise of such right.

The right of free discussion has been questioned. It would be well for
humanity if this were all; but unhappily, the pages of history are
replete with deeds of persecution and cruelty, committed by men, in the
possession of power, on their less fortunate fellow-men, who have
presumed to exercise the right of free investigation. Cupidity has drawn
a line of demarcation; it has established boundaries for thought; and
miserable has been the fate of the unhappy wretch who, rejoicing in the
dignity of his nature, and anxious to discover the abode of Truth, has
dared to pass the Rubicon.

What is Free Discussion? We answer, it is the exercise of the reasoning
faculties. Without Free Discussion man cannot exist. His physical
existence might indeed remain; but he could no longer be deemed a man;
and would have to take a lower rank in the scale of creation.

Without investigation it is impossible to arrive at Truth; hence the
utility of Free Discussion. This is never denied when science is the
subject; and we have yet to learn why it should be restrained in any
case; and also _how_ and _when_ any set of men became possessed of the
right to restrain the exercise of the reasoning faculties of their
fellow-men.

When men have not been impelled by cupidity to shackle the minds of
their fellow beings, a spirit of uncharitableness has induced them to
pursue the same line of conduct. Whoever has maintained an opinion
contrary to theirs, has been considered as being actuated, not by
mistaken, but, by dishonest motives; and has therefore been deemed a fit
subject for punishment. As this work will probably be read by many
professing Christians we will here give an extract from Dr. Blair’s
sermon on _Candor_, which will, probably, make a greater impression than
any thing we could offer on that subject.

“It is one of the misfortunes of our present situation, that some of the
good dispositions of human nature are apt to betray us into frailties
and vices. Thus it often happens, that the laudable attachment which we
contract to the country, or the church, to which we belong, or to some
political denomination under which we class ourselves, both confines our
affections within too narrow a sphere, and gives rise to violent
prejudices against such as come under an opposite description. Not
contented with being in the right ourselves, we must find all others in
the wrong. We claim an exclusive possession of goodness and wisdom: and
from approving warmly of those who join us, we proceed to condemn, with
much acrimony, not only the principles, but the _characters_, of those
from whom we differ. Hence, persons of well disposed minds are too
often, through the strength of partial good affection, involved in the
crime of uncharitable judgment They rashly extend to every individual
the severe opinion which they have unwarrantably conceived of a whole
body. This man is of a party whose principles we reckon slavish; and
therefore his whole sentiments are corrupted. That man belongs to a
religious sect which we are accustomed to deem bigoted; and therefore he
is incapable of any generous or liberal thought Another is connected
with a sect which we have been taught to account relaxed; and therefore
he can have no sanctity.—Are these the judgments of candor and charity?
Is true piety or virtue so very limited in its nature, as to be confined
to such alone as see every thing with our eyes, and follow exactly the
train of our ideas?”

The author disclaims any intention of wounding the feelings of those who
hold opinions different to his own. For the religions hypocrite he has
no bowels of compassion; but the sincere believer in Divine revelation,
whose conduct is regulated by the universally acknowledged roles of
morality, is to him an object of sincere respect and esteem.

Many things connected with what is called Divine revelation, have been
very freely commented on by the author; and sometimes in a style which
the Christian world will probably be disposed to condemn; but it should
be remembered that what appears sacred to one, excites the ridicule of
others. The Pagan venerates his manufactured god; the Christian views it
with contempt and indignation.

The object of the author has been the promotion of Truth and
Benevolence.

Should he fail to produce the effects he has contemplated, he will yet
be able to console himself with the reflection, that he has been
actuated by good intentions. The time has been when the assertion was
frequently made that “hell was paved with good intentions” had the work
appeared at that time, the author would, doubtless, have been destined,
so far as human agency could effect it, to become one of the paving
stones of that remarkable edifice: but a brighter day has dawned upon
the world; Reason is asserting her right to empire; and the cheering
spirit of benevolence is animating the nations of the earth.

The shades of life’s evening admonish the author that his sojourn in the
world will very shortly be brought to a close. He is anxious, therefore,
before his departure, to cast in his mite for the eradication of human
suffering, and the promotion of human felicity; and then, in wrapping
himself in the mantle of universal benevolence, to retire from the
transitory scene, in charity with all men.




GENERAL INTRODUCTION


THE main object of this book is to show that Jehovah, the God of the
Jews, is not the Sovereign Ruler of the Universe, but a fictitious
being, having no real existence whatever. If the above position be
correct, it follows, that the Bible, including the Old and New
Testaments, is not a Divine Revelation. But that the reader may see,
more clearly, upon what uncertain ground divine revelation rests, the
plan pursued in the following chapters will be a review of the _facts_
and _personages_ as recorded in the Old and New Testaments. But the
limits of this work will only admit of a mere scantling of what might be
written on the subject.

In most Christian countries (America excepted,) this work would be
answered by either fine or imprisonment, or probably both. But
fortunately for the cause of truth and free discussion, theological
power here is so happily balanced, that persecution for religious
opinions is impracticable. The period therefore has arrived, in this
country in particular, when reason is free from the former obstacles
that every where crossed its path. Now, then, is the time for us to
examine the religion of our forefathers, and explore the regions of
human credulity. A mixture of pain and pleasure will be the
result:—_pain_, in considering what suffering has befallen the human
family, when the laudable indulgence of imagining and reasoning was
considered rebellion against God; and _pleasure_, to us who, having
escaped those dreadful evils which in former ages spread terror
throughout the world, can lessen the evils that surround us, and augment
to an almost unlimited degree our happiness.

To those who may have the moral courage to read the following pages, I
would say, I have neither a desire to shock their feelings, nor any wish
to change their sentiments in order to gratify my vanity; for had
Christianity been productive of “peace on earth and good will towards
men,” I should have been the last to have opposed it. But on the
contrary, the page of religious history is blotted with human gore. The
intolerant spirit that pervades the Old and New Testaments, has so
inoculated its followers of every sect, that while they profess to love
each other for Christ’s sake, one sect (the strongest) has put to death
a weaker sect for God’s sake. Nothing short of convincing men that the
Bible is not a divine revelation, can or will guarantee posterity
against a recurrence of those scenes of horror, at the very thought of
which, the heart sickens.

From the pulpit, and in religious works, nothing is more common than to
exclaim with horror at the unblushing Infidel. Unblushing Infidel! What
cause have Infidels to blush? The blush, if any, ought to be on the face
of the Christians of every sect. They have never failed to persecute
when in power: they have been guilty of cruelties, at which the savage
cannibal would weep, and this will ever be the case so long as the Bible
is considered as coming from God; because, till all consequence is taken
away from faith, and transferred to moral rectitude, persecution is the
effect of believing that _faith_ is the sure passport to glory, while
_unbelief_ is the broad road to perdition. Men cease to be Christians
when they lose this spirit of intolerance, and become Infidels.

Sects are not alike intolerant; but all are in some degree. The
Calvinists will not permit the Unitarians to preach in their churches.
The Unitarians, or Universalists, will not permit an Infidel lecturer to
speak in their churches,—no, not even on moral subjects. Christians,
then, will always be more or less of a persecuting disposition, and
nothing but giving up the Bible, as a Divine revelation, will destroy
that spirit. To show how a profession of Christianity, unfits men to do
justice to those who differ from them in religion, I will refer to the
treatment of Thomas Paine, author of “Common Sense.” His services in the
glorious struggle that “tried men’s souls” have been shamefully
forgotten. Yes! the friend of the immortal Washington, who shared in the
toils and dangers with the father of this great republic,—how have
Americans generally treated his name and efforts to erect one of the
most noble monuments of human wisdom—the _independent republic of North
America?_ For all his faithful devotedness to the independence of
America, how is his name and memory spoken of at the present time? From
the pulpit, every kind of falsehood and detraction is poured forth
concerning him.

If he had been, a member of a church, the same fanatical priesthood
would have lauded him to the skies. Such is the nature of religious
bigotry, that the friendship of the ever to be venerated Washington—even
that, cannot shield his name from pulpit calumny. “Bigotry, she has no
head, and cannot think; she has no heart, and cannot feel.”

But the name and services of Thomas Paine, are not, and never will be,
forgotten. Thanks to the Liberals throughout the Union, his birthday is
yearly celebrated in most of the cities and towns in the different
States. A handsome and durable monument has been erected to his memory
at New Rochelle, New York State. The thanks of-the Liberals are due to
Mr. G. Vale, Editor of the _Beacon_, published in New York, for his
untiring perseverance in urging on the completion of a monument will, in
time, command the respect of posterity. Why are the name and services of
Thomas Paine be cautiously omitted by our orators and statesmen, when
speaking of the patriotism of a Washington, Jefferson, Adams, Hancock,
and others? It would offend the church and priesthood, as well as the
whole of the Christian community; because—“_He that believeth not shall
be damned._” This is the brightest gem in the Christian’s crown of
glory. If he nurse this intolerant spirit against Infidels, the
Christian considers his “_calling and election sure._”

Sincere believers in Divine revelation are not aware what monsters the
Bible makes of them; but for which they would be humane, compared to
what they are under its influence. I am surprised that they are (the
majority of them) so just, humane, and charitable, when I take into
consideration the doctrines contained (or believed to be) in what is
called the Word of God. In addition to their own evil habits and
disregard for virtue in the common concerns of life, they have a Devil
to tempt them by a thousand ways in which they are ignorant. Again, they
have a Saviour who shed his blood to save them from the just punishment
of their deserts; so that with their own evil deeds, and being urged on
by the Devil, they become monsters in crime. They then go, as the phrase
is, to Christ, be sorry, or profess to be, for what they have done, and
are pardoned, and in the sight of Heaven are considered _superior_ to
the unconverted whom they have injured. Can you, my readers, wonder at
the crimes of God’s people? According to this doctrine, a man may steal
a horse and cart, by the use of which, another man earned support for
his family; the thief sells it, and spends the amount, in connexion with
wretches like himself. He then goes to Jesus, repents, is forgiven; and,
to follow the plan throughout—if the man who lost his horse and cart is
an unbeliever, he goes to Hell, while the rogue sits singing and
laughing in Glory!

This book is sent into society from the best of motives; hoping it will
induce Christians to practise moderation, and somewhat abate that
raging, fanatical fever, that has been so fatal to human happiness. If
you take from us the Bible, says the Christian, what will you give in
its stead? We answer, man requires nothing but what God, or Nature, has
given him. All men in common, have reason to consult, by which man will
learn the duty he owes to himself, and also to his fellow beings. The
error lies in being taught, that reason, when in full exercise, will
lead him into error. This has been his misfortune; and his punishment
has followed as a consequence. The Bible contains many good moral
precepts; but these are, by Christians, thought little of, compared with
its doctrines. Faith is all important. By faith, barbarous Calvin caused
Servetus to be burnt by a slow fire; and through faith, St. Austin, that
drunken debauchee, obtained a good report.

The Bible is at war with man’s reasoning powers; and, like a land
pirate, has held up false lights, which instead of conducting man to the
haven of happiness and safety, has caused him to make shipwreck on the
rocks and shoals of religious dogmas. Man is lost in no other sense than
that, the loss of his reason. To recover _that_, and bring it into full
exercise, is all the Saviour he needs. His moral path is as clear as
light. God, or Nature, has made it a law of man’s existence that he must
love happiness, ease, and enjoyment; and also, that he must hate pain
and trouble in every stage and form. This law is forced upon him
independent of his choice. It is ever present to his senses, till he
ceases to exist, or to be rational. This is man’s stock of moral
material furnished by God, or Nature. How clear, then, is his duty! He
has but to follow out this law, by the aid of his reasoning, judging,
and comparing powers. It will never lead him wrong. He requires no
Bible, no Saviour; he is never lost; he has no incomprehensible
doctrines to support or defend. Unlike the sectarian, he feels no
disposition to persecute others who differ from him in matters of faith;
he has no angry God to propel him on to fight for his glory; he can
balance up every night his moral account of the day; and if he has
followed out the law of his nature, by augmenting his own, and also the
happiness of his fellow beings, and lightened the load of human ills
around him, he in truth is the good man, be his faith little or much.
That the following work may forward moral improvement, and encourage
moderation and universal good will among the human family, is the
sincere wish of

THE AUTHOR




DETAILED CONTENTS


OLD TESTAMENT

PREFACE.—Free Discussion; the right to use it in examining the
Scriptures; its certainty in destroying error and establishing
truth—Extract from Dr. Blair’s sermon on Candor—Motives of the author in
laying his work before the public.

GENERAL INTRODUCTION.—Object of the book—Intolerance and persecution of
Christian sects—Their abuse of Infidels and calumnious treatment of
Thomas Paine—His name and services appreciated by Liberals—Pernicious
influence of the Bible upon morals—Knowledge of the laws of our
existence the only sure guide to wisdom, happiness, and virtue.

GOD’S CHOSEN PEOPLE.—Character and situation of the Jews—Their treatment
by Jehovah—Why were they chosen, and did they answer the end of their
choice?—Probable reasoning of the Jewish God—Account of his visit to
Abram and Sarah, and their reception and treatment of him—The
consequences to the Jews of considering themselves the chosen people—The
five books said to have been written by Moses—Treatment of Hagar and her
child—Jehovah and the Jews.

CHAPTER I.—From the Creation to the Deluge.

