CHAPTER I. FROM THE CREATION TO THE DELUGE


FROM what has before been written, the reader is no doubt convinced,
that the writer of this work does not believe the Bible to have any
claim to divine authority; but is entirely, from beginning to end, a
collection of absurd tales, of historic facts, and of personages that
have no foundation in truth, which unfortunately, by being considered of
divine origin, has generated a train of calamities destructive to the
peace and welfare of the human race. And to account for its hav-ing
gained credit, and got such strong foothold in the world, we have only
to consider that _fable_ is the elder sister of history; that nations
have run a long career of incidents, mostly fabulous, before any
appearance of authentic history made its way in the world. What took
place in those days may be considered like things taking place in the
dark.

From such fabulous materials, then, national history always commences.
Not that the writers or authors intend to deceive and impose on
posterity; they write what they believe; what they have been told, and
what is generally credited in those days. Here, then, we discover the
Bible to be of use to us, in showing to what lamentable extent poor
mortals have sincerely erred in following the legendary tales of former
times. And now, that the bandage is removed from our eyes, let us all
use our best exertions to spread knowledge among those, who, with us,
are seeking after truth, but who have till now sought it where it is not
to be found.

The authors of the Bible, no doubt, followed in the same track as those
who are called profane writers. They wrote what had been told them by
their forefathers. Hence the miracles and wonders, credited by them, of
the most extravagant nature, that never did and never could take place;
and unfortunately, for the peace and happiness of mortals, by giving
credit to such things, they, for ages, shut up every avenue that would
otherwise have led them to the temple of truth.

To believe the account of Adam’s transgression, in connection with all
the circumstances attending it, to be a matter of fact, appears hardly
possible for any man of sane mind. Yet millions there are, who never
have had a doubt of its being literally true. Whoever first wrote it,
did so from tradition or hearsay, as this is the origin of all national
history. It is not impossible but that every nation of antiquity had a
similar commencement; because, as history did not appear till hundreds
of years after the facts related are said to have taken place, it
follows that hearsay evidence is the _best_ and _only_ evidence that can
be obtained. If this is a correct view of the strange tales related in
the Bible; then, the more strange and impossible the greater glory is
given to God, by swallowing all down, and asking no questions.

The Bible commences, as to persons, with—first, Jehovah, Adam, and Eve,
and, according to the orthodox Christians, the Devil was near at hand.
Here, then, we have before us, according to Bible history, Jehovah, God
of all, about to form or make a world, and put on it both man and beast.
This was done without consulting in any way whatever, with Adam and Eve,
who were to be placed at the head of all creation. Every circumstance
that would take place to Adam and Eve, and their posterity, throughout
all ages, was planned, approved of, and finally settled, in the mind of
Jehovah, before they had life or being.

Here we have a God knowing all that will take place; and arranging
circumstances favorable to its fulfilment. On the other hand, Adam and
Eve were ignorant of the past, the present, and also of the future. Only
notice the infinite difference between the two contracting parties. I
wish the reader to keep this in view, as it respects what is termed the
fall of our first parents. In all ages of the Christian superstition,
the fall of Adam has been urged as a justification of God’s quarrel with
the human race.

Let us examine this subject calmly. It is but justice that this should
be done; since from one hundred thousand pulpits in the different
nations of the earth, the priests never fail to praise and thank the
Lord for his goodness to the descendants of Adam. I, on the other hand,
will honestly, though feebly, advocate the cause of poor, _libelled,
condemned, priest-ridden Man_. If, before our first parents had been
called into life, they had been informed on what conditions _they_ and
their _posterity_ were to receive it, together with the final destiny of
ninety out of every hundred of their unfortunate race, they would no
doubt have exclaimed, “For humanity’s sake, let us forever sleep in the
womb of chaos!” It is the common practice from the pulpit, as also from
the writings of the orthodox Christians, to libel the human race, by
saying, that man has rebelled against God, and turned from him; when the
truth is, that in all ages and nations, man, has been seeking after the
best God he could find, and God; has always remained the great
_Unknown_, while man, in whatever state we find him, “savage, saint, or
sage,” has been endeavoring to find out God.

This has always been his misfortune. By trying to find out the absent
and unknown God, he has, in his imagination, invented and followed a
thousand foolish whims, till, losing all correct ideas of moral
rectitude, he has died of old age without arriving at the knowledge of
_whom or what_ to worship. Whereas, if he had not troubled himself at
all about his maker, and, by the aid of his reasoning powers, had come
to the just conclusion, that as he knew not how, nor where to find God,
it would follow that it was the business of his maker, and not _his_ to
instruct in the right way to worship the true God. This mode of
reasoning will be reprobated by Christians as horrid and wicked; but in
reply, it may be asked, to what amount of knowledge have they arrived by
all their seeking after him?

We now return to the Bible account of Adam and Eve’s creation. The
position that justice, strict justice, is due on the part of God towards
his new creation, must never be lost sight of in our investigations. If
any thing like trickery or injustice on his part is recorded, we,
without hesitation, denounce it as a libel on his character, and totally
unworthy of the least credit. In reviewing the Old and New Testament, as
being considered a Divine Revelation, this criterion will be always
referred to; for, if any writings purporting to be of Divine authority,
represent their author to be any thing otherwise than a God impartial
and just, such writings will, by the author of this work, be considered
entirely unworthy of the broad seal of Heaven, and as fully deserving of
being held up to human beings as false, and a flagrant imposition on the
credulity of mankind.

And here the reader is reminded, that we have now before us, in the
creation of man, a scene of the most surprising nature. A God, infinite
in wisdom, unbounded in power, about to bring into existence a race of
beings; he, on his part, possessing all knowledge of the past, the
present, and also of the future; and they, on their part, entirely
passive, not being consulted as to their organization, their wishes, or
the consequences that would result to their progeny. From such a
position, what ought we to expect, in order that the being about to be
made, might have a fair point from which to start in his untried career?
Would we not suppose that every advantage should have been given to the
party who had no voice concerning his future destiny, nor that of his
race? The smallest omission in providing for or securing his first
movements, would be fatal to his happiness, and also that of his race.

That no such precaution, on the part of the God of the Bible, was
pursued towards his new made creatures, will be fully proved by the
examination of the events recorded as having taken place in the Garden
of Eden! Whatever were the passions or the inclinations included in the
physical organization of our first parents, they had not any control
over them whatever, because of the impossibility of their being
consulted in a state of non-existence. Whatever they were then, and,
also, what was to be their future destiny, was known to Jehovah only; to
Adam and Eve, it was all unknown. This, then, was the state of the
pretended Creator and the creatures.

We will pass over the account of the six days’ creation, together with
the serpent’s deceiving Eve by the aid of what the Christians believe to
be the Devil. It deserves no comment, except, that from the account
given in the Bible, we may infer, that happy would it have been for Adam
if he had remained an old bachelor; for, in that case, Satan perhaps
would neither have scraped acquaintance with the serpent, nor ever
thought of lurking about the garden. But the source of all human
misfortune, according to the Old and New Testaments, is included in
Eve’s eating the forbidden fruit. We may ask, why was one tree forbidden
among so many? Certainly as a trap, set to catch the inexperienced,
virtuous, and harmless Eve. What humbug! to make such a fuss about
Adam’s being alone, without a help-mate; and: at the very time the rib
operation was going on, Jehovah, stood by, and knew whatever he might
say, that the woman, on leaving her ribship, would damn all that he had
declared to be good. Can we, dare we, charge the Governor of the
Universe with such trickery? It must never be lost sight of, that the
very prohibition of one tree, would be certain, in their state of
ignorance, to produce the consequence that followed: viz., to induce
Eve, from curiosity, to partake of it. Is it any thing short of insanity
to suppose that such dreadful consequences would follow so trifling an
offence?

This forbidden tree had something in it, that, to us, seems very
strange. It was to impart knowledge; and as the fruit was inviting to
the eye, and a desire existing to obtain knowledge, Eve fell a victim to
her unfortunate curiosity. Nor was this all. Until Eve ate thereof, it
appears that the happy couple did not perceive their want of clothing.
Instantly they set to work to repair this first mishap, by sewing leaves
together to make aprons. But in this stage of the business, the Lord
seems to have some compassion left, for he, “_the Lord, made coats of
skins and clothed them_”—poor Adam and Eve being ignorant of the
strength and durability of leaf aprons. We may suppose the Lord as
thinking or saying to Adam,—“Why, this will never do; you must have
something more lasting, or else, by every wind that blows, you will be
no more than a bundle of tattered rags.” Soon, therefore, by the Lord’s
assistance, poor Adam and Eve jumped into a new suit of clothes! And, to
make sure of man’s destruction, by taking that which was forbidden, the
serpent was permitted to point out the advantages that would follow; so
that the appearance of the fruit, and the desire to get knowledge, urged
on by the serpent, together with Eve’s ignorance that any thing like
lying existed in the Garden of Eden, the disobedience of our first
parents was, by ninety-nine chances out of a hundred, secured, and the
damnation of their posterity made sure.

Now, to ascribe such conduct to God, such barefaced design to quarrel
with his new creation, is horrid in the extreme, and would disgrace (bad
as it is said he is) the very Devil himself. And if the account is not
true, if the facts, as recorded, did not take place, but are altogether
to be considered as an allegory, then it follows, that human redemption
is an allegory, also; and the whole fabric of the Jewish and Christian
religion falls to the ground.

In dismissing this father of humbugs, (the fall of our first parents,)
which ended in Adam and Eve’s expulsion from Paradise, by way of
consolation, we may in justice say, “Farewell, Adam and Eve; you have
had but a rough beginning. God and the Devil have both conspired to make
you unhappy, But never mind, do your best; comfort and console each
other; the whole world is before you. This garden trade has proved a
failure altogether. If you can but procure a spade, a hoe, and shovel,
you will in time get on; and, as your present misfortune originated from
that unforeseen quarrel in the garden, live in peace, and share equally
in your troubles, and also in your prosperity. Things are not so bad,
after all; and if Adam’s wound in the side is not yet entirely healed,
it is your duty, Eve, as a good wife, to pay particular attention to it.
It is for your interest, also; for if Jehovah should, be again offended
with you, as in the garden, and take from Adam the opposite rib from
which you sprang, and of it make a second Eve, the serpent would pay
another visit to mar your happiness, and your troubles would have no
end.”

What kind of religion there was, if any, in those days, we know not; but
Cain and Abel, Adam’s sons, appear to have been worshippers of Jehovah,
notwithstanding the expulsion of their parents from Paradise. We have it
recorded that, in the course of their worship, Cain’s offering was of
the “fruits of the earth,” and Abel’s was “a lamb with the fat thereof.”
Cain’s offering had no respect paid to it; but, on the other hand,
Abel’s offering was respected. The reason why the one was rejected and
the other accepted, we have no means of knowing; at any rate, Jehovah
knew that murder would follow as a consequence. Here, then, we have an
account of the _first religious quarrel_, and the murderous spirit that
was connected with it. And history confirms this truth, that the same
murderous spirit has always, more or less, shown itself in all religious
disputes; but more dreadful and furious in the Jewish and Christian
religions than in any others. From Cain, the first religious murderer,
to the present day, intolerance and blood appear to have stained the
pages of Jewish and Christian history. And now, that those days of
persecution have passed away, let us do all in our power to prevent
their recurrence.

Following the history of the antediluvians, in Genesis, chap. vi., we
are not a little surprised to find a new race of, beings on earth. We
find, that after “_men began to multiply an the face of the earthy and
daughters were born unto them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of
men, that they were fair, and they took them wives of all which they
chose, and they bare children unto them; the same became mighty men,
which were of old men of renown_.” Here we may ask, is it possible to
believe in the truth of this account? But for its being recorded in the
Bible, no person, having one grain of common sense, would for a moment
give it the least credit. But its truth rests on the same authority as
the fall of our first parents, and no doubt is equally true. We are
told, by Christ, that in heaven, they “_neither marry nor are given in
marriage_”; but here it seems that the sons of God were tired of their
restraint, and broke loose, and came a wooing the pretty young girls of
those days: and, from the account, the courtship was short; for they
took to them, wives of all that they chose. Good heavens! how the young
men of those days must have stared to see the young ladies So pliable!
If, in those days, “bustles” were not worn by the girls, the sons of God
soon put them, one and all, in a bustle. Wonder how those gentlemen were
dressed, that the women became so soon captivated! If, in the course of
their negociations, some girl, more thoughtful than the rest, had asked
her strange lover what employment he intended to follow, he would have
been stuck fast to have given an answer. After all, if this account is
to be considered true, heaven is not in so happy a state as is
represented; for the sons of God became uneasy in their confinement, and
preferred a love frolic to Gabriel’s evening song. As heaven is
considered to have the most enchanting music, perhaps the new visiters
brought with them their instruments, and began their courtship by a
heavenly jig. It does not appear that Jehovah exhibited any displeasure
on account of the sons of God leaving the blessed abodes and marrying
the daughters of men. For aught we know, it was an experiment to improve
the antediluvian race.

But leaving this point for ministers of the gospel to settle, it seems
as if their progeny were a jolly set of fellows, and became “_men of
renown._” Taking, then, a review of the world from its creation until it
was destroyed by the deluge, we discover, that if the facts recorded are
true, and did really take place, it was one continued chapter of
blunders. First, Adam is made and set to work. It is next discovered
that he requires a partner; but, behold! no materials are left with
which to make one. Adam is then laid up in dock; taken to pieces like an
old steamboat; one of his timbers removed, and a woman appears. Things
go on well, but only for a short time. Eve soon longs for fruit; she
takes it; then, lo, and wonder! she and her husband discover, and for
the first time feel, a sense of decency. They set to work to make
aprons; this is but lost labor. The Lord, it appears by the account, was
not in the garden, but on returning, found his servants partly clothed.
He informs them of their error; sets to work and protects them from wind
and weather. To be sure, they were not turned out naked; the very ground
was cursed for their bad conduct, and thorns and thistles would spring
up to annoy them. Whether the Garden of Eden was given up altogether, or
another gardener employed to keep it, we have no account.

This, at any rate, was paying dear for an apple, or peach. We find,
however, that our first parents did not despair; for they soon raised a
family. If this expulsion did actually take place, to talk of family
troubles is nothing, compared to this unfortunate couple. For one single
fault, to be driven as outcasts from their only known home, to wander
they did not know where, without experience or capital to begin with! Of
all the houseless wanderers, their lot seems to be the most piteous to
behold.

Again, whether “the sons of God” Were permitted to descend and marry the
daughters of men by way of improving the race, we know not. If
improvement was Jehovah’s object in this strange union, another failure,
equal to former ones, was the result. The antediluvians, one and all,
were so wicked, that “the Lord repented that he had made man on the
earth; and it grieved him at his heart.” One exception only, in the
family of Noah; to whom Jehovah immediately communicated his
determination to _destroy man and beast by a flood_—Noah’s family only
excepted.

To conclude this chapter, a few remarks will suffice.—If the foregoing
account of the creation is maintained to be truly the work of Infinite
Wisdom and Power, what a picture presents itself to the mind of a
sensible and reasonable man! Can it be possible for such an one to
believe it? His mind must reject it as the most barefaced falsehood that
ever could be proposed to human credence; as impossible to be true, and
equally impossible to be credited by any person having the least claim
on common sense. And yet, in this crazy world, to give credit to it, is
to be respectable; but to deny its truth, is to be infamous, and an
object of Christian horror, unworthy to live in this world, and sure of
damnation in the next. No man living can get over this certain
conclusion, that if the Governor of the Universe did act towards Adam
and Eve, together with the rest of the antediluvians, as is recorded in
the Bible, he made them for no other apparent end than to quarrel with
them, so as to have a pretence to punish and torment creatures who had
no power to resist. And can such a Being be the object of love and
adoration? The Devil himself is not painted in colors half so black.

But enough has been said on this subject. We turn from it in disgust,
and boldly say to all the world, that no such God ever did, nor does now
exist; nor did the facts recorded in the Bible, of Adam’s fall, _ever
take place._




