CHAPTER III. FROM THE CONFUSION OF TONGUES TO THE BIRTH OF MOSES


THE object to be accomplished in this chapter is, to show, from the
Bible history itself, the folly and absurdity of admitting the Jehovah
of the Bible to be the Supreme Ruler of the Universe; for, after
destroying every thing that had life, by the flood, Jehovah, somewhat
like a conquering hero, returns to heaven. The war with the human race
being over, Divine vengeance is satisfied. No religious worship, that we
read of, was then known on the earth. But, behold! a new outbreak
occurs, that requires the immediate interference of the God of Israel.

In Genesis, chapter xi., it is recorded, that the then inhabitants of
the earth began to build a tower, the top of which was to reach the
heavens, that they might make to themselves a great name, and be no more
scattered abroad on the earth. What crime it could be considered by
Jehovah, for men to unite in building a tower so lofty that the top
would reach the heavens, we know not. However ignorant the then
inhabitants of the earth were, the Lord knew that they could not annoy
him by the erection of a tower to any height they might be inclined to
raise it. The writer of the account makes it appear, that Jehovah became
uneasy at the progress the workmen were making, and at last could bear
it no longer; so he came down, as the term is, and confounded their
speech in such a manner that they could not understand each other.

Can it be possible, for men who reflect at all, to believe such glaring
nonsense? The writers of the Bible have not only made a God unjust and
vengeful, but they have put into his head such foolish whims, as, that
after having destroyed a world by a deluge, the innocent with the
guilty, he came down from heaven to scare away carpenters and
bricklayers from their honest labor; and have made him virtually to
say—“Be off! Clear out! I will not permit you to hammer away here!” The
conduct of the Bible God towards the builders of Babel, and, in fact,
the whole of the then human family, seems to be like that of an
unfeeling father, who cares not for his children, and who is also
equally indifferent as to whether the human race worshipped him, or fell
down to worship stocks or stones; for, instead of ordering them to build
an altar to the true and living God, he ordered them off, to wander
abroad on the earth, and do the best they could. And here an opportunity
was lost of insuring their conversion; since, as they were all of one
language and speech, how easy to convert the whole race at once! Now,
here we may discover a _man-made God_. Sometimes he is all jealousy for
his own name—all fury against idolatry; at other times, he seems to care
but little for the happiness of his creatures, or the honor of his name.
After having compelled the builders of Babel to quit their undertaking,
Jehovah returns back to heaven; and from the silence of Bible history,
he does not appear to have superintended human affairs at all, for
hundreds of years after. And now, ye ministers of the Gospel of grace,
what have you to say in vindication of the very existence of such a God?
The origin of your God is of man’s creation; he never had a real
existence.

After an absence of many years, having given up, to all appearance, any
interest in human affairs, Jehovah turns his attention to Abram and his
family, and adopts them as his chosen people. And from this account, we
clearly discover the absurdity of believing the God of Abram to be the
universal sovereign; for, from the moment of the adoption of Abram and
his seed forever, from that very moment the family affairs of Abram,
Isaac and Jacob, seem to engross the attention of Jehovah; and, while I
am writing, I blush for shame at the credulity of mankind in professing
to believe such contemptible trash. What can be more weak and ridiculous
than to suppose that the Lord and two angels came to the tent of Abram,
and went through all the ceremonies of a pastoral visit,—such as washing
of feet and taking water until dinner was prepared, and that while
partaking of Abram’s hospitality, they inquired for his wife, and then
renewed what before had been promised, namely—that Sarah, Abram’s wife,
should have a son in her old age?

One remarkable feature, throughout the whole of the Bible, presents
itself. It is this: that in every movement Jehovah makes among his
favorite people the Jews, and in all the correspondence he holds with
Abram and his seed, every thing is done by way of experiment on that
people; as if Jehovah did not know what would happen until he had gained
information by _actual experiment!_ In the case of the builders of the
Tower of Babel, it is said—“_And the Lord came down to see the city, and
the tower which the children of men builded._” And again—"_Go to, let us
go down, and there confound their language_.” And also, in the case of
Sodom, the Lord told Abram concerning the cry of the wickedness of the
inhabitants of Sodom. The Lord said to Abram—"_I will go down now, and
see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which
is come unto me; if not, I will know._”—[Genesis xviii. 21.] Abram,
having heard of the intended destruction of the Sodomites, remonstrates
with Jehovah on the injustice of destroying the innocent with the
guilty. Then follows the pleading of Abram with the Lord, in favor of
Sodom; and from the willingness of the Lord to comply with the request
of Abram,—if the old patriarch had had the moral courage to have gone on
with one more request,—Sodom might have been saved. The personage who
communed with Abram is, by the inspired writer, called the “_Judge of
all the earth_.” The same who had that day dined with Abram, and to whom
Abram said, “_Behold, now I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord,
which am but dust and ashes_”!

And now, patient reader, what have Christians to believe in reference to
this matter? Why, they must believe that the great immortal God came to
the earth from his Unknown abode, in the likeness of _man_, in company
with two angels; that he called on Abram, who was surrounded by his
flocks and herds, dwelling in a tent, perhaps inferior to our Indian
log-houses; that he, the Judge of all the earth, with two of his angels,
were (according to eastern hospitality) presented with water to drink,
and also, water to wash their feet—a practice most refreshing in a warm
climate. An invitation was given them to dine, which they accepted and
so particular is the narrative, that, what they had for dinner is
mentioned: the calf was instantly slain, and the baking commenced.

And here we may inquire, whether or not this circumstance did really
take place, as it is recorded? If it did, then the believers in the
Bible, as a Divine Revelation, have to believe that the Great God of
all, the Universal Ruler of the Universe, came on earth to the tent of
Abram, in the form of a man, with two of the angelic host; and that they
_then and there_ had their feet washed, and sat down to a dinner of veal
and griddle cakes, and did eat thereof, and drink water. Now, if Moses,
or any other pretended inspired writer, wrote this, I ask, is not the
God of Abram a _man-made God?_ He is said to have feet that required
washing, and an appetite that required food. He had a mouth, teeth, and
also a stomach to receive food; and we may infer that he had hands, for
it is not recorded that Abram cut his victuals, or fed him or the angels
with a spoon.

If the believers of the Bible consider that the foregoing account is
allegorical, and not to be considered as having really taken place, it
then follows that human redemption is allegorical, also; for the promise
made to Abram was, that _In thee and in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed_. This promise included the mission of Jesus,
who was to save his people from their sins, and also to _heal the
nations, and to bring in everlasting righteousness_. Christians, then,
if they believe the Bible to be a Divine Revelation, must believe that
the Judge of the whole earth, while at dinner, in promising Abram a son,
included also, in that promise, the mission of Jesus, _the Saviour of
the world._

And here we may notice the views that Abram had of the Supreme Judge of
all. As he appeared to Abram in the form of a man, and as such was
treated by him, Abram brought forth water to wash the feet of the Lord,
and invited him to dine, which he did; which is proof positive that
Abram considered that the Lord was in the habit of taking refreshment,
such as eating and drinking, or he would never have thought of giving
the Lord such an invitation. If this account be true, the New Testament
must be false, when it declares that _no man hath seen God at any time,
and that none can see him and live_. But of Abram it is written, that he
saw the Lord, face to face, and also that they dined together; and, as
if to remove all doubt of its truth, it mentions what they dined on,
namely—veal and cakes. It therefore follows, that the account, as
recorded of the Lord’s dining with Abram, must be taken in its plain and
literal sense; because it is connected with the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and also of Lot’s wife being turned _into a pillar of salt_;
which account is referred to as having taken place, by the writers of
the New Testament. After the Lord and the two angels had retired from
dinner, the Lord informed Abram of his errand to the above cities; which
was, to find out whether their ill-fated inhabitants were as wicked as
they had been reported; as he (the Lord) was determined to know. It was
then that Abram began to plead with the Lord, and to show the injustice
of destroying the innocent with the guilty, as from the nature of the
crime for which the people of Sodom and Gomorrah were to be destroyed,
all the women and children were innocent. Abram, therefore, saw
immediately the horrid cruelty and injustice of such destruction as was
about to overtake the unfortunate inhabitants of Sodom. In the
discussion, Abram had the best of the argument, but his efforts were
unavailing. Fire came down from heaven, and they were burnt alive,
innocent and guilty together.

From the account it appears, that after the Lord parted with Abram, he
also took his leave of the angels; and what became of the Lord, the
Bible is silent; but the angels, after having dined with Abram, took
supper with Lot. This Lot seems to be the only man in Sodom that was
worth saving; and he certainly acted very strange: for when his townsmen
insisted on knowing who the angels were, and on what business they came,
Lot offered to turn into the street his two innocent daughters, to be
dealt with according to the wishes of those vile wretches, if they would
but permit him to lodge and entertain the strangers. Certainly, the
morality of the Bible is most sublime, and the ways of the Jewish God
_past finding out!_

The case of Lot’s wife is, to all appearance, very strange. Her crime of
looking back, would appear to us much less than that of her husband’s in
turning his daughters into the street. The history of Lot winds up with
a strange account, and not very favorable to strict morality, namely—the
project of his daughters in making him drunk, and the disgusting
consequences that followed. Thus, it is clear, that Lot’s wife (bless
the good old woman!) was the best, in a moral point of view, in the
whole family; and only for looking back on her beloved home, she was
treated like a dead sow, by being put into pickle. To conclude this
tirade of nonsense and folly, we will add—“_remember Lot’s wife_.”

It appears from Bible history, that when Abram left his own country, he
was any thing but rich; and as his substance consisted in a few heads of
cattle, a famine soon overtook him as he journeyed, which induced him to
go down into Egypt, the then granary of the earth. To prevent any
unpleasant consequences that might result to Abram, because of the
beauty of Sarah, his wife, she was instructed to call her husband her
brother. It turned out as was expected, for she was recommended to
Pharaoh, and taken into the royal palace. Immediately, presents came
unto Abram in quick succession, consisting of “_sheep and oxen, and he
asses; men-servants and maidservants; and she asses and camels_.” But
the Lord, ever watchful over Abram’s affairs, troubled Pharaoh and his
house; and when Pharaoh discovered the cause of this evil, he
remonstrated with Abram for his duplicity, and returned his wife
undefiled. So kind, however, was the Lord to Abram, that the presents
were made before the cheat was discovered, and he came out of Egypt a
rich man.

This may be said to be the beginning of Abram’s good luck; and we may
suppose that in returning home to their old pasturage, Sarah would laugh
and exclaim—“See what it is to have a handsome wife!” Another famine
will make brother Abram and sister Sarah the richest couple in pastoral
life.

In the course of events, Abram and Sarah had recourse again to the same
trick, on Abimelech, King of Gerar, which had been acted with so much
success in Egypt. Sarah, on account of her beauty, _at ninety years of
age_, was taken by the King; but the Lord, ever the guardian of Sarah’s
virtue, came to Abimelech in a dream, and threatened him and all his
house with death, if Sarah was not given up to her lawful husband. The
King remonstrated with the Lord, and justified his conduct by declaring,
that both Abram and Sarah had deceived him; and said—“_In the integrity
of my hearty and innocency of hands, have I done this._” The Lord
replied—“_I know that you did it innocently, for I withheld thee from,
sinning against me; therefore, suffered I thee not to touch her._”
Again, as before, presents of cattle, men-servants, and maid-servants,
with a thousand pieces of silver into the bargain, were given to Abram,
with his wife, who is as chaste as morning dew.

I have dwelt longer on this account than I at first intended, merely to
show the folly in believing that the Almighty Lord of all had any
concern in such contemptible fooleries as are recorded in the family
concerns of Abram. One thing, however, is omitted; and that is, the
quarrel between Sarah and Hagar. The tent or house became too hot to
hold those rival women; at last, Sarah triumphed by turning out Hagar
and her love-begotten child, which demanded the Lord’s interference, and
gave poor Abram no small share of trouble.

From the moment that Jehovah adopted the family of Abram, the Bible
account warrants us in supposing that the family concerns of that
patriarch particularly engaged the attention of Jehovah; since, for
every trifling concern that took place, the Lord was applied to in order
to settle the matter. Rebekah, the mother of Jacob and Esau, when about
to become a mother, applied to the Lord for information respecting her
singular situation; and the Lord informed her that she would be the
mother of two celebrated nations, and satisfied her mind as to every
other inquiry she made. And here we may ask, how it was that the Lord,
in those days, was so easy of access? How every gossipping old woman
could lay her case before the Lord, and wait his advice and answer? The
reply is at hand. The whole account of the Lord’s saying unto Abram, or
the Lord’s saying unto Moses, and again, “_the word of the Lord came
unto Moses, saying,”_ is all humbug: no such word ever came; no such
conversation ever took place.

Whoever wrote the Book of Genesis, has placed Jehovah in an immoral
point of view; as keeping company with unprincipled knaves, and as
acting without any regard to the strict rules of justice and mercy; as
having a system of favoritism, which does not admit of administering
impartial justice. The case of Jacob and Esau is directly opposed to
truth and impartiality. Esau was, in a moral point of view, evidently
the best of the two; but Jacob was Jehovah’s choice. Esau, according to
Bible history, was a hardy, industrious, and generous man. Jacob, on the
other hand, was his mother’s pet; and the deception which he and his
mother played on old Isaac, who was blind, is in strict accordance with
the conduct of all the Lord’s favorites. Jacob, according to Bible
history, was, through his whole life, full of deception and trickery. He
could lie and take a false oath to deceive his blind father; and by
deceit, deprive his brother Esau of his lawful right of inheritance. And
yet the Lord was with him, and connived at all his baseness!

But Jacob, conscious of his wickedness, and justly deserving his
brother’s resentment, fled to his uncle for protection. On his way, the
Lord appeared to him in visions; and, notwithstanding his lying and
false swearing to his father, promised him divine assistance. Jacob
still acted in the same crafty manner, even with the Lord himself;
always having his own self-interest in view; for, after the Lord had
said, Genesis xxvii., 15, “_And behold, I am with thee, and will keep
thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into
this land; for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have
spoken to thee of_”—even after this promise from the Lord, in verse 20
it is said—“And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, if God will be with me, and
will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and
raiment to put on, so that I come again to my father’s house in peace,
*then shall the Lord be my God*.”

Well done, Jacob! that is making a good Jew bargain. Jehovah and Jacob
both kept their word; for Jacob married his two cousins, the daughters
of his uncle Laban, and staid with him until he, by the help of the
Lord, contrived to jockey old Laban out of the best of his cattle, and
ran away back to his own father’s house, taking with him, by stealth,
the gods of Laban his father. Thus did Jacob not only triumph over the
heathen gods, by carrying them off captive, but continued to adhere to
Jehovah, his own God, who did not desert him in his recreant tricks. It
is not to be wondered that the sons of Jacob should be so base in their
actions, after the example of their father; and considering what a mixed
breed they were, having so many mothers. Their conduct towards their
brother Joseph is a sample of their actions; and although Bible history
records the good fortune of Joseph, he, among the rest of his brethren,
acted the tyrant as soon as power would permit him so to do.

This chapter will conclude with a few remarks on the life of Joseph, and
his career in Egypt. The fame and good fortune of Joseph, depended on
his gift of interpreting _dreams_, which finally made him, under
Pharaoh, _Lord of the land_; and according to his predictions, _seven
years of famine were to succeed seven years of plenty_; by which, Joseph
planned the entire subjugation of Egypt. He, by the authority of
Pharaoh, bought up all the grain left of the seven years’ plenty; and
when the famine came, the grain was sold to the inhabitants at the price
that Joseph was pleased to put upon it. But the famine continued so long
that all the money was spent. The poor, half-starved people told Joseph
their situation, and offered their cattle in exchange for grain; the
cattle were taken by him; at last, all their cattle disappeared, and the
people continued in want; then, offer was made of their lands, which
Joseph also took; and with their lands, themselves; so the government
took all. But after the famine, Joseph proposed to furnish them with
seed wherewith to sow their fields, on condition that, ever after,
Pharaoh was to have one-fifth of the yearly produce. How kind of Joseph!
Now, if the Bible be true concerning this matter, I ask, could anything
be more unjust and cruel?




