CHAPTER VI. THE REIGNS OF SAUL, DAVID, AND SOLOMON


SAMUEL, the last of the Judges of Israel, when very old, appointed his
sons to judge the people—“But they took bribes and perverted judgment.”
The Israelites complained to Samuel of their injustice, and demanded a
King, like other nations. Now, considering the unsettled state of the
Jews for hundreds of years, “when there was no King in Israel, and every
man did that which was right in his own eyes” the request was
reasonable; for they were tired of the unsettled state of their national
affairs. Samuel inquired of the Lord what was to be done? The reply from
the Lord was, that Samuel was to let them have a King, agreeably to
their wishes; at the same time, it displeased Jehovah, who chose Saul
without consulting the people. His choice is recorded to have been
pleasing to the Lord, who gave Saul a good character. This kingly
government seemed fair in the beginning, and we ought to expect it would
have proved a change for the better, as it was by Jehovah’s own
appointment At the commencement of Saul’s reign, he was ordered to go
and fight against the Amalekites. The order was thus given:—“_Thus saith
the Lord of Hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to Israel; how he
laid wait for him in the way when he came up from Egypt_” This offence
was given some hundred years before, when the Israelites were passing to
the land of promise; when the Amalekites opposed them, and refused to
let them go through their land. To us, this vengeance appears cruel and
unjust. This was visiting the sins of the fathers on the children with a
vengeance. At the present day, no tyrant could be found that would
imitate such base conduct as is fathered on the all-wise, all-powerful
Ruler of the World.

The following statement will serve to make the situation of Saul clearly
understood by the readers of this work, and will show the nature of
Saul’s offence for which he and his family were so severely
punished:—Some four or five hundred years before Saul was born, the
Israelites were opposed by the Amalekites passing through their land;
and when Saul was chosen King, by Jehovah, his first campaign was to go
and destroy the then inhabitants of Amalek, for an offence committed by
their forefathers long since dead and gone. Saul was ordered by Jehovah
not to save old or young, but to kill (murder) all, from the suckling to
hoary old age. He fulfilled his orders as he thought, excepting that of
taking their King prisoner, and the best of the cattle to sacrifice to
Jehovah’s honor; and for this one act of mercy, Saul was deposed, and
David chosen in his stead. Now, if Jehovah knew that Saul would not obey
the orders given, why was he chosen to be their King at all? And if
Jehovah was disappointed, where was his foreknowledge? Does that Power
and Wisdom that rules the Universe, blunder in this way? What say you,
Christian ministers?

According to what is written, the Jewish God repented that he made this
choice! Did he repent? We are told that when Saul was put down, and
David made King in his stead, that Jehovah could not, like man, repent
in putting down David, though he had done so as it respected Saul. To
father such inconsistency on the Author of Nature, is an outrage on
justice and common sense. Again, to punish with fire and sword a whole
nation, for what their forefathers had done five hundred years before;
and to make the God of the Universe the author of such a command,—if
blasphemy exists against God, this is it to perfection.

From the short reign of Saul, we cannot form a decided opinion as to his
kingly character; but one thing is clear, from the Scriptures, that his
act of mercy towards the King of Amalek, offended Jehovah, and both
himself and family suffered grievously for it; for Samuel told Saul,
that’ in consequence of his sparing Agag, the King, his royal authority
was taken from him, and _given to a man better than he_. Well might a
poet, who wrote on this subject about forty years ago, call Samuel an
impostor, and exclaim—:

    “From haunts of men be that impostor driven,
    Who thinks humanity incenses heaven.”

In concluding this account of Saul, we may venture to affirm, that he
was one of the best Kings on record; his only failing appears to have
been his humanity.

We now come to the reign of David, “_he man after God’s own heart._” It
appears that his slaying Goliah, first brought him into notice; for
which act David was to be rewarded by having Saul’s daughter in
marriage. Before this took place, however, it is recorded, in 1 Samuel
xviii., 10, “_And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit
from God came upon Saul_”; but David could play so well on some kind of
a musical instrument, that his performance drove the Devil out of the
old King. From this account it seems, if the evil spirit means a Devil,
that Jehovah kept Devils ready to start off from heaven to do any dirty
work; a very worthy practice to ascribe to the God of all! It appears
that Saul’s troubles, and the evil spirit sent to him from the Lord, had
nearly made him crazy—and well it might: but I have no pity for him,
because there is not one word of truth in the whole silly tale.

David now demands his wife, according to promise; but Saul puts a heavy
tax on his intended son-in-law, before his daughter could be given up.
The demand made by Saul on David, before he was permitted to marry his
daughter, is written in 1 Samuel xviii., 25, an account showing how well
cultivated Kings and Princes were in those days, but too filthy for me
to detail. Notwithstanding Saul was deposed, and David anointed King,
still Saul kept possession of the kingdom, and David was an object of
jealousy. At this time, the Israelites were in an unsettled state; and
David, although a King, had no resources. A part of the people were with
David, but the bulk of the nation adhered to Saul.

Those two Kings, then, both of whom had been chosen by Jehovah, were
still opposing each other. Now, what folly to suppose that either of
them were appointed by the Governor of all the Earth! Even admitting the
historical part to be true, who can believe that Infinite Wisdom had any
part in so unsettled a form of government? it being like unto what
England was at one time of her history, when two parties were contending
for power. What a changeable, unsettled Being do the Scriptures make the
Jewish God! and what folly to believe him to be the Sovereign Ruler of
all! The regularity and order which is every where and at all times
manifest in nature, proclaim to all nations that the Jehovah of the
Bible is not Nature’s God.

Although David had been anointed King, to the exclusion of Saul and his
house, still the old King retained his authority, and David was
compelled to be cautious how he proceeded, as Saul was jealous of him as
a rival. Now David had recourse to the following expedient:—“_And he
collected every one that was in distress, and every one that was in
debt, and every one that was discontented, and he became a captain over
them, and there were with him about four hundred men._” David, in one of
his flights from Saul, and being in want of bread, applied to Abimelech,
the priest, for five loaves; and the priest answered David, and said,
“_There is no common bread under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread,
if the young men have at least kept themselves from women._” And David
answered the priest, and said unto him, “_Of a truth, women have been
kept from us about three days, since I came out._” The reader will now
see how David began his reign, as the following incident, will also
fully confirm. The above account may be found in 1 Samuel, chapter xxi.

The following account of the progress of David and his small army, is in
1 Samuel, chapter xxv.:—David fled into the wilderness, and while there,
he heard of a rich man by the name of Nabal, who had, on a shearing,
made a feast for his shearers and friends. David embraced this
opportunity, to levy a tax on Nabal, and sent ten young men to ask for a
part of the good things prepared for the sheep shearing: “_And Nabal
answered David’s servants, and said, who is David? and who is the son of
Jesse? there be many servants now-a-days that break away every man from
his master. Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that
I have killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I know not
whence they be?_” This answer so enraged David, that he exclaimed, “The
time my army lay in the wilderness, near to the flock of Nabal, we took
nothing from them, and also prevented others from stealing of the flock,
and now I cannot get a dinner for me and my six hundred men.” “_And
David said unto his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded
on every man his sword: and David also girded on his sword: and there
went up after David about four hundred men, and two hundred abode by the
stuff._” Now, to use David’s own words, he intended to slay every man
living; Nabal, sheep shearers, and all belonging to him. Don’t forget
this was the man _after Jehovah’s own heart!_

But it happened that Abigail, Nabal’s wife, heard of her husband’s
refusal to David’s demands, and she loaded several asses with all kinds
of the best provisions, and met David as he was advancing to take
vengeance on Nabal. And when David saw her, he said, “_Blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me. For in very
deed, as the Lord God of Israel liveth which hath kept me back from
hurting thee, except thou hadst hasted, and come to meet me, surely
there had not been left unto Nabal by the morning light, any that
pisseth against the wall_.” It is recorded after this, that in about ten
days, “_the Lord smote Nabal that he died._” Christians, perhaps, will
say, it served him right; because he would not give away his dinner to
the Lord’s anointed. But to complete this account of David, it is
written that he married Nabal’s widow, and then he had sheep, goats, and
all, although he had many wives before; but, being “_a man after Gods
own heart_” we Infidels must be silent.

After the death of Saul, David being in favor with the people, and
strictly adhering to the worship of Jehovah, his reign bid fair to be
happy to himself, and to the nation at large: but he had too many wives,
and consequently his family troubles came on thick and fast. One son
rebelled against him, and flew to arms; and Solomon usurped the throne
after the death of his father, and put to death his elder brother by a
former wife, under a pretence the most frivolous, to secure himself a
safe possession of his usurped power. Another son ravished his
half-sister by another mother; and in return, the ravisher was murdered
by the brother of the violated virgin. In truth, if it is true as
recorded, David’s whole life was one continued scene of blood and
slaughter; and on his death-bed he recommended Solomon to murder
others—as his oath prevented him from doing it in his lifetime.

However strictly David obeyed Jehovah, and “turned not aside to worship
other gods,” in a moral point of view he was a wicked man. His conduct
for licentiousness was notorious. In addition to the number of wives he
had before the death of Saul, his royal master, Nathan the prophet says
that “Jehovah gave him Saul’s wives, besides”; but, not satisfied with
all this, so contemptible was his conduct, he sneaked about to obtain a
sight of an officer’s wife while in the bath. Such low, cowardly
curiosity would disgrace the driver of a dung-cart. A lady’s bath not to
be held sacred by this filthy, dirty animal, and yet to be called “the
man after God’s own heart”! His actions would disgrace the Devil, for
Satan offered no insult to Eve: his worst crime was no more than
saying—“Madam, the fruit is good, do taste, it will do you no harm, and
you will be the wiser; after all.”

Never let us forget the artifice the Lord’s anointed made use of, in
order to conceal his crime. When Uriah, his officer, came from the army
with news of importance to David, after the seduction of Bathsheba, the
cunning debauchee said, come, Uriah, do not hurry back to the camp; go
home to Bathsheba, your wife; she will be happy to see you: go home, my
faithful servant, and stay with your wife.

But Uriah refused, by saying, the officers and the army are in the open
fields, and I will not go home to take comfort in my own house. So Uriah
slept in the gate with the servants. And when David found that he had
not been home, he made him tarry another day, and that night got him
drunk. In the meantime the King wrote a letter to Joab, the Captain of
the host, and sent it by Uriah, to place him in the front of the battle,
where he would be killed. The unsuspecting Uriah then returned; to his
duty, with his death warrant in his hand; and, according to the orders
given to Joab, the commander of the host of Israel, Uriah was placed in
that part of the engagement where he fell, covered with wounds and
glory.

It will be seen by the orders sent to the Captain, concerning Uriah, by
the King, what cowardly artifice was used to murder his noble officer,
whose wife, unknown to him, had been seduced. David’s words are, “_Set
ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him
that he may be smitten and die._” Such an act would disgrace the worst
despot on earth, but it was done by “the man after God’s own heart”!
When Nathan was sent by Jehovah to David, to remind him of his
wickedness, it was done, in the way of a parable. David did not at first
discover its application: and it is recorded, that “_David’s anger was
greatly kindled against the man, and he said unto Nathan as the Lord
liveth, the man that hath done this thing shall surely die.” “Thou art
the man!_” said Nathan; and David exclaimed, “_Oh! Lord, I have
sinned._” In fact, he was found out, but for which he would not have
made this acknowledgment.

After the death of Uriah, David took her (Bathsheba) to wife, and
Jehovah made up the matter with him; first, by destroying the child, the
innocent victim who had no part in the murder; and, secondly, by saving
and pardoning David for crimes of the deepest dye: and, also, the Lord
told him, that because of his wickedness he should have discord in his
family:—“_Thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will raise up evil against
thee, out of thine house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes,
and give them unto thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the
sight of this sun._” To destroy the innocent child, who had no
participation in the crime of the father, is too shocking to be
admitted, when it is recorded as the sentence of the just and impartial
God. I know Christians will reply, that the ways of God are not as our
ways, and that it is wicked in mortals to find fault with what is done
by a Being of infinite power, wisdom, and Goodness. In reply, it is
contended that the conduct pursued on this occasion by Jehovah, is
shocking when ascribed to a God impartial and just, and that it is more
becoming mortals, like ourselves, to reject the whole story as a vile
falsehood, than to father it on that Being, or that Cause, who:

    “Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
    Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees.”

To conclude these remarks on David’s life and conduct, we ask, which is
the more reasonable supposition, that the whole account, so far as it
implicates a God of Justice, is, from beginning to end untrue? or, that
a Being of unbounded power, wisdom and goodness, should in any way
associate with so abandoned a character as King David? For myself, I
prefer the latter. I have omitted another account in the life of David,
that requires to be noticed. It is recorded in 2 Samuel, chapter xxiv.,
that David ordered the people to be numbered. One account says that
Satan, and another account says that the Lord, moved David to number the
people: no doubt it was done to get the number of the fighting men of
Israel; for doing which, the Lord was angry with David; and three modes
of punishment were submitted for the choice of the King:—“_Seven years’
famine, or to flee three months before his enemies, or to have three
days’ pestilence in the land._” The last was chosen, and it is recorded
that seventy thousand men died of the pestilence, as a punishment for
the offence of David. It is a libel on the Supreme Being to charge him
with the authorship of such injustice and cruelty. That thousands of
persons may have been cut off by plague, or pestilence, at times, and in
different nations, is highly probable—but not by a judgment for other
men’s sins.

In Homer’s Iliad, we have a similar account, written, according to
historians, about nine hundred years before the Christian era. In the
account of the Trojan War, the commander of the Grecian army, in the
sacking of different towns, took many female captives, among whom was
one who was the daughter of the Priest of Apollo, one of the Grecian
gods. The venerable Priest came to the General, clothed in his robes,
bearing the sublime and awe-inspiring ensigns of his god, and demanded
the liberation of his captive daughter. The General insulted the Priest
by a positive refusal to give up his daughter, and he (the Priest)
departed, and offered the following prayer:

    “If e’er with wreaths I hung the sacred fane,
    Or fed the flame with fat of oxen slain,
    God of the silver bow, thy shafts employ,
    Avenge my quarrel, and the Greeks destroy.”

The second General in command inquired of the Grecian Priest the cause
of such mortality among the soldiers; and the Priest returned the
following answer:—:

    “The King of men, the reverend Priest defied,
    And, for the King's offence, the people died.”

The similarity between the Jehovah of the Jews, and the Apollo of the
Greeks, is very striking. Jehovah slew the Jewish army because David
numbered the people; and the Grecian god slew the soldiers because the
Priest had been insulted. The number is exactly the same, each being
seventy thousand men. The God of the Jews is said to have been the
author of the destruction of the army of the Israelites, and a heathen
god the destroyer of the Greeks. The first is believed to be a part of
Divine Revelation; the last is acknowledged to be but fiction.

From all the accounts recorded respecting David, to me he appears to
have been a wicked man; much worse than Saul, whose worst action seems
to have been his humanity in sparing Agag, whom he took prisoner. I
cannot, therefore, believe, that the Universal Ruler of all Nature
sanctioned his actions, directly or indirectly, any more than he does
now, or ever has done, those of any other legal murderer.

A few remarks more will conclude the life and conduct of David. In 1
Kings, chapter i., it is recorded, that David being old and infirm,
could get no warmth in bed, and a fair young damsel was sought for
throughout the land of Israel, to wait on him by day, and sleep with him
during the night, to keep the old King warm. With her he was much
pleased, but the account states, that “David the King knew her not.”
This is a strange tale, for if the sole object was, to get a young woman
to sleep with him, then not the fairest, but the fattest, plumpest girl
to be found throughout the land, would have been the most proper person
for such service; for at that time, David must have had half a score of
wives living. It is therefore clear, that warmth was only a pretence for
selecting a handsome young maiden to comfort the Lord’s anointed; and we
may safely infer that David was not cured of his former tricks.

The life and conduct of Solomon must now pass in review. When his father
was on his death-bed, he gave his son Solomon instructions to put to
death several persons who had been the subjects of David, but to whom he
(David) had sworn while living, that he would spare their lives. And
accordingly, Solomon, after the death of his father, put into execution
the orders he had received, and slew the persons mentioned by David; so
that his reign commenced in blood.

And here it is proper to notice, that Bathsheba, the wife of Uriah, and
the mother of Solomon, in order to disinherit the eldest son of David by
his former wife, prevailed on David to have Solomon anointed King, in
the lifetime of his father. So that Adonijah, the real heir, was set
aside; and the better to secure the throne, Solomon had his half-brother
put to death. The cause of this execution, as is recorded, was because
Adonijah asked leave of Solomon, the King, to marry the damsel who kept
David warm in his old age! Jehovah had chosen a strange family, after
turning out Saul from the-kingdom, and Solomon was too pure to let a
brother live, after being so wicked as to ask permission to marry the
young virgin who had kept the back of his old father warm in a cold
night!

After Solomon had slain those men according to the orders before given
by his father, he added another to the list, viz., Adonijah, his
half-brother. The Lord appeared to him in a dream, and said, “Ask what I
shall give thee.” Solomon then dreamed that he gave the following reply
to the gracious permission:—_“Give, therefore, thy servant an
understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good
and bad.”_ This request is said to have pleased the Lord, who added to
it _“both riches and honor”; “and-Solomon awoke, and behold it was a
dream.”_ This account is written in 1 Kings, chapter iii.; and all that
can be made of it is, that Solomon dreamed the Lord told him so, and we
have nothing but his word for it.

The Bible record of Solomon’s riches, and, in fact, the whole of his
life, is not entitled to any credit whatever. We may say, however, that
some allowance ought to be made for Solomon on account of the bad
example under which he was brought tip in the family of his father; for
if the Scripture history of the facts concerning Solomon is to be
considered true, then the whole of his reign is the most extraordinary
which ever happened in the world. Beginning with his riches, it exceeds
every thing in ancient or modern times. The feast at the opening of the
Temple was no small matter.

Scripture informs us, that at the dedication of the Temple, Scripture
informs us, that at the dedication of the Temple, the sacrifice offered
up, was twenty-two thousand oxen, and one hundred and twenty-two
thousand sheep. This, when we consider the smallness of David’s domains,
and the general poverty of his family, is incredible; but as every thing
is so wonderful, and the whole of the reign of Solomon is so
extravagant, no dependence whatever is to be placed on any of its
accounts.

As it regards Solomon’s household, the provisions named for each day are
the following:—“_Thirty measures of fine flour, threescore measures of
meal, ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and an hundred
sheep, besides harts and roebucks, and fallow-deer, and faited fowls.”
“And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen.”_ Now, in so small, and in many parts barren
land, where could they be raised? But Solomon had need of a plentiful
table, for it is recorded that he had seven hundred wives, and three
hundred concubines! If he had wisdom enough to regulate his house so as
to live happy, it must be owned that the Lord had given him more than a
common share; but as none but fools or madmen will believe this account,
we may let it pass without comment.

The most astonishing inconsistency in the reign of Solo-man, is his
continual departure from the worship of Jehovah, who had been his
benefactor, and who had also repeatedly warned him of the consequences
of a departure from the God of his father. If what is recorded of his
riches be true, they were greater than those of any monarch on earth.
The gold he is said to have possessed when he built the Temple, exceeds
all calculation, and is in strict accordance, in point of magnitude,
with his feast at the dedication of the Temple, and with his daily
allowance of food for his household, and also with his seven hundred
wives, and three hundred concubines. But when we consider the poverty of
the Israelites up to the time of his father’s reign, and also David’s
poverty until the death of Saul, when at times, David had neither food
for himself nor army, neither had he gold nor silver wherewith to
purchase it—it may be asked, how Solomon came into the possession of
such an immense quantity of gold? and also from what vast extent of
country did he procure his horses, when but a few years before, David,
his father; could scarcely afford to keep a jackass? Again, where did he
procure such numerous herds of cattle and flocks of sheep?

But as I have before said, the greatest inconsistency of all is, that
Solomon should worship other gods, contrary to the express command of
Jehovah, who had given him wisdom, riches, and honors. Leaving
Christians, then, to settle with Solomon, how he, with all his wisdom,
could so play the fool and madman in the face of his God, some attention
will be directed to the God of Abram, Isaac, and Jacob. It will be
recollected that Saul, the predecessor of David, had offended Jehovah by
sparing the life of Agag, a captive King. In consequence, it is recorded
that the God of Israel repented that he put Saul on the throne. He then
chose David, and his family, to succeed the house of Saul; and having
made this second choice, he declared he should not repent again.

If this last declaration had been made by man, in his choice, after
having before been mistaken, the following mode of reasoning would aptly
apply; and Jehovah would also thus reason:—“I made choice of Saul to be
King over Israel. I sent him to smite Amalek, and not to spare any soul
alive, old age and infancy not excepted; but Saul did not obey my
orders, but spared the King and brought him a captive, which I did not
expect As I took him from driving mules, and made him a King, he ought
therefore to have obeyed my commands. I dethroned him and his family
forever. I then appointed David, a man after my own heart. In this
choice I was happy. He departed not from my worship or my law, but with
a few exceptions. It is true, David committed adultery and murder, in
the case of Bathsheba and Uriah; but he repented, and I caused the brat
to die out of the way, which made room for Solomon. Now, who could ever
have thought that Solomon would have turned out so bad? Why, the fellow,
in addition to wisdom, riches, and honor, has now seven hundred wives,
and three hundred concubines! and not content with this number, he
marries the daughters of heathens, prostrates himself before their
idols, and builds new temples to their gods; but I promised not to
repent again, yet Solomon must be punished. I will not, therefore,
depose him, but in his son’s reign I will divide the kingdom, and give
the greater part of it to one of mean birth. I will not wholly take it
away from the seed of David, because I promised him that he should not
want a man to sit on his throne; but I will, for the wickedness of
Solomon, cause discord among the tribes, that will induce them to fight
against each other. It is not for the thousand women that Solomon had,
which would not fail to create discord and all manner of misery; neither
for putting to death his brother: all that I could have tolerated—but he
changed his religion, and worshipped strange gods; I will rend the
nation asunder, never more to be united. It would have been more to my
honor to have suffered Saul to continue on the throne, for he only
disobeyed my Orders once, but the son of David built temples for
idolatry, and worshipped false gods, setting my authority at defiance.
In his son’s reign, therefore, I will bring on trouble in his house,
that all Israel may know how great is the sin of worshipping false gods,
and thus rebelling against the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel.”

I will now ask the Christian preachers, whether I dishonor the all-wise
Sovereign of the Universe, in not believing him to be capable of such
tomfoolery as this: in choosing, and again rejecting his former choice:
in blundering, to rectify a former blunder, and falling into one much
greater, to remedy the first: to be doing, and undoing: to have an end
to accomplish, and to make use of means that fail in its accomplishment.
Ye priests! if ye are not blind, look at the heavens above, and also on
the earth beneath, and then ask yourselves, whether the God of all is
the same personage as Jehovah, the God of Israel?

To conclude these remarks respecting the house of David and
Solomon:—Even admitting that such personages had a real existence, I
cannot so dishonor the Supreme Governor of Nature as for a moment to
admit, that he dealt with either David or Solomon any otherwise than he
deals with every human being, and I should stand before my fellow men a
self-convicted hypocrite, were I to affect to believe.




