CHAPTER I.


WHATEVER may have been the moral character of the Jews, as a nation, at
the time the reputed Messiah came among them, the priests and the people
not only expected his advent, but they also considered that event as an
end to their then subjugation, and more than a renewal of their former
greatness and glory. And here the reader will perceive that they (the
Jews) had no prejudice against the appearance of such a personage; the
only thing they required was, his certain identity, that they might know
the true Messiah was among them. Nothing could have been more favorable
to his reception than such a universal expectation. This general belief
throughout the nation was on their part equivalent to their saying to
the God of Jacob, “We have long waited, and most ardently desired, the
fulfilment of the promise made to Abram and his seed forever.” This
short statement is faithful, and true as to the feelings and
expectations of the whole Jewish nation.

In this stage of our remarks, every thing appears to warrant the
conclusion, that, on the part of the descendants of Abram, no difficulty
stood in the way of their submitting to their expected Lord and Master.
To make him fully known to them, so that no mistake could possibly
happen as to his person and authority, belonged to Jehovah alone; for if
the Messiah promised, seemed in nowise to be represented in the person
of Jesus, then the Jews would have been sure to have rejected him as
another impostor of the same sort as had previously imposed on their
nation. In reviewing, then, the New Testament, the object of the writer
will be to show, that Jesus, the pretended Saviour of the world, was not
sent from God, and consequently, the New Testament is not of Divine
authority.

In the following inquiry, I shall not dispute the existence of Jesus,
_as a man_, living about the time recorded of him, but take for granted
the history of his life, with the exception of his divine mission, as
this method will be better understood by the reader, as excluding
irrelevant matter. In the Gospel history, then, it clearly appears, that
Jesus wrote nothing of his own sayings or doings; it was all done by
others. This omission to give a clear code of morals, adapted to the
Gospel dispensation, and also rules and regulations for this new sect,
will appear strange, when we refer to the formation and regulation of
the Jewish Church. Moses, or whoever was its founder, took great pains
to record the most minute things connected with the Jewish worship;
while, on the contrary, the Christian Church is left in such a state of
uncertainty, that its author wrote not a word himself, nor, for aught we
know, did he give orders to his followers to commit to writing any thing
he did or said, not even of the miracles he so often performed. It must
appear passing strange, that a religion of such vast importance to the
whole human race should be, as it were, left to chance, as to the manner
in which it was to descend to posterity, when compared with the
minuteness of the Mosaic code. Of the four evangelists, no one in
particular had orders to write the life and doings of Christ, so that
the inference is this: that all the history of the life of Jesus,
including his death and resurrection, is but the testimony of others;
consequently, we have no certainty that Christ ever said or did those
things recorded of him. So that it amounts to this—somebody has said
that Jesus performed miracles; and the same may be said of the rest of
his sayings and doings; and we may add, that somebody has written that
he was put to death, and that on the third day he arose from the dead.

It is from such vague and unauthenticated writings, written by nobody
knows who, nor when they made their first appearance, that the
foundation is drawn on which rests the Gospel Dispensation; and as the
different writers have given different accounts of the things said to
have taken place, no reliance can be given to any of the facts recorded
as having actually occurred. The different writers have also given rise
to doctrines so opposite to each other, that every sect can find
Scripture evidence for the support of its respective dogmas. Eighteen
hundred years have then passed away, and we are still ignorant of what
is, and what is not, Gospel.

Is it possible that any thing can be more directly in opposition, than
the Universalists and the different sects that believe in endless
punishment in a future life? Again, can any two things be more opposite
than the doctrines concerning the person of Christ, as held by the
Unitarians and the Trinitarians; and yet, both of these doctrines are
taken from the New Testament, which contains all that is written of him.
And what is still more wonderful, each of these sects are positive with
respect to their own opinions, and are surprised at each other’s
ignorance of God’s Word; and even at the present day, they only want
full power, and they would soon come to blows. Not only these opinions,
but many more, equally opposed to each other, can be supported by
referring to God’s unerring Word. It is a common saying, “the glorious
uncertainty of the law”; I will add, it is the glorious uncertainty of
the _Gospel_ which has made so many priests, and also, it is its
uncertainty which has been in every age of the church the cause of
thousands of honest persons meeting a violent and cruel death, for the
glory of God.

The reader will in the following pages discover, that my main object is
to show that Jesus was no more sent from heaven to save mankind by the
sacrifice of himself for the sins of the world, than others are sent to
build houses or dig canals; and that the plan, as it is called, of human
redemption, has brutalized the human race, and stood in the way of moral
rectitude, and the development of kind and humane feelings. Although
Matthew and Luke have recorded the miraculous conception of Jesus, yet,
as it is omitted by Mark and John, I shall begin my remarks with the
baptism of John. As it respects the heavenly origin of Jesus, he never
mentions it in the course of his ministry, neither does his mother.
Jesus, in speaking of himself, said he was _the son of man_. Now, if
Joseph, or some other man, was not his father, he (Jesus) then went by a
false name; for, in that case, he was but the son of a woman. We will
leave this point of disputation with the Christians, and begin with the
baptism of John.

After Jesus had been baptized by John, it is recorded, that there came a
voice from heaven, saying, “_Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well
pleased._” (Mark i., 11.) “_And immediately the Spirit driveth him into
the wilderness, and he was there in the wilderness forty days, tempted
of Satan._” What possible end was to be obtained by this journey into
the wilderness, and what kind of spirit it was that drove him there, we
have no information. At any rate, in a forlorn state, and very hungry,
Satan made his first visit to the Messenger of Peace. Jesus seemed no
way surprised at this Satanic intrusion. They conversed together as old
friends. We may suppose Satan to open the conversation somewhat in the
following manner:—

“Why, Jesus! you seem to be any thing but in comfortable quarters. This
is carrying temperance rather too far; nothing to eat or drink, and
surrounded by wild beasts as hungry as yourself! I have heard that you
represent to your nation that you are sent to them from Jehovah, your
father. Now, if you have any thing to communicate to them of importance,
this secluded spot is very unfavorable to make known your mission. Come,
give over fasting, for _if you are the Son of God, command these stones
that they be made bread?_” This observation, or, as it is called, this
temptation of the Devil, caused Jesus to make this reply:—“_It is
written, that man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that
proceedeth ont of the mouth of God. Then the Devil taketh him up into
the holy city, [or coaxed him to leave the wilderness,] and setteth him
on a pinnacle of the Temple, and saith unto him, If thou be the Son of
God, cast thyself down, for it is written,, he shall give his angels
charge concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest
at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. Jesus said unto him, It
is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God. Again, the
Devil taketh him up into art exceeding high mountain, and showeth him
all the kingdoms of the worlds and the glory of them; and saith unto
him, all these things will I give thee, if thou wilt fall dawn and
worship me. Then saith Jesus unto him, Get thee hence, Satan; for it is
written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou
serve. Then the Devil leaveth him, and behold angels came and ministered
unto him._” (Matthew, chapter iv.)

To those Who are not afraid to examine this strange account, it must
appear unworthy of the least credit. In the first place, as it stands
recorded, the Devil and Jesus act as if they had been old and intimate
acquaintances. This is the first announcement we have that any such
personage as the Devil ever visited this earth, except he is the same
identical being who, upwards of four thousand years before, came to the
garden of Eden and tempted Eve, and was the cause of herself and her
husband’s being expelled from that abode of innocence. If it were the
intention of the writers of the life of Jesus, that it should be
understood that the Devil had been resting quietly, and enjoying
himself, and then appeared, ripe for new schemes of mischief, and Satan
reasoning within himself was resolved again to try his hand,—is it
possible, when this account is duly considered, that one person in a
thousand can give credit to such nonsense?

A few remarks on Christ’s temptation by the Devil will suffice to show
its absurdity. In the first place, then, can we believe that a being of
Infinite Power, Wisdom, and Goodness, ever has, or does now, keep in
existence a Devil whose whole aim and happiness consist in tempting
God’s creatures to rebel against their maker and benefactor; and that
God has given him power and capacity to induce men and women to commit
every sort of crime that disgraces humanity? Besides, so artful is this
Devil that man has but a poor chance to escape his cunning attacks and
devices. We are told that the Lord is angry with the wicked every day;
and yet for all that, he has made a being of immense power who possesses
unbounded malice against both God and man. Would any man, who was in his
right mind, keep in his employ a person who would daily destroy his
property, and breed discord among his steady workmen? None but a madman
could so act; and shall we suppose that the all-wise ruler of the
universe would follow in the path of a man out of his senses?

Again, according to the account in Matthew, the Devil seems full of life
and impudence; while the reputed Saviour appears sheepish and stupid,
and seems willing to follow the Devil about at his bidding! We have no
account as to the form in which the Devil appeared, whether as a rich
man or a loafer; whether fat or lean, and how old he appeared to be;
neither are we informed in what kind of dress he walked through the
street of Jerusalem, whether it was in the costume of the age, or in the
livery of hell. At any rate, Jesus seemed rather scared at the old
serpent. Jesus commenced his mission more like a hermit than as a
messenger of peace; to God’s chosen people. In fact, there is, in Jesus,
through his whole life, something so unearthly that his existence as a
man is very doubtful. In the whole account of the temptation of the
Devil, the evidence of its being a mixture of fable and falsehood is,
apparent.

Besides, it is altogether unaccountable how Jesus and the Devil became
so well acquainted with each other; for Jesus was a Jew by nation, and
strictly obeyed the law of Moses; but Moses is completely silent as to
the existence of any such personage as the Devil. At the time when it is
said Jesus came to the Jewish nation, they had, during their captivity,
embraced the theology of their conquerors; and on their return to the
land of their nativity, brought with them the-belief in the existence of
good and bad angels, and also the doctrine of a future state of rewards
and punishments,—dogmas unknown to, and never taught by, Moses. It is
clear, then, that the very existence of a Devil never was a doctrine of
the Old Testament, but on the contrary, it was borrowed from eastern
mythology; and Jesus, finding that the Jews professed to believe it,
fell in with it, as also a heaven and a hell, and a judgment to come,
which doctrines were all of heathen origin. The Old Testament is silent
as to what constitutes orthodox Christianity. Ye Christian ministers!
your heaven and hell, by the teaching of which you gain wealth and live
like princes, is nothing but an echo of by-gone ages, which had its
origin in the imagination of the priesthood of an antiquity anterior to
the existence of Moses or of the Jewish nation!

But to return to the temptation of Jesus by the Devil. And here it may
be asked, how it can now, or ever could, be considered a temptation at
all? If Jesus was what they say he professed to be, _the sent of God_,
he knew well that the Devil had nothing to give him by way of inducement
to distrust his Father’s superintendence and care. Jesus might have said
to Satan, “You lying old Devil, you know that you have no kingdom to
bestow; you likewise well know that you have not land enough whereon to
build a hovel, in which to shelter your favorite associates, the swine!”
But, on the contrary, Jesus seems to act with great respect towards the
Devil. He made no objections to follow Satan wherever he chose to lead
him. We are ignorant of the object Jesus had in view by retiring into
the wilderness; and how the Devil came to be acquainted with his
destitute situation, we are also at a loss to conjecture. Likewise, we
have yet to learn whether Satan resided among the Jews, or dwelt in the
regions of the air, as he is called “the Prince and power of the air,
the spirit which works in the hearts of the children of disobedience.”

The number of forty years, or days, is repeatedly chosen by the writers
of the Old Testament, in which to perform something wonderful, and of
great importance. Thus, the Jews were forty years going from Egypt to
the land of promise, during which time nearly all that came out of
bondage were destroyed for their disobedience against the God of Abram,
Isaac, and Jacob. Jehovah and Moses were forty days on Mount Sinai,
preparing ornaments for the Jewish worship, during which time Aaron and
the rest of the Israelties returned back to worship the gods of their
former oppressors; so that it appears, before the church of Jehovah in
the wilderness was ready to sing his praise, and thank him for bringing
them out of bondage, both Aaron and the people were singing and dancing
before the golden calves of Egypt! The number forty has been most
unfortunate for Jehovah’s plans; for, in addition to repeated failures
connected with the number forty, it is recorded that Jehovah was grieved
forty years for the transgressions of his chosen people; and Jesus,
after forty days’ fasting, surrounded by devouring beasts and hungry
vultures, behold! the Devil came skulking along with brazen-faced
impudence, and Jesus, the better to get rid of him, broke up his
solitary abode. Thus, again, the number forty concluded without any
apparent object being effected.

Whoever wrote this account of Christ’s temptation, as if it was not
foolish enough, has added, that after the Devil had withdrawn from
making Jesus such tempting offers to enlist into his service, angels
came and ministered unto him. What the nature of the service was, which
they performed, we know not; but one would suppose their first inquiry
ought to have been, whether he did not wish to have his dinner as soon
as possible? The whole of this account is so contemptible, that I shall
not give it any further attention.

If we contrast the submissive conduct and humble deportment of Jesus,
when in conversation with the Devil, with his manner and intercourse
with the rulers and priests of his own nation, he appears, in reference
to the latter, whom we should expect he would have treated with that
respectable language due to their standing in society, and consistent
with his dignity as the Messenger of Peace, to great disadvantage as a
divine teacher: for it must be ever borne in mind, that Jesus must be
considered, according to his own account, superior to all that ever came
before him, and to the imperfections found in men in common, and even in
the prophets of old, so that he must so conduct himself that his sayings
and doings must be capable of standing the most rigid moral scrutiny.
But, instead of his appealing to the Jewish rulers in the most courteous
manner—instead of his plainly stating who he was, and the vast
importance of his coming on earth, he begins by upbraiding them in a way
calculated to disgust them, and thereby frustrate the object of his
mission. He calls them “a generation of vipers” and asks them “how they
can think to escape the damnation of hell?”

Although the chief priest and rulers were over-anxious in their
inquiries as to whom he was, and by what authority he so openly
condemned others, he treated them as unworthy of a civil reply; for, let
the moral conduct of the Jewish priests and rulers be what it might,
admitting it was very bad, nothing could justify him in the use of
insult and the most violent vituperations. What kind of reception would
an ambassador meet with in England, should he, before his’ mission was
fully understood by that Court, abuse the rulers of that kingdom, and at
the same time associate with a few obscure individuals as witnesses of
such abuse? Would he be considered a fit person to represent the
authorities who sent him? for, never let us forget, that of all the
missions sent by one nation to another nation for the settlement of any
difficulties that might exist between them, none ever was of such
importance as the one which Jesus was to present to "_the lost sheep of
the house of Israel_.” Let us also bear in mind, that the rulers among
the Jews made every inquiry as to whom he was, and the purport of his
coming. Yes, every effort on the part of the Jews was made to draw out
of him from whence he derived his authority: but his answers were any
thing but to the point, for, he said on one occasion, “_An evil and
adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; and there shall no sign be
given to it, but the sign of the prophet Jonas,_” and that was no answer
at all.

I am well aware what Christians will say in this case: that his miracles
were sufficient evidence; but all the proof we have that he did perform
miracles, is, somebody has written that he did so. But here I shall
dispute the performance of some of his miracles, from the New Testament
account of them; and, in my next chapter, I shall show that modern
discoveries have proved, beyond dispute, that some of the miracles said
to have been performed by Jesus could not have taken place, for if any
person in the present age, were to pretend that he could perform similar
miracles, he would not only be considered an impostor, but would also be
deemed an ignoramus.




CHAPTER. II.


OF all the miracles said to have been wrought by Jesus, as recorded in
the Gospels, the casting out of devils are among the foremost. The case
of Mary Magdalene is often referred to by Jesus himself; it is related
that no less than seven had taken possession of her person. It is truly
wonderful, that at the time of Christ’s preaching, the old Devil of all,
and a host of subordinate ones, appeared to be more active than at any
other time of which we have any account The Old Devil came forward after
an absence of more than four thousand years; for, we have no account
that he, either in person or by proxy, had visited God’s chosen people,
admitting that it was he, who, by the agency of a serpent, or by any
other means, deceived Adam and Eve, by which deception, pain, and even
death, followed as a consequence. Satan might well think that he could
afford to rest awhile, till Jehovah should make some new movement to
benefit the human race.

How the Devil came to know that Jesus was about to commence preaching
repentance for the remission of sin, we have no means of finding out;
but, when Jesus had retired into the wilderness, behold the Devil was
close at his heels, and they seemed to be as well acquainted as two old
playmates. The Devil was well fitted for discussion, for he appeared
well versed with the Old Testament. However, if he were the same Devil
who outwitted Jehovah in Paradise, he failed to obtain a victory over
the Son in the wilderness. What became of him after his defeat on the
Temple, and when he came down from the mountain, we have no account No
mention is made of his being concerned in riding the hogs into the sea.
We must, therefore, leave him, and attend to the triumph of Jesus in
ejecting them from their strong holds.

The first in order which we shall review, as being possessed of devils,
will be Mary Magdalene, out of whom, it is recorded, Jesus cast seven
devils. This woman must be considered most grievously afflicted. How
they operated on her—whether it was by inflicting bodily pain, or a
mental disease, we know not; at any rate, she seemed incapable of
getting rid of them. The number being seven, and having dispositions
opposed to each other, they no doubt often quarrelled among themselves,
and disturbed her in her sleeping hours; at all events, her gratitude
and attachment to Jesus is proof positive that she preferred their room
to their company.

Christians, in speaking of Mary Magdalene, convey the idea, that,
previous to the casting out of the devils, she did not bear a good
character. But this is a mistake; for, if the New Testament account of
devils taking possession of persons, be true, and that no human power
can eject them, it then follows, that Mary Magdalene was truly
unfortunate, since no less than seven of these intruders were constantly
about her. We are left to conjecture how the number seven could have
been discovered. If Mary had been compelled to have had seven teeth
extracted, the number could have been fully known to those who stood by;
but how, or in what way, it could have been known that seven devils were
cast out, unless they appeared visible to the by-standers, does not
appear. But we will not dwell too long on such sheer nonsense, as not
one word of truth is in the whole story of casting out devils; for the
best of all possible reasons, because there were none at all to cast
out. It is recorded that the Jews were troubled with devils of different
kinds, such as unclean devils, deaf and dumb devils, and, in one case, a
kind of devil which could not be cast out only by prayer and fasting.
If, at the present day, a person was to apply for medical aid, and hint
to the doctor that his wife was really possessed with (not seven) but
one devil, the doctor would consider such a man a fit subject for a
lunatic asylum.

As it respects demoniacal possession, it is, or rather was of heathen
origin. The Jews, as a nation, believed in its truth, as did also the
surrounding nations; consequently, if a person had a complaint attended
with fits, or any thing rather out of the common way, by which human
beings were afflicted, such a disease was considered a possession of one
or more evil spirits. But now, that the laws of nature are better
understood, and medical science more fully developed, demonology, as
well as witchcraft and sorcery, are given up altogether. No doubt now
remains, but that the whole was the effect of ignorance and fraud; and
consequently the casting out of devils by Jesus and his apostles, had no
reality in it whatever. It is not possible for us to conceive why demons
or devils should have taken possession of human beings, admitting that
they have a real existence. We are ignorant as to the state of mind of
these beings. Whether in those days they took possession of men and
women out of rebellion against God, or, having no real home, were only
wanderers, and felt more comfortable when dwelling in the bodies of
animals or of human beings, we cannot determine. The latter, however,
appears to have been the case; for, an one occasion, when Jesus was
about to expel a legion, the devils _besought him to permit them to
enter into the swine_; but it is recorded, that the hogs started off
down into the sea, and were drowned. What became of the devils, we know
not. If this miracle took place, one thing is clear, namely, that the
devils, with all their cunning, made a bad calculation as to the
security they would have m the swine.

At the time Jesus is said to have lived among the Jews, the casting out
of devils was a common occurrence; for Jesus, in reply to the charge
that he cast out devils by Beelzebub, the prince or chief of devils,
says, “_If I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast
them out? therefore they shall be the judges,_” So that, after all, it
follows, that what so many could do without the authority of Jesus, was
no miracle at all. It was nothing short of imposition, and failed of
being any proof of his divine mission. The truth is, that casting out
devils was a heathen practice, among many other things, of heathenish
origin; and Jesus, according to the New Testament, fell in with it, as
he did with many doctrines which the Jews brought into the land of
Israel when they returned from their long captivity. The Jews brought
back with them the belief of a future state of rewards and punishments,
the existence of the soul, a heaven for the virtuous and good, and a
hell for the wicked; also good and bad angels, and a future judgment,
over which Jesus said to the Jews he was appointed to be the judge.
Notwithstanding the silence of the Old Testament as to the tenets above
noticed, yet Jesus fell in with them, and he also threatened the Jews
that they were in danger of that very hell and damnation which they
gathered from their heathen conquerors. Ye Christian priests! your
heaven and hell, and also your devil, belong to and originated in a
heathen mythology, the beginning of which is lost in a remote antiquity.
Yes, Christian doctors! your heaven and hell, which, from the hope of
the first, and the fear of the last, you teach as divine truths, and, by
so doing, live in splendor,—these very doctrines have nothing divine
about them, and you ought to know it.

Leaving, then, the miracles of casting out devils, which were no proof
of the divine mission of Jesus, because others, it is said, could,
without his aid, do the same, we must refer to the other miracles said
to have been performed and intended to establish his claim as being the
true Messiah, _the sent of God_. If the miracles that Jesus performed,
had been intended to remove all doubts that the Jewish nation had as to
his being an impostor, such miracles ought to have been sufficiently
convincing for that purpose; for, on such test, his reception or
rejection entirely depended. Now, from the accounts of his appealing to
his countrymen, and reproaching them for their unbelief, he does not, to
all appearance, wish nor try to convince them; for, it is said of his,
miracles, that “he did not many mighty works because of their unbelief.”
Their incredulity as to his being the true Christ, is a reason why he
should have followed up miracle after miracle, until unbelief would have
been impossible on the part of the Jews; for, the reader must keep in
mind that the dispute with Jesus and the Jews was not of a moral
character: it was as to his authority in assuming to be greater than
Abram, or all the prophets of the Old Testament.

Again, Jesus says, “_Woe unto you_ [of such a town or village,] _for if
the mighty works which have been done in you, had been done in Sodom and
Gomorrah, they would have repented in sackcloth and ashes_.” “Therefore
it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of
judgment, than for you.” Now here we can see, that the miracles were not
of the sort to convince. Then, why not produce others more strong?
Besides, it showed Jesus to be ignorant of the human mind, his
condemning men for not believing when the evidence was not strong enough
to convince them. It is true, according to the accounts of Christ’s
preaching to the Jews, that instead of argument he resorted to abuse of
the coarsest kind, and the same conduct is pursued by Christians towards
unbelievers at the present day. In some instances, Jesus charged the
persons on whom a miracle had been performed, that _they should tell
none of it._

Again, the evidence arising from the working of miracles must always
depend on the information possessed by those before whom such signs and
wonders were wrought. If Jesus intended to rest his Messiahship on the
wonders he intended to perform, in such a case the most learned and best
informed of the Jewish nation were the proper persons to be the judges
for, in our day, in the nineteenth century, we have daily proof that so
universal is ignorance, and so credulous is the mass of society, that
such trash and inconsistent doctrines as those taught by Joseph Smith
and his famous Golden Bible have gained thousands Of believers, and the
greatest part of them are sincere, and would suffer death sooner than
renounce what they believe to be a divine revelation to Smith, and
others of the same stamp. The most learned and intelligent of the Jews
knew this truth, as many of their ignorant people had been led away by
false Christs, and lost their all, and their lives also. No wonder,
then, that they should watch closely every movement made by Jesus, the
then reputed Messiah. There are, in the present age, many things
discovered and known to the most unlearned, that, in former times, much
less remote than the time in which Jesus is said to have lived, Would
have been thought miraculous, and the persons performing them as
possessing power more than human. So that we may safely conclude, that
Infinite Wisdom would not have made use of so uncertain a species of
evidence as miracles, to convince the Jews that the _sent of God was
come_. Other and more certain means would have been resorted to, so that
the Jews could not have mistaken the real Christ, and put him to death
for an impostor.

If we attentively examine the life of Jesus, as written by the four
evangelists, we shall be surprised at many parts of his proceedings. His
uncourteous language to the great men of his nation must strike the
reader very forcibly. He preaches humility and meekness, and soon we
perceive him arrogating divine honors, and calling those, who came
before him, robbers and thieves. He commands his followers to _judge
not_, and the next moment he judges others, and condemns them without
ceremony; and although it is said of him, that “a bruised reed he would
not break, and smoking flax he would not quench,” and that “_his voice
could not be heard in the street,_” yet we find him using something very
little short of outrage and violence. In the affair of the Temple, for
instance, it is recorded that Jesus took a cord, and began to attack
those sitting about that sacred place, “_overthrowing the tables of the
money-changers, and the seats of them that sold doves,_” calling them
“_a den of thieves._” Such conduct the Jews could not expect from their
long-wished and earnestly-desired Messiah.

Even at twelve years of age, his conduct seems to have had something
strange about it; namely, his absenting himself from his home. When his
parents found him, and told him that “_they had sought him sorrowing,_”
he said, in reply, “Wist ye not that I must be about my Father’s
business?” This answer appears not to have been understood by his
relations; but if Joseph was not his father, his mother could not wonder
at his straying from home; she would have said to Joseph, “As you are
not his father, he has reference to the Holy Ghost.” His conduct also
partook of the same strangeness at the marriage-feast. When the wine was
all out, his mother told her son of it; his reply was not very
dutiful—“_Woman_,” says he, “_what have I to do with thee?_” At such a
place, on the night of a marriage ceremony, there seems something so
unearthly about him, that he never appeared at ease in any company; such
an absence of mirthful enjoyment was calculated to spread a gloom
throughout the whole party.

But that which appears very strange in Jesus, is his using language that
even his disciples did not understand, such as, “The kingdom of heaven
is at hand;” that he “came down from heaven;” for, says Jesus, “_No man
hath ascended up into heaven, but he who came down from heaven, even the
son of man, who is in heaven._” And again, “_Repent ye, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand;_” and to the rich man, who asked him what he was
to do to secure the kingdom of heaven, Jesus said, that in addition to
loving and fearing God, and doing his duty to his neighbor, he “_must
sell all he had, and give it to the poor._”

The reader must ever keep in mind the true merits of the case between
Jesus and the Jews. It was not, whether they were more immoral than
their heathen neighbors, nor as to their being more or less learned than
surrounding nations; for, we do not find that Jesus ever made any
inquiries as to their mechanic arts, or the state of agriculture
practised among them. Neither do we find that Jesus interested himself
as to their progress in the science of astronomy. The last of these we
can conceive would have been very useful; and it might be supposed that
he could impart some knowledge in regard to it, since, in his passage
from heaven to earth, he must have crossed: some of the planetary
orbits, and no doubt observed their satellites then undiscovered; but to
communicate such important information was not included in his mission.
His only object was, to convince the Jews that he, and he alone, was the
true and undoubted Messiah promised by the prophets to redeem and
restore the Jews, as a nation, to their former greatness and glory.
Every either subject was useless, and only stood as an hindrance in the
way of the great purpose of his coming.

I have before stated, that miracles must ever be considered doubtful
evidence to prove that the performer is any thing; more than what men in
all ages have pretended to be; and to pretend to do what is far beyond
human agency, presupposes that the persons who are to be the judges,
know where human power ends, and divine power begins. But for this
knowledge, no just and certain rule can be laid down; consequently, it
is folly to conceive that Infinite Wisdom would make use of means so
ill-adapted to the end m view. It would be but an attempt to prove a
doubtful truth, by means equally if not more doubtful.

But, before closing this chapter, we will inquire into the probability
of any miracles having been performed, as mentioned by the New Testament
writers. And here our attention must be turned to the internal evidence
afforded by the New Testament itself. We shall there find internal or
indirect proof, that those miracles never took place, and that the whole
of them were ante-dated; that is, after the persons were dead who are
said to have been the performers. If this can be made out, miracles will
then receive a shock from which they never can recover. To do this, will
be the work of what remains to be done in this chapter.

John the Baptist is the first personage we shall select. The miracle
said to have taken place at the baptism of Jesus, is recorded by John,
as follows:—“_And after Jesus came up out of the water, the heavens were
opened unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove,
and lighting upon him; and, lo! a voice from heaven saying, *This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased._” (Matthew iii. 16, 17.) Again,
in John’s Gospel, i., 36, when John the Baptist saw Jesus, he said of
him, “_Behold the Lamb of God.” John also said of Jesus, that *he knew
him not till it was told him, that on whomsoever he (John) should see
the Spirit of God descend, the same is he_—meaning the true Christ. Now
here are repeated miracles to convince not only John the Baptist, but
also all that were present at the baptism of Jesus. Such evidence ought
to have stopped any future inquiries as to the real Messiahship of
Jesus; but there are strong doubts as to the truth that any such wonders
were exhibited at the time they are recorded to have taken place.

I shall proceed to present those doubts to the reader, as truth is my
object, and I am not afraid to follow after it:—in Matthew ii., 1, 2, it
reads, “_Now when John had heard in the prison the works of Christ, he
sent two of his disciples, and said unto him, Art thou he that should
come, or do we look for another?_” This question, sent by John to
Christ, shows clearly that John did not hear of the wonders wrought by
Christ until he (John) was in prison for his reproof of Herod. This
account makes it almost certain that the whole story of John’s baptizing
Jesus, and also of the voice from heaven, saying, “This is my beloved
Son, in whom 1 am well pleased,” is a fabrication altogether, and that
John had never heard of Jesus until his confinement For this conclusion,
we have twofold proof: since if John had baptized Jesus, and the wonders
were performed as recorded, John could not have required any further
evidence us to his being no pretender, but the true Messiah, the hope
and expectation of Israel. On the part of Jesus, his reply would have
been, “Why, John, what do you mean by sending a question as to whom I
am? You heard the voice from heaven when I was baptized; you also saw
the dove descend on my head; and now you send two of your disciples to
inquire of me, by saying, ‘Art thou he that should come, or do we look
for another?’”

If we consider John’s question to Jesus, and also Jesus’s reply, it will
be plain that John had not even seen nor heard much of Jesus, till after
he was in prison. What, then, aha** we say of those wonders at the
baptism of Jesus? The answer is at hand, which is, that there is no
truth in the story. The probability is, that it was recorded from
hearsay evidence, by some person unknown, and ante-dated so as to
correspond to the time of John the Baptist; but that such evidence was
given to John, of the identity of Jesus, as to prevent any future
inquiry, there can be no doubt, admitting it ever took place; but John’s
sending his disciples to Jesus to ascertain the truth of his being the
true Messiah, fully destroys the truth of any voice being heard by John,
or the Holy Spirit descending like a dove on the head of Jesus.

The ignorance of all the disciples of Jesus, as it regards who he really
was, is remarkable, if it be admitted that he performed what is said of
him. We will notice the Apostle Peter, as he may be fairly considered
the representative of the twelve. It is written, that when Jesus and
Peter were together, behold! old Moses and Elias (Elijah) came so near
to the earth that they held conversation with Jesus, and that Peter,
somehow or other, knew them; but he, so far from being alarmed at seeing
those two old prophets, was unwilling that they should return, and even
proposed to Jesus to prepare for their stay. Surely, that was an age of
miracles and wonders! We have an account of the old Devil’s crawling out
from some hole or cave, and following Jesus into the wilderness; and,
again, we have two old prophets returned, hovering in the air, and
conversing with Jesus; one of whom is said to have died a thousand years
previous to the time of his holding this supposed conversation with
Jesus from the clouds; and the other, at nearly the same time, was taken
up into heaven in a chariot of fire! Those two strange personages must
have had business of great importance with Jesus. Are we to consider
this strange visit to have taken place, when the truth of it rests on
the same authority as all the other miracles and wonders which are
recorded concerning the mission of Jesus? If Moses and Elijah did not in
truth and reality talk to Jesus from the clouds, in the hearing of
Peter, in their real persons, or by their apparitions, it then follows,
that there is no truth in any of the miracles or wonders said to have
been performed, to prove that Jesus was _sent from God_; for all the
miracles and wonders which (it is said) took place, stand or fall
together.

If, for instance, the Devil did not find Jesus in the wilderness, and go
with him into the city, and tempt him to throw himself from the
Temple—if this is not strictly true, why, then, it is false as to Moses
and Elijah’s talking with him from the clouds. This incredible story, if
related in any book but what is called the Word of God, would not be
credited by one in ten thousand; but being found in the life of the
Redeemer, the man who rejects it and proclaims it unworthy of credit, is
considered an enemy of God, and will have the sentence of “_Go, ye
cursed_,” &c. As so much importance is attached to what is called the
Word of God, we will discuss a little further the business which brought
Moses and Elijah so near to this earth. As to where Moses or Elijah
reside, we have no knowledge, and what is the nature of their
employment, we know not; but if they still live, they must have some
location, and also, we suppose, must be employed about something—but
these things we must leave to those who are better acquainted with other
worlds, while our attention will be directed to the business of the
heavenly visitors.

If Moses had any interest in the mission of Jesus to the Jews, he could
have been serviceable to him, as he had been their former leader, and
therefore could give him useful hints concerning them. We may suppose he
would introduce the subject of Jesus’s mission in the following
manner:—“I am Moses, the former leader of the seed of Abram, and hearing
that Jehovah had sent his son Jesus to convert them to the true worship
of God, and the practice of justice and truth, I come to offer my
services, as I am well acquainted with that disobedient race; and, in
truth, I had a terrible time of it with them: only think of forty years
in the wilderness, always murmuring, and worshipping strange gods, for
which, at times, they were cruelly punished; Jehovah destroyed thousands
of them for resisting my authority; but they were incurable. He would
have, at one time, so great was his wrath, destroyed them all; but I
told him what the Egyptians and the heathen in general would say, and he
altered his mind, and killed off the worst of them: for, getting a
little out of temper with them at one time, in consequence of their
murmurings, Jehovah became angry with me, and I was prevented from
enjoying full possession of the promised land. It always surprised me
how it came about that Jehovah should select them from the rest of the
human race, for in my lifetime nothing was ever made of them; they even
disgraced the God who had made them his choice. I left them in thy hands
of Joshua, as the most proper person to rule over them; but how he got
along with them, I have not heard.” “Your offer, Moses, is duly
appreciated; but the Jews, as a nation, are now a different people from
what they were when you had to manage them. My course will be different
altogether from what you pursued. Farewell! Moses and Elijah.” We may
suppose that Jesus would say to Peter, “As for your purposing to erect
three tabernacles in this place, one for myself, one for Moses, and
another for Elijah, it is proof that you are entirely ignorant of my
future dealings with my own nation; for, in a few months, such things
will transpire, that even you, Peter, all zealous as you are, will swear
off and deny any knowledge of me.”

Now, reader, nothing can be more extravagant than to suppose that such
conversation took place between Jesus, Moses, and Elijah. But if those
two old prophets did really descend, and converse with Jesus, then what
I have supposed is no more extravagant than that two prophets, who had
not been on earth for a thousand years, should pay a visit to Jesus, and
hold converse with him. These miracles never occurred, and the world has
been imposed upon and plundered by men, who, by telling such tales, have
lived in idleness; and their quarrels about what Jesus said or somebody
said, or did, have in every age been the cause of evils of every kind,
and of rendering human beings ignorant and wretched.

Christians, in speaking of the divine mission of Jesus, urge is miracles
as proofs that he came from God with full authority to give laws to, and
finally _to judge both quick and dead_; but the proof is wanting that he
ever performed one miracle. All the evidence we derive from the miracles
said to have been performed is not, that we know they were wrought by
Jesus, but that it is by somebody recorded that he did the mighty works
attributed to him, and which to us is no evidence at all. To believe,
then, what is written, without knowing by whom, or at what time and
place it was written, is to believe without evidence, which would be a
voluntary degradation of the noble faculties which have been conferred
upon man.




