CHAPTER I

_By the Law of Nations navigation is free to all persons whatsoever_


My intention is to demonstrate briefly and clearly that the
Dutch--that is to say, the subjects of the United Netherlands--have
the right to sail to the East Indies, as they are now doing, and to
engage in trade with the people there. I shall base my argument on
the following most specific and unimpeachable axiom of the Law of
Nations, called a primary rule or first principle, the spirit of
which is self-evident and immutable, to wit: Every nation is free to
travel to every other nation, and to trade with it.

God Himself says this speaking through the voice of nature; and
inasmuch as it is not His will to have Nature supply every place with
all the necessaries of life, He ordains that some nations excel in
one art and others in another. Why is this His will, except it be
that He wished human friendships to be engendered by mutual needs and
resources, lest individuals deeming themselves entirely sufficient
unto themselves should for that very reason be rendered unsociable?
So by the decree of divine justice it was brought about that one
people should supply the needs of another, in order, as Pliny the
Roman writer says,[1] that in this way, whatever has been produced
anywhere should seem to have been destined for all. Vergil also sings
in this wise:

      “_Not every plant on every soil will grow_,”[2]

and in another place:

      “_Let others better mould the running mass
      Of metals_,” etc.[3]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


Hoc igitur qui tollunt, illam laudatissimam tollunt humani generis
societatem, tollunt mutuas benefaciendi occasiones, naturam denique
ipsam violant. Nam et ille quem Deus terris circumfudit Oceanus,
undique et undique versus navigabilis, et ventorum stati aut
extraordinarii flatus, non ab eadem semper, et a nulla non aliquando
regione spirantes, nonne significant satis concessum a natura cunctis
gentibus ad cunctas aditum? Hoc Seneca[4a] summum Naturae beneficium
putat, quod et vento gentes locis dissipatas miscuit, et sua omnia in
regiones ita descripsit, ut necessarium mortalibus esset inter ipsos
commercium. Hoc igitur ius ad cunctas gentes aequaliter pertinet:
quod clarissimi Iurisconsulti[5a] eo usque producunt, ut negent ullam
rempublicam aut Principem prohibere in universum posse, quo minus
alii ad subditos suos accedant, et cum illis negotientur. Hinc ius
descendit hospitale sanctissimum: hinc querelae:

      _Quod genus hoc hominum? quaeve hunc tam barbara morem
      Permittit patria? hospitio prohibemur harenae._[6a]

Et alibi

                            _litusque rogamus
      Innocuum et cunctis undamque auramque patentem._[7a]

Et scimus bella quaedam ex hac causa coepisse, ut Megarensibus

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


Those therefore who deny this law, destroy this most praise-worthy
bond of human fellowship, remove the opportunities for doing mutual
service, in a word do violence to Nature herself. For do not the
ocean, navigable in every direction with which God has encompassed
all the earth, and the regular and the occasional winds which blow
now from one quarter and now from another, offer sufficient proof
that Nature has given to all peoples a right of access to all
other peoples? Seneca[4] thinks this is Nature’s greatest service,
that by the wind she united the widely scattered peoples, and yet
did so distribute all her products over the earth that commercial
intercourse was a necessity to mankind. Therefore this right belongs
equally to all nations. Indeed the most famous jurists[5] extend
its application so far as to deny that any state or any ruler can
debar foreigners from having access to their subjects and trading
with them. Hence is derived that law of hospitality which is of the
highest sanctity; hence the complaint of the poet Vergil:

      “_What men, what monsters, what inhuman race,
      What laws, what barbarous customs of the place,
      Shut up a desert shore to drowning men,
        And drive us to the cruel seas again._”[6]

And:

      “_To beg what you without your want may spare--
      The common water, and the common air._”[7]

We know that certain wars have arisen over this very matter; such for
example as the war of the Megarians against the

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

in Athenienses.[8a] Bononiensibus in. Venetos,[9a] Castellanis etiam
in Americanos has iustas potuisse belli causas esse, et ceteris
probabiliores Victoria putat,[10a] si peregrinari et degere apud
illos prohiberentur, si arcerentur a participatione earum rerum quae
iure gentium aut moribus communia sunt, si denique ad commercia non
admitterentur.

Cui simile est quod in Mosis[11a] historia et inde apud Augustinum
legimus,[12a] iusta bella Israelitas contra Amorrhaeos gessisse,
quia innoxius transitus denegabatur; qui IVRE HVMANAE SOCIETATIS
aequissimo patere debebat. Et hoc nomine Hercules Orchomeniorum,
Graeci sub Agamemnone Mysorum Regi arma intulerunt,[13a] quasi libera
essent naturaliter itinera, ut Baldus dixit.[14a] Accusanturque

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Athenians,[8] and that of the Bolognese against the Venetians.[9]
Again, Victoria[10] holds that the Spaniards could have shown just
reasons for making war upon the Aztecs and the Indians in America,
more plausible reasons certainly than were alleged, if they really
were prevented from traveling or sojourning among those peoples,
and were denied the right to share in those things which by the Law
of Nations or by Custom are common to all, and finally if they were
debarred from trade.

We read of a similar case in the history of Moses,[11] which we find
mentioned also in the writings of Augustine,[12] where the Israelites
justly smote with the edge of the sword the Amorites because they had
denied the Israelites an innocent passage through their territory,
a right which according to the Law of Human Society ought in all
justice to have been allowed. In defense of this principle Hercules
attacked the king of Orchomenus in Boeotia; and the Greeks under
their leader Agamemnon waged war against the king of Mysia[13] on the
ground that, as Baldus[14] has said, high roads were free

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

a Germanis apud Tacitum[15a] Romani, quod colloquia congressusque
gentium arcerent, fluminaque et terras et coelum quodam modo ipsum
clauderent. Nec ullus titulus Christianis quondam in Saracenos magis
placuit, quam quod per illos terrae Iudaeae aditu arcerentur.[16a]

Sequitur ex sententia Lusitanos etiamsi domini essent earum regionum
ad quas Batavi proficiscuntur, iniuriam tamen facturos si aditum
Batavis et mercatum praecluderent.

Quanto igitur iniquius est volentes aliquos a volentium populorum
commercio secludi, illorum opera quorum in potestate nec populi isti
sunt, nec illud ipsum, qua iter est, quando latrones etiam et piratas
non alio magis nomine detestamur, quam quod illi hominum inter se
commeatus obsident atque infestant?

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

by nature. Again, as we read in Tacitus,[15] the Germans accused the
Romans of ‘preventing all intercourse between them and of closing up
to them the rivers and roads, and almost the very air of heaven’.
When in days gone by the Christians made crusades against the
Saracens, no other pretext was so welcome or so plausible as that
they were denied by the infidels free access to the Holy Land.[16]

It follows therefore that the Portuguese, even if they had been
sovereigns in those parts to which the Dutch make voyages, would
nevertheless be doing them an injury if they should forbid them
access to those places and from trading there.

Is it not then an incalculably greater injury for nations which
desire reciprocal commercial relations to be debarred therefrom
by the acts of those who are sovereigns neither of the nations
interested, nor of the element over which their connecting high road
runs? Is not that the very cause which for the most part prompts us
to execrate robbers and pirates, namely, that they beset and infest
our trade routes?

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




CAPUT II

_Lusitanos nullum habere ius dominii in eos Indos ad quos Batavi
navigant titulo inventionis_

Non esse autem Lusitanos earum partium dominos ad quas Batavi
accedunt, puta Iavae, Taprobanae, partis maximae Moluccarum,
certissimo argumento colligimus, quia dominus nemo est eius rei
quam nec ipse umquam nec alter ipsius nomine possedit. Habent
insulae istae quas dicimus et semper habuerunt suos reges, suam
rempublican, suas leges, sua iura; Lusitanis mercatus, ut aliis
gentibus conceditur; itaque et tributa cum pendunt, et ius mercandi
a principibus exorant, dominos se non esse, sed ut externos advenire
satis testantur; ne habitant quidem nisi precario. Et quamquam ad
dominium titulus non sufficiat, quia et possessio requiritur, cum
aliud sit rem habere, aliud ius ad rem consequendam, tamen ne titulum
quidem dominii in eas partes Lusitanis ullum esse affirmo, quem non
ipsis eripuerit Doctorum, et quidem Hispanorum sententia.

Primum si dicent inventionis praemio eas terras sibi cessisse, nec
ius, nec verum dicent. Invenire enim non illud est oculis usurpare,
sed apprehendere, ut Gordiani epistola

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




