CHAPTER XIII

_The Dutch must maintain their right of trade with the East Indies by
peace, by treaty, or by war_


Wherefore since both law and equity demand that trade with the East
Indies be as free to us as to any one else, it follows that we are to
maintain at all hazards that freedom which is ours by nature, either
by coming to a peace agreement with the Spaniards, or by concluding
a treaty, or by continuing the war. So far as peace is concerned, it
is well known that there are two kinds of peace, one made on terms of
equality, the other on unequal terms. The Greeks[178] call the former
kind a compact between equals, the latter an enjoined truce; the
former is meant for high souled men, the latter for servile spirits.
Demosthenes in his speech on the liberty of the Rhodians[179] says
that it was necessary for those who wished to be free to keep away
from treaties which were imposed upon them, because such treaties
were almost the same as slavery. Such conditions are all those by
which one party is lessened in its own right, according to the
definition of Isocrates.[180] For if, as Cicero says,[181] wars
must be undertaken in order that people may live in peace unharmed,
it follows that peace ought to mean not an agreement which entails
slavery, but an undisturbed liberty, especially as peace and justice
according to

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

complurium[182a] iudicio pax et iustitia nominibus magis quam re
differant, sitque pax non qualiscumque, sed ordinata concordia.

* [Philippica XII, 14: cum iis facta pax non erit pax, sed pactio
servitutis.]

Indutiae autem si fiunt satis apparet ex ipsa indutiarum natura non
debere medio earum tempore condicionem cuiusquam deteriorem fieri,
cum ferme interdicti uti possidetis instar obtineant.

Quod si in bellum trudimur hostium iniquitate, debet nobis causae
aequitas spem ac fiduciam boni eventus addere. Nam[183a] ὑπὲρ ὧν ἄν
ἐλαττῶνται μεχρὶ δυνατοῦ πάντες πολεμοῦσι, περὶ δὲ τοῦ πλεονεκτεῖν
οὐχ οὕτως, ‘pro his in quibus iniuria afficiuntur omnes quantum
omnino possunt depugnant: at propter alieni cupiditatem non item’;
quod et Alexander Imperator ita expressit: τὸ μὲν ἄρχειν ἀδίκων ἒργων
οὐκ ἀγνώμονα ἔχει τὴν πρόκλησιν, τὸ δὲ τοὺς ὀχλοῦντας ἀποσείεσθαι ἔκ
τε τῆς ἀγαθῆς συνειδήσεως ἔχει τὸ θαῤῥαλέον, καὶ ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ἀδικεῖν
ἀλλ’ ἀμύνασθαι ὑπάρχει τὸ εὔελπι, ‘eius a quo coepit iniuria,
provocatio maxime invidiosa est; at cum depelluntur aggressores,
sicut bona conscientia fiduciam secum fert, ita quia de vindicanda
non de inferenda iniuria laboratur, spes etiam adsunt optimae’.

Si ita necesse est, perge gens mari invictissima, nec tuam tantum,
sed humani generis libertatem audacter propugna.

      _Nec te, quod classis centenis remigat alis,
        Terreat: INVITO labitur illa MARI:
      Quodve vehunt prorae Centaurica saxa minantes,
        Tigna cava et pictos experiere metus.
      Frangit et attollit vires in milite causa;
        Quae nisi iusta subest, excutit arma pudor._[184a]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

the opinion of many philosophers and theologians[182] differ more in
name than in fact, and as peace is a harmonious agreement based not
on individual whim, but on well ordered regulations.

If however a truce is arranged for, it is quite clear from the very
nature of a truce, that during its continuance no one’s condition
ought to change for the worse, inasmuch as both parties stand on the
equivalent of a _uti possidetis_.

But if we are driven into war by the injustice of our enemies, the
justice of our cause ought to bring hope and confidence in a happy
outcome. “For,” as Demosthenes has said, “every one fights his
hardest to recover what he has lost; but when men endeavor to gain at
the expense of others it is not so.”[183] The Emperor Alexander has
expressed his idea in this way: ‘Those who begin unjust deeds, must
bear the greatest blame; but those who repel aggressors are twice
armed, both with courage because of their just cause, and with the
highest hope because they are not doing a wrong, but are warding off
a wrong’.

Therefore, if it be necessary, arise, O nation unconquered on the
sea, and fight boldly, not only for your own liberty, but for that of
the human race. “Nor let it fright thee that their fleet is winged,
each ship, with an hundred oars. The sea whereon it sails will have
none of it. And though the prows bear figures threatening to cast
rocks such as Centaurs throw, thou shalt find them but hollow planks
and painted terrors. ’Tis his cause that makes or mars a soldier’s
strength. If the cause be not just, shame strikes the weapon from his
hands.”[184]

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


Si iusta multi, et ipse Augustinus,[185a] arma crediderunt eo nomine
suscipi, quod per terras alienas iter innoxium negaretur, quanto illa
erunt iustiora, quibus maris, quod naturae lege commune est, usus
communis et innoxius postulatur? Si iuste oppugnatae sunt gentes quae
in suo solo commercia aliis interdicebant, quid illae quae populos
ad se nihil pertinentes per vim distinent, ac mutuos earum commeatus
intercludunt? Si res ista in iudicio agitaretur, dubitari non potest
quae a viro bono expectari deberet sententia, ait Praetor:[186a]
‘Quo minus illi in flumine publico navem agere, ratem agere, quove
minus per ripam exonerare liceat, vim fieri veto’. De mari et litore
in eandem formam dandum interdictum docent interpretes, exemplo
Labeonis, qui cum interdiceret Praetor:[187a] ‘Ne quid in flumine
publico ripave eius facias, quo statio iterve navigio deterius sit,
fiat’; simile dixit interdictum competere in mari:[188a] ‘Ne quid in
mari inve litore facias, quo portus, statio, iterve navigio deterius
sit, fiat’.

Immo et post prohibitionem, si quis scilicet in mari navigare
prohibitus sit, aut non permissus rem suam vendere, aut re sua uti,
iniuriarum eo nomine competere actionem Vlpianus respondit.[189a]
Theologi insuper et qui tractant casus, quos vocant, conscientiarum,
concordes tradunt,

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


If many writers, Augustine himself[185] among them, believed it was
right to take up arms because innocent passage was refused across
foreign territory, how much more justly will arms be taken up against
those from whom the demand is made of the common and innocent use
of the sea, which by the law of nature is common to all? If those
nations which interdicted others from trade on their own soil are
justly attacked, what of those nations which separate by force and
interrupt the mutual intercourse of peoples over whom they have
no rights at all? If this case should be taken into court, there
can be no doubt what opinion ought to be anticipated from a just
judge. The praetor’s law says:[186] ‘I forbid force to be used in
preventing any one from sailing a ship or a boat on a public river,
or from unloading his cargo on the bank’. The commentators say that
the injunction must be applied in the same manner to the sea and to
the seashore. Labeo, for example, in commenting on the praetor’s
edict,[187] ‘Let nothing be done in a public river or on its bank, by
which a landing or a channel for shipping be obstructed’, said there
was a similar interdict which applied to the sea, namely,[188] ‘Let
nothing be done on the sea or on the seashore by which a harbor, a
landing, or a channel for shipping be obstructed’.

Nay more, after such a prohibition, if, namely, a man be prevented
from navigating the sea, or not allowed to sell or to make use of his
own wares and products, Ulpian says that he can bring an action for
damages on that ground.[189] Also the theologians and the casuists
agree that he who prevents another from buying or selling, or who
puts his

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

eum qui alterum vendere aut emere impediat, utilitatemve propriam
publicae ac communi praeponat, aut ullo modo alterum in eo quod est
iuris communis impediat, ad restitutionem teneri omnis damni viri
boni arbitrio.

Secundum haec igitur vir bonus iudicans, Batavis libertatem
commerciorum adiudicaret, Lusitanos et ceteros, qui eam libertatem
impediunt, vetaret vim facere, et damna restituere iuberet. Quod
autem in iudicio obtineretur, id ubi iudicium haberi non potest,
iusto bello vindicatur. Augustinus:[190a] ‘Iniquitas partis adversae
iusta ingerit bella’. Et Cicero:[191a] ‘Cum sint duo genera
decertandi, unum per disceptationem, alterum per vim, confugiendum ad
posterius, si uti non licet priore’. Et Rex Theodoricus: ‘Veniendum
tunc ad arma, cum locum apud adversarium iustitia non potest
reperire’. Et quod proprius est nostro argumento,[192a] Pomponius
eum qui rem omnibus communem cum incommodo ceterorum usurpet, MANV
PROHIBENDVM respondit. Theologi quoque tradunt, sicuti pro rerum
cuiusque defensione bellum recte suscipitur, ita non minus recte
suscipi, pro usu earum rerum quae naturali iure debent esse communes.
Quare ei qui itinera praecludat, evectionemque mercium impediat,
etiam non expectata ulla publica auctoritate, _via facti_, ut
loquuntur, posse occurri.

Quae cum ita sint, minime verendum est, ne aut Deus

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

private interests before the public and common interests, or who
in any way hinders another in the use of something which is his by
common right, is held in damages to complete restitution in an amount
fixed by an honorable arbitrator.

Following these principles a good judge would award to the Dutch
the freedom of trade, and would forbid the Portuguese and others
from using force to hinder that freedom, and would order the payment
of just damages. But when a judgment which would be rendered in a
court cannot be obtained, it should with justice be demanded in a
war. Augustine[190] acknowledges this when he says: ‘The injustice
of an adversary brings a just war’. Cicero also says:[191] “There
are two ways of settling a dispute; first, by discussion; second,
by physical force; we must resort to force only in case we may not
avail ourselves of discussion.” And King Theodoric says: ‘Recourse
must then be had to arms when justice can find no lodgment in an
adversary’s heart’. Pomponius, however, has handed down a decision
which has more bearing on our argument[192] than any of the citations
already made. He declared that the man who seized a thing common to
all to the prejudice of every one else must be forcibly prevented
from so doing. The theologians also say that just as war is
righteously undertaken in defense of individual property, so no less
righteously is it undertaken in behalf of the use of those things
which by natural law ought to be common property. Therefore he who
closes up roads and hinders the export of merchandise ought to be
prevented from so doing _via facti_, even without waiting for any
public authority.

Since these things are so, there need not be the slightest

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

eorum conatus secundet, qui ab ipso institutum ius naturae
certissimum violant, aut homines ipsi eos inultos patiantur, qui solo
quaestus sui respectu communem humani generis utilitatem oppugnant.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

fear that God will prosper the efforts of those who violate that
most stable law of nature which He himself has instituted, or that
even men will allow those to go unpunished who for the sake alone of
private gain oppose a common benefit of the human race.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




  CVM SVB HOC TEMPVS PLVRIMAE REGIS HISPANIARVM LITTERAE IN MANVS
  NOSTRAS VENISSENT, QVIBVS IPSIVS ET LVSITANORVM INSTITVTVM
  MANIFESTE DETEGITVR, OPERAE PRETIVM VISVM EST EX IIS, QUAE
  PLERAEQVE EODEM ERANT ARGVMENTO, BINAS IN LATINVM SERMONEM
  TRANSLATAS EXHIBERE.


Domine Martine Alphonse de Castro, Prorex amice, ego Rex multam tibi
salutem mitto:

Cum hisce litteris perveniet ad te exemplum typis impressum Edicti
quod faciendum curavi, quo, ob rationes quas expressas videbis,
aliasque meis rebus conducentes prohibeo commercium omne externorum
in ipsis partibus Indiae aliisque regionibus transmarinis.
Quandoquidem res haec est momenti atque usus maximi, et quae effici
summa cum industria debeat, impero tibi, ut simulatque litteras
has et edictum acceperis, publicationem eius omni diligentia
procures in omnibus locis ac partibus istius imperi, idque ipsum
quod edicto continetur exsequaris sine ullius personae exceptione,
cuiuscumque qualitatis, aetatis, condicionisve sit, citra omnem
moram atque excusationem, procedasque ad impletionem mandati via
merae exsecutionis, nullo admisso impedimento, appellatione, aut
gravamine in contrarium, cuiuscumque materiae generis aut qualitatis.
Iubeo itaque hoc ipsum impleri per eos ministros ad quos exsecutio
pertinet, iisque significari, non modo eos qui contra fecerint malam
operam mihi navaturos, sed eosdem me puniturum privatione officiorum
in quibus mihi serviunt.

Quia autem relatum est mihi commorari in istis partibus

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




APPENDIX

_Two letters of Philip III, King of Spain_


As several letters of the King of Spain have come of late into our
hands, in which his design and that of the Portuguese is clearly
disclosed, it seemed worth while to translate into Latin two of them
which had particular bearing upon the controversy at issue, and to
append them here.


