CHAPTER IX

_Trade with the East Indies does not belong to the Portuguese by
title of occupation_


Neither discovery nor occupation [which have been fully treated
in Chapters II and V], is to be invoked on the point here under
consideration, because the right of carrying on trade is not
something corporal, which can be physically seized; nor would
discovery or occupation help the case of the Portuguese even if
they had been the very first persons to trade with the East Indies,
although such a claim would be entirely untenable and false. For
since in the beginning peoples set out along different paths, it was
necessary that some become the first traders, nevertheless it is
absolutely certain that those traders did not on that account acquire
any rights. Wherefore if the Portuguese have any right by virtue of
which they _alone_ may trade with the East Indies, that right like
other servitudes ought to arise from concession, either express or
tacit, that is to say, from prescription. Otherwise no such right can
exist.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




CAPVT X

_Mercaturam cum Indis propriam non esse Lusitanorum titulo donationis
Pontificiae_


Concessit nemo, nisi forte Pontifex, qui non potuit.[163a] Nemo
enim quod suum non est concedere potest. At Pontifex, nisi totius
Mundi temporalis sit Dominus, quod negant sapientes, ius etiam
commerciorum universale sui iuris dicere non potest. Maxime vero
cum res sit ad solum quaestum accommodata, nihilque ad spiritualem
procurationem pertinens, extra quam cessat, ut fatentur omnes,
Pontificia potestas. Praeterea si Pontifex solis illud Lusitanis ius
tribuere vellet idemque adimere hominibus ceteris, duplicem faceret
iniuriam: Primum Indis, quos ut extra Ecclesiam positos Pontifici
nulla ex parte subditos esse diximus. His igitur cum nihil quod
ipsorum est adimere possit Pontifex, etiam ius illud quod habent cum
quibuslibet negotiandi adimere non potuit. Deinde aliis hominibus
omnibus Christianis et non Christianis, quibus idem illud ius adimere
non potuit sine causa indicta. Quid quod ne temporales quidem Domini
in suis imperiis prohibere possunt commerciorum libertatem, uti
rationibus et auctoritatibus ante demonstratum est?

Sicut et illud confitendum est, contra ius perpetuum naturae
gentiumque, unde ista libertas originem sumpsit in omne tempus
duratura, nullam valere Pontificis auctoritatem.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




CHAPTER X

_Trade with the East Indies does not belong to the Portuguese by
virtue of title based on the Papal Donation_


No one has granted it except perhaps the Pope, and he did not have
the power.[163] For no one can give away what he does not himself
possess. But the Pope, unless he were the temporal master of the
whole world, which sensible men deny, cannot say that the universal
right in respect of trade belongs to him. Especially is this true
since trade has to do only with material gains, and has no concern
at all with spiritual matters, outside of which, as all admit, Papal
power ceases. Besides, if the Pope wished to give that right to the
Portuguese alone, and to deprive all other men of the same right,
he would be doing a double injustice. In the first place, he would
do an injustice to the people of the East Indies who, placed as we
have said outside the Church, are in no way subjects of the Pope.
Therefore, since the Pope cannot take away from them anything that is
theirs, he could not take away their right of trading with whomsoever
they please. In the second place, he would do an injustice to all
other men both Christian and non-Christian, from whom he could not
take that same right without a hearing. Besides, what are we to say
of the fact that not even temporal lords in their own dominions are
competent to prohibit the freedom of trade, as has been demonstrated
above by reasonable and authoritative statements?

Therefore it must be acknowledged, that the authority of the Pope has
absolutely no force against the eternal law of nature and of nations,
from whence came that liberty which is destined to endure for ever
and ever.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




CAPVT XI

_Mercaturam cum Indis non esse Lusitanorum propriam iure
praescriptionis aut consuetudinis_


Restat praescriptio, seu consuetudinem mavis dicere.[164a] Sed
nec huius nec illius vim esse aliquam inter liberas nationes, aut
diversarum gentium Principes, nec adversus ea quae primigenio iure
introducta sunt, cum Vasquio ostendimus. Quare et hic ut ius mercandi
proprium fiat, quod proprietatis naturam non recipit, nullo tempore
efficitur. Itaque nec titulus hic adfuisse potest, nec bona fides,
quae cum manifesto desinit, praescriptio secundum Canones non ius
dicetur, sed iniuria.

Quin et ipsa mercandi quasi possessio non ex iure proprio contigisse
videtur, sed ex iure communi quod ad omnes aequaliter pertinet; sicut
contra, quod aliae nationes cum Indis contrahere forte neglexerunt,
id non Lusitanorum gratia fecisse existimandi sunt, sed quia sibi
expedire crediderunt; quod nihil obstat quo minus ubi suaserit
utilitas, id facere possint, quod antea non fecerint. Certissima enim
illa regula a doctoribus traditur,[165a] in his quae sunt arbitrii
seu merae facultatis, ita ut per se actum tantum facultatis eius,
non autem ius novum operentur, nec praescriptionis nec consuetudinis
titulo annos etiam mille valituros: quod et

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -




