CHAPTER XIV. OLD DIAMOND


AFTER this Diamond recovered so fast, that in a few days he was quite
able to go home as soon as his father had a place for them to go. Now
his father having saved a little money, and finding that no situation
offered itself, had been thinking over a new plan. A strange occurrence
it was which turned his thoughts in that direction. He had a friend in
the Bloomsbury region, who lived by letting out cabs and horses to the
cabmen. This man, happening to meet him one day as he was returning from
an unsuccessful application, said to him:

“Why don't you set up for yourself now--in the cab line, I mean?”

“I haven't enough for that,” answered Diamond's father.

“You must have saved a goodish bit, I should think. Just come home with
me now and look at a horse I can let you have cheap. I bought him only a
few weeks ago, thinking he'd do for a Hansom, but I was wrong. He's got
bone enough for a waggon, but a waggon ain't a Hansom. He ain't got go
enough for a Hansom. You see parties as takes Hansoms wants to go like
the wind, and he ain't got wind enough, for he ain't so young as he once
was. But for a four-wheeler as takes families and their luggages, he's
the very horse. He'd carry a small house any day. I bought him cheap,
and I'll sell him cheap.”

“Oh, I don't want him,” said Diamond's father. “A body must have time
to think over an affair of so much importance. And there's the cab too.
That would come to a deal of money.”

“I could fit you there, I daresay,” said his friend. “But come and look
at the animal, anyhow.”

“Since I lost my own old pair, as was Mr. Coleman's,” said Diamond's
father, turning to accompany the cab-master, “I ain't almost got the
heart to look a horse in the face. It's a thousand pities to part man
and horse.”

“So it is,” returned his friend sympathetically.

But what was the ex-coachman's delight, when, on going into the stable
where his friend led him, he found the horse he wanted him to buy was
no other than his own old Diamond, grown very thin and bony and
long-legged, as if they, had been doing what they could to fit him for
Hansom work!

“He ain't a Hansom horse,” said Diamond's father indignantly.

“Well, you're right. He ain't handsome, but he's a good un” said his
owner.

“Who says he ain't handsome? He's one of the handsomest horses a
gentleman's coachman ever druv,” said Diamond's father; remarking to
himself under his breath--“though I says it as shouldn't”--for he did
not feel inclined all at once to confess that his own old horse could
have sunk so low.

“Well,” said his friend, “all I say is--There's a animal for you, as
strong as a church; an'll go like a train, leastways a parly,” he added,
correcting himself.

But the coachman had a lump in his throat and tears in his eyes. For the
old horse, hearing his voice, had turned his long neck, and when his
old friend went up to him and laid his hand on his side, he whinnied
for joy, and laid his big head on his master's breast. This settled the
matter. The coachman's arms were round the horse's neck in a moment, and
he fairly broke down and cried. The cab-master had never been so fond of
a horse himself as to hug him like that, but he saw in a moment how it
was. And he must have been a good-hearted fellow, for I never heard of
such an idea coming into the head of any other man with a horse to sell:
instead of putting something on to the price because he was now pretty
sure of selling him, he actually took a pound off what he had meant to
ask for him, saying to himself it was a shame to part old friends.

Diamond's father, as soon as he came to himself, turned and asked how
much he wanted for the horse.

“I see you're old friends,” said the owner.

“It's my own old Diamond. I liked him far the best of the pair, though
the other was good. You ain't got him too, have you?”

“No; nothing in the stable to match him there.”

“I believe you,” said the coachman. “But you'll be wanting a long price
for him, I know.”

“No, not so much. I bought him cheap, and as I say, he ain't for my
work.”

The end of it was that Diamond's father bought old Diamond again, along
with a four-wheeled cab. And as there were some rooms to be had over the
stable, he took them, wrote to his wife to come home, and set up as a
cabman.




CHAPTER XV. THE MEWS


IT WAS late in the afternoon when Diamond and his mother and the baby
reached London. I was so full of Diamond that I forgot to tell you a
baby had arrived in the meantime. His father was waiting for them with
his own cab, but they had not told Diamond who the horse was; for his
father wanted to enjoy the pleasure of his surprise when he found it
out. He got in with his mother without looking at the horse, and his
father having put up Diamond's carpet-bag and his mother's little trunk,
got upon the box himself and drove off; and Diamond was quite proud of
riding home in his father's own carriage. But when he got to the mews,
he could not help being a little dismayed at first; and if he had never
been to the back of the north wind, I am afraid he would have cried a
little. But instead of that, he said to himself it was a fine thing all
the old furniture was there. And instead of helping his mother to be
miserable at the change, he began to find out all the advantages of the
place; for every place has some advantages, and they are always
better worth knowing than the disadvantages. Certainly the weather was
depressing, for a thick, dull, persistent rain was falling by the time
they reached home. But happily the weather is very changeable; and
besides, there was a good fire burning in the room, which their
neighbour with the drunken husband had attended to for them; and the
tea-things were put out, and the kettle was boiling on the fire. And
with a good fire, and tea and bread and butter, things cannot be said to
be miserable.

Diamond's father and mother were, notwithstanding, rather miserable, and
Diamond began to feel a kind of darkness beginning to spread over his
own mind. But the same moment he said to himself, “This will never do.
I can't give in to this. I've been to the back of the north wind. Things
go right there, and so I must try to get things to go right here. I've
got to fight the miserable things. They shan't make me miserable if I
can help it.” I do not mean that he thought these very words. They are
perhaps too grown-up for him to have thought, but they represent the
kind of thing that was in his heart and his head. And when heart and
head go together, nothing can stand before them.

“What nice bread and butter this is!” said Diamond.

“I'm glad you like it, my dear” said his father. “I bought the butter
myself at the little shop round the corner.”

“It's very nice, thank you, father. Oh, there's baby waking! I'll take
him.”

“Sit still, Diamond,” said his mother. “Go on with your bread and
butter. You're not strong enough to lift him yet.”

So she took the baby herself, and set him on her knee. Then Diamond
began to amuse him, and went on till the little fellow was shrieking
with laughter. For the baby's world was his mother's arms; and the
drizzling rain, and the dreary mews, and even his father's troubled
face could not touch him. What cared baby for the loss of a hundred
situations? Yet neither father nor mother thought him hard-hearted
because he crowed and laughed in the middle of their troubles. On the
contrary, his crowing and laughing were infectious. His little heart was
so full of merriment that it could not hold it all, and it ran over into
theirs. Father and mother began to laugh too, and Diamond laughed till
he had a fit of coughing which frightened his mother, and made them all
stop. His father took the baby, and his mother put him to bed.

But it was indeed a change to them all, not only from Sandwich, but from
their old place, instead of the great river where the huge barges with
their mighty brown and yellow sails went tacking from side to side like
little pleasure-skiffs, and where the long thin boats shot past with
eight and sometimes twelve rowers, their windows now looked out upon a
dirty paved yard. And there was no garden more for Diamond to run into
when he pleased, with gay flowers about his feet, and solemn sun-filled
trees over his head. Neither was there a wooden wall at the back of
his bed with a hole in it for North Wind to come in at when she liked.
Indeed, there was such a high wall, and there were so many houses about
the mews, that North Wind seldom got into the place at all, except when
something must be done, and she had a grand cleaning out like other
housewives; while the partition at the head of Diamond's new bed only
divided it from the room occupied by a cabman who drank too much beer,
and came home chiefly to quarrel with his wife and pinch his children.
It was dreadful to Diamond to hear the scolding and the crying. But it
could not make him miserable, because he had been at the back of the
north wind.

If my reader find it hard to believe that Diamond should be so good,
he must remember that he had been to the back of the north wind. If he
never knew a boy so good, did he ever know a boy that had been to the
back of the north wind? It was not in the least strange of Diamond to
behave as he did; on the contrary, it was thoroughly sensible of him.

We shall see how he got on.




