CHAPTER XXXVI.
WHEREIN IS RELATED THE STRANGE AND UNDREAMT-OF ADVENTURE OF THE
DISTRESSED DUENNA, ALIAS THE COUNTESS TRIFALDI, TOGETHER WITH A LETTER
WHICH SANCHO PANZA WROTE TO HIS WIFE, TERESA PANZA




p36a.jpg (150K)

Full Size



The duke had a majordomo of a very facetious and sportive turn, and he
it was that played the part of Merlin, made all the arrangements for
the late adventure, composed the verses, and got a page to represent
Dulcinea; and now, with the assistance of his master and mistress, he
got up another of the drollest and strangest contrivances that can be
imagined.

The duchess asked Sancho the next day if he had made a beginning with
his penance task which he had to perform for the disenchantment of
Dulcinea. He said he had, and had given himself five lashes overnight.

The duchess asked him what he had given them with.

He said with his hand.

“That,” said the duchess, “is more like giving oneself slaps than
lashes; I am sure the sage Merlin will not be satisfied with such
tenderness; worthy Sancho must make a scourge with claws, or a
cat-o’-nine tails, that will make itself felt; for it’s with blood that
letters enter, and the release of so great a lady as Dulcinea will not
be granted so cheaply, or at such a paltry price; and remember, Sancho,
that works of charity done in a lukewarm and half-hearted way are
without merit and of no avail.”

To which Sancho replied, “If your ladyship will give me a proper
scourge or cord, I’ll lay on with it, provided it does not hurt too
much; for you must know, boor as I am, my flesh is more cotton than
hemp, and it won’t do for me to destroy myself for the good of anybody
else.”

“So be it by all means,” said the duchess; “to-morrow I’ll give you a
scourge that will be just the thing for you, and will accommodate
itself to the tenderness of your flesh, as if it was its own sister.”

Then said Sancho, “Your highness must know, dear lady of my soul, that
I have a letter written to my wife, Teresa Panza, giving her an account
of all that has happened me since I left her; I have it here in my
bosom, and there’s nothing wanting but to put the address to it; I’d be
glad if your discretion would read it, for I think it runs in the
governor style; I mean the way governors ought to write.”

“And who dictated it?” asked the duchess.

“Who should have dictated but myself, sinner as I am?” said Sancho.

“And did you write it yourself?” said the duchess.

“That I didn’t,” said Sancho; “for I can neither read nor write, though
I can sign my name.”

“Let us see it,” said the duchess, “for never fear but you display in
it the quality and quantity of your wit.”

Sancho drew out an open letter from his bosom, and the duchess, taking
it, found it ran in this fashion:

SANCHO PANZA’S LETTER TO HIS WIFE, TERESA PANZA


If I was well whipped I went mounted like a gentleman; if I have got a
good government it is at the cost of a good whipping. Thou wilt not
understand this just now, my Teresa; by-and-by thou wilt know what it
means. I may tell thee, Teresa, I mean thee to go in a coach, for that
is a matter of importance, because every other way of going is going on
all-fours. Thou art a governor’s wife; take care that nobody speaks
evil of thee behind thy back. I send thee here a green hunting suit
that my lady the duchess gave me; alter it so as to make a petticoat
and bodice for our daughter. Don Quixote, my master, if I am to believe
what I hear in these parts, is a madman of some sense, and a droll
blockhead, and I am in no way behind him. We have been in the cave of
Montesinos, and the sage Merlin has laid hold of me for the
disenchantment of Dulcinea del Toboso, her that is called Aldonza
Lorenzo over there. With three thousand three hundred lashes, less
five, that I’m to give myself, she will be left as entirely
disenchanted as the mother that bore her. Say nothing of this to
anyone; for, make thy affairs public, and some will say they are white
and others will say they are black. I shall leave this in a few days
for my government, to which I am going with a mighty great desire to
make money, for they tell me all new governors set out with the same
desire; I will feel the pulse of it and will let thee know if thou art
to come and live with me or not. Dapple is well and sends many
remembrances to thee; I am not going to leave him behind though they
took me away to be Grand Turk. My lady the duchess kisses thy hands a
thousand times; do thou make a return with two thousand, for as my
master says, nothing costs less or is cheaper than civility. God has
not been pleased to provide another valise for me with another hundred
crowns, like the one the other day; but never mind, my Teresa, the
bell-ringer is in safe quarters, and all will come out in the scouring
of the government; only it troubles me greatly what they tell me—that
once I have tasted it I will eat my hands off after it; and if that is
so it will not come very cheap to me; though to be sure the maimed have
a benefice of their own in the alms they beg for; so that one way or
another thou wilt be rich and in luck. God give it to thee as he can,
and keep me to serve thee. From this castle, the 20th of July, 1614.


Thy husband, the governor,
SANCHO PANZA


When she had done reading the letter the duchess said to Sancho, “On
two points the worthy governor goes rather astray; one is in saying or
hinting that this government has been bestowed upon him for the lashes
that he is to give himself, when he knows (and he cannot deny it) that
when my lord the duke promised it to him nobody ever dreamt of such a
thing as lashes; the other is that he shows himself here to be very
covetous; and I would not have him a money-seeker, for ‘covetousness
bursts the bag,’ and the covetous governor does ungoverned justice.”

“I don’t mean it that way, señora,” said Sancho; “and if you think the
