letter I have given you. And then without waiting for any answer she
left the window, though not before she saw me take the letter and the
handkerchief, and I had by signs let her know that I would do as she
bade me; and so, seeing myself so well paid for the trouble I would
have in bringing it to you, and knowing by the address that it was to
you it was sent (for, señor, I know you very well), and also unable to
resist that beautiful lady’s tears, I resolved to trust no one else,
but to come myself and give it to you, and in sixteen hours from the
time when it was given me I have made the journey, which, as you know,
is eighteen leagues.’

“All the while the good-natured improvised courier was telling me this,
I hung upon his words, my legs trembling under me so that I could
scarcely stand. However, I opened the letter and read these words:

The promise Don Fernando gave you to urge your father to speak to mine,
he has fulfilled much more to his own satisfaction than to your
advantage. I have to tell you, señor, that he has demanded me for a
wife, and my father, led away by what he considers Don Fernando’s
superiority over you, has favoured his suit so cordially, that in two
days hence the betrothal is to take place with such secrecy and so
privately that the only witnesses are to be the Heavens above and a few
of the household. Picture to yourself the state I am in; judge if it be
urgent for you to come; the issue of the affair will show you whether I
love you or not. God grant this may come to your hand before mine shall
be forced to link itself with his who keeps so ill the faith that he
has pledged.


“Such, in brief, were the words of the letter, words that made me set
out at once without waiting any longer for reply or money; for I now
saw clearly that it was not the purchase of horses but of his own
pleasure that had made Don Fernando send me to his brother. The
exasperation I felt against Don Fernando, joined with the fear of
losing the prize I had won by so many years of love and devotion, lent
me wings; so that almost flying I reached home the same day, by the
hour which served for speaking with Luscinda. I arrived unobserved, and
left the mule on which I had come at the house of the worthy man who
had brought me the letter, and fortune was pleased to be for once so
kind that I found Luscinda at the grating that was the witness of our
loves. She recognised me at once, and I her, but not as she ought to
have recognised me, or I her. But who is there in the world that can
boast of having fathomed or understood the wavering mind and unstable
nature of a woman? Of a truth no one. To proceed: as soon as Luscinda
saw me she said, ‘Cardenio, I am in my bridal dress, and the
treacherous Don Fernando and my covetous father are waiting for me in
the hall with the other witnesses, who shall be the witnesses of my
death before they witness my betrothal. Be not distressed, my friend,
but contrive to be present at this sacrifice, and if that cannot be
prevented by my words, I have a dagger concealed which will prevent
more deliberate violence, putting an end to my life and giving thee a
first proof of the love I have borne and bear thee.’ I replied to her
distractedly and hastily, in fear lest I should not have time to reply,
‘May thy words be verified by thy deeds, lady; and if thou hast a
dagger to save thy honour, I have a sword to defend thee or kill myself
if fortune be against us.’

“I think she could not have heard all these words, for I perceived that
they called her away in haste, as the bridegroom was waiting. Now the
night of my sorrow set in, the sun of my happiness went down, I felt my
eyes bereft of sight, my mind of reason. I could not enter the house,
nor was I capable of any movement; but reflecting how important it was
that I should be present at what might take place on the occasion, I
nerved myself as best I could and went in, for I well knew all the
entrances and outlets; and besides, with the confusion that in secret
pervaded the house no one took notice of me, so, without being seen, I
found an opportunity of placing myself in the recess formed by a window
of the hall itself, and concealed by the ends and borders of two
tapestries, from between which I could, without being seen, see all
that took place in the room. Who could describe the agitation of heart
I suffered as I stood there—the thoughts that came to me—the
reflections that passed through my mind? They were such as cannot be,
nor were it well they should be, told. Suffice it to say that the
bridegroom entered the hall in his usual dress, without ornament of any
kind; as groomsman he had with him a cousin of Luscinda’s and except
the servants of the house there was no one else in the chamber. Soon
afterwards Luscinda came out from an antechamber, attended by her
mother and two of her damsels, arrayed and adorned as became her rank
and beauty, and in full festival and ceremonial attire. My anxiety and
distraction did not allow me to observe or notice particularly what she
wore; I could only perceive the colours, which were crimson and white,
and the glitter of the gems and jewels on her head dress and apparel,
surpassed by the rare beauty of her lovely auburn hair that vying with
the precious stones and the light of the four torches that stood in the
hall shone with a brighter gleam than all. Oh memory, mortal foe of my
peace! why bring before me now the incomparable beauty of that adored
enemy of mine? Were it not better, cruel memory, to remind me and
recall what she then did, that stirred by a wrong so glaring I may
seek, if not vengeance now, at least to rid myself of life? Be not
weary, sirs, of listening to these digressions; my sorrow is not one of
those that can or should be told tersely and briefly, for to me each
incident seems to call for many words.”

To this the curate replied that not only were they not weary of
listening to him, but that the details he mentioned interested them
greatly, being of a kind by no means to be omitted and deserving of the
same attention as the main story.

“To proceed, then,” continued Cardenio: “all being assembled in the
hall, the priest of the parish came in and as he took the pair by the
hand to perform the requisite ceremony, at the words, ‘Will you, Señora
Luscinda, take Señor Don Fernando, here present, for your lawful
husband, as the holy Mother Church ordains?’ I thrust my head and neck
out from between the tapestries, and with eager ears and throbbing
heart set myself to listen to Luscinda’s answer, awaiting in her reply
the sentence of death or the grant of life. Oh, that I had but dared at
that moment to rush forward crying aloud, ‘Luscinda, Luscinda! have a
care what thou dost; remember what thou owest me; bethink thee thou art
mine and canst not be another’s; reflect that thy utterance of “Yes”
and the end of my life will come at the same instant. O, treacherous
Don Fernando! robber of my glory, death of my life! What seekest thou?
Remember that thou canst not as a Christian attain the object of thy
wishes, for Luscinda is my bride, and I am her husband!’ Fool that I
am! now that I am far away, and out of danger, I say I should have done
what I did not do: now that I have allowed my precious treasure to be
robbed from me, I curse the robber, on whom I might have taken
vengeance had I as much heart for it as I have for bewailing my fate;
in short, as I was then a coward and a fool, little wonder is it if I
am now dying shame-stricken, remorseful, and mad.

“The priest stood waiting for the answer of Luscinda, who for a long
time withheld it; and just as I thought she was taking out the dagger
to save her honour, or struggling for words to make some declaration of
the truth on my behalf, I heard her say in a faint and feeble voice, ‘I
will:’ Don Fernando said the same, and giving her the ring they stood
linked by a knot that could never be loosed. The bridegroom then
approached to embrace his bride; and she, pressing her hand upon her
heart, fell fainting in her mother’s arms. It only remains now for me
to tell you the state I was in when in that consent that I heard I saw
all my hopes mocked, the words and promises of Luscinda proved
falsehoods, and the recovery of the prize I had that instant lost
rendered impossible for ever. I stood stupefied, wholly abandoned, it
seemed, by Heaven, declared the enemy of the earth that bore me, the
air refusing me breath for my sighs, the water moisture for my tears;
it was only the fire that gathered strength so that my whole frame
glowed with rage and jealousy. They were all thrown into confusion by
Luscinda’s fainting, and as her mother was unlacing her to give her air
a sealed paper was discovered in her bosom which Don Fernando seized at
once and began to read by the light of one of the torches. As soon as
he had read it he seated himself in a chair, leaning his cheek on his
hand in the attitude of one deep in thought, without taking any part in
the efforts that were being made to recover his bride from her fainting
fit.

“Seeing all the household in confusion, I ventured to come out
regardless whether I were seen or not, and determined, if I were, to do
some frenzied deed that would prove to all the world the righteous
indignation of my breast in the punishment of the treacherous Don
Fernando, and even in that of the fickle fainting traitress. But my
fate, doubtless reserving me for greater sorrows, if such there be, so
ordered it that just then I had enough and to spare of that reason
which has since been wanting to me; and so, without seeking to take
vengeance on my greatest enemies (which might have been easily taken,
as all thought of me was so far from their minds), I resolved to take
it upon myself, and on myself to inflict the pain they deserved,
perhaps with even greater severity than I should have dealt out to them
had I then slain them; for sudden pain is soon over, but that which is
protracted by tortures is ever slaying without ending life. In a word,
I quitted the house and reached that of the man with whom I had left my
mule; I made him saddle it for me, mounted without bidding him
farewell, and rode out of the city, like another Lot, not daring to
turn my head to look back upon it; and when I found myself alone in the
open country, screened by the darkness of the night, and tempted by the
stillness to give vent to my grief without apprehension or fear of
being heard or seen, then I broke silence and lifted up my voice in
maledictions upon Luscinda and Don Fernando, as if I could thus avenge
the wrong they had done me. I called her cruel, ungrateful, false,
thankless, but above all covetous, since the wealth of my enemy had
blinded the eyes of her affection, and turned it from me to transfer it
to one to whom fortune had been more generous and liberal. And yet, in
the midst of this outburst of execration and upbraiding, I found
excuses for her, saying it was no wonder that a young girl in the
seclusion of her parents’ house, trained and schooled to obey them
always, should have been ready to yield to their wishes when they
offered her for a husband a gentleman of such distinction, wealth, and
noble birth, that if she had refused to accept him she would have been
thought out of her senses, or to have set her affection elsewhere, a
suspicion injurious to her fair name and fame. But then again, I said,
had she declared I was her husband, they would have seen that in
choosing me she had not chosen so ill but that they might excuse her,
for before Don Fernando had made his offer, they themselves could not
have desired, if their desires had been ruled by reason, a more
eligible husband for their daughter than I was; and she, before taking
the last fatal step of giving her hand, might easily have said that I
had already given her mine, for I should have come forward to support
any assertion of hers to that effect. In short, I came to the
conclusion that feeble love, little reflection, great ambition, and a
craving for rank, had made her forget the words with which she had
deceived me, encouraged and supported by my firm hopes and honourable
passion.

“Thus soliloquising and agitated, I journeyed onward for the remainder
of the night, and by daybreak I reached one of the passes of these
mountains, among which I wandered for three days more without taking
any path or road, until I came to some meadows lying on I know not
which side of the mountains, and there I inquired of some herdsmen in
what direction the most rugged part of the range lay. They told me that
it was in this quarter, and I at once directed my course hither,
intending to end my life here; but as I was making my way among these
crags, my mule dropped dead through fatigue and hunger, or, as I think
more likely, in order to have done with such a worthless burden as it
bore in me. I was left on foot, worn out, famishing, without anyone to
help me or any thought of seeking help: and so thus I lay stretched on
the ground, how long I know not, after which I rose up free from
hunger, and found beside me some goatherds, who no doubt were the
persons who had relieved me in my need, for they told me how they had
found me, and how I had been uttering ravings that showed plainly I had
lost my reason; and since then I am conscious that I am not always in
full possession of it, but at times so deranged and crazed that I do a
thousand mad things, tearing my clothes, crying aloud in these
solitudes, cursing my fate, and idly calling on the dear name of her
who is my enemy, and only seeking to end my life in lamentation; and
when I recover my senses I find myself so exhausted and weary that I
can scarcely move. Most commonly my dwelling is the hollow of a cork
tree large enough to shelter this miserable body; the herdsmen and
goatherds who frequent these mountains, moved by compassion, furnish me
with food, leaving it by the wayside or on the rocks, where they think
I may perhaps pass and find it; and so, even though I may be then out
of my senses, the wants of nature teach me what is required to sustain
me, and make me crave it and eager to take it. At other times, so they
tell me when they find me in a rational mood, I sally out upon the
road, and though they would gladly give it me, I snatch food by force
from the shepherds bringing it from the village to their huts. Thus do
pass the wretched life that remains to me, until it be Heaven’s will to
bring it to a close, or so to order my memory that I no longer
recollect the beauty and treachery of Luscinda, or the wrong done me by
Don Fernando; for if it will do this without depriving me of life, I
will turn my thoughts into some better channel; if not, I can only
implore it to have full mercy on my soul, for in myself I feel no power
or strength to release my body from this strait in which I have of my
own accord chosen to place it.

“Such, sirs, is the dismal story of my misfortune: say if it be one
that can be told with less emotion than you have seen in me; and do not
trouble yourselves with urging or pressing upon me what reason suggests
as likely to serve for my relief, for it will avail me as much as the
medicine prescribed by a wise physician avails the sick man who will
not take it. I have no wish for health without Luscinda; and since it
is her pleasure to be another’s, when she is or should be mine, let it
be mine to be a prey to misery when I might have enjoyed happiness. She
by her fickleness strove to make my ruin irretrievable; I will strive
to gratify her wishes by seeking destruction; and it will show
generations to come that I alone was deprived of that of which all
others in misfortune have a superabundance, for to them the
impossibility of being consoled is itself a consolation, while to me it
is the cause of greater sorrows and sufferings, for I think that even
in death there will not be an end of them.”

Here Cardenio brought to a close his long discourse and story, as full
of misfortune as it was of love; but just as the curate was going to
address some words of comfort to him, he was stopped by a voice that
reached his ear, saying in melancholy tones what will be told in the
Fourth Part of this narrative; for at this point the sage and sagacious
historian, Cid Hamete Benengeli, brought the Third to a conclusion.



c27e.jpg (65K)



