letter doesn’t run as it ought to do, it’s only to tear it up and make
another; and maybe it will be a worse one if it is left to my
gumption.”

“No, no,” said the duchess, “this one will do, and I wish the duke to
see it.”

With this they betook themselves to a garden where they were to dine,
and the duchess showed Sancho’s letter to the duke, who was highly
delighted with it. They dined, and after the cloth had been removed and
they had amused themselves for a while with Sancho’s rich conversation,
the melancholy sound of a fife and harsh discordant drum made itself
heard. All seemed somewhat put out by this dull, confused, martial
harmony, especially Don Quixote, who could not keep his seat from pure
disquietude; as to Sancho, it is needless to say that fear drove him to
his usual refuge, the side or the skirts of the duchess; and indeed and
in truth the sound they heard was a most doleful and melancholy one.
While they were still in uncertainty they saw advancing towards them
through the garden two men clad in mourning robes so long and flowing
that they trailed upon the ground. As they marched they beat two great
drums which were likewise draped in black, and beside them came the
fife player, black and sombre like the others. Following these came a
personage of gigantic stature enveloped rather than clad in a gown of
the deepest black, the skirt of which was of prodigious dimensions.
Over the gown, girdling or crossing his figure, he had a broad baldric
which was also black, and from which hung a huge scimitar with a black
scabbard and furniture. He had his face covered with a transparent
black veil, through which might be descried a very long beard as white
as snow. He came on keeping step to the sound of the drums with great
gravity and dignity; and, in short, his stature, his gait, the
sombreness of his appearance and his following might well have struck
with astonishment, as they did, all who beheld him without knowing who
he was. With this measured pace and in this guise he advanced to kneel
before the duke, who, with the others, awaited him standing. The duke,
however, would not on any account allow him to speak until he had
risen. The prodigious scarecrow obeyed, and standing up, removed the
veil from his face and disclosed the most enormous, the longest, the
whitest and the thickest beard that human eyes had ever beheld until
that moment, and then fetching up a grave, sonorous voice from the
depths of his broad, capacious chest, and fixing his eyes on the duke,
he said:

“Most high and mighty señor, my name is Trifaldin of the White Beard; I
am squire to the Countess Trifaldi, otherwise called the Distressed
Duenna, on whose behalf I bear a message to your highness, which is
that your magnificence will be pleased to grant her leave and
permission to come and tell you her trouble, which is one of the
strangest and most wonderful that the mind most familiar with trouble
in the world could have imagined; but first she desires to know if the
valiant and never vanquished knight, Don Quixote of La Mancha, is in
this your castle, for she has come in quest of him on foot and without
breaking her fast from the kingdom of Kandy to your realms here; a
thing which may and ought to be regarded as a miracle or set down to
enchantment; she is even now at the gate of this fortress or plaisance,
and only waits for your permission to enter. I have spoken.” And with
that he coughed, and stroked down his beard with both his hands, and
stood very tranquilly waiting for the response of the duke, which was
to this effect: “Many days ago, worthy squire Trifaldin of the White
Beard, we heard of the misfortune of my lady the Countess Trifaldi,
whom the enchanters have caused to be called the Distressed Duenna. Bid
her enter, O stupendous squire, and tell her that the valiant knight
Don Quixote of La Mancha is here, and from his generous disposition she
may safely promise herself every protection and assistance; and you may
tell her, too, that if my aid be necessary it will not be withheld, for
I am bound to give it to her by my quality of knight, which involves
the protection of women of all sorts, especially widowed, wronged, and
distressed dames, such as her ladyship seems to be.”

On hearing this Trifaldin bent the knee to the ground, and making a
sign to the fifer and drummers to strike up, he turned and marched out
of the garden to the same notes and at the same pace as when he
entered, leaving them all amazed at his bearing and solemnity. Turning
to Don Quixote, the duke said, “After all, renowned knight, the mists
of malice and ignorance are unable to hide or obscure the light of
valour and virtue. I say so, because your excellence has been barely
six days in this castle, and already the unhappy and the afflicted come
in quest of you from lands far distant and remote, and not in coaches
or on dromedaries, but on foot and fasting, confident that in that
mighty arm they will find a cure for their sorrows and troubles; thanks
to your great achievements, which are circulated all over the known
earth.”

“I wish, señor duke,” replied Don Quixote, “that blessed ecclesiastic,
who at table the other day showed such ill-will and bitter spite
against knights-errant, were here now to see with his own eyes whether
knights of the sort are needed in the world; he would at any rate learn
by experience that those suffering any extraordinary affliction or
sorrow, in extreme cases and unusual misfortunes do not go to look for
a remedy to the houses of jurists or village sacristans, or to the
knight who has never attempted to pass the bounds of his own town, or
to the indolent courtier who only seeks for news to repeat and talk of,
instead of striving to do deeds and exploits for others to relate and
record. Relief in distress, help in need, protection for damsels,
consolation for widows, are to be found in no sort of persons better
than in knights-errant; and I give unceasing thanks to heaven that I am
one, and regard any misfortune or suffering that may befall me in the
pursuit of so honourable a calling as endured to good purpose. Let this
duenna come and ask what she will, for I will effect her relief by the
might of my arm and the dauntless resolution of my bold heart.”



p36e.jpg (22K)



