CHAPTER XXVII.
OF HOW THE CURATE AND THE BARBER PROCEEDED WITH THEIR SCHEME; TOGETHER
WITH OTHER MATTERS WORTHY OF RECORD IN THIS GREAT HISTORY




c27a.jpg (169K)

Full Size




The curate’s plan did not seem a bad one to the barber, but on the
contrary so good that they immediately set about putting it in
execution. They begged a petticoat and hood of the landlady, leaving
her in pledge a new cassock of the curate’s; and the barber made a
beard out of a grey-brown or red ox-tail in which the landlord used to
stick his comb. The landlady asked them what they wanted these things
for, and the curate told her in a few words about the madness of Don
Quixote, and how this disguise was intended to get him away from the
mountain where he then was. The landlord and landlady immediately came
to the conclusion that the madman was their guest, the balsam man and
master of the blanketed squire, and they told the curate all that had
passed between him and them, not omitting what Sancho had been so
silent about. Finally the landlady dressed up the curate in a style
that left nothing to be desired; she put on him a cloth petticoat with
black velvet stripes a palm broad, all slashed, and a bodice of green
velvet set off by a binding of white satin, which as well as the
petticoat must have been made in the time of king Wamba. The curate
would not let them hood him, but put on his head a little quilted linen
cap which he used for a night-cap, and bound his forehead with a strip
of black silk, while with another he made a mask with which he
concealed his beard and face very well. He then put on his hat, which
was broad enough to serve him for an umbrella, and enveloping himself
in his cloak seated himself woman-fashion on his mule, while the barber
mounted his with a beard down to the waist of mingled red and white,
for it was, as has been said, the tail of a clay-red ox.

They took leave of all, and of the good Maritornes, who, sinner as she
was, promised to pray a rosary of prayers that God might grant them
success in such an arduous and Christian undertaking as that they had
in hand. But hardly had he sallied forth from the inn when it struck
the curate that he was doing wrong in rigging himself out in that
fashion, as it was an indecorous thing for a priest to dress himself
that way even though much might depend upon it; and saying so to the
barber he begged him to change dresses, as it was fitter he should be
the distressed damsel, while he himself would play the squire’s part,
which would be less derogatory to his dignity; otherwise he was
resolved to have nothing more to do with the matter, and let the devil
take Don Quixote. Just at this moment Sancho came up, and on seeing the
pair in such a costume he was unable to restrain his laughter; the
barber, however, agreed to do as the curate wished, and, altering their
plan, the curate went on to instruct him how to play his part and what
to say to Don Quixote to induce and compel him to come with them and
give up his fancy for the place he had chosen for his idle penance. The
barber told him he could manage it properly without any instruction,
and as he did not care to dress himself up until they were near where
Don Quixote was, he folded up the garments, and the curate adjusted his
beard, and they set out under the guidance of Sancho Panza, who went
along telling them of the encounter with the madman they met in the
Sierra, saying nothing, however, about the finding of the valise and
its contents; for with all his simplicity the lad was a trifle
covetous.

The next day they reached the place where Sancho had laid the
broom-branches as marks to direct him to where he had left his master,
and recognising it he told them that here was the entrance, and that
they would do well to dress themselves, if that was required to deliver
his master; for they had already told him that going in this guise and
dressing in this way were of the highest importance in order to rescue
his master from the pernicious life he had adopted; and they charged
him strictly not to tell his master who they were, or that he knew
them, and should he ask, as ask he would, if he had given the letter to
Dulcinea, to say that he had, and that, as she did not know how to
read, she had given an answer by word of mouth, saying that she
commanded him, on pain of her displeasure, to come and see her at once;
and it was a very important matter for himself, because in this way and
with what they meant to say to him they felt sure of bringing him back
to a better mode of life and inducing him to take immediate steps to
become an emperor or monarch, for there was no fear of his becoming an
archbishop. All this Sancho listened to and fixed it well in his
memory, and thanked them heartily for intending to recommend his master
to be an emperor instead of an archbishop, for he felt sure that in the
way of bestowing rewards on their squires emperors could do more than
archbishops-errant. He said, too, that it would be as well for him to
go on before them to find him, and give him his lady’s answer; for that
perhaps might be enough to bring him away from the place without
putting them to all this trouble. They approved of what Sancho
proposed, and resolved to wait for him until he brought back word of
having found his master.

Sancho pushed on into the glens of the Sierra, leaving them in one
through which there flowed a little gentle rivulet, and where the rocks
and trees afforded a cool and grateful shade. It was an August day with
all the heat of one, and the heat in those parts is intense, and the
hour was three in the afternoon, all which made the spot the more
inviting and tempted them to wait there for Sancho’s return, which they
did. They were reposing, then, in the shade, when a voice unaccompanied
by the notes of any instrument, but sweet and pleasing in its tone,
reached their ears, at which they were not a little astonished, as the
place did not seem to them likely quarters for one who sang so well;
for though it is often said that shepherds of rare voice are to be
found in the woods and fields, this is rather a flight of the poet’s
fancy than the truth. And still more surprised were they when they
perceived that what they heard sung were the verses not of rustic
shepherds, but of the polished wits of the city; and so it proved, for
the verses they heard were these:

What makes my quest of happiness seem vain?
Disdain.
What bids me to abandon hope of ease?
Jealousies.
What holds my heart in anguish of suspense?
Absence.
If that be so, then for my grief
Where shall I turn to seek relief,
When hope on every side lies slain
By Absence, Jealousies, Disdain?

What the prime cause of all my woe doth prove?
Love.
What at my glory ever looks askance?
Chance.
Whence is permission to afflict me given?
Heaven.
If that be so, I but await
The stroke of a resistless fate,
Since, working for my woe, these three,
Love, Chance and Heaven, in league I see.

What must I do to find a remedy?
Die.
What is the lure for love when coy and strange?
Change.
What, if all fail, will cure the heart of sadness?
Madness.
If that be so, it is but folly
To seek a cure for melancholy:
Ask where it lies; the answer saith
In Change, in Madness, or in Death.


The hour, the summer season, the solitary place, the voice and skill of
the singer, all contributed to the wonder and delight of the two
listeners, who remained still waiting to hear something more; finding,
however, that the silence continued some little time, they resolved to
go in search of the musician who sang with so fine a voice; but just as
they were about to do so they were checked by the same voice, which
once more fell upon their ears, singing this

SONNET

When heavenward, holy Friendship, thou didst go
Soaring to seek thy home beyond the sky,
And take thy seat among the saints on high,
It was thy will to leave on earth below
Thy semblance, and upon it to bestow
Thy veil, wherewith at times hypocrisy,
Parading in thy shape, deceives the eye,
And makes its vileness bright as virtue show.
Friendship, return to us, or force the cheat
That wears it now, thy livery to restore,
By aid whereof sincerity is slain.
If thou wilt not unmask thy counterfeit,
This earth will be the prey of strife once more,
As when primæval discord held its reign.


The song ended with a deep sigh, and again the listeners remained
waiting attentively for the singer to resume; but perceiving that the
music had now turned to sobs and heart-rending moans they determined to
find out who the unhappy being could be whose voice was as rare as his
sighs were piteous, and they had not proceeded far when on turning the
corner of a rock they discovered a man of the same aspect and
appearance as Sancho had described to them when he told them the story
of Cardenio. He, showing no astonishment when he saw them, stood still
with his head bent down upon his breast like one in deep thought,
without raising his eyes to look at them after the first glance when
they suddenly came upon him. The curate, who was aware of his
misfortune and recognised him by the description, being a man of good
address, approached him and in a few sensible words entreated and urged
him to quit a life of such misery, lest he should end it there, which
would be the greatest of all misfortunes. Cardenio was then in his
right mind, free from any attack of that madness which so frequently
carried him away, and seeing them dressed in a fashion so unusual among
the frequenters of those wilds, could not help showing some surprise,
especially when he heard them speak of his case as if it were a
well-known matter (for the curate’s words gave him to understand as
much) so he replied to them thus:

“I see plainly, sirs, whoever you may be, that Heaven, whose care it is
to succour the good, and even the wicked very often, here, in this
remote spot, cut off from human intercourse, sends me, though I deserve
it not, those who seek to draw me away from this to some better
retreat, showing me by many and forcible arguments how unreasonably I
act in leading the life I do; but as they know, that if I escape from
this evil I shall fall into another still greater, perhaps they will
set me down as a weak-minded man, or, what is worse, one devoid of
reason; nor would it be any wonder, for I myself can perceive that the
effect of the recollection of my misfortunes is so great and works so
powerfully to my ruin, that in spite of myself I become at times like a
stone, without feeling or consciousness; and I come to feel the truth
of it when they tell me and show me proofs of the things I have done
when the terrible fit overmasters me; and all I can do is bewail my lot
in vain, and idly curse my destiny, and plead for my madness by telling
how it was caused, to any that care to hear it; for no reasonable
beings on learning the cause will wonder at the effects; and if they
cannot help me at least they will not blame me, and the repugnance they
feel at my wild ways will turn into pity for my woes. If it be, sirs,
that you are here with the same design as others have come with, before
you proceed with your wise arguments, I entreat you to hear the story
of my countless misfortunes, for perhaps when you have heard it you
will spare yourselves the trouble you would take in offering
consolation to grief that is beyond the reach of it.”

As they, both of them, desired nothing more than to hear from his own
lips the cause of his suffering, they entreated him to tell it,
promising not to do anything for his relief or comfort that he did not
wish; and thereupon the unhappy gentleman began his sad story in nearly
the same words and manner in which he had related it to Don Quixote and
the goatherd a few days before, when, through Master Elisabad, and Don
Quixote’s scrupulous observance of what was due to chivalry, the tale
was left unfinished, as this history has already recorded; but now
fortunately the mad fit kept off, allowed him to tell it to the end;
and so, coming to the incident of the note which Don Fernando had found
in the volume of “Amadis of Gaul,” Cardenio said that he remembered it
perfectly and that it was in these words:

“_Luscinda to Cardenio._


“Every day I discover merits in you that oblige and compel me to hold
you in higher estimation; so if you desire to relieve me of this
obligation without cost to my honour, you may easily do so. I have a
father who knows you and loves me dearly, who without putting any
constraint on my inclination will grant what will be reasonable for you
to have, if it be that you value me as you say and as I believe you
do.”


“By this letter I was induced, as I told you, to demand Luscinda for my
wife, and it was through it that Luscinda came to be regarded by Don
Fernando as one of the most discreet and prudent women of the day, and
this letter it was that suggested his design of ruining me before mine
could be carried into effect. I told Don Fernando that all Luscinda’s
father was waiting for was that mine should ask her of him, which I did
not dare to suggest to him, fearing that he would not consent to do so;
not because he did not know perfectly well the rank, goodness, virtue,
and beauty of Luscinda, and that she had qualities that would do honour
to any family in Spain, but because I was aware that he did not wish me
to marry so soon, before seeing what the Duke Ricardo would do for me.
In short, I told him I did not venture to mention it to my father, as
well on account of that difficulty, as of many others that discouraged
me though I knew not well what they were, only that it seemed to me
that what I desired was never to come to pass. To all this Don Fernando
answered that he would take it upon himself to speak to my father, and
persuade him to speak to Luscinda’s father. O, ambitious Marius! O,
cruel Catiline! O, wicked Sylla! O, perfidious Ganelon! O, treacherous
Vellido! O, vindictive Julian! O, covetous Judas! Traitor, cruel,
vindictive, and perfidious, wherein had this poor wretch failed in his
fidelity, who with such frankness showed thee the secrets and the joys
of his heart? What offence did I commit? What words did I utter, or
what counsels did I give that had not the furtherance of thy honour and
welfare for their aim? But, woe is me, wherefore do I complain? for
sure it is that when misfortunes spring from the stars, descending from
on high they fall upon us with such fury and violence that no power on
earth can check their course nor human device stay their coming. Who
could have thought that Don Fernando, a highborn gentleman,
intelligent, bound to me by gratitude for my services, one that could
win the object of his love wherever he might set his affections, could
have become so obdurate, as they say, as to rob me of my one ewe lamb
that was not even yet in my possession? But laying aside these useless
and unavailing reflections, let us take up the broken thread of my
unhappy story.

“To proceed, then: Don Fernando finding my presence an obstacle to the
execution of his treacherous and wicked design, resolved to send me to
his elder brother under the pretext of asking money from him to pay for
six horses which, purposely, and with the sole object of sending me
away that he might the better carry out his infernal scheme, he had
purchased the very day he offered to speak to my father, and the price
of which he now desired me to fetch. Could I have anticipated this
treachery? Could I by any chance have suspected it? Nay; so far from
that, I offered with the greatest pleasure to go at once, in my
satisfaction at the good bargain that had been made. That night I spoke
with Luscinda, and told her what had been agreed upon with Don
Fernando, and how I had strong hopes of our fair and reasonable wishes
being realised. She, as unsuspicious as I was of the treachery of Don
Fernando, bade me try to return speedily, as she believed the
fulfilment of our desires would be delayed only so long as my father
put off speaking to hers. I know not why it was that on saying this to
me her eyes filled with tears, and there came a lump in her throat that
prevented her from uttering a word of many more that it seemed to me
she was striving to say to me. I was astonished at this unusual turn,
which I never before observed in her, for we always conversed, whenever
good fortune and my ingenuity gave us the chance, with the greatest
gaiety and cheerfulness, mingling tears, sighs, jealousies, doubts, or
fears with our words; it was all on my part a eulogy of my good fortune
that Heaven should have given her to me for my mistress; I glorified
her beauty, I extolled her worth and her understanding; and she paid me
back by praising in me what in her love for me she thought worthy of
praise; and besides we had a hundred thousand trifles and doings of our
neighbours and acquaintances to talk about, and the utmost extent of my
boldness was to take, almost by force, one of her fair white hands and
carry it to my lips, as well as the closeness of the low grating that
separated us allowed me. But the night before the unhappy day of my
departure she wept, she moaned, she sighed, and she withdrew leaving me
filled with perplexity and amazement, overwhelmed at the sight of such
strange and affecting signs of grief and sorrow in Luscinda; but not to
dash my hopes I ascribed it all to the depth of her love for me and the
pain that separation gives those who love tenderly. At last I took my
departure, sad and dejected, my heart filled with fancies and
suspicions, but not knowing well what it was I suspected or fancied;
plain omens pointing to the sad event and misfortune that was awaiting
me.

“I reached the place whither I had been sent, gave the letter to Don
Fernando’s brother, and was kindly received but not promptly dismissed,
for he desired me to wait, very much against my will, eight days in
some place where the duke his father was not likely to see me, as his
brother wrote that the money was to be sent without his knowledge; all
of which was a scheme of the treacherous Don Fernando, for his brother
had no want of money to enable him to despatch me at once.

“The command was one that exposed me to the temptation of disobeying
it, as it seemed to me impossible to endure life for so many days
separated from Luscinda, especially after leaving her in the sorrowful
mood I have described to you; nevertheless as a dutiful servant I
obeyed, though I felt it would be at the cost of my well-being. But
four days later there came a man in quest of me with a letter which he
gave me, and which by the address I perceived to be from Luscinda, as
the writing was hers. I opened it with fear and trepidation, persuaded
that it must be something serious that had impelled her to write to me
when at a distance, as she seldom did so when I was near. Before
reading it I asked the man who it was that had given it to him, and how
long he had been upon the road; he told me that as he happened to be
passing through one of the streets of the city at the hour of noon, a
very beautiful lady called to him from a window, and with tears in her
eyes said to him hurriedly, ‘Brother, if you are, as you seem to be, a
Christian, for the love of God I entreat you to have this letter
despatched without a moment’s delay to the place and person named in
the address, all which is well known, and by this you will render a
great service to our Lord; and that you may be at no inconvenience in
doing so take what is in this handkerchief;’ and said he, ‘with this
she threw me a handkerchief out of the window in which were tied up a
hundred reals and this gold ring which I bring here together with the
