V

DAILY BREAD

When Charles Lyell addressed himself to the problems of geology, he found
that his predecessors in the study had accounted for all the stupendous
phenomena whose story is written in the earth's crust, on the supposition
of vast catastrophic disturbances in the remote past, because they held
that these effects were too prodigious to have been wrought by the
ordinary slow processes of nature with which we are familiar.  Lyell took
up the question by the near and homely end.  He patiently watched the
workings of heat and cold, sunshine and rain and frost, summer and
winter, in the fields about his own house.  He learned there what these
familiar forces are capable of, in what directions they operate, and in
them he found the clew to the story of the past aeons.  Right about his
doorstep were the magicians that had done it all.

That illustrates the process of discovery in the spiritual universe.  We
are not to soar up into infinity to find God.  The only air that will
support our wings is that which encircles closely this familiar planet.
Let us look for a divine significance in homely things.

Here is Goodness.  It is right about us, in people whom we know and meet
every day, plainly visible to eyes that know how to see it.  Here are all
its forms.  Innocence,--the very image of it looks upon you from many a
child's face.  Courage, firmness, self-control,--you may read them in the
lines of many a manly countenance.  Purity,--who has not felt its
hallowing regard fall upon him from the eyes of maid and matron?  Pity,
tenderness, sympathy,--these angels move about us in human forms, and he
that hath eyes to see them sees.

Fineness of character must be recognized by sympathetic observation.
There must be the watchful attentiveness, like that of the sculptor
studying his subject, the hunter tracking his prey.  And there must be in
the observer himself some quality akin to that he would detect.  Only the
good see goodness, only the lover sees love.  A mother would convey to
her little daughter some full sense of the motherly feeling that yearns
within her, but how can it be done?  In just one way: let that daughter
grow up and have children of her own, _then_ she will know how her mother
felt.

Would we know something of the Divine Mother-heart?  We must first get in
ourselves something of the mother-feeling.  "Every one that loveth
knoweth God and is born of God."

Perhaps there has been given to us some human friend,--parent or comrade,
husband or wife,--in whom as nowhere else we see the beauty of the soul.
Best, divinest gift of life is such a friend as that,--a friend who fills
toward us a place like that to which our poet so nobly aspires:--

  "You shall not love me for what daily spends,
  You shall not know me on the noisy street,
  Where I, as others, follow petty ends;
  Nor when in fair saloons we chance to meet;
  Nor when I 'm jaded, sick, anxious, or mean;
  But love me then and only, when you know
  Me for the channel of the rivers of God,
  From deep, ideal, fontal heavens that flow."


Sometimes the friend whose goodness so touches us as with the very
presence of God is one whom we have never seen.  To millions of hearts
that place has been filled by Christ.

These lines of Emerson--heroic idealist that he was--ask to be loved only
when he is at his highest, and so is felt as a revelation of something
higher than himself.  But our best friends--comrade, mother, or
wife--love the ideal soul in us, and love us no less when we are "jaded,
sick, anxious, or mean," covering with exquisite pity our infirmities,
and by their nobility lifting us out of our baseness.  And in that
affection which embraces our best and our worst, those human friends are
the symbols--yes, and are part of the reality--of the Divine love.

And what is all beauty, all grandeur, but the manifestation, through the
eye to the soul, of the one Supreme Being?  The mountains, the sea, the
sunset, touch us with more than pleasure: they stir in us some awe, some
mystic delight, some profound recognition of sacred reality.  How can we
better frame the wonder in speech than by saying, "Just as my friend's
face manifests to me my friend, so Nature is as the very face of the
living God"?

In the processes of human life,--the life we live and the life we
see,--there is discernible a significance which grows more impressive,
more solemn, more inspiring, just as we learn to read it intelligently.
What a wonderful drama is this play of human lives,--this perpetual
tragedy and comedy, of which some slight and faint transcript finds
expression in the pages of poet and novelist!  We needs must continually
see and feel something of it, but we are apt to miss its best
significance.  What fastens our attention most in our experience, or in
what we sympathetically watch in others, is the element of enjoyment or
suffering.  Pain and pleasure are so very, very real!  We ache, and we
are sorry for another's ache; we are joyous, and glad in another's joy.
And there it often stops with us.  But all the while something is working
under the pain and pleasure.  Character is being made or marred.  Yonder
man bleeds, and you sigh for him,--ah! but a hero is being moulded there.
And here one thrives and prospers, expands and radiates,--but a spiritual
bankruptcy is approaching.


When we look closely and deeply at the world about us,--whether at this
ordered world of nature, moving steadily in its unbroken and majestic
course, or at the external aspect of grandeur and loveliness, or at the
drama in which all men are actors, as it is disclosed to insight and
sympathy, or at the inner world of each one's personal experience,--do we
not find ourselves in the perpetual presence of Goodness, Order, Beauty,
Love?  Are not these the very presence of Deity?

"But," you say, "there is also confusion to be seen,--what does that
signify?"  Just so fast as human intelligence advances, it finds that
what seemed disorder is really governed by strictest order.  You say, "We
see ugliness as well as beauty,--what does that mean?"  Ugliness serves
its purpose in aiding by repulsion to train the sense of beauty.  Beauty,
and man's delight in it, is the end; ugliness, and our repulsion from it,
is but an incident and means.  You say, "We see wickedness,--what of
that?"  May we not hope that wickedness, in the broad survey of mankind's
upward progress, is the stumbling of a child over its alphabet?

The instinct that the shadow is the servant of the light, that seeming
disorder, ugliness, sin are but veiled instruments of good,--this seems
one of the truths which flash upon mankind in gleams, and which as the
race rises actually into nobler life tend to become clear and steadfast
conviction.


It is the vastness of the Divinity that overwhelms us.  Suppose a man,
simple-hearted and imaginative, who, in a distant country, has read of
America, and has fashioned her in his thoughts as a heroic female
figure,--a kind of goddess.  He has taken as literal reality such poetic
descriptions as those in Lowell's "Commemoration Ode" and Emerson's
"Boston Hymn,"--

  "Lo! I uncover the land
  Which I hid of old time in the West,
  As a sculptor uncovers the statue
  When he has wrought his best."

And he comes to you and says, "Show me America!"  And you show him a
little of this country, its mountains and lakes and rivers, its shops and
farms and people.  He is interested and gratified.  Yet this is not what
he expected; and he says, "But show me America,--that radiant, heroic
form, that goddess to charm the eyes and the heart."  And you tell him:
"But America is too great to be taken in so, at a glance.  You have just
begun to see it.  You have seen New England's hill-farms, but you have
not seen the prairies of the West.  You have seen the Penobscot and
Kennebec, the Connecticut and Hudson; but you have yet to see the
Mississippi and Niagara.  I have taken you to Katahdin and Monadnock and
Mount Washington, but you have yet to behold the Alleghanies and the
Rockies and Tacoma.  Our people you have just begun to see: our armies of
free toilers, our happy households, our strong men and lovely
women,--these you are only beginning to know." And he says, perhaps: "But
all this is so diffuse, so various, so difficult to comprehend!  I had
fancied _America_ as some one beautiful, some one to love.  How can one
love such a scattered, immense, diversified thing as this you describe to
me?"  Well, you tell him: "You may not understand it yet awhile; but this
country which you say is not a thing to love was in peril of its life a
few years ago, and it was so loved that men by hundreds of thousands left
home, and risked life and all for it, and their mothers and wives and
sisters sent them forth.  That is how America can be loved!"

In some such fashion as this do we grope after a God whom we can
comprehend at a glance; and, lo! his presence fills the universe.  "Say
not, Who shall ascend into heaven to bring him down, or who shall descend
into hell to bring him up? for he is nigh thee, before thy eyes and in
thy heart."


The chief revelation we need is the education of our own perceptive
powers.  Sir John Lubbock has pointed out, in a very striking passage,
that the material world may convey itself through other senses than the
five which we possess, that there may be innumerable other senses, and
that some of these may perhaps be already developed in other creatures
than man.  Such a suggestion stirs our curiosity and desire; but how few
of us have learned to rightly use the five senses we have!  And of the
moral perceptions we have but a most rudimentary development.  We are
unconscious of most of the world we live in, unconscious even of what
many of our fellow-men discern.  Did you ever happen to be in the
presence of a sunset, flooding the heavens with glory, with a companion
who showed no sign of perceiving the splendor?  Ah! perhaps he was
blinded to it by some secret grief or care, some trouble which you might
have discovered in him and comforted, had your sympathy been as acute as
your sense of beauty.  But did his blindness, whatever its cause, suggest
to you that you perhaps were at that moment in the presence of sublime
realities, to which your consciousness was closed as his was to the
sunset?


To recognize consciously the spiritual elements in the universe belongs
partly to a right cultivation of character, and partly it is due to
natural endowment, to an intellectual faculty.  It is not, after all, of
so much account that we _see_ the divine in life as that we have it in
ourselves.  In this one sentence, "Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God," Jesus puts spiritual vision as the result of a moral
quality.  But it is the moral quality itself on which, in one form and
another, his blessing is constantly pronounced.  So, if you say, "I
cannot see,--God is in no sense visible to me," yet there remain still
most precious gifts, if you will take them.  Blessed are the gentle, the
peacemakers, the merciful, they that do hunger and thirst after
righteousness; blessed are the sympathetic, the stout-hearted, the
open-eyed, the open-handed; plain and simple and sure are these
benedictions.

The presence of Divinity which it is most essential that we recognize is
the choice perpetually presented to us between a higher and a lower
course of action.  Whether one has the joyful, uplifting vision is of
small consequence in comparison with whether he steadily chooses and
follows the right.


No one can be reasoned or persuaded into any living faith in God or
immortality, any more than reason and persuasion can draw from the cold
April furrow the field of waving wheat.  The faith _grows_ in the
individual and in the race, under that culture to which the higher powers
subject us,--a culture in which the elements are experience and fidelity,
thought and action, love and loss, aspiration and achievement.  Love and
Loss, the sweetest angel and the sternest one, join their hands to give
us that gift of the immortal hope.

If one asks, How shall I gain faith in God and hope of immortality? what
better answer can we give him than this: Be faithful, live, and love!
Work and love press their treasures on you with full hands.  Open your
eyes to the glory of the universe.  Watch the world's new life quickening
in bud and bird-song.  Get into sympathetic current with the hearts
around you.  Be sincere; be a man.  Keep open-minded to all knowledge,
and keep humble in the sense of your ignorance.  Seek the company that
ennobles, the scenes that ennoble, the books that ennoble.  In your
darkest hour, set yourself to brighten another's life.  Be patient.  If
an oak-tree takes a century to get its growth, shall a man expect to win
his crown in a day?  Find what word of prayer you can sincerely say, and
say it with your heart.  Look at the moral meanings of things.  Learn to
feel through your own littleness that higher power out of which comes all
the good in you.  Join yourself to men wherever you can find them in that
noblest attitude, true worship of a living God.  Know that to mankind are
set two teachers of immortality, and see to it that you so faithfully
learn of Love that Sorrow when she comes shall perfect the lesson.


Love in its simplest and most common forms is often strangely wise.  Many
a mother learns from the light of her baby's eyes more than all wisdom of
books can teach.  When the little, unconscious thing is taken from her
arms, there is given to her sometimes a feeling, "My baby is _mine_
forever;" a feeling in whose presence we stand in reverent, tender awe.
It is not every experience of bereavement which brings with it this
uplift of comfort.  But to the noble love of a noble object there comes
the sense of something in the beloved that outlasts death.  To the
_noble_ love, for most of our affection has a selfish strain in it; the
clinging to another for what of present enjoyment he yields to us brings
small illumination or assurance.  But as self loses itself in another's
life, there comes to us the deep instinct of something over which death
has no power.  Above all, when we unselfishly love one in whom dwells
moral nobility,--when it is a great and vital and holy nature to which we
join ourselves,--there comes to us a profound and pregnant sense of its
immortality.  It is when death's stroke has fallen that that sense rises
into full, triumphant bloom.

No wonder the disciples felt that their Master lived!  Theirs was the
experience that in substance repeats itself whenever from among those who
love it a noble soul goes home.  It was because Jesus was supremely
noble, and they had loved him with consummate affection, that their
experience was so intense and vivid.  Its true significance lay in this,
that it was not supernatural but natural.  It is standing the pyramid on
its apex to deduce all human goodness from the goodness of Jesus, and to
argue a universal immortality solely from his rising.  Let us place the
pyramid four-square in the universal truth of human nature.  Let us
ground our religion upon the moral fidelity, the human love, the
spiritual aspiration, and the sober regard for fact, in which all loyal
souls can agree.  Then at its summit we shall get that character of which
Jesus is the type, a character in which self-sacrifice and joy divinely
blend, and which in its passage from earth imparts the irresistible
assurance of a higher life beyond.

This morning the sun rose upon earth and trees encased in blazing jewelry
of ice.  Fast, fast the beauty melted and was gone,--and in its place,
behold the brown earth touched with living green and teeming with
promise; the trees' strong limbs tipped with swelling buds; and over all
the tender, brooding sky of spring.  Even so, the pageant of the
miracle-story dissolves, to give place to the natural consciousness of
eternal beauty and eternal life.

A group of Americans meet in a foreign city, and they talk fondly of
home, and to each of them home has its special meaning.  One says: "I
remember the green hill-pastures and the great elms and the white
farmhouses; I know just how the autumn woods are looking, and the stocked
corn, and the pumpkins ripening in the sun; and I am homesick for a sight
of it all."  Another says: "It is the nation that I think of.  To me
America seems the home of the poor man, the common man.  She is working
out great and difficult questions in government and society, and I have
strong faith that the outcome of it all is going to be a great good to
the world.  I long to take part once more in that national life; and over
here among strangers I want at least to Le no discredit to the dear old
country, and if possible to pick up some bit of knowledge or experience
that I can add to the common stock when I get home."  A third man says:
"Yes, that's all true; but I don't often think of it in so big a way as
that.  I want to see my old neighbors.  And in these foreign Sundays I
get hungry for the old church I've been to ever since I was a boy, and
the prayers, and the old tunes."  Another, perhaps, is silent; but to his
heart all the while are present the faces of his wife and children.

As they end their talk and go out together, up the harbor comes a gallant
ship, and at her peak float the stars and stripes; and at the sight
through each heart runs a common thrill of love and devotion.  One man's
thought of home is the broader, and another's is the tenderer; but
America is home to them all.

So into each loyal soul there shines a ray from the divine Sun and Soul
of the universe.  Each, according to his individual capacity, receives of
the fullness of Him that filleth all in all.

To some minds the beauty of nature brings a deep and inspiring sense of
divinity.  As one who has this sensibility looks on the hills and woods
flushing in the tender radiance of autumn, there comes to him perhaps no
articulate and conscious thought.  He may not name the name of God, or
think it.  But the soul is uplifted.  There flows in upon it some high
serenity, some mysterious sense of ineffable good.  If from such a scene
one returns to life's activities in braver, truer, and gentler mood,
there has been to him a divine revelation.

Some men are of a metaphysical turn of mind, and not only their thoughts
but all their emotional experience, all that directs their purpose and
animates their feeling, is cast in the mould of highly abstract ideas.
They express themselves in phrases which to most people seem cold or
meaningless,--an empty substitute for the warmth of religious life.  But
to the thinker himself these phrases stand for profound realities.  It
may be that words which have to other ears the dryness of a mathematical
formula are to him the expression of moral purpose and sacred trust.
Such an one may say: "I do not recognize a personal God, I do not know
that I shall have any personal immortality; but I believe in the moral
order of the universe and seek to conform to it.  I fearlessly trust my
destiny here and hereafter."  Perhaps on most of his hearers the words
fall coldly; but if they see that the speaker's life bears fruit of
goodness and heroism and service, they may be sure that, though in a
language strange to them, God has spoken to his soul.

There are a great many people, and some of the very best of people, who
never get any vivid or distinct apprehension of realities above the
sphere of their personal activity.  Often they conform to the usages and
the language of a religious faith in which they have been educated, and,
very likely, feel some self-reproach that they know so little of the
spiritual experiences which others speak of.  There are men, too, who
frankly say, "I don't know much about God; I can't get hold of what folks
call religion; but I try to do my work honestly, and I want to help other
people just as much as I can."  Some of the most genuine religion in the
world exists in people who are almost unconscious that they have any
religion.  The simple desire to do right, and the constant readiness to
"lend a hand,"--that is the revelation which such souls receive.

Another very large class--a class which once included most of the
distinctively religious world--crave and find the warmth of a personal
relation with Christ as the only satisfying thing.  It is one of the
great and wonderful facts of human history, this personal devotion of
unnumbered souls throughout the ages to Jesus.  In its intensest form it
is affection to a living personality.  Any attempt to explain it as an
appreciation of beneficent influences of which Jesus was the historical
originator, or as the reproduction of a temper and purpose resembling
that which was in Jesus, fails to satisfy those in whom love to Christ is
the ruling sentiment.  It is a person, and a living person, that they
love.  One may decline to accept the theories which are wont to accompany
the sentiment; one may not believe that Jesus was God, nor that personal
love for him can be required as an essential part of religion; and, at
the same time, one may believe that when a noble soul passes from earth,
it rises into yet nobler existence, and may be truly apprehended and
profoundly loved by those who are here.  Certainly we see this: that to
many men and women the strongest and holiest sentiment of life is
affection for a personal embodiment of goodness and love, who once walked
in Galilee and Jerusalem, existing now in the invisible realm,
sympathizing with all human aspiration, pitiful to all human weakness and
sorrow, inspiring to all effort and hope and trust.  That sentiment is
surely a blessed revelation to those in whom it exists,--the warm and
living symbol of an eternal reality.

To many, the disclosure of God is made in some way especially personal to
themselves.  Very often some human friend is the best manifestation and
assurance of divinity.  Our faith leans on the faith of the best and most
loving person we have known.  Sometimes the heart's natural language is
"My father's God," "my mother's God."  With some, the life beyond death
first becomes real to consciousness when the heart's treasure has been
taken there.  Sometimes, in looking upon one's own life, one becomes
deeply conscious of the higher guidance that has led it.  There are hours
in which past sorrows shine out as heavenly messengers of good.  There
dawns upon us a sense of the blessedness that life has held; all its
highest experiences become instinct with the suggestion of a celestial
meaning that we as yet but half apprehend.  We escape for the moment from
the thralldom of self; personal happiness merges in something higher; we
are glad and still in the sense of a divine Will working in us and in all
things.  In such hours the soul says, "_My_ God."

There is infinite variety of personal experience; "so many kinds of
voices in the world, and none of them without signification."  One man
has been deep in drunkenness and debauchery, he has grown reckless and
hopeless; but through some friendly voice there reaches him an impulse to
a new and successful effort; there comes in upon him the sense of a
divine love; a mighty forgiving and restoring force seems to seize him
and draw him back to life.  In his religion thereafter there may be the
glowing emotion of one who has been forgiven much and loves much.
Another man walks always in steady allegiance to conscience and right,
and never has any rapturous emotions; is not he, too, the child of God?
We dislike the prodigal's elder brother for his jealousy; but his
father's word to him, despite that touch of unworthiness, was: "Son, thou
art ever with me, and all that I have is thine."

One whose life flows with smooth current may find the significance of
religion in duty rather than in trust.  To such a one God may appear as
an ideal, inspiring conduct, but not as a power, controlling events.  But
upon him, it may be, there breaks some great emergency of life and death;
the heart cries out like a child waking frightened in the night, and
there answers it, from some depth far below its fear, a voice that says
"Peace!"  In that hour the soul finds its father.  Thereafter passing
doubts and fears can but ruffle the surface for a moment.


In our northern winter, how perfectly the trees blend with the scene
about them!  They seem wholly a part of winter's grand but lifeless
world, and with what beauty do they crown that world,--the columnar
trunks, the mighty grip of the roots upon the firm earth, the arching
sweep of stalwart boughs, the delicate tracery against the sky!  They
answer to the season's mood, bending in patient grace beneath a load of
snow, casing themselves in jewels, or springing up again in slender
strength; silent, except when the deep voice of the wind speaks through
them.  Their shadows soften the sunlight glittering on the snow, or weave
a black fretwork when the cold moon shines.  Yet vital in their hearts
the trees hold summer's secret.  A little while, and they will be clothed
in the leafy glory of June.  The robin and catbird and oriole will sing
hidden among their branches.  Of that summer season the trees will be the
delight and crown, that now stand like true children of winter.  They
stand now so strong and true because of that hidden life within them
which summer will fully disclose.  It is because it is alive that the
trunk bends to the storm but does not break, and the twigs hold up their
load of snow.  So, there are lives that so fit themselves to this world
in which they stand that they become its finest part.  Their sympathy
finds out the secret needs and possibilities of those about them.  Their
insight discerns the work which society most needs, and their fidelity
accomplishes that part of the work which falls to them.  Their natures
stand open to all the glad influences of earth; their hearts rejoice with
them that do rejoice, and weep with them that weep.  They make full proof
of those experiences in which fortitude and silent endurance are the only
resource.  Sometimes they are happy, and sometimes they are sad; but
always other people are happier because of them.  They are the children
of a better country.  For them the soul's full summer waits.  Knowing
them, we do indeed know something of God and the eternal life.


There is freedom to be achieved from the pettiness of our lives.  They
never, perhaps, look so pitiful as when they seem made up altogether of
little, necessary details.  Our planting and reaping, building and
buying, all the half-mechanical operations that absorb our thought and
time, seem sometimes little better than the bustle of a colony of ants.
When we look down upon it all from the height of some quiet, meditative
hour, are we not at times oppressed with a sense of its triviality and
worthlessness?  Trivial and worthless it is, except as amidst it all we
are working out something higher.  But to a man whose heart is set on
noble ends; one whose great aim is, not to get his bread and butter, but
to be a man; one who wants, not just to make a profit out of his
neighbors, but to serve them and help them, these details are no more
trivial or degrading than the rough dress and homely tools of a sculptor
are unworthy of the marble beauty that is growing under his hands.  The
high purpose consecrates and transfigures all, the want of purpose
degrades all.  I have stood in Switzerland upon the Gorner Grat, looking
upon the grandest scene in Europe.  On every side a circle of towering
heights look down; against the sky rise dazzling snowy summits,
celestially pure, celestially tender; the Matterhorn frowns in awful
majesty; vast ice-rivers sweep down toward the valley in solemn, silent
march.  If there be upon earth a spot that of itself has power to hush
the soul with noblest emotion, it should be that.  Yet there I have seen
a company of travelers spend their half-hour in senseless gabble and
banter and the laughter of fools.  Amid the squalid surroundings of a New
York tenement-house, I have seen a poor Irish woman living with such
fortitude and faith and generosity that it was a comfort and inspiration
to meet her.  That brave soul ennobled its mean surroundings with a glory
which not the Alps and the sky could flash in upon a heart made blind and
dull by ignoble thoughts.


If there dwells in us the spirit of life we shall be freed from the
bondage of doubt.  On how many earnest and aspiring lives does doubt
throw its chill shadow!  The world is crossing the flood that divides the
old form of faith from the new.  The rising water strikes cold to many a
heart.  Here and there the waves sweep men off from all moral footing.  I
know not that for the resolute and thoughtful there is any escape from
some suffering in the transition.  Could we be always sure that it is
only a transition,--could we know always that a better country lies
waiting us,--all might be easily borne.  The suffering we may not
decline; but safety, utter safety, we may keep through all.  _Life_ is
always possible to us.  Fidelity, purity, self-sacrifice,--these may
always be ours.  Are we baffled in our search for a divine plan in the
universe?  Let us look nearer home; can we not find the clew to a divine
plan in our own lives?  Yes, there need never fail to us an immediate
token of divinity.  There is always, at the lowest, a duty to be done.
There is always, at the very lowest, a burden to be bravely borne.  There
is always some one to be helped.  Do we say, But this does not comfort
me, does not reassure me?  Then let it guide me!  It is not essential
that I should be always in the sunshine.  It is only essential that in
sunshine or in darkness my steering should be true.  And I am never
without a compass while I see that there is for me a higher and a lower,
a right and a wrong, to choose between.


Does any sense of bondage weigh you down?  Disappointment, it may
be,--failure, life's fair promise blighted.  It may be the bitter slavery
of evil habit.  It may be a dull and apathetic way of life, stirred with
a vague yearning toward higher possibilities.  It may be the darkness of
a lost faith.  It may be a bereavement that has emptied life.  Whatever
it be, the angel of deliverance stands beside you.  He is perhaps in very
humble garb, unsuspected of you.  Some lowly duty awaits you.  Some
saddened life, unnoticed by your side, asks you to cheer it.  Whatever
opportunity of duty or of service lies in the path before you is God's
own messenger.  Meet it like the messenger of a king!  So meet every
duty, every opportunity.  Find them, make them, for yourself.  Live no
longer in solitude but in brotherhood.  So shall the very spirit of God
dwell in you; so in his service shall you find perfect freedom.


The end of February is near, and not a hint or whisper of spring does
Nature give us yet.  We are wont to have earlier than this a few days at
least that seem to start the sap in the trees and the blood in the veins,
when the first bluebird is heard, and we get one swift, delicious glimpse
of the good time coming.  But this year the cold only takes a sharper
clutch.  At its average, our northern winter has a fierce and almost
merciless persistence.  Those first days of spring are hardly more than
the taste of freedom with which the cat tantalizes the mouse.  It is this
lingering close of winter that is hard to bear.  The supplies begin to
give out.  The wood-pile that stood so high when the first snow came is
getting lowered to very near the ground.  The poor man's little hoard,
that was to bridge him over till the season of good work, is perilously
shrunken.  Vitality, too, begins to run low.  The body pines for the
out-door life from which it has too long been shut off.  Winter is a
hard-fisted churl who does n't give just measure.  He drives off the
mellow and jolly Autumn before its mid-month October is fairly gone.  He
bullies Spring so that the poor, gentle-hearted thing has to get almost
under the wing of Summer before she dares take possession of the remnant
of her own.  The great robber gets almost half the year.  The very bears,
curled up for their long nap, must in these days wake sometimes with an
uneasy shiver and wonder whether their stock of fat will hold out.

This last and worst onset of winter may stand for those experiences that
come as the sharpest test of the stuff that is in men.  The pressure of
adversity goes on and on, until we say it has reached the last point of
endurance, and then another turn is given to the screw!  For three long
days the battle has raged around the heights of Gettysburg, and each side
seems to have done its utmost, when the word is given for Pickett's
division in solid column to throw itself straight against Cemetery Hill,
that becomes a volcano to meet it.  Those are the times that mark men for
the rest of their lives as heroes.  Yet there are finer heroisms than
this.  The very splendor of such an hour, with a nation's fate at stake
and the world looking on, is enough to find out and kindle any spark of
manhood in a man.  With no such inspiration as that, there are in every
community men and women who are battling with poverty and adversity and
all kinds of trouble with a finer courage than that of the battlefield.
They cover an anxious heart with a cheerful face, for the sake of husband
or wife or children who are watching the face.  No winter is long enough,
no lifetime is long enough, to tire out their fortitude and patience and
love.  There are resources in human nature that never are known until
things are at their hardest.

So at winter's worst--come it in one form or another--man summons up his
courage, and though the winter be longer and sharper than he had
thought--though poverty pinches him or trouble weighs upon him--he sets
himself stoutly to bear it.  Alone and unhelped he seems, perhaps,--the
march of the seasons and the vast order of the universe taking no account
of him; yet manfully he will face whatever comes.  Whatever comes?  It is
the summer that is coming!  As certain as to-day's snow and cold, the
season of all beauty and warmth and delight is on its way!  The
apple-blossoms, the wild-flowers, the budding of every twig, the
greenness of the pastures, the rejoicing life of animals and birds and
insects, the sweet airs of May, the sunshine of June,--these, and all
varied loveliness beyond imagination's reach or heart's desire, lie just
before us.  So for every soul that patiently endures an unimagined summer
waits.  Our patient endurance seems to us now a great matter, and indeed
if we have it not we are little worth; but when the more genial season
comes--when there fully reveals itself to us that high meaning of our
lives and that divine destiny of which now we catch but a glimpse--we
shall say, not "How well we endured the winter," but "How glorious is
God's summer!"

Take the case of a man who, having engaged in the active business of
life, feeling himself amply capable of it and longing for it, finds
himself by force of circumstances kept out of work.  Perhaps he has his
living to earn, perhaps he has a wife and children to support, and he can
get nothing to do.  Well, that is about as hard a place as a man can be
called to stand in.  Idleness in itself is hard.  It is a burden even to
those who have wealth and all the luxuries and amusements that can be
devised to while away their leisure.  It is the very nature of a man who
is good for anything to _do_.  Idleness is as unnatural and trying to the
mind as sickness is to the body.  But to see those you love in need, to
see them threatened with suffering, to know that you could amply provide
for them if you had a chance, and not to find a chance,--what is so hard
as that?

It is so hard, my friend, that, if you can bear it and not be conquered
by it, you are a hero.  If under that load you can keep your patience and
your temper and your courage, you have won a victory such as makes life
worth living.  Just as in battle it is the post of danger that is most
honorable, so always the hard place is the place of honor.  "But," you
say perhaps, "I don't care about being a hero; I want to see my wife and
children taken care of."  That is the best of all reasons for keeping up
heart.  When a good wife sees her husband unfortunate and out of work,
what is it that she most dreads?  Not that they will starve,--starvation
seldom happens in this country.  Not that they will be poor, though of
that she may be somewhat afraid.  Her greatest fear is lest her husband
should get discouraged and down-hearted; should take to drink, perhaps;
at any rate, should become so despondent and embittered that the light
shall go out of their lives and their children's.  Now it is his business
not to let that happen.  It is his part to keep up for her sake a
resolute heart and a cheerful face.  And if she is a true woman, how
gladly will she do the same for him!  Out of just such circumstances
there come two opposite results, according as people meet them.  There
comes failure of effort and resolution, then despondency, then
recklessness, drunkenness perhaps, and at last ruin, the break-up of
character, the destruction of the children's prospects, or sometimes
suicide.  When a man, under pressure of such trouble, really gives up,
even for an hour, the effort to be brave and make the best of things, he
takes a step on a road at the end of which is suicide.  _That_ is the
consummate act of cowardice; that is the last logical result of refusing
to face and conquer our troubles.  Heaven have mercy on the man who seeks
in death a refuge, and so multiplies the suffering of those he leaves
behind!  And at the point where begins the wretched road of despondency,
which if followed out leads to this or some other ruin, there branches
another road--manly endurance of the worst, courage which is strong
because it is loving,--a road which leads to heights beyond our sight.
To bear trouble together, and for each other's sake to rise above
it,--what knits hearts together like that?

Take, again, the case of a man who is by circumstances shut off from work
that he could do and longs to do for the large benefit of mankind,--the
man who has a gift of teaching and is not allowed to teach, or who has
the statesman's quality and finds no place in public affairs, or who,
with any large executive and beneficent faculty, finds himself denied all
opportunity of exercising it.  For a faculty to be repressed is hard just
in proportion as its quality is noble.  A caged canary is hardly a
painful sight, but a caged eagle stirs one with regret.  And the world
has such need of all noble talent; such exigent and hungry need of the
true teacher, statesman, seer,--of the word of inspiration and the act of
leadership!  How shall one who feels in him the power and sees the need;
who grasps in his hand the keen sickle, yet is held back, while before
his eyes the fields are white with the harvest which threatens, unreaped,
to perish,--how shall he reconcile himself to his lot?  How escape the
thought that he and all mankind are but playthings in the grasp of cruel
and ironic fate?

What, then, does the world most need of us?  Is it wisdom, or
statesmanship, or executive power?  These things it greatly needs.  But
most of all it needs character.  Most of all it needs that quality of
personality which is moulded by the interplay of loyal will with the
shifting course of outward event.  For our wisest thoughts the world can
very well wait, or do without them altogether; almost certainly some one
else has thought them and said them.  Our executive power to be added to
the world's work,--it is but a fly's strength contributed to a
steam-engine.  One thing the universe asks of us, which no one else can
give,--_ourselves_; our highest and fullest self.  It is not what we do
externally, but what we are, that measures our worth.  The real and
lasting value of a word or an act depends largely on the weight of
character behind it.  And in character no higher effect is wrought out
than that which comes through endurance and heroic passivity.  To stand
long before closed doors of opportunity and keep serene; to see work
waiting, see others working, and in patience and self-control to bide
one's time,--that is more than to do any work; it is to be a man.  The
time comes when manhood finds itself to be power.

A brook goes singing on its way, marking its course through forest and
field with a track of beauty and freshened life.  Men throw a dam across
its path, and through many a long day its course is stopped and its
waters silently accumulate.  And the brook says, "Alas for my lost
freedom and service!  Alas for the rush and sparkle and joy of my
cascades!  Alas for the parched meadows, the unwatered ferns and mosses!"
But the day comes when with a cataract leap it crosses its barrier;
meadow and mosses and ferns revive; and now the stored power of the
stream is turning great mills and grinding bread for men.

Washington rode as a subordinate in Braddock's army; ignorance commanded
and knowledge looked on powerless until the mischief was done.  Twenty
years of quiet follow; great events are impending, eloquent men are
rousing and leading; what is there for this silent Virginian? till
suddenly he finds himself the chief commander.  Then comes waiting to
which all before was easy; holding away from the stronger enemy, holding
steady under the impatience and the doubts of friends; for one bold
stroke, a year of waiting and watching; till, at last, victory!  And not
to Washington victorious at Yorktown do we turn for inspiration so much
as to Washington in the dead of winter at Valley Forge.

There are a great many women whose capacities and desires seem much
beyond their opportunities.  This is especially true of our New England,
who stimulates the brains of her children, and consigns many of her
daughters to a secluded life with small scope for action.  There are many
women who, being unmarried, or being married and childless, or left by
the flight of the young birds to brood an empty nest, have not the full
natural outlet of a woman's activities and affections, and suffer
consciously or unconsciously from a partial emptiness and idleness of
what is best in them.  The burden upon such lives is that of isolation.
Isolation may be in the midst of a crowd as well as in solitude; it is
when the heart is not filled that we are truly alone.  And this real
solitude, this isolation of the affections from their proper objects, is
something so bad, so against the law of our nature, that, broadly
speaking, it is a matter not so much for endurance as for speedy getting
rid of.  Do you feel yourself alone and empty-hearted?  Then you have
necessity indeed for fortitude and brave endurance, but above all and
before all you are to get out of your solitude.  You cannot command for
yourself the love you would gladly receive; it is not in our power to do
that; but that noble love which is not asking but giving,--that you can
always have.

Wherever your life touches another life, there you have opportunity.  The
finest, the most delicate, the most irresistible force lies in the mutual
touch of human lives.  To mix with men and women in the ordinary forms of
social intercourse becomes a sacred function when one carries into it the
true spirit.  To give a close, sympathetic attention to every human being
we touch; to try to get some sense of how he feels, what he is, what he
needs; to make in some degree his interest our own,--that disposition and
habit would deliver any one of us from isolation or emptiness.  There is
but one sight more beautiful than the mother of a family ministering
happiness and sunshine to them all; and that is a woman who, having no
family of her own, finds her life in giving cheer and comfort to all whom
she reaches, and makes a home atmosphere wherever she goes.  Though she
have not the joy of wife and mother, she has that which is most sacred in
wifehood and motherhood.  She shares the blessedness of that highest life
the earth has seen, of him who, having no home nor where to lay his head,
brought into other homes a new happiness, and who spoke the transforming
word, "It is more blessed to give than to receive."

Take, again, the case of an invalid, who is for a long period shut out by
illness or weakness from all ordinary activities.  There are many such to
whom pain and physical endurance are less trying than the feeling of
being excluded from use and service, and having their moral life stunted
or disordered by this stoppage of the natural play of the faculties.
There are kinds of illness, especially those of the nervous system, which
seem to invade the seat of the will and soul itself, to irritate the
temper and sap the resolve and foster a self-centring egotism, by a power
that is literally irresistible.  Before such experiences as this one
thought rises: it is part of mankind's business to lessen, and so far as
possible to extirpate, these maladies.  The individual sufferer must meet
as best he can the conditions thrust upon him, but to prevent such
conditions from arising is the lesson for the rest of us.  We are only
beginning to appreciate how largely the salvation of mankind must be
worked out through physical means.  The pestilences, the transmitted
diseases, the insanities, the nervous disorders, bred of violated
law,--all these and the like curses, which not merely destroy human life
but degrade it, are to be fought and extirpated.  We must secure for
soul-life some fair room and chance as against these pests and tyrants.
Here lies the noblest work of science; here, in prevention rather than in
cure, lies the best field of that unsurpassed profession, the
physician's.  And, too, in this preventive work each man must learn to be
his own physician, and minister to himself.

But what, meantime, is our disabled and secluded invalid to do?  He is
like a man set to fight a battle with one arm tied behind him.  Others
may pity, but for him his disablement must be a motive to greater
exertion; he must supply by courage and skill the place of the lacking
strength.  It is what man can do under limitations and disabilities that
shows his high-water mark of achievement.  Any one can be cheerful in
perfect health, but to be cheerful under weakness and pain,--_that_ is
worth trying for!  To be considerate and unselfish, when one is at ease
and has all he wants, does not cost much; but to take thought for others
and to spare them, and to be sympathetic with their joys and troubles,
when pain forces you to be self-conscious, and long endurance tempts you
to become self-centred,--well, if you can do that, you are good for
something.  If you can do that, have no fear that you are useless.  Such
fruit is rare enough to be precious.  The lessons taught from many a
sick-bed of bravery and gentleness and love,--we get no other teaching so
good as that.  There is many a family where it is the one who can do the
least who does the most,--where it is the invalid's room from which goes
out the strongest influence of patience and sweet courage and that divine
quality which transforms trouble.

In one sick-room in a foreign land, for years a home-loving woman has
been an exile; a woman of active and eager disposition, with large,
executive capacity and ripe experience, shut up almost to idleness; a
woman of large benevolence, who had entered on work of peculiar
excellence and attractiveness, cut off from all such activities.  This,
with frequent pain, with fluctuation of hope and discouragement as to the
future; and yet there is about her an atmosphere as serene as the Alpine
heights that look down upon her, as cheerful as the sunny Alpine pastures
with their tinkle of sheep-bell and hum of mountain bee.  Her constant
thought goes out to distant friends and brings them near; her close
attention follows the march of the world's great interests, the fortunes
of England and Russia and America, the course of freedom and reform; a
sense of nature's beauty, trained to fineness through years of enforced
quietude, brings exquisite ministrations; she shares the lives of the
little circle of friends about her; heart and mind are at rest in the
peace of God.  Patience has had her perfect work.


Up, friend! leave your law case, your sermon, your accounts, and come out
for an hour into this delicious March day, bracing as winter and sweet as
spring.  The new life of the year is stirring in the trees whose tops
begin to redden, and in the brown pastures where watchful eyes can
already see the green.  The joy of the season is singing in a million
bluebirds' and robins' throats; the cocks crow gayly; the caw of the big
black crow flapping overhead with ragged wing has a cheery tone.  All
living creatures feel the tingle and throb of the great tide of life that
sweeps in with the returning sun.  See yonder two dogs, how they frolic,
how they crouch and wheel and charge and roll each other over and pretend
to bite.  "Pure mongrels," both of them, and as happy as if they were the
most aristocratic of Irish setters!  See near by the tree full of flowers
that has lasted the winter through.  That is a tulip-tree, holding up its
thousand delicate ghostly cups.  Its grand trunk rises straight and
unbroken full thirty feet, then branches in symmetry, and holds up as if
to catch the sunshine and the rain its fairy goblets.  And here is an oak
that has not yet let go its grip on last year's dead leaves.  How sharply
the snow rattled on them, as if clashing on the iron which naturalists
say the sturdy tree holds in its blood!  Who ever sees these last oak
leaves fall?  And who knows where this dry, dead grass vanishes when the
green blades fill all its room?  Look at the horse-chestnut; already its
buds are shiny.  It must wait a good while before their

        "little hands unfold,
  Softer 'n a baby's be at three days old."


Sharp whistles the wind to-day, but it is the breath of life that it
breathes into us.  It comes down from yonder hills where the snow is
shining yet.  Grandly on the horizon lies Mount Tom, like a crouching
lion, guardian over the fair valley.  Where the mountain line breaks,
between him and his twin sentinel, Holyoke, we know that the broad
Connecticut sweeps past Hockanum.  The glorious river,--what an unfailing
joy it is to the eye as it curves and winds on its leisurely, steadfast
course to the sea!  Here at our feet is another river, a little brook
flowing in clear stream over the roadside sand, born of the last
snow-drift and living till the sun drinks it up.  And beside it are half
a dozen happy boys, paddling with their bare feet, making mud dams,
scraping new channels and short cuts for the stream.

How black is the still water of this pond, smooth as a steel mirror! what
perfect pictures it gives back of its woody and snow-touched banks!  The
woods above are solemn as that grandest work of man, an Old World
cathedral, and free as only the Lord's own works are free, with the music
of the wind in the great pine-tops; the gracious, infinite sky revealing
itself through their tracery; the columnar trunks swaying now like a
ship's masts.  How at evening the setting sun glows through their black
shafts; how ethereal the light that then fills the spaces of the wood;
how the stars look down through the branches in the living stillness of
the night!  A few steps, and below us in the hollow we see the city, all
its commonplaceness charmed away, the vulgar noises of the streets
blended in a soft murmur.  Not one human life moves in those streets,
commonplace and vulgar though it may seem, but has its own charm and
beauty, if we could find the right view-point, or if our sight went deep
enough.

Across a plowed field darts in swift zigzag a gleam of blue; then,
perched on a fence-rail, sends a thrilling song.  The bluebird is the
true voice of early spring, as is the bobolink of later spring.
Bobolinks and apple-blossoms come together in the prodigal time of May.
Our Northern spring is the most arrant of coquettes,--the most delicious
in allurement, the swiftest in retreat.  One day she seems to pour her
whole heart out to us, and we think she is ours once and for all; next
day she pelts us with sleet; buffets, freezes us; she--nay, she is gone,
and we never shall see her again; it is the sourest shrew in the whole
sisterhood of the year that has come in her stead!  But the true lover
thinks not so.  He knows her woman's heart,--coying it a little, holding
back her treasure till she sees if her worshiper be faithful, to pour it
out all unstinted at the last, when May's perfect bridal day shall usher
in the full and fruitful marriage blessing of the year.

On this June morning, place yourself here, under the shade of this noble,
wide-spreading apple-tree on a garden lawn.  Last night the earth was
washed by showers, and a thunder-storm cleared the air.  This morning a
fresh northwest wind breaks the clouds, and opens pure, sweet depths of
sky.  Around us the flowers of early summer are blooming.  Over the grass
trip the young birds, mottle-breasted robins and bluebirds; the trees
ring with frequent song; from the barnyard comes cheery cackle and cluck,
and the chickens stray forth to investigate the secrets and riches of the
world.  A catbird pours out an opera in which he takes all the parts in
succession, and the voice of the wind rises and falls in mysterious,
delicious cadence.

"Oil and wine:" the oil poured on the wounds to soothe and heal, the wine
drunk to revive and hearten with cordial life.  The Hebrew symbolism has
its roots in strong material soil: its imagery is vigorous and
ruddy,--"wine of gladness," "oil of joy," "wine that maketh glad the
heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread which
strengtheneth man's heart."  A modern psalmist might add, "and coffee
which uplifts his spirit, and tobacco which soothes his cares."

Jesus chose, as the two symbols by which he would be remembered, bread
and wine.  Bread stands for nourishment and substantial support, wine for
exhilaration and joy.  When his disciples were full of the sorrow of
approaching parting, he showed them that the loss was only in semblance:
the reality was to be a higher energy, a purer joy,--bread to eat, wine
to drink,--not death, but life.  The sorrow attendant on death and loss
is to be esteemed but the pangs that usher in life.  "A woman when she is
in travail hath sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as she is
delivered of the child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that
a man is born into the world."

"The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach
the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to
preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind,
to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of
the Lord."  What a key-note is that,--how jubilant, tender, strong!

As the earth revolving passes alternately into light and shadow, so human
life in its divine appointment moves by turns through sorrow and through
joy.  Each has its service for the soul, as for the earth has day and
night each its ministry and message.  Of pain come hardihood and strength
and sympathy.  What a sapless, fibreless thing is a man untrained by
endurance and untaught by suffering!  How flaccid in muscle, how narrow
in intelligence, how shallow in affection!

Yet, as to an all-beholding eye the sun pours light through all the
planetary spaces, and the night, which to us on the world's darkened side
seems all-enfolding, is in truth but a shadowy fleck in the vast
sun-steeped sphere: so, of the soul's universe, the native, all-pervasive
element is conscious good.  Gladness is man's proper atmosphere.  It is
by the impulse of his deepest nature that he seeks joy, it is by the
force of spiritual gravitation that he is drawn to it.  But two hard
lessons await him.  One is, that to reach that goal he must trust himself
to a higher Power, his own effort and purpose being to obey that Power.
The other is, that the goal is not for one alone, but for all; and he can
reach it only as he shares the common lot, making himself partner in the
vicissitudes of his comrades, rejoicing with them that rejoice and
weeping with them that weep.  On our long voyage the stars by which we
steer must be Duty and Love.  The stars guide us, the winds and currents
bear us, to the port of perfect good.  The instinct of our journey's end
we call Hope; the instinct by which we cleave to our true course, even
when wholly doubtful of its end, and though false lights beckon us
alluringly,--that instinct we call Faith.

Open your eyes upon the world on such a morning as this.  Forget your own
cares long enough to really see, but for a moment, yonder spray of roses
waving in the breeze.  Watch the play of light and shade in the
flickering leaves overhead.  Listen to the chorus of voices from bird,
insect, and wind.  The wine of gladness!  Nature pours it in a sparkling
flood, unceasing by day and night, for every one who will drink.

Nature pours the wine of gladness, but only from the mingling of human
hearts comes the oil of tenderness.  From sorrow it gets its sacred
fragrance, from mutual service it draws its healing power, from the
bitterness of parting it wins the sweetness of an inexpressible hope.

It was under the stroke of a great bereavement, the death of his child,
that Emerson, in the "Threnody," gave utterance to highest consolation
soaring out of sorrow's darkness.  It was under the shadow of that loss
that he heard the voice,--

  "Saying, What is excellent,
  As God lives, is permanent;
  Hearts are dust, hearts' loves remain,
  Heart's love will meet thee again."


It is the same voice that speaks through all the ages.  It speaks through
Isaiah, "to give beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness."  It speaks in Paul, when
in one sentence he gives the relation with God and his fellows into which
man may come when out of darkness is born light.  "Blessed be God, even
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God
of all comfort; who comforteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be
able to comfort them which are in any trouble by the comfort wherewith we
ourselves are comforted of God."

Where, asks the stricken heart, shall I find the God of comfort?  O
heart, only God himself shall answer you!  But know this, that the very
end and purpose of grief is that it shall be comforted.  Comfort?  The
word has no meaning except to those who have mourned; was never stamped
with its sacred significance except by those who had been through the
deep waters of grief.  "As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I
comfort you."  A man child, a woman child, He trains you to fullness of
stature, to greatness of experience, to capacity for noble joy, for
heart-sufficing love.  To greatness and to joy he calls us, and draws us
slowly by the changing years.  The cross is the symbol of a passing
experience.  The end, the attainment, is figured to us by that face of
Nature which is the face of God, with the strength of the mountains, the
gladness of the sunlight, the freedom of the sky, the infinitude of the
ocean.


The ripe days of early autumn open their best joys only to the sturdy
walker, who turns his back on the streets to seek the country roads, and
leaves the roads behind him to explore the forest nooks, the ravines, and
the sheltered meadows, hidden deftly away from the incurious traveler,
and keeping a wild sweetness for him who finds them out for himself.  If
one is in good tune, he may get the finest flavor of such a walk by
taking it alone, or with only rarely perfect companionship.  The ideal
companion is one who can fully enjoy, who will help you to glimpses
through another pair of eyes, and who will never obtrude inopportunely
between yourself and nature.  If a satisfactory human comrade be not at
hand, one may find these qualities in no ordinary degree in--a good dog.
But then to appreciate them one must be a true dog-lover, a gift which
is, alas! denied to some otherwise exemplary and worthy people.

What does the dog think of it all?  He has his own keen pleasures.  His
nose is an organ of intelligence and enjoyment which his master does not
possess.  He explores woodchuck holes; he tracks real or imaginary
squirrels; one barks and scolds at him from a high limb, and throws him
into a delicious fever of excitement.  As Fox said the greatest pleasure
in life was to win at cards, and the next greatest to lose at cards, so
apparently the dog finds even an unsuccessful chase to be the second best
joy he knows.  Look at him, tense and motionless with excitement, as he
watches the noisy chatterer overhead!  No doubt the squirrel will brag to
all his acquaintances of how he openly defied and triumphed over his huge
enemy.

A chestnut bough swings low, and with hospitable hand proffers a
half-open burr, out of which shine the glossy brown nuts.  Sweet is the
taste of the nuts.  Sweet is the crisp red apple into which we bite, and
with just a hint of the flavor of stolen fruit.

What audacious pen will try to reproduce or even dryly catalogue the
glories poured out for eye and ear, for heart and brain, upon a bright
and cool September day?  The deep-glowing sumacs, the asters purple and
white mixed with flaming goldenrod, in a splendid audacity of color such
as only One artist dare venture on; the occasional dash of scarlet upon a
maple, a first wave of the great tide that is sweeping up to cover the
whole north country; the masses of yet unbroken green left neither dimmed
nor dusty by the generous, moist summer; the oaks that will long hold
their green flag in unchanging tint, as if "no surrender" were written on
it, and then, last of all the trees, change to a hue of matchless depth
and richness, like the life-blood of a noble heart that shows its full
intensity only just before death's translation falls upon it; the
separate tint of each leaf and vine, "good after its kind;" the soft
whiteness of the everlastings in the hill-pastures; the reaped buckwheat
fields heaped with their sheaves, stubble and sheaves alike drenched in a
fine wine of color; the solemn interior of the woods, with the late
sunlight touching the shafts of the pines; the partridge-berry and the
white mushroom growing beneath, as in a cathedral one sees bright-faced
children kneeling to say their prayers at the foot of the solemn pillars;
the masses of light and of shadow--one cannot say which is the
tenderer--lying on the cool meadows as evening draws on; the voice of
unseen waters, the voice of the wind in the pines.

And so, with song, with autumn colors, with sunset lights, the Mother
calls her children home.





End of Project Gutenberg's The Chief End of Man, by George S. Merriam



