CHAPTER X

THE CURRICULUM[27]

  _We, believing that the normal child has powers of mind which fit
  him to deal with all knowledge proper to him, give him a full and
  generous curriculum, taking care only that all knowledge offered
  to him is vital, that is, that facts are not presented without
  their informing ideas. Out of this conception comes our principle
  that:--_

  “Education is the Science of Relations”; _that is, a child has
  natural relations with a vast number of things and thoughts: so
  we train him upon physical exercises, nature lore, handicrafts,
  science and art, and upon many living books, for we know that our
  business is not to teach him all about anything, but to help him
  to make valid as many as may be of_--

      “_Those first-born affinities
      That fit our new existence to existing things._”

  _In devising a syllabus for a normal child, of whatever social
  class, three points must be considered_:--

    (_a_) _He requires much knowledge, for the mind needs
    sufficient food as much as does the body._

    (_b_) _The knowledge should be various, for sameness in mental
    diet does not create appetite (i.e., curiosity)._

    (_c_) _Knowledge should be communicated in well-chosen
    language, because his attention responds naturally to what is
    conveyed in literary form._

  _As knowledge is not assimilated until it is reproduced, children
  should “tell back” after a single reading or hearing: or should
  write on some part of what they have read._

  _A_ single reading _is insisted on, because children have
  naturally great power of attention; but this force is dissipated
  by the re-reading of passages, and also, by questioning,
  summarising, and the like._

  _Acting upon these and some other points in the behaviour of
  mind, we find that the educability of children is enormously
  greater than has hitherto been supposed, and is but little
  dependent on such circumstances as heredity and environment._

  _Nor is the accuracy of this statement limited to clever children
  or to children of the educated classes: thousands of children in
  elementary schools respond freely to this method, which is based
  on the_ behaviour of mind.


Few things are more remiss in our schools than the curriculum which
is supposed to be entirely at the option of the Head: but is it?
Most Secondary schools work towards examinations which more or less
afford the privilege of entry to the Universities. The standard to
be reached is set by these and the Heads of schools hold themselves
powerless.

Though Elementary schools no longer work with a view to examination
results yet as their best pupils try for scholarships admitting
them to secondary schools, they do come indirectly under the same
limitations. There is, however, much less liberty in Secondary than
in Primary schools with regard to the subjects taught and the time
devoted to each. The result is startling. A boy of eight in an
Elementary school may shew more intelligence and wider knowledge
than a boy of fourteen in a Preparatory school, that is, if he have
been taught on the principles I have in view, while the other boy
has been instructed with a view to a given standard of scholarship.
The Preparatory school boy does, however, reach that standard in
Latin, if not in Greek also, and in Mathematics.

If we succeed in establishing a similar standard which every
boy and girl of a given age should reach in a liberal range of
subjects, a fair chance will be afforded to the average boy and
girl while brilliant or especially industrious young people will go
ahead.

We labour under the mistake of supposing that there is no natural
law or inherent principle according to which a child’s course of
studies should be regulated; so we teach him those things which,
according to Locke, it is becoming for a ‘gentleman’ to know on
the one hand, and, on the other, the arts of reading, writing and
summing, that he may not grow up an illiterate citizen. In both
cases the education we offer is too utilitarian,--an indirect
training for the professions or for a craftsman’s calling with
efforts in the latter case to make a boy’s education bear directly
on his future work.

But what if in the very nature of things we find a complete
curriculum suggested? “The human race has lost its title deeds,”
said Voltaire, and mankind has been going about ever since seeking
to recover them; education is still at sea and Voltaire’s epigram
holds good. We have not found our title deeds and so we yield to
the children no inherent claims. Our highest aim is to educate
young people for their uses to society, while every faddist is
free to teach what he pleases because we have no title deeds to
confront him with. Education, no doubt, falls under the economic
law of supply and demand; but the demand should come from the
children rather than from teachers and parents; how are their
demands to become articulate? We must give consideration to this
question because the answer depends on a survey of the composite
whole we sum up as ‘human nature,’ a whole whose possibilities are
infinite and various, not only in a budding genius, the child of a
distinguished family, but in every child of the streets.

A small English boy of nine living in Japan, remarked,--“Isn’t it
fun, Mother, learning all these things? Everything seems to fit
into something else.” The boy had not found out the whole secret;
everything fitted into something within himself.

The days have gone by when the education befitting either a
gentleman or an artisan was our aim. Now we must deal with a child
of man, who has a natural desire to know the history of his race
and of his nation, what men thought in the past and are thinking
now; the best thoughts of the best minds taking form as literature,
and at its highest as poetry, or, as poetry rendered in the
plastic forms of art: as a child of God, whose supreme desire and
glory it is to know about and to know his almighty Father: as a
person of many parts and passions who must know how to use, care
for, and discipline himself, body, mind and soul: as a person of
many relationships,--to family, city, church, state, neighbouring
states, the world at large: as the inhabitant of a world full of
beauty and interest, the features of which he must recognise and
know how to name, and a world too, and a universe, whose every
function of every part is ordered by laws which he must begin to
know.

It is a wide programme founded on the educational rights of man;
wide, but we may not say it is impossible nor may we pick and
choose and educate him in this direction but not in that. We may
not even make choice between science and the ‘humanities.’ Our part
it seems to me is to give a child a vital hold upon as many as
possible of those wide relationships proper to him. Shelley offers
us the key to education when he speaks of “understanding that grows
bright gazing on many truths.”

Because the relationships a child is born to are very various, the
knowledge we offer him must be various too. A lady teaching in Cape
Colony writes,--“The papers incorporated in the pamphlet _A Liberal
Education: Practice_ (by A. C. Drury) testify to--to me--an almost
incredible standard of proficiency. The mistakes are just the kind
of mistakes that children should make and no more of them than just
enough to keep them from being priggish. There are none of those
howlers of fact or expression that make one view one’s efforts with
a feeling of utter despondency.”

The knowledge of children so taught is consecutive, intelligent
and complete as far as it goes, in however many directions. For it
is a mistake to suppose that the greater the number of ‘subjects’
the greater the scholar’s labour; the contrary is the case as
the variety in itself affords refreshment, and the child who has
written thirty or forty sheets during an examination week comes out
unfagged. Not the number of subjects but the hours of work bring
fatigue to the scholar; and bearing this in mind we have short
hours and no evening preparation.


SECTION I

THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOD

Of the three sorts of knowledge proper to a child,--the knowledge
of God, of man, and of the universe,--the knowledge of God ranks
first in importance, is indispensable, and most happy-making.
Mothers are on the whole more successful in communicating this
knowledge than are teachers who know the children less well and
have a narrower, poorer standard of measurement for their minds.
Parents do not talk down to children, but we might gather from
educational publications that the art of education as regards young
children is to bring conceptions down to their ‘little’ minds. If
we give up this foolish prejudice in favour of the grown-up we
shall be astonished at the range and depth of children’s minds;
and shall perceive that their relation to God is one of those
‘first-born affinities’ which it is our part to help them to make
good. A mother knows how to speak of God as she would of an absent
father with all the evidences of his care and love about her and
his children. She knows how to make a child’s heart beat high in
joy and thankfulness as she thrills him with the thought, ‘my
Father made them all,’ while his eye delights in flowery meadow,
great tree, flowing river. “His are the mountains and the valleys
his and the resplendent rivers, whose eyes they fill with tears
of holy joy,” and this is not beyond children. We recollect how
‘Arthur Pendennis’ walked in the evening light with his mother
and recited great passages from Milton and the eyes of the two
were filled ‘with tears of holy joy,’ when the boy was eight.
The teacher of a class has not the same tender opportunities but
if he take pains to get a just measure of children’s minds it is
surprising how much may be done.

The supercilious point of view adopted by some teachers is the
cause of the small achievements of their scholars. The ‘kiddies’
in a big girls’ school are not expected to understand and know
and they live down to the expectations formed of them. We (of the
P.N.E.U.) begin the definite ‘school’ education of children when
they are six; they are no doubt capable of beginning a year or two
earlier but the fact is that nature and circumstances have provided
such a wide field of education for young children that it seems
better to abstain from requiring _direct_ intellectual efforts
until they have arrived at that age.

As for all the teaching in the nature of ‘told to the children,’
most children get their share of that whether in the infant school
or at home, but this is practically outside the sphere of that
part of education which demands a _conscious mental effort_, from
the scholar, the mental effort of telling again that which has
been read or heard. That is how we all learn, we tell again, to
ourselves if need be, the matter we wish to retain, the sermon, the
lecture, the conversation. The method is as old as the mind of man,
the distressful fact is that it has been made so little use of in
general education. Let us hear Dr. Johnson on the subject:--

  “‘Little people should be encouraged always to tell whatever they
  hear particularly striking to some brother, sister, or servant,
  immediately, before the impression is erased by the intervention
  of newer occurrences.’ He perfectly remembered the first time
  he heard of heaven and hell because when his mother had made
  out such a description of both places as she thought likely to
  seize the attention of her infant auditor who was then in bed
  with her, she got up and dressing him before the usual time, sent
  him directly to call the favourite workman in the house to whom
  she knew he would communicate the conversation while it was yet
  impressed upon his mind. The event was what she wished and it
  was to that method chiefly that he owed the uncommon felicity of
  remembering distant occurrences and long past conversations.”
  (Mrs. Piozzi).

Now our objective in this most important part of education is
to give the children the knowledge of God. We need not go into
the question of intuitive knowledge, but the expressed knowledge
attainable by us has its source in the Bible, and perhaps we cannot
do a greater indignity to children than to substitute our own or
some other benevolent person’s rendering for the fine English,
poetic diction and lucid statement of the Bible.

Literature at its best is always direct and simple and a normal
child of six listens with delight to the tales both of Old and New
Testament read to him passage by passage, and by him narrated in
turn, with delightful touches of native eloquence. Religion has two
aspects, the attitude of the will towards God which we understand
by Christianity, and that perception of God which comes from a
gradual slow-growing comprehension of the divine dealings with
men. In the first of these senses, Goethe was never religious, but
the second forms the green reposeful background to a restless and
uneasy life and it is worth while to consider how he arrived at so
infinitely desirable a possession. He gives us the whole history
fully in _Aus Meinem Leben_, a treatise on education very well
worth our study. There he says,--

  “Man may turn where he will, he may undertake what he will but
  he will yet return to that road which Dante has laid down for
  him. So it happened to me in the present case: my efforts with
  the language” (Hebrew, when he was ten) “with the contents of the
  Holy Scriptures, resulted in a most lively presentation to my
  imagination of that beautiful much-sung land and of the countries
  which bordered it as well as of the people and events which
  have glorified that spot of earth for thousands of years....
  Perhaps someone may ask why I set forth here in such detail this
  universally known history so often repeated and expounded. This
  answer may serve, that in no other way could I show how with the
  distractions of my life and my irregular education I concentrated
  my mind and my emotion on one point because I can in no other
  way account for the peace which enveloped me however disturbed
  and unusual the circumstances of my life. If an ever active
  imagination of which the story of my life may bear witness led
  me here and there, if the medley of fable, history, mythology,
  threatened to drive me to distraction, I betook myself again to
  those morning lands, I buried myself in the five books of Moses
  and there amongst the wide-spreading, shepherd people I found the
  greatest solitude and the greatest comfort.”

It is well to know how Goethe obtained this repose of soul, this
fresh background for his thoughts, and in all the errors of a
wilful life this innermost repose appears never to have left
him. His eyes, we are told, were tranquil as those of a god, and
here is revealed the secret of that large tranquility. Here,
too, Goethe unfolds for us a principle of education which those
who desire their children to possess the passive as well as the
active principle of religion would do well to consider; for it is
probably true that the teaching of the New Testament, not duly
grounded upon or accompanied by that of the Old, fails to result
in such thought of God, wide, all-embracing, all-permeating, as
David, for example, gives constant expression to in the Psalms.
Let us have faith and courage to give children such a full and
gradual picture of Old Testament history that they unconsciously
perceive for themselves a panoramic view of the history of
mankind typified by that of the Jewish nation as it is unfolded
in the Bible. Are our children little sceptics, as was the young
Goethe, who take a laughing joy in puzzling their teachers with
a hundred difficulties? Like that wise old Dr. Albrecht, let us
be in no haste to explain. Let us not try to put down or evade
their questions, or to give them final answers, but introduce them
as did he to some thoughtful commentator who weighs difficult
questions with modesty and scrupulous care. If we act in this way,
difficulties will assume their due measure of importance, that
is to say, they will be lost sight of in the gradual unfolding
of the great scheme whereby the world was educated. I know of no
commentator for children, say, from six to twelve, better than
Canon Paterson Smyth (_The Bible for the Young_). He is one of the
few writers able to take the measure of children’s minds, to help
them over real difficulties, give impulse to their thoughts and
direction to their conduct.

Between the ages of six and twelve children cover the whole of
the Old Testament story, the Prophets, major and minor, being
introduced as they come into connection with the Kings. The teacher
opens the lesson by reading the passage from _The Bible for the
Young_, in which the subject is pictorially treated; for example,--

  “It is the battle field of the valley of Elah. The camp of Israel
  is on one slope, the big tents of the Philistines on the other.
  The Israelites are rather small men, lithe and clever, the
  Philistines are big men, big, stupid, thick-headed giants, the
  same as when Samson used to fool them and laugh at them long ago.
  There is great excitement on both sides,” etc.

There will be probably some talk and discussion after this
reading. Then the teacher will read the Bible passage in question
which the children will narrate, the commentary serving merely as a
background for their thoughts. The narration is usually exceedingly
interesting; the children do not miss a point and often add
picturesque touches of their own. Before the close of the lesson,
the teacher brings out such new thoughts of God or new points of
behaviour as the reading has afforded, emphasising the moral or
religious lesson to be learnt rather by a reverent and sympathetic
manner than by any attempt at personal application.

Forms III and IV (twelve to fifteen) read for themselves the whole
of the Old Testament as produced by the Rev. H. Costley-White in
his _Old Testament History_. Wise and necessary omissions in this
work make it more possible to deal with Old Testament History, in
the words of the Authorised Version, than if the Bible were used as
a single volume. Then, “each period is illustrated by reference to
contemporary literature (e.g., Prophets and Psalms and monuments).”
Again, “Brief historical explanations and general commentary are
inserted in their proper places.” For example, after Genesis iii,
we read, as an introduction to the story of Cain and Abel,--

  “The original object of this story was to explain the development
  of sin amongst mankind and the origin of homicide which in this
  first instance was actual murder. There are difficulties in the
  story which do not admit of satisfactory explanation. It may be
  asked,--‘Why did God not accept Cain’s offering?’ ‘How was His
  displeasure shewn?’ ‘What was the sign appointed for Cain?’ ‘Whom
  did he marry?’ The best way to answer such questions is to admit
  that we do not know, but we may add that these early stories are
  only a selection which do not necessarily form a consistent and
  complete whole, and that in this very case there are signs that
  the original story has been cut down and edited.

  “Among the lessons taught are the following,--(1) God judges
  man’s motives rather than his acts. The service of the heart is
  worth more than any ceremonial. (2) It is not the sin of murder
  that is condemned so much as the sin of jealousy and malice: cf.
  the Sermon on the Mount, Matt, xxi, 6. (3) The great doctrine of
  the Brotherhood of Man, that each man is his brother’s keeper and
  has his share of responsibility for the conditions of the lives
  of others. (4) Sin always brings its own punishment. (5) God
  remonstrates with man before the climax of sin is reached.”

The footnotes which form the only commentary upon the text are
commendably short and to the point.

Having received a considerable knowledge of the Old Testament in
detail from the words of the Bible itself and having been trained
to accept difficulties freely without giving place to the notion
that such difficulties invalidate the Bible as the oracle of God
and our sole original source of knowledge concerning the nature
of Almighty God and the manner of His government of the world,
children are prepared for a further study of divinity, still
following the Bible text.

When pupils are of an age to be in Forms V and VI (from 15 to 18)
we find that Dummelow’s _One Volume Bible Commentary_ is of great
service. It is designed to provide in convenient form,--

  “A brief explanation of the meaning of the Scriptures.
  Introductions have been supplied to the various books and Notes
  which will help to explain the principal difficulties, textual,
  moral or doctrinal, which may arise in connection with them.
  A series of articles has also been prefixed dealing with the
  larger questions suggested by the Bible as a whole. It is hoped
  that the Commentary may lead to a perusal of many of the books
  of Holy Scripture which are often left unread in spite of their
  rare literary charm and abundant usefulness for the furtherance
  of the spiritual life.... In recent years much light has been
  thrown upon questions of authorship and interpretation and the
  contributors to this volume have endeavoured to incorporate in it
  the most assured results of modern scholarship whilst avoiding
  opinions of an extreme or precarious kind. Sometimes these
  results differ from traditional views but in such cases it is not
  only hoped but believed that the student will find the spiritual
  value and authority of the Bible have been enhanced rather than
  diminished by the change.”

The Editor has in these words set forth so justly the aims of the
Commentary that I need only say we find it of very great practical
value. The pupils read the general articles and the introductions
to the separate Books; they read too the Prophets and the poetical
books with the notes supplied. Thus they leave school with a fairly
enlightened knowledge of the books of the Old Testament and of the
aids modern scholarship has brought towards their interpretation;
we hope also with increased reverence for and delight in the ways
of God with men.

The New Testament comes under another category. The same
commentaries are used and the same methods followed, that is, the
reverent reading of the text, with the following narration which
is often curiously word perfect after a single reading; this is
the more surprising because we all know how difficult it is to
repeat a passage which we have heard a thousand times; the single
attentive reading does away with this difficulty and we are able
to assure ourselves that children’s minds are stored with perfect
word pictures of every tender and beautiful scene described in the
Gospels; and are able to reproduce the austere if equally tender
teaching which enforces the object lessons of the miracles. By
degrees the Person of Our Lord as revealed in His words and His
works becomes real and dear to them, not through emotional appeals
but through the impression left by accurate and detailed knowledge
concerning the Saviour of the World, Who went about doing good.
Dogmatic teaching finds its way to them by inference through a
quiet realisation of the Bible records; and loyalty to a Divine
Master is likely to become the guiding principle of their lives.

I should like to urge the importance of what may be called a poetic
presentation of the life and teaching of Our Lord. The young reader
should experience in this study a curious and delightful sense of
harmonious development, of the rounding out of each incident, of
the progressive unfolding which characterises Our Lord’s teaching;
and, let me say here, the custom of narration lends itself
surprisingly to this sort of poetic insight. Every related incident
stands out in a sort of bas-relief; every teaching so rendered
unfolds its meaning; every argument convinces; and the personages
reveal themselves to us more intimately than almost any persons
we know in real life. Probably very little hortatory teaching is
desirable. The danger of boring young listeners by such teaching
is great, and there is also the further danger of provoking
counter-opinions, even counter-convictions, in the innocent-looking
audience. On the whole we shall perhaps do well to allow the
Scripture reading itself to point the moral.

“We are at present in a phase of religious thought, Christian and
pseudo-Christian, when a synthetic study of the life and teaching
of Christ may well be of use. We have analysed until the mind
turns in weariness from the broken fragments; we have criticised
until there remains no new standpoint for the critic; but if we
could only get a whole conception of Christ’s life among men and
of the philosophic method of His teaching, His own words should be
fulfilled and the Son of Man lifted up, would draw all men unto
Himself. It seems to me that _verse_ offers a comparatively new
medium in which to present the great theme. It is more impersonal,
more condensed, is capable of more reverent handling than is prose;
and what Wordsworth calls the ‘authentic comment’ may be essayed
in verse with more becoming diffidence. Again, the supreme moment
of a very great number of lives, that in which a person is brought
face to face with Christ, comes before us with great vividness in
the Gospel narratives, and it is possible to treat what we may call
dramatic situations with more force, and at the same time with more
reticence, in verse than in prose.

“We have a single fragment of the great epic which the future may
bring forth,--

                     ‘Those holy fields
      Over whose acres walked those blessed feet
      Which fourteen hundred years ago were nailed
      For our advantage to the bitter cross.’

“If Shakespeare had given us the whole how rich should we be! Every
line of verse dealing directly with Our Lord from the standpoint of
His personality is greatly treasured. We love the lines in which
Trench tells us,--

      ‘Of Jesus sitting by Samarian well
      Or teaching some poor fishers on the shore.’

and Keble’s,--

      ‘Meanwhile He paces through the adoring crowd
      Calm as the march of some majestic cloud.’

or his,--

      ‘In His meek power He climbs the mountain’s brow.’

Every line of such verse is precious but the lines are few, no
doubt because the subject is supremely august. Meantime we are
waiting for the great epic: because the need seems to be urgent
the writer has ventured to offer a temporary stop-gap in the six
volumes of _The Saviour of the World_.” (_From the Preface to the
first volume_).

A girl of thirteen and a half (Form IV) in her Easter examination
tackled the question: “_The people sat in darkness_”.... “_I am
the Light of the World._” _Shew as far as you can the meaning of
these statements._ She was not asked to write in verse, and was she
not taught by a beautiful instinct to recognise that the phrases
she had to deal with were essential poetry and that she could best
express herself in verse?

      “The people sat in darkness--all was dim,
      No light had yet come unto them from Him,
      No hope as yet of Heaven after life,
      A peaceful haven far from war and strife.
      Some warriors to Valhalla’s halls might go
      And fight all day, and die. At evening, lo!
      They’d wake again, and drink in the great hall.
      Some men would sleep for ever at their fall;
      Or with their fickle Gods for ever be:
      So all was dark and dim. Poor heathens, see!
      _The Light ahead_, the clouds that roll away,
      The golden, glorious, dawning of the Day;
      And in the birds, the flowers, the sunshine, see
      The might of Him who calls, ‘Come unto Me.’”

A girl of seventeen (Form V) answered the question: _Write an essay
or a poem on the Bread of Life_, by the following lines,--

      “‘How came He here,’ ev’n so the people cried,
      Who found Him in the Temple: He had wrought
      A miracle, and fed the multitude,
      On five small loaves and fish: so now they’d have
      Him king; should not they then have ev’ry good,
      Food that they toiled not for and clothes and care,
      And all the comfort that they could require?--
      So thinking sought the king....
                                    Our Saviour cried:
      ‘Labour ye not for meat that perisheth,
      But rather for the everlasting bread,
      Which I will give’--Where is this bread, they cry,
      They know not ’tis a heavenly bread He gives
      But seek for earthly food--‘I am the Bread of Life
      And all who come to Me I feed with Bread.
      Receive ye then the Bread. Your fathers eat
      Of manna in the wilderness--and died--
      But whoso eats this Bread shall have his part
      In everlasting life: I am the Bread,
      That cometh down from Heaven; unless ye eat
      Of me ye die, but otherwise ye live.’
      So Jesus taught, in Galilee, long since.

      “The people murmured when they heard His Word,
      How can it be? How can He be our Bread?
      They hardened then their hearts against His Word,
      They would not hear, and could not understand,
      And so they turnéd back to easier ways,
      And many of them walked with Him no more.
      May He grant now that we may hear the Word
      And harden not our hearts against the Truth
      That Jesus came to teach: so that in vain
      He may not cry to hearts that will not hear,
      ‘I am the Bread of Life, for all that come,
      I have this gift, an everlasting life,
      And room within my Heavenly Father’s House.’”

The higher forms in the P.U.S. read _The Saviour of the World_
volume by volume together with the text arranged in chronological
order. The lower forms read in turns each of the Synoptic Gospels;
Form IV adds the Gospel of St. John and The Acts, assisted by the
capital Commentaries on the several Gospels by Bishop Walsham How,
published by the S.P.C.K. The study of the Epistles and the Book
of Revelation is confined for the most part to Forms V and VI.
The Catechism, Prayer-book, and Church History are treated with
suitable text-books much in the same manner and give opportunities
for such summing-up of Christian teaching as is included in the
so-called dogmas of the Church. We find that Sundays together with
the time given to preparation for Confirmation afford sufficient
opportunities for this teaching.[28]


SECTION II

THE KNOWLEDGE OF MAN

(_a_) HISTORY

I have already spoken of history as a vital part of education and
have cited the counsel of Montaigne that the teacher ‘shall by the
help of histories inform himself of the worthiest minds that were
in the best ages.’ To us in particular who are living in one of
the great epochs of history it is necessary to know something of
what has gone before in order to think justly of what is occurring
to-day. The League of Nations, for example, has reminded us not
only of the Congress of Vienna but of the several Treaties of
Perpetual Peace which have marked the history of Europe. It is
still true that,--

      “Things done without example, in their issue
      Are to be feared. Have you a precedent
      Of this commission?”
                                (_Henry VIII._)

We applaud the bluff King’s wisdom and look uneasily for precedents
for the war and the peace and the depressing anxieties that have
come in their train. We are conscious of a lack of sound judgment
in ourselves to decide upon the questions that have come before
us and are aware that nothing would give us more confidence than
a pretty wide acquaintance with history. The more educated among
our ‘Dominion’ cousins complain that their young people have no
background of history and as a consequence ‘we are the people’ is
their master thought; they would face even the loss of Westminster
Abbey without a qualm. What is it to them where great events
have happened, great persons lived and moved? And, alas, this
indifference to history is not confined to the Dominions; young
people at home are equally indifferent, nor have their elders such
stores of interest and information as should quicken children with
the knowledge that always and everywhere there have been great
parts to play and almost always great men to play those parts: that
any day it may come to anyone to do some service of historical
moment to the country. It is not too much to say that a rational
well-considered patriotism depends on a pretty copious reading of
history, and with this rational patriotism we desire our young
people shall be informed rather than with the jingoism of the
emotional patriot.

If there is but little knowledge of history amongst us, no doubt
our schools are in fault. Teachers will plead that there is no
time save for a sketchy knowledge of English history given in a
course of lectures of which the pupils take notes and work up
reports. Most of us know how unsatisfying is such a course however
entertaining. Not even Thackeray could introduce the stuff of
knowledge into his lectures on _The Four Georges_. Our knowledge
of history should give us something more than impressions and
opinions, but, alas, the lack of time is a real difficulty.

Now the method I am advocating has this advantage; it multiplies
time. Each school period is quadrupled in time value and we find
that we get through a surprising amount of history in a thorough
way, in about the same time that in most schools affords no more
than a skeleton of English History only. We know that young people
are enormously interested in the subject and give concentrated
attention if we give them the right books. We are aware that our
own discursive talk is usually a waste of time and a strain on the
scholars’ attention, so we (of the P.N.E.U.) confine ourselves
to affording two things,--knowledge, and a keen sympathy in the
interest roused by that knowledge. It is our part to see that every
child _knows_ and _can tell_, whether by way of oral narrative
or written essay. In this way an unusual amount of ground is
covered with such certainty that no revision is required for
the examination at the end of the term. A _single reading_ is a
condition insisted upon because a naturally desultory habit of mind
leads us all to put off the effort of attention as long as a second
or third chance of coping with our subject is to be hoped for.
It is, however, a mistake to speak of the ‘effort of attention.’
Complete and entire attention is a natural function which requires
no effort and causes no fatigue; the anxious labour of mind of
which we are at times aware comes when attention wanders and has
again to be brought to the point; but the concentration at which
most teachers aim is an innate provision for education and is not
the result of training or effort. Our concern is to afford matter
of a sufficiently literary character, together with the certainty
that no second or third opportunity for knowing a given lesson will
be allowed.

The personality of the teacher is no doubt of much value but
perhaps this value is intellectual rather than emotional. The
perception of the teacher is keenly interested, that his mind and
their minds are working in harmony is a wonderful incentive to
young scholars; but the sympathetic teacher who believes that to
attend is a strain, who makes allowance for the hundred wandering
fancies that beset a child--whom he has at last to pull up with
effort, tiring to teacher and pupil--hinders in his good-natured
efforts to help.

The child of six in IB has, not stories from English History, but
a definite quantity of consecutive reading, say, forty pages in
a term, from a well-written, well-considered, large volume which
is also well-illustrated. Children cannot of course themselves
read a book which is by no means written down to the ‘child’s
level’ so the teacher reads and the children ‘tell’ paragraph by
paragraph, passage by passage. The teacher does not talk much and
is careful never to interrupt a child who is called upon to ‘tell.’
The first efforts may be stumbling but presently the children get
into their ‘stride’ and ‘tell’ a passage at length with surprising
fluency. The teacher probably allows other children to correct any
faults in the telling when it is over. The teacher’s own really
difficult part is to keep up sympathetic interest by look and
occasional word, by remarks upon a passage that has been narrated,
by occasionally shewing pictures, and so on. But she will bear in
mind that the child of six has begun the serious business of his
education, that it does not matter much whether he understands this
word or that, but that it matters a great deal that he should learn
to deal directly with books. Whatever a child or grown-up person
can tell, that we may be sure he knows, and what he cannot tell,
he does not know. Possibly this practice of ‘telling’ was more
used in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries than it is now. We
remember how three gentlemen meet in _Henry VIII_ and one who has
just come out of the Abbey from witnessing the coronation of Anne
Boleyn is asked to tell the others about it, which he does with
the vividness and accuracy we obtain from children. In this case
no doubt the ‘telling’ was a stage device, but would it have been
adopted if such narration were not commonly practised? Even in our
own day a good _raconteur_ is a welcome guest; and a generation or
two ago the art was studied as a part of gentlemanly equipment. The
objection occurs that such a social accomplishment is unnecessary
for children and is a mere exercise of memory. Now a passage to be
memorised requires much conning, much repetition, and meanwhile the
learners are ‘thinking’ about other matters, that is, the _mind_
is not at work in the act of memorising. To read a passage with
full attention and to tell it afterwards has a curiously different
effect. M. Bergson makes the happy distinction between _word_
memory and _mind_ memory, which, once the force of it is realised,
should bring about sweeping changes in our methods of education.

Trusting to mind memory we visualise the scene, are convinced by
the arguments, take pleasure in the turn of the sentences and frame
our own upon them; in fact that particular passage or chapter has
been received into us and become a part of us just as literally as
was yesterday’s dinner; nay, more so, for yesterday’s dinner is of
little account to-morrow; but several months, perhaps years hence,
we shall be able to narrate the passage we had, so to say, consumed
and grown upon with all the vividness, detail and accuracy of the
first telling. All those powers of the mind which we call faculties
have been brought into play in dealing with the intellectual
matter thus afforded; so we may not ask questions to help the child
to reason, paint fancy pictures to help him to imagine, draw out
moral lessons to quicken his conscience. These things take place as
involuntarily as processes of digestion.

Children of seven are promoted to Form IA in which they remain
for a couple of years. They read from the same capital book, Mrs.
Marshall’s _Our Island Story_, and about the same number of pages
in a term; but while the readings in IB are confined to the first
third of the book embodying the simpler and more direct histories,
those in IA go on to the end of the volume and children learn at
any rate to love English history. “I’d a lot sooner have history
than my dinner,” said a sturdy boy of seven by no means inclined to
neglect his dinner.

In IA the history is amplified and illustrated by short biographies
of persons connected with the period studied, Lord Clive, Nelson,
etc.; and Mrs. Frewen Lord’s delightful _Tales from Westminster
Abbey_ and _from St. Paul’s_ help the children immensely in
individualising their heroes. It is good to hear them ‘tell’
of Franklin, Nelson, Howard, Shaftesbury, and their delight in
visiting the monuments is very great. One would not think that
Donne would greatly interest children but the excitement of a small
party in noticing the marks of the Great Fire still to be seen on
his monument was illuminating to lookers-on.

Possibly there is no sounder method of inculcating a sane and
serviceable patriotism than this of making children familiar with
the monuments of the great even if they have not the opportunity
to see them. Form II (ages 9 to 12) have a more considerable
historical programme which they cover with ease and enjoyment.
They use a more difficult book than in IA, an interesting
and well-written history of England of which they read some
fifty pages or so in a term. IIA read in addition and by way
of illustration the chapters dealing with the social life of
the period in a volume, treating of social life in England. We
introduce children as early as possible to the contemporary history
of other countries as the study of English history alone is apt to
lead to a certain insular and arrogant habit of mind.

Naturally we begin with French history and both divisions read from
the _First History of France_, very well written, the chapters
contemporary with the English history they are reading. The
readiness with which children write or tell of Richelieu, Colbert,
Bayard, justifies us in this early introduction of foreign history;
and the lucidity and clearness with which the story is told in
the book they use results on the part of the children in such a
knowledge of the history of France as throws light on that of their
own country and certainly gives them the sense that history was
progressing everywhere much as it was at home during the period
they are reading about.

The study of ancient history which cannot be contemporaneous we
approach through a chronologically-arranged book about the British
Museum (written for the scholars of the P.U.S. by the late Mrs.
W. Epps who had the delightful gift of realising the progress of
the ages as represented in our great national storehouse). I have
already instanced a child’s visit to the Parthenon Room and her
eager identification of what she saw with what she had read, and
that will serve to indicate the sort of key to ancient history
afforded by this valuable book. Miss G. M. Bernau has added to the
value of these studies by producing a ‘Book of Centuries’ in which
children draw such illustrations as they come across of objects of
domestic use, of art, etc., connected with the century they are
reading about. This slight study of the British Museum we find very
valuable; whether the children have or have not the opportunity of
visiting the Museum itself, they have the hope of doing so, and,
besides, their minds are awakened to the treasures of local museums.

In Form III children continue the same history of England as in II,
the same French history and the same British Museum Book, going on
with their ‘Book of Centuries.’ To this they add about twenty to
thirty pages a term from a little book on Indian History, a subject
which interests them greatly.

Slight studies of the history of other parts of the British Empire
are included under ‘Geography.’

In Form IV the children are promoted to Gardiner’s _Student’s
History of England_, clear and able, but somewhat stiffer than that
they have hitherto been engaged upon, together with Mr. and Mrs.
Quennell’s _History of Everyday Things in England_ (which is used
in Form III also). Form IV is introduced to outlines of European
history. _The British Museum for Children_ and ‘Book of Centuries’
are continued.

It is as teachers know a matter of extreme difficulty to find the
exactly right book for children’s reading in each subject and
for some years we have been regretting the fact that Lord’s very
delightful _Modern Europe_[29] has been out of print.

The history studies of Forms V and VI (ages 15 to 18) are more
advanced and more copious and depend for illustration upon readings
in the literature of the period. Green’s _Shorter History of the
English People_ is the text-book in English history, amplified,
for example, by Macaulay’s _Essays on Frederick the Great_ and the
_Austrian Succession_, on _Pitt_ and _Clive_. For the same period
we use an American history of Western Europe and a very admirable
history of France, well-translated from the original of M. Duruy.
Possibly Madame de Staël’s _L’Allemagne_ or some other historical
work of equal calibre may occur in their reading of French. It is
not possible to continue the study of Greek and Roman history in
detail but an admirably written survey informed with enthusiasm is
afforded by Professor de Burgh’s _The Legacy of the Ancient World_.
The pupils make history charts for every hundred years on the plan
either adapted or invented by the late Miss Beale of Cheltenham,
a square ruled into a hundred spaces ten in each direction with
the symbol in each square showing an event which lends itself to
illustration during that particular ten years. Thus crossed battle
axes represent a war.

The geographical aspects of history fall under ‘Geography’ as a
subject. This course of historical reading is valued exceedingly
by young people as affording a knowledge of the past that bears
upon and illuminates the present. The writer recollects meeting
a brilliant group of Oxford undergraduates, keen and full of
interest, but lamentably ignorant, who said, “We want to know
something about history. What do you advise us to read? We know
nothing.” Perhaps no youth should go to College without some such
rudimentary course of English, European, and, especially, French
history, as is afforded by the programmes.[30] Such a general
survey should precede any special course and should be required
before the more academic studies designed to prepare students for
‘research work.’

It will be observed that the work throughout the Forms is always
chronologically progressive. The young student rarely goes over
old ground; but should it happen that the whole school has arrived
at the end of 1920, say, and there is nothing for it but to begin
again, the books studied throw new light and bring the young
students into line with modern research.

But any sketch of the history teaching in Forms V and VI in a given
period depends upon a notice of the ‘literature’ set; for plays,
novels, essays, ‘lives,’ poems, are all pressed into service and
where it is possible, the architecture, painting, etc., which the
period produced. Thus questions such as the following on a term’s
work both test and record the reading of the term,--“Describe the
condition of (_a_) the clergy, (_b_) the army, (_c_) the navy,
(_d_) the general public in and about 1685.” “Trace the rise of
Prussia before Frederick the Great.” “What theories of government
were held by Louis XIV? Give some account of his great ministers.”
“Describe the rise of Russia and its condition at the opening of
the eighteenth century.” “Suppose Evelyn (Form VI) or Pepys (Form
V) in counsel at the League of Nations, write his diary for three
days.” “Sketch the character and manners of Addison. How does he
appear in _Esmond_?”

It is a great thing to possess a pageant of history in the
background of one’s thoughts. We may not be able to recall this or
that circumstance, but, ‘the imagination is warmed’; we know that
there is a great deal to be said on both sides of every question
and are saved from crudities in opinion and rashness in action. The
present becomes enriched for us with the wealth of all that has
gone before.

Perhaps the gravest defect in school curricula is that they fail to
give a comprehensive, intelligent and interesting introduction to
history. To leave off or even to begin with the history of our own
country is fatal. We cannot live sanely unless we know that other
peoples are as we are with a difference, that their history is as
ours, with a difference, that they too have been represented by
their poets and their artists, that they too have their literature
and their national life. We have been asleep and our awaking is
rather terrible. The people whom we have not taught, rise upon us
in their ignorance and ‘the rabble,’--

      “As the world were now but to begin
      Antiquity forgot, custom not known,
      They cry,--‘Choose we!’”
                               (_Hamlet._)

Heaven help their choice for choosing is indeed with them, and
little do they know of those two ratifiers and props of every
present word and action, Antiquity and Custom! It is never too late
to mend but we may not delay to offer such a liberal and generous
diet of History to every child in the country as shall give weight
to his decisions, consideration to his actions and stability to his
conduct; that stability, the lack of which has plunged us into many
a stormy sea of unrest.

It is to be noted that ‘stability’ is the mark of the educated
classes. When we reflect upon the disturbance of the national
life by labour unrest and, again, upon the fact that political
and social power is passing into the hands of the majority, that
is of the labouring classes, we cannot but feel that there is a
divine fitness, a providential adaptation in the circumstance
that the infinite educability of persons of all classes should
be disclosed to us as a nation at a time when an emotional and
ignorant labouring class is a peculiar danger. I am not sure that
the education implied in the old symbol of the ladder does make
for national tranquility. It is right that equal opportunity of
being first should be afforded to all but that is no new thing. Our
history is punctuated by men who have risen, and the Roman Church
has largely founded herself as has the Chinese Empire upon this
doctrine of equal opportunity. But let us remember that the men
who climb are apt to be uneasy members of society; the desire for
knowledge for its own sake, on the other hand, finds satisfaction
in knowledge itself.

The young men see visions; the hardships of daily life are
ameliorated, and while an alert and informed mind leads to decency
and propriety of living it does not lead to the restless desire to
subvert society for the sake of the chances offered by a general
upheaval. Wordsworth is right:--

      “If rightly trained and bred Humanity is humble.”

We live in times critical for everybody but eminently critical for
teachers because it rests with them to decide whether personal
or general good should be aimed at, whether education shall be
merely a means of getting on or a means of general progress towards
high thinking and plain living and therefore an instrument of the
greatest national good.[31]


