II

THE KNOWLEDGE OF MAN

(_f_) ART

There are few subjects regarded with more respect and less
confidence in our schools than this of ‘Art.’ Of course, we say,
children should have their artistic powers cultivated, especially
those who have such powers, but _how_ is the question. The neat
solution offered by South Kensington in the sixties,--freehand
drawing, perspective, drawing from the round, has long been
rejected; but nothing definite has taken its place and we still
see models of cones, cubes and so on, disposed so that the eye may
take them in freely and that the hand may perhaps produce what the
eye has seen. But we begin now to understand that art is not to be
approached by such a macadamised road. It is of the spirit, and
in ways of the spirit must we make our attempt. We recognise that
the power of appreciating art and of producing to some extent an
interpretation of what one sees is as universal as intelligence,
imagination, nay, speech, the power of producing words. But there
must be knowledge and, in the first place, not the technical
knowledge of how to produce, but some reverent knowledge of what
has been produced; that is, children should learn pictures, line
by line, group by group, by reading, not books, but pictures
themselves. A friendly picture-dealer supplies us with half a dozen
beautiful little reproductions of the work of some single artist,
term by term. After a short story of the artist’s life and a few
sympathetic words about his trees or his skies, his river-paths or
his figures, the little pictures are studied one at a time; that
is, children learn, not merely to see a picture but _to look at
it_, taking in every detail. Then the picture is turned over and
the children tell what they have seen,--a dog driving a flock of
sheep along a road but nobody with the dog. Ah, there is a boy
lying down by the stream drinking. It is morning as you can see
by the light so the sheep are being driven to pasture, and so on;
nothing is left out, the discarded plough, the crooked birch, the
clouds beautiful in form and threatening rain, there is enough for
half an hour’s talk and memory in this little reproduction of a
great picture and the children will know it wherever they see it,
whether a signed proof, a copy in oils, or the original itself in
one of our galleries. We hear of a small boy with his parents in
the National Gallery; the boy, who had wandered off on his own
account, came running back with the news,--“Oh, Mummy, there’s
one of our Constables on that wall.” In this way children become
acquainted with a hundred, or hundreds, of great artists during
their school-life and it is an intimacy which never forsakes them.
A group of children are going up to London for a treat. “Where
would you like to go?” “Oh, Mummy, to the National Gallery to see
the Rembrandts.” Young people go to tea in a room strange to them
and are delighted to recognise two or three reproductions of De
Hooch’s pictures. In the course of school-life children get an Open
Sesame to many art galleries, and to many a cultivated home; and
life itself is illustrated for them at many points. For it is true
as Browning told us,--

      “For, don’t you mark, we’re made so that we love
      First when we see them painted, things we have passed
      Perhaps a hundred times nor cared to see.”

Here is an example of how beautiful and familiar things give quite
new delight when they are pictured. A lady writes,--

  “I was invited to a small village to talk about the P.U. School.
  Twelve really interested women came in spite of heavy rain.... I
  suggested introducing them to some of the friends their children
  had made and we had a delightful picture talk with Jean B.
  Corot, delightful to me because of the way one woman especially
  narrated. She did it as if she had been set free for the first
  time for months. It was the ‘Evening’ picture with a canal on the
  right and that splendid mass of quiet trees in the centre. The
  others gave bits of the picture but she gave the whole thing. It
  was a green pasture to her.”

The noteworthy thing is that these women were familiar with all
such details as Corot offers in their own beautiful neighbourhood,
but Browning is right; we learn to see things when we see them
painted.

It will be noticed that the work[35] done on these pictures is
done by the children themselves. There is no talk about schools of
painting, little about style; consideration of these matters comes
in later life, but the first and most important thing is to know
the pictures themselves. As in a worthy book we leave the author
to tell his own tale, so do we trust a picture to tell its tale
through the medium the artist gave it. In the region of art as
elsewhere we shut out the middleman.

Forms V and VI are asked to,--“Describe, with study in sepia,
Corot’s ‘Evening.’” Beyond this of a rough study from memory of
a given picture or of any section of it, these picture studies
do not afford much material for actual drawing; they are never
copied lest an attempt to copy should lessen a child’s reverence
for great work. We are shy in speaking of what we do in actual
drawing since Herr Cizek came among us and shewed what great
things children could do with scarcely any obvious teaching and
but little suggestion. But probably such work is only to be done
under the inspiration of an artist of unusual powers and I am
writing for teachers who depend upon their children rather than
upon themselves. They illustrate favourite scenes and passages
in the books read during the term and the spirit with which the
illustrations are drawn and the fitting details introduced make
the teacher aware of how much more the children have seen in the
passage than he has himself. Their courage in grappling with
points of technique is very instructive. They tackle a crowd with
wonderful ingenuity, a crowd listening to Mark Antony’s oration,
cheering the Prince of Wales in India, in fact wherever a crowd is
wanted it is suggested pretty much as an artist would give it by
a show of heads. Like those Viennese children they use all their
paper, whether for a landscape or the details in a room. They
give you horses leaping brooks, dogs running after cats, sheep
on the road, always with a sense of motion. It is evident that
children study the figures they see with due attention and will
give you a gardener sharpening his scythe, their mother sewing,
a man rowing, or driving, or mowing. Their chairs stand on four
legs and their figures on two feet in a surprising way, and they
are always on the watch to correct their errors by what they see.
They have a delightful and courageous sense of colour, and any
child will convince you that he has it in him to be an artist.
Their field studies give them great scope. The first buttercup in
a child’s nature note book is shockingly crude, the sort of thing
to scandalise a teacher of brush-drawing, but by and by another
buttercup will appear with the delicate poise, uplift and radiance
of the growing flower.

Drawing is generally so well taught now that we need do no more
than emphasize one or two special points in our work, such as the
definite study of pictures and the illustrations of Nature Note
Books.

We do what is possible to introduce children to Architecture; and
we practise clay-modelling and the various artistic handicrafts,
but there is nothing unusual in our work in these directions.[36]

With Musical Appreciation the case is different; and we cannot do
better than quote from an address made by Mrs. Howard Glover at the
Ambleside Conference of the Parents’ Union, 1922:--

  “Musical Appreciation--which is so much before the eye at the
  present moment--originated in the P.N.E.U. about twenty-five
  years ago. At that time I was playing to my little child much of
  the best music in which I was interested, and Miss Mason happened
  to hear of what I was doing. She realised that music might give
  great joy and interest to the life of all, and she felt that just
  as children in the P.U.S. were given the greatest literature
  and art, so they should have the greatest music as well. She
  asked me to write an article in the _Review_ on the result of my
  observations, and to make a programme of music each term which
  might be played _to_ the children. From that day to this, at the
  beginning of every term a programme has appeared; thus began a
  movement which was to spread far and wide.

  “Musical Appreciation, of course, has nothing to do with playing
  the piano. It used to be thought that ‘learning music’ must mean
  this, and it was supposed that children who had no talent for
  playing were unmusical and would not like concerts. But Musical
  Appreciation had no more to do with playing an instrument than
  acting had to do with an appreciation of Shakespeare, or painting
  with enjoyment of pictures. I think that all children should take
  Musical Appreciation and not only the musical ones, for it has
  been proved that only three per cent. of children are what is
  called ‘tone-deaf’; and if they are taken at an early age it is
  astonishing how children who appear to be without ear, develop it
  and are able to enjoy listening to music with understanding.”


SECTION III

THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE UNIVERSE

(_a_) SCIENCE[37]

Huxley’s axiom that science teaching in the schools should be
of the nature of ‘common information’ is of use in defining our
limitations in regard to the teaching of science. We find another
limitation in the fact that children’s minds are not in need of the
mental gymnastics that such teaching is supposed to afford. They
are entirely alert and eager to know. Books dealing with science
as with history, say, should be of a literary character, and we
should probably be more scientific as a people if we scrapped all
the text-books which swell publishers’ lists and nearly all the
chalk expended so freely on our blackboards. The French mind has
appreciated the fact that the approach to science as to other
subjects should be more or less literary, that the principles which
underlie science are at the same time so simple, so profound and
so far-reaching that the due setting forth of these provokes what
is almost an emotional response; these principles are therefore
meet subjects for literary treatment, while the details of their
application are so technical and so minute as,--except by way of
illustration,--to be unnecessary for school work or for general
knowledge. We have not a copious scientific literature in English
but we have quite enough to go on with in our schools. We find an
American publication called _The Sciences_ (whose author would seem
to be an able man of literary power) of very great value in linking
universal principles with common incidents of every day life in
such a way that interest never palls and any child may learn on
what principles an electric bell works, what sound means, how a
steam engine works, and many other matters, explained here with
great lucidity. Capital diagrams and descriptions make experiments
easy and children arrive at their first notions of science without
the verbiage that darkens counsel. Form IIA read _Life and Her
Children_ by Arabella Buckley and get a surprising knowledge of the
earlier and lower forms of life. IIB take pleasure in Kingsley’s
_Madam How and Lady Why_. They are expected to do a great deal
of out-of-door work in which they are assisted by _The Changing
Year_, admirable month by month studies of what is to be seen
out-of-doors. They keep records and drawings in a Nature Note Book
and make special studies of their own for the particular season
with drawings and notes.

The studies of Form III for one term enable children to--“Make
a rough sketch of a section of ditch or hedge or sea-shore and
put in the names of the plants you would expect to find.” “Write
notes with drawings of the special study you have made this term.”
“What do you understand by calyx, corolla, stamen, pistil? In
what ways are flowers fertilised?” “How would you find the Pole
Star? Mention six other stars and say in what constellations they
occur.” “How would you distinguish between Early, Decorated and
Perpendicular Gothic? Give drawings.” Questions like these, it will
be seen, cover a good deal of field work, and the study of some
half dozen carefully selected books on natural history, botany,
architecture and astronomy, the principle being that children
shall observe and chronicle, but shall not depend upon their own
unassisted observation.

The study of natural history and botany with bird lists and plant
lists continues throughout school life, while other branches of
science are taken term by term.

The questions for Form IV for one term illustrate the various
studies of the scholars in natural history, general science,
hygiene and physiology; in fact, their studies are so various that
it is difficult to give each a separate title in the programme:--


  GEOGRAPHY.

  1. Write a short sketch of Central Asia, with map.

  2. Compare Palestine with the Yorkshire moors. Describe the
  valley of the Jordan.

  3. “There is but one Nelson.” Illustrate by half-a-dozen
  instances.

  4. What is said in _Eöthen_ of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre?


  NATURAL HISTORY.

  1. What do you know of (_a_), the manatee, (_b_), the whalebone
  whale (sketch of skeleton), (_c_), porpoises and dolphins?

  _or_, 1. Describe (_a_), quartz crystals, (_b_), felspar, (_c_),
  mica, (_d_), hornblende. In what rock do these occur?

  2. What do you know of insectivorous plants? Name those you know.

  3. What circumstances strike you in a walk in summer?


  GENERAL SCIENCE.

  1. What do you understand by,--(_a_), electrical attraction,
  (_b_), repulsion, (_c_), conductors, (_d_), insulators, (_e_),
  methods of obtaining electricity?

  2. Prove that “you never see matter itself,” and show how sight
  gives us knowledge.


  PHYSIOLOGY.

  1. Describe the structure of the human ear.

Perhaps _Some Wonders of Matter_ by Bishop Mercer is the most
inspiring of the half-dozen volumes in current use in Form IV for
this section of their work. The questions indicate the varied
nature of the work and the answers shew that in every case the
knowledge is fairly wide and thorough. All the children in the
school are usually ready to answer each question on the work of the
term.

Forms V and VI again cover a wide field as the following questions
on a term’s work sufficiently indicate,--


  GEOGRAPHY.

  VI.

  1. Show how the discovery of the New World affected England in
  commerce and war.

  2. According to what general law is life distributed on the earth?

  3. Describe the Siege of Mexico by Cortes, and its surrender.

  VI. & V.

  4. How has the war affected (_a_), Luxembourg, (_b_), the Eastern
  frontier of Belgium, (_c_), Antwerp and the Scheldt?

  V.

  1. Show how the Restoration affected our American possessions.

  2. Show accurately how longitude is determined.

  3. Sketch the history and character of Montezuma.


  GEOLOGY AND GENERAL SCIENCE.

  VI.

  1. Discuss fully (_a_), the cause of radio-activity, (_b_),
  gravitation.

  2. What have you to say of the scenic aspects of the English
  Trias? Name a dozen of the fossils. Sketch half-a-dozen.

  V.

  1. Give as full an explanation as you can of colour.

  2. Describe the composition of the igneous rocks. Where do they
  appear?


  BIOLOGY, BOTANY, ETC.

  VI.

  1. What are the characters of the backboneless animals? Describe
  half-a-dozen examples.

  2. Describe and account for the vegetation of (_a_), woodlands,
  (_b_), heath, (_c_), moorland, (_d_), meadow.

  V.

  1. How would you classify the industries of animals? Give
  examples.

  2. Describe the flora of the seashore.

  VI. & V.

  3. Describe, with drawings, the special study you have made this
  term.


  ASTRONOMY.

  VI.

  1. What do you understand by precession? Describe the precession
  and mutation of the earth’s axis.

  V.

  1. Write an essay on the planet Mercury.

If we wanted an excuse for affording children a wide syllabus
introducing them at any rate to those branches of science of which
every normal person should have some knowledge, we find it in
the deprecatory words of Sir Richard Gregory in his Presidential
Address in the Education Science Section of the British
Association. He said that,--

  “Education might be defined as a deliberate adjustment of a
  growing human being to its environment, and the scope and
  character of the subjects of instruction should be determined
  by this biological principle. What was best for one race or
  epoch need not be best for another. The essential mission of
  school science was to prepare pupils for civilised citizenship
  by revealing to them something of the beauty and the power of
  the world in which they lived, as well as introducing them to
  the methods by which the boundaries of natural knowledge had
  been extended. School science, therefore, was not intended to
  prepare for vocations, but to equip pupils for life. It should
  be part of a general education, unspecialised, but in no direct
  connexion with possible university courses to follow. Less than
  three per cent. of the pupils from State-aided secondary schools
  proceeded to universities, and yet most of the science courses in
  these schools were based on syllabuses of the type of university
  entrance examinations. The needs of the many were sacrificed to
  the few.

  “Too much importance was attached to what could be covered by
  personal experiment and observation. Every science examination
  qualifying for the first school certificate, which now
  represented subjects normally studied up to about sixteen years
  of age, was mainly a test of practical acquaintance with facts
  and principles encountered in particular limited fields, but not
  a single one afforded recognition of a broad and ample course
  of instruction in science such as was a necessary complement to
  laboratory work.

  “The numbers [of examination candidates] suggested that general
  scientific teaching was almost non-existent. The range of
  instruction in the portions of subjects taken, moreover, was
  almost confined to what could be taught in a laboratory. Reading
  or teaching for interest or to learn how physical science was
  daily extending the power of man received little attention
  because no credit for knowledge thus gained was given in
  examinations. There was very special need for the reminder that
  science was not all measurement, nor all measurement science.”

It is reassuring to see methods that we have pursued for
over thirty years with admirable results recommended thus
authoritatively. The only sound method of teaching science is to
afford a due combination of field or laboratory work, with such
literary comments and amplifications as the subject affords. For
example, from _Ethics of the Dust_ children derive a certain
enthusiasm for crystals as such that their own unaided observation
would be slow to afford. As a matter of fact the teaching of
science in our schools has lost much of its educative value through
a fatal and quite unnecessary divorce between science and the
‘humanities.’

The nature note books which originated in the P.U.S. have
recommended themselves pretty widely as travelling companions and
life records wherein the ‘finds’ of every season, bird or flower,
fungus or moss, is sketched, and described _somewhat_ in the
manner of Gilbert White. The nature note book is very catholic and
finds room for the stars in their courses and for, say, the fossil
anemone found on the beach at Whitby. Certainly these note books
do a good deal to bring science within the range of common thought
and experience; we are anxious not to make science a utilitarian
subject.


GEOGRAPHY

The teaching of Geography suffers especially from the utilitarian
spirit. The whole tendency of modern Geography, as taught in
our schools, is to strip the unfortunate planet which has been
assigned to us as our abode and environment of every trace of
mystery and beauty. There is no longer anything to admire or to
wonder at in this sweet world of ours. We can no longer say with
Jasper Petulengro,--“Sun, moon and stars are sweet things, brother;
there is likewise the wind on the heath.” No, the questions
which Geography has to solve henceforth are confined to how and
under what conditions is the earth’s surface profitable to man
and desirable for his habitation. No more may children conceive
themselves climbing Mont Blanc or Mount Everest, skating on the
Fiords of Norway or swimming in a gondola at Venice. These are not
the things that matter, but only how and where and why is money
to be made under local conditions on the earth’s surface. It is
doubtful whether this kind of teaching is even lucrative because
the mind works on great ideas, and, upon these, works to great
ends. Where science does not teach a child to wonder and admire it
has perhaps no educative value.

Perhaps no knowledge is more delightful than such an intimacy
with the earth’s surface, region by region, as should enable the
map of any region to unfold a panorama of delight, disclosing not
only mountains, rivers, frontiers, the great features we know as
‘Geography,’ but associations, occupations, some parts of the past
and much of the present, of every part of this beautiful earth.
Great attention is paid to map work; that is, before reading a
lesson children have found the places mentioned in that lesson
on a map and know where they are, relatively to other places, to
given parallels, meridians. Then, bearing in mind that children
do not generalise but must learn by particulars, they read and
picture to themselves the Yorkshire Dales, the Sussex Downs, the
mysteries of a coal-mine; they see ‘pigs’ of iron flowing forth
from the furnace, the slow accretions which have made up the
chalk, the stirring life of the great towns and the occupations
of the villages. Form II (A and B) are engaged with the counties
of England, county by county, for so diverse are the counties in
aspect, history and occupations, that only so can children acquire
such a knowledge of England as will prove a key to the geography
of every part of the world, whether in the way of comparison or
contrast. For instance, while I write, the children in IIA are
studying the counties which contain the Thames basin and “Write
verses on ‘The Thames’” is part of their term’s work. _Our Sea
Power_, by H. W. Household, is of extraordinary value in linking
England with the world by means of a spirited account of the
glorious history of our navy, while the late Sir George Parkin,
than whom there is no better qualified authority, carries children
round the Empire. They are thrown on their own resources or those
of their teachers for what may be called current Geography. For
instance, “Learn what you can about _The Political Map of Europe
after the Great War_. (Evans, 4_d._).”

In Form III the Geography is still regional, that is, children are
led to form an intimate acquaintance with the countries of Europe
so that the map of any country calls up in a child’s imagination
a wonderful panorama of the diversities of the country, of the
people, their history and occupations. It is evident that this
kind of geographical image cannot be secured in any other way
than by considering Europe country by country. They begin with a
general survey of the seas and shores of the continent, of the
countries and peoples, of the diversities of tongues and their
historical origin, of the plains and mountains, of the rivers
and their basins; a survey after which they should be able to
answer such questions as,--“Name three rivers which flow into the
Baltic.” “What lands form the southern and eastern shores of the
Mediterranean?” “What countries are washed by the Baltic?” “Between
what parallels does Europe extend? What other continents lie partly
within the same parallels?” The young scholars are at home with the
map of Europe before they consider the countries separately.

The picture we present of the several countries is meant to be
before all things interesting and at the same time to provide an
intelligent and fairly exhaustive account of the given country.
Whatever further knowledge a child acquires will fit in to this
original scheme. For example, “The Rhône Valley and the Border
lands.”[38]

  “The warm and fertile Rhône valley belongs in climate to the
  southern region, where, although the vine is grown, large
  plantations of olive and mulberry occupy much of the land. We
  are apt to think of the South of France as the sunny south, the
  sweet south, ‘but,’ says a writer whom we have already quoted,
  ‘it is austere, grim, sombre’ ... but the mulberry feeds the
  silkworm and so furnishes material for the great manufacture of
  France. Lyons, the second city of France, is the seat of the silk
  manufacture including those of velvets and satins. It is seated
  upon a tongue of land at the confluence of the rapid Rhône and
  the sluggish Saône, and along the banks of both rivers are fine
  quays.”

This extract indicates how geographical facts are introduced
incidentally, pretty much as a traveller comes across them. The
work for one term includes Belgium, Holland, Spain and Portugal,
and the interests connected with each of these countries are
manifold. For example,--

  “On the seashore near Leyden is Katwyck where the expiring Rhine
  is helped to discharge itself into the sea by means of a wide
  artificial channel provided with no less than thirteen pairs of
  enormous floodgates. These are shut to keep out the sea when the
  tide is coming in, and open to let the streams pass out during
  ebb tide. Notwithstanding these great works the once glorious
  Rhine makes but an ignoble exit. The delta of this river may be
  said to include the whole breadth of Holland.”[39]

It will be noticed that an attempt is made to shew the romance
of the natural features, the history, the industries, so that a
country is no more a mere matter of names on a map, or of sections
shewn by contour lines. Such generalisations are not Geography
but are slow conclusions which the mind should come to of itself
when it acquires intimacy with a region. Something of a literary
character is preserved in the Geography lessons. The new feature in
these is the study of maps which should be very thorough. For the
rest the single reading and narration as described in connection
with other work is sufficient in this subject also. Children cannot
tell what they have not seen with the mind’s eye, which we know as
imagination, and they cannot see what is not told in their books
with some vividness and some grasp of the subject. The thoroughness
of the map study is shewn by such a question to be answered from
memory as,--“What part of Belgium does the Scheldt drain? Name any
of its feeders. Name ten famous places in its basin. What port
stands at the head of its estuary?” We find great light thrown upon
the geography of the Empire in a little book of literary quality,
_Fighting for Sea Power in the Days of Sail_.

There are two rational ways of teaching Geography. The first is
the inferential method, a good deal in vogue at the present time;
by it the pupil learns certain geographical principles which he is
expected to apply universally. This method seems to me defective
for two reasons. It is apt to be misleading as in every particular
case the general principle is open to modifications; also, local
colour and personal and historical interests are wanting and the
scholar does not form an intellectual and imaginative conception
of the region he is learning about. The second which might be
called the panoramic method unrolls the landscape of the world,
region by region, before the eyes of the scholar with in every
region its own conditions of climate, its productions, its people,
their industries and their history. This way of teaching the most
delightful of all subjects has the effect of giving to a map of a
country or region the brilliancy of colour and the wealth of detail
which a panorama might afford, together with a sense of proportion
and a knowledge of general principles. I believe that pictures are
not of very great use in this study. We all know that the pictures
which abide with us are those which the imagination constructs from
written descriptions.

The Geography for Form IV[40] includes Asia, Africa, America
and Australasia. But the same principle is followed: vivid
descriptions, geographical principles, historical associations and
industrial details, are afforded which should make, as we say, an
impression, should secure that the region traversed becomes an
imaginative possession as well as affording data for reasonable
judgments. The pupil begins with a survey of Asia followed by a
separate treatment of the great countries and divisions and of the
great physical features. Thus of Siberia we read,--

  “All travellers unite in praise of the free Siberian peasant. As
  soon as one crosses the Urals one is surprised by the extreme
  friendliness and good nature of the inhabitants as much as by the
  rich vegetation of the well-cultivated fields and the excellent
  state of the roads in the southern part of the government of
  Tobolsk.”

or,--

  “The glossy jet black soft thick fur of the sea-otter is the most
  valuable of all the Russian skins. Next ranks the skin of the
  black fox. But though a thousand of its skins are worth no more
  than one skin of the sea-otter, the little grey squirrel whose
  skins are imported by the million really plays the most important
  part in the Siberian fur trade.”

Of Further India,--

  “Pigou, the middle division, is really the vast delta of the
  Irrawaddy, a low-lying country which yields enormous quantities
  of rice while on the higher grounds which wall in the great river
  are the finest teak forests in the world.”

Africa follows Asia with the discoveries of Livingstone, Speke,
Burton, Grant, etc. We get an account of African village life and
among the chapter headings are Abyssinia, Egypt, Up the Nile, The
Soudan, The Sahara, The Barbary States, South Africa, Cape Colony,
The Islands. America follows with an account of the progress of
discovery, a geographical sketch of South America, the Andes
and the Mountain States, Chili, Peru, Bolivia, etc., the Great
Plains of South America, Central America, North America, Canada, a
historical sketch of the United States, the Eastern States, States
of the Mississippi valley, the prairies, the Western States and
territories, California. In the section on the Eastern States we
read,--

  “Stretching from this chain (the Alleghanies) is the great
  Appalachian coalfield which extends through Pennsylvania,
  Virginia and Ohio, with a length of 720 miles containing, it is
  said, coal enough to supply the world for four thousand years!
  Iron occurs with the coal in great abundance. Most of this
  coal is of the kind called Anthracite. It is extremely slow in
  burning, emits no smoke, but has a painfully drying effect upon
  the air of a room. Sir Charles Lyall speaking of Pottsville on
  this coalfield says,--‘Here I was agreeably surprised to see
  a flourishing manufacturing town with the tall chimneys of a
  hundred furnaces burning night and day, yet quite free from
  smoke. Leaving this clear atmosphere and going down into one of
  the mines it was a no less pleasing novelty to find that we could
  handle the coal without soiling our fingers.’”

But enough has been said to indicate the sort of intimacy that
scholars in Form IV get with all quarters of the world, their
geography, landscape, histories and industries, together with the
study of the causes which affect climate and industries. Geikie’s
_Physical Geography_ affords an admirable introduction to the
principles of physical geography.

Forms V and VI are expected to keep up with the newspapers and
know something about places and regions coming most into note in
the current term. Also, in connection with the history studied,
Seeley’s _Expansion of England, The Peoples and Problems of
India_, Geikie’s _Elementary Lessons in Physical Geography_,
Mort’s _Practical Geography_, and Kipling’s _Letters of Travel_
are included in the reading of one term. In these Forms the young
students are expected to apply their knowledge to Geography, both
practical and theoretical, and to make much use of a good Atlas
without the map questions which have guided the map work of the
lower Forms.


