CHAPTER II

A DARING PROJECT


While Tom and his chum are in the house of the Russian, who so
strangely produced the platinum just when it was most needed, I am
going to take just a little time to tell you something about the hero
of this story.  Those who have read the previous books of this series
need no introduction to him, but in justice to my new readers I must
make a little explanation.

Tom Swift was an inventor, as was his father before him. But Mr. Swift
was getting too old, now, to do much, though he had a pet
invention--that of a gyroscope--on which he worked from time to time.
Tom lived with his father in the village of Shopton, in New York state.
His mother was dead, but a housekeeper, named Mrs. Baggert, looked
after the wants of the inventors, young and old.

The first book of the series was called "Tom Swift and His
Motor-Cycle," and in that I related how Tom bought the machine from a
Mr. Wakefield Damon, of Waterford, after the odd gentleman had
unintentionally started to climb a tree with it. That disgusted Mr.
Damon with motor-cycling, and Tom had lots of fun on the machine, and
not a few daring adventures.

He and Mr. Damon became firm friends, and the oddity of the
gentleman--mainly that of blessing everything he could think of--was no
objection in Tom's mind. The young inventor and Ned Newton went on many
trips together, Mr. Damon being one of the party.

In Shopton lived Andy Foger, a bullying sort of a chap, who acted very
meanly toward Tom at times. Another resident of the town was a Mr.
Nestor, but Tom was more interested in his daughter Mary than in the
head of the household. Add Eradicate Sampson, an eccentric colored man
who said he got his name because he "eradicated" dirt, and his mule,
Boomerang, and I think you have met the principal characters of these
stories.

After Tom had much enjoyment out of his motor-cycle, he got a motor
boat, and one of his rivals on Lake Carlopa was this same Andy Foger,
but our hero vanquished him. Then Tom built an airship, which had been
the height of his ambition for some years. He had a stirring cruise in
the Red Cloud, and then, deserting the air for the water, Tom and his
father built a submarine, in which they went after sunken treasure. In
the book, "Tom Swift and His Electric Runabout," I told how, in the
speediest car on the road, Tom saved his father's bank from ruin, and
in the book dealing with Tom's wireless message I related how he saved
the Castaways of Earthquake Island.

When Tom went among the diamond makers, at the request of Mr. Barco
Jenks, and discovered the secret of phantom mountain the lad fancied
that might be the end of his adventures, but there were more to follow.
Going to the caves of ice, his airship was wrecked, but he and his
friends managed to get back home, and then it was that the young
inventor perfected his sky racer, in which he made the quickest flight
on record.

Most startling were his adventures in elephant land whither he went
with his electric rifle, and he was the means of saving a missionary,
Mr. Illingway and his wife, from the red pygmies.

Tom had not been home from Africa long before he got a letter from this
missionary, telling about an underground city in Mexico that was said
to be filled with gold. Tom went there, and in the book, entitled, "Tom
Swift in the City of Gold," I related his adventures.

How he and his friends were followed by the Fogers, how they eluded
them, made their way to the ruined temple in a small dirigible balloon,
descended to the secret tunnel, managed to turn aside the underground
river, and reach the city of gold with its wonderful gold statues--all
this is told in the volume.

Then, after pulling down, in the centre of the underground city, the
big golden statue, the door of rock descended, and made our friends
prisoners. They almost died, but Andy Foger and his father, in league
with some rascally Mexicans and a tribe of head-hunters, finally made
their way to the tunnel, and most unexpectedly, released Tom and his
friends.

There was a fight, but our hero's party escaped with considerable gold
and safely reached Shopton. Now, after a winter spent in work, fixing
over an old aeroplane, we again meet Tom.

"Would you mind telling me something about where this platinum comes
from, and if you can get any more of it?" asked Tom, after a pause,
following the strange statement made by the Russian.

"I will gladly tell you the story," spoke Mr. Petrofsky, "for I am much
interested in inventions, and I formerly did something in that line
myself, and I have even made a small aeroplane, so you see I know the
need of platinum in a high power magneto."

"But where did you get such pure metal?" asked Tom. "I have never seen
it's equal."

"There is none like it in all the world," went on the Russian, "and
perhaps there never can be any more. I have only a small supply. But in
Siberia--in the lost mine--there is a large quantity of it, as pure as
this, needing only a little refining.

"Can't we get some from there?" asked the young inventor eagerly. "I
should think the Russian government would mine it, and export it."

"They would--if they could find it," said Ivan Petrofsky dryly, "but
they can't--no one can find it--and I have tried very hard--so hard, in
fact, that it is the reason for my coming to this country--that and the
desire to find and aid my brother, who is a Siberian exile."

"This is getting interesting," remarked Ned to Tom in a low voice, and
the young inventor nodded.

"My brother Peter, who is younger than I by a few years, and I, are the
last of our family," began Mr. Petrofsky, motioning Tom and Ned to take
chairs. "We lived in St. Petersburg, and early in life, though we were
of the nobility, we took up the cause of the common people."

"Nihilists?" asked Ned eagerly, for he had read something of these
desperate men.

"No, and not anarchists," said Mr. Petrofsky with a sad smile. "Our
party was opposed to violence, and we depended on education to aid our
cause. Then, too, we did all we could in a quiet way to help the poor.
My brother and I invented several life-saving and labor-saving machines
and in this way we incurred the enmity of the rich contractors and
government officials, who made more money the more people they could
have working for them, for they made the people buy their food and
supplies from them.

"But my brother, and I persisted, with the result that we were both
arrested, and, with a number of others were sent to Siberia.

"Of the horrors we endured there I will say nothing. However, you have
probably read much. In the country near which we were quartered there
were many mines, some of salt and some of sulphur. Oh, the horrors of
those mines! Many a poor exile has been lost in the windings of a salt
mine, there to die miserably. And in the sulphur mines many die also,
not from being lost so much as being overcome by stifling gases. It is
terrible! And sometimes they are purposely abandoned by their guides,
for the government wants to get rid of certain exiles.

"But you are interested in platinum. One day my brother and I who had
been sent to work in the salt mines, mistook a turning and wandered on
and on for several miles, finally losing our way. We had food and water
with us, or we would have perished, and, as it was, we nearly died
before we finally found our way out of an abandoned opening.

"We came out in the midst of a terrible snowstorm, and wandered about
almost frozen. At last we were found by a serf who, in his sled, took
us to his poor cottage. There we were warmed and fed back to life.

"We knew we would be searched for, as naturally, our absence would lead
to the suspicion that we had tried to escape. So as soon as we were
able, we started back to the town where we were quartered. The serf
wanted to take us in his sled, but we knew he might be suspected of
having tried to aid us to get away, and he might be arrested. So we
went alone.

"As might have been expected, we became lost again, and wandered about
for several days. But we had enough food to keep us alive. And it was
during this wandering that I came upon the platinum mine. It was down
in a valley, in the midst of a country densely wooded and very
desolate.  There was an outcropping of the ore, and rather idly I put
some of it in my pockets. Then we wandered on, and finally after awful
suffering in terrific storms, were found by a searching party and
brought back to the barracks."

"Did they think you had escaped?" asked Tom.

"They did," replied the Russian, "and they punished us severely for it,
in spite of our denials. In time I managed secretly to smelt the
platinum ore, and I found I had some of the purest metal I had ever
seen. I was wishing I could find the mine, or tell some of my friends
about it, when one of the officers discovered the metal in my bed.

"He demanded to know where I had gotten it, and knowing that refusal
would only make it the worse for me I told him. There was considerable
excitement, for the value of the discovery was recognized, and a search
was at once made for the mine.

"But, even with the aid we were able to give, it could not be located.
Many expeditions went out to hunt for it but came back baffled. They
could not penetrate that wild country."

"They should have used an aeroplane," suggested Tom.

"They did," replied the Russian quickly, "but it was of no use."

"Why not?" the young inventor wanted to know.

"Because of the terrific winds that almost continually sweep over that
part of Siberia. They never seem to cease, and there are treacherous
air currents and 'pockets' that engulfed more than one luckless
aviator. Oh, you may be sure the Russian government spared no means of
finding the lost platinum mine, but they could not locate it, or even
get near the place where they supposed it to be.

"Then, perhaps thinking that my brother and I were concealing
something, they separated us. Where they sent him I do not know, but I
was doomed to the sulphur mines. I was heartbroken, and I scarcely
cared whether I lived or died. But an opportunity of escape came, and I
took it. I wanted to save my brother, but I did not know where he was,
and I thought if I could make my way to some civilized country, or to
free America, I might later be able to save my brother.

"I went to England, taking some of my precious platinum with me, and
stayed there for two years. I learned your language, but my efforts to
organize an expedition to search for the lost mine, and for my brother,
failed. Then I came here, and--well, I am still trying."

"My! That is certainly interesting!" exclaimed Ned, who had been all
attention during the telling of the story.

"And you certainly had a hard time," declared Tom. "I am much obliged
for this platinum. Have you set a price on it? It is worth much more
than the ordinary kind."

"The price is nothing to you," replied the Russian, with a smile. "I am
only too glad to help you fix your aeroplane. Will it take long? I
should like to watch you."

"Come along," invited Tom. "I can soon have it going again, and I'll
give you a ride, if you like."

"No, thank you, I'm hardly up to that yet, though I may be some day.
The machine I made never flew well and I had several bad falls."

Tom and Ned worked rapidly on the magneto, and soon had replaced the
defective bits of platinum.

"If the Russians had such a machine as this maybe they could have
gotten to that mine," suggested Ned, who was very proud of Tom's craft.

"It would be useless in the terrific winds, I fear," answered Ivan
Petrofsky. "But now I care little for the mine. It is my brother whom I
want to save. He must be in some of the Siberian mines, and if I had
such a craft as this I might be able to rescue him."

Tom Swift dropped the file he was using. A bright light sparkled in his
eyes. He seemed strangely excited.

"Mr. Petrofsky!" he cried, "would you let me have a try at finding your
brother, and would you come with me?"

"Would I?" asked the Russian eagerly. "I would be your debtor for life,
and I would always pray for you, if you could help me to save my
brother Peter."

"Then we'll have a try at it!" cried Tom. "I've got a different airship
than this--one in which I can travel three thousand miles without
coming down. I haven't had any excitement since I got back from the
city of gold. I'm going to Russia to help you rescue your brother from
exile, and I'm also going to have a try for that lost platinum
treasure!"

"Thank heaven, there is some hope for poor Peter at last," murmured Mr.
Petrofsky earnestly.

"You never can get to the platinum mine," said Ned. "The winds will
tear your airship to pieces."

"Not the kind I'm going to make," declared Tom. "It's going to be an
air glider, that will fairly live on high winds. Ho! for Siberia and
the platinum mines. Will you come?"

"I don't know what you mean by an air glider, Tom Swift, but I'll go to
help rescue my brother," was the quick answer, and then, with the light
of a daring resolve shining in his eyes, the young inventor proceeded
to get his aeroplane in shape for the trip back to Shopton.




