CHAPTER III

MY EXPERIMENTS WITH EUSAPIA PALADINO.


In the earlier pages of this volume some of my later experiments with the
Neapolitan medium, Eusapia Paladino, have been described. We shall now
revert to the earlier ones.

My first experimental seance with this remarkable medium took place on the
27th of July, 1897. In response to the invitation of an excellent and
honorable family,--that of Blech,--the name of which has for a long time
been happily associated with modern researches in theosophy, occultism,
and psychological studies, I betook myself to Montfort-l'Amaury, to make
the personal acquaintance of this medium, whose case had already been
studied in several particulars by MM. Lombroso, Charles Richet,
Ochorowicz, Aksakof, Schiaparelli, Myers, Lodge, A. De Rochas, Dariex, J.
Maxwell, Sabatier, De Watteville, and a great number of other scholars and
scientists of high standing. Mme. Paladino's gifts had even been made the
subject of a work by Count de Rochas upon _The Externalization of
Motivity_, as well as of innumerable articles in the special reviews.

The impression that results from the reading of all the official reports
is not altogether satisfactory, and besides leaves us with our curiosity
entirely ungratified. On the other hand, I can say, as I have already had
occasion to remark, that, during the last forty years, almost all the
celebrated mediums have been present at one time or another in my salon in
the avenue l'Observatoire in Paris, and that I have detected them nearly
all in trickery. Not that they always deceive: those who affirm this are
wrong. But, consciously or unconsciously, they bring with them an element
of trouble against which one is obliged to be constantly on guard, and
which places the experimenter in conditions diametrically opposed to those
of scientific observation.

Apropos of Eusapia I had received from my illustrious colleague, M.
Schiaparelli, director of the observatory at Milan, to whom science is
indebted for so many important discoveries, a long letter from which I
will quote a few passages:

    During the autumn of 1892 I was invited by M. Aksakof to be present at
    a certain number of Spiritualistic seances held under his direction
    and care, for the purpose of meeting the medium Eusapia Paladino, of
    Naples. I saw a number of very surprising things, a part of which, to
    tell the truth, could be explained by very ordinary means. But there
    are others the production of which I should not know how to explain by
    the known principles of natural philosophy. I add, without any
    hesitation, that, if it had been possible to entirely exclude all
    suspicion of deceit, one would have had to recognize in these facts
    the beginning of a new science pregnant with consequences of the
    highest importance. But it must be admitted that these experiments
    have been made in a manner little calculated to convince impartial
    judges of their sincerity. Conditions were always imposed that
    hindered the right comprehension of what was really taking place. When
    we proposed modifications in the program suited to give to the
    experiments the stamp of clearness and to furnish evidence that was
    lacking, the medium invariably declared that, if we did so, the
    success of the seance would thereby be made impossible. In fine, we
    did not _experiment_ in the true sense of the word: we were obliged to
    be content with _observing_ that which occurred under the unfavorable
    circumstances imposed by the medium. Even when mere observation was
    pushed a little too far, the phenomena were no longer produced or
    lost their intensity and their marvellous nature. Nothing is more
    offensive than these games of hide-and-seek to which we are obliged to
    submit

    All that kind of thing excites distrust. Having passed all my life in
    the study of nature, which is always sincere in its manifestations and
    logical in its processes, it is repugnant to me to turn my thoughts to
    the investigation of a class of truths, which it seems as if a
    malevolent and disloyal power was hiding from us with an obstinacy the
    motive of which we cannot comprehend. In such researches it is not
    sufficient to employ the ordinary methods of natural philosophy, which
    are infallible, but very limited in their action. We must have
    recourse to that other critical method, more subject to error, but
    more audacious and more powerful, of which police officers and
    examining magistrates make use when they are trying to bring out a
    truth in the midst of disagreeing witnesses, a part at least of whom
    have an interest in hiding that truth.

    In accordance with these reflections, I cannot say that I am convinced
    of the reality of the things which are comprised under the ill-chosen
    name of Spiritualism. But neither do I believe in our right to deny
    everything; for, in order to have a good basis for denial, it is not
    sufficient to _suspect_ fraud, it is necessary to _prove it_. These
    experiments, which I have found very unsatisfactory, other
    experimenters of great confidence and of established reputation have
    been able to make in more favorable circumstances. I have not enough
    presumption to oppose a dogmatic and unwarranted denial to proofs in
    which scientists of great critical ability, such as MM. Crookes,
    Wallace, Richet, Oliver Lodge, have found a solid basis of fact and
    one worthy their examination, to such an extent that they have given
    to it years of study. And we should deceive ourselves if we believed
    that men convinced of the truth of Spiritualism are all fanatics.
    During the experiments of 1892 I had the pleasure of knowing some of
    these men. I was obliged to admire their sincere desire to know the
    truth; and I found, in the case of several of them, philosophic ideas
    very sensible and very profound, joined to a moral character
    altogether worthy of esteem.

    That is the reason why it is impossible for me to declare that
    Spiritualism is a ridiculous absurdity. I ought, then, to abstain from
    pronouncing any opinion whatever: my mental state on this subject may
    be defined by the word "agnosticism."

    I have read with much attention all that the late Professor Zoellner
    has written on this subject. His explanation has a purely material
    basis,--that is to say, it is the hypothesis of the objective
    existence of a fourth dimension of space, an existence which cannot be
    comprised within the scope of our intuition, but the possibility of
    which cannot be denied on that ground alone. Once grant the reality of
    the experiments which he describes, and it is evident that his theory
    of these things is the most ingenious and probable that can be
    imagined. According to this theory, mediumistic phenomena would lose
    their mystic or mystifying character and would pass into the domain of
    ordinary physics and of physiology. They would lead to a very
    considerable extension of the sciences, an extension such that their
    author would deserve to be placed side by side with Galileo and
    Newton. Unfortunately, these experiences of Zoellner were made with a
    medium of poor reputation. It is not only the sceptics who doubt the
    good faith of M. Slade: it is the Spiritualists themselves. M.
    Aksakof, whose authority is very great in similar matters, told me
    himself that he had detected him in trickery. You see by this that
    these theories of Zoellner lose any support they might have derived
    from the exact demonstration of experiment, at the same time that they
    remain very beautiful, very ingenious, and quite possible.

    Yes, quite possible in spite of everything; in spite of the lack of
    success that I had when I tried to reproduce them with Eusapia. On the
    day when we shall be enabled to make, with absolute sincerity, _a
    single one_ of these experiments, the matter will have made great
    progress; from the hands of charlatans it will have passed into those
    of physicists and physiologists.

Such is the communication made to me by M. Schiaparelli. I found his
reasoning to be without defect, and it was in a state of mind entirely
analogous to his that I arrived at Monfort-l'Amaury (with all the more
interest because Slade was one of the mediums of whom I was just now
speaking).

Eusapia Paladino was introduced to me. She is a woman of very ordinary
appearance, a brunette, her figure a little under the medium height. She
was forty-three years old, not at all neurotic, rather stout. She was born
on January 21, 1854, in a village of La Pouille; her mother died while
giving birth to the child; her father was assassinated eight years
afterward, in 1862, by brigands of southern Italy. Eusapia Paladino is her
maiden name. She was married at Naples to a merchant of modest means named
Raphael Delgaiz, a citizen of Naples. She manages the petty business of
the shop, is illiterate, does not know how to either read or write,
understands only a little French. I conversed with her, and soon perceived
that she has no theories and does not burden herself by trying to explain
the phenomena produced by her.

The salon in which we are going to conduct our experiments is a room on
the ground floor, rectangular, measuring twenty feet in length by nineteen
in breadth; there are four windows, an outside entrance door and another
in the vestibule.

Before the sitting, I make sure that the large doors and windows are
closely shut by window-blinds with hooks and by wooden blinds on the
inside. The door of the vestibule is simply locked with a key.

In an angle of the salon, at the left of the large entrance door, two
curtains of a light color have been stretched on a rod, joining in the
middle and forming thus a little cabinet. In this cabinet there is a sofa,
and leaning against this a guitar; on one side is a chair, on which have
been placed a music-box and a bell. In the recess of the window which is
included in the cabinet there is a music-rack, upon which has been placed
a plate containing a well-smoothed cake of glazier's putty, and under
which, on the floor, is a huge tray containing a large smoothed cake of
the same. We have prepared these plaques of putty because the annals of
Spiritualism have often shown the imprint of hands and of heads produced
by the unknown beings whom it is our business in this work to investigate.
The large tray weighs about nine pounds.

Why this dark cabinet? The medium declares it is necessary to the
production of the phenomena "that relate to the condensation of fluids."

I should prefer that there should be nothing of the kind. But the
conditions must be accepted, though we must have an exact understanding
about them. Behind the curtain the stillness of the aerial waves is at its
maximum, the light at its minimum. It is curious, strange, infinitely
regrettable that light prohibits certain effects. Undoubtedly, it would
not be either philosophic or scientific to oppose this condition. It is
possible that the radiations, the forces, which act may be the rays of the
invisible end of the spectrum, I have already had occasion to remark, in
the first chapter, that he who would seek to make photographs without a
dark chamber would cloud over his plate and obtain nothing. The man who
would deny the existence of electricity because he had been unable to
obtain a spark in a damp atmosphere would be in error. He who would not
believe in the existence of stars because we only see them at night would
not be very wise. Modern progress in natural philosophy has taught us that
the radiations that impinge on the retina represent only the smallest
fraction of the totality. We can then admit the existence of forces which
do not act in the full light of day. But, in accepting these conditions,
the essential point is not to be their dupe.

Hence, before the seance, I examined carefully the narrow corner of the
room before which the curtain was stretched, and I found nothing except
the objects mentioned above. Nowhere in the room was there any sign
whatever of concealed mechanism, no electric wires or batteries or
anything of the kind, either on the floor or in the walls. Moreover, the
perfect sincerity of M. and Mme. Blech is beyond all suspicion.

Before the seance, Eusapia was undressed and dressed before Mme. Zelma
Blech. Nothing suspicious was found.

The sitting was begun in full light, and I constantly laid stress upon
obtaining the largest number of phenomena we could in the full light of
day. It was only gradually, according as the "spirit" begged for it, that
the light was turned down. But I obtained the concession that the darkness
should never be absolute. At the last limit, when the light had to be
entirely extinguished, it was replaced by one of the red lanterns used by
photographers.

The medium sits _before_ the curtain, turning her back to it. A table is
placed before her,--a kitchen table, made of spruce, weighing about
fifteen pounds. I examined this table and found nothing in it suspicious.
It could be moved about in every direction.

I sit at first on the left of Eusapia, then at her right side. I make sure
as far as possible of her hands, her legs, and her feet, by personal
control. Thus, for example, to begin with, in order to be sure that she
should not lift the table either by her hands or her legs, or her feet, I
take her left hand in my left hand, I place my right open hand upon her
knees, and I place my right foot upon her left foot. Facing me, M.
Guillaume de Fontenay, no more disposed than I to be duped, takes charge
of her right hand and her right foot.

There is full light,--a big kerosene lamp with a wide burner and a light
yellow shade, besides two lighted candles.

At the end of three minutes the table begins to move, balancing itself,
and rising sometimes to the right, sometimes to the left. A minute
afterwards it is _lifted entirely from the floor_, to a height of about
nine inches, and remains there two seconds.

In a second trial, I take the two hands of Eusapia in mine. A notable
levitation is produced, nearly under the same conditions.

We repeat the same experiments thrice, in such a way that five levitations
of the table take place in a quarter of an hour, and for several seconds
the four feet are completely lifted from the floor, to the height of about
nine inches. During one of the levitations the experimenters did not touch
the table at all, but formed the chain above it and in the air; and
Eusapia acted in the same way.

So then it seems that an object can be lifted, in opposition to the law of
gravity, without the contact of the hands which have just been acting upon
it. (Proof already given above, pp. 5-8, 16.)

A round centre table placed at my right comes forward without contact
towards the table, always in full light, be it understood, as if it would
like to climb up on it, and falls down. Nobody has moved aside or
approached the curtain, and no explanation of this movement can be given.
The medium has not yet entered into a trance and continues to take part in
the conversation.

Five raps in the table indicate, according to a convention arranged by the
medium, that the unknown cause asks for less light. This is always
annoying: I have already said what I think of this. The candles are blown
out, the lamp turned down, but the light is strong enough for us to see
very distinctly everything that takes place in the salon. The round table,
which I had lifted and set aside, approaches the table and tries several
times to climb up on it. I lean upon it in order to keep it down, but I
experience an elastic resistance and am unable to do so. The free edge of
the round table places itself on the edge of the rectangular table, but,
hindered by its triangular foot, it does not succeed in clearing itself
sufficiently to climb upon it. Since I am holding the medium, I ascertain
that she makes no effort of the kind that would be needed for this style
of performance.

The curtain swells out and approaches my face. It is at this moment that
the medium falls into a trance. She utters sighs and lamentations and only
speaks now in the third person, saying that she is John King, a psychic
personality who claims to have been her father in another existence and
who calls her "my daughter" (_mia figlia_). This is an auto-suggestion
proving nothing as to the identity of the force.

Five new taps ask for still _less light_, and the lamp is most completely
turned down, but not extinguished. The eyes, growing accustomed to the
clare-obscure, still distinguish pretty well what is taking place.

The curtain swells out again, and I feel that I am touched on the
shoulder, through the stuff of the curtain, as if by a closed fist. The
chair in the cabinet, upon which are placed the music-box and the bell, is
violently shaken, and the objects fall to the floor. The medium asks again
for _less light_, and a red photographic lantern is placed upon the piano,
the light of the lamp being extinguished. The control is rigorously kept
up, the medium agreeing to it with the greatest docility.

For about a minute the music-box plays intermittent airs behind the
curtain, as if it was turned by some hand.

The curtain moves forward again toward me, and a rather strong hand seizes
my arm. I immediately reach forward to seize the hand, but I grasp only
the empty air. I then press the two legs of the medium between mine and I
take her left hand in my right. On the other side, her right hand is
firmly held in the left hand of M. de Fontenay. Then Eusapia brings the
hand of the last named toward my cheek, and imitates upon the cheek, with
the finger of M. de Fontenay, the movement of a little revolving crank or
handle. The music-box, which has one of these handles, _plays at the same
time behind the curtain in perfect synchronism_. The instant that
Eusapia's hand stops, the music stops: all the movements correspond, just
as in the Morse telegraphic system. We all amused ourselves with this. The
thing was tried several times in succession, and every time the movement
of the finger tallied the playing of the music.

I feel several touches in the back and on the side. M. de Fontenay
receives a hard slap on the back that everybody hears. A hand passes
through my hair. The chair of M. de Fontenay is violently pulled, and a
few moments afterwards he cries, "I see the silhouette of a man passing
between M. Flammarion and me, above the table, shutting out the red
light!"

This thing is repeated several times. I do not myself succeed in seeing
this silhouette. I then propose to M. de Fontenay that I take his place,
for, in that case, I should be likely to see it also. I soon distinctly
perceive a dim silhouette passing before the red lantern, but I do not
recognize any precise form. It is only an opaque shadow (the profile of a
man) which advances as far as the light and retires.

In a moment, Eusapia says there is some one behind the curtain. After a
slight pause she adds:

"There is a man by my side, on the right: he has a great soft forked
beard." I ask if I may touch this beard. In fact, while lifting my hand,
I feel a rather soft beard brushing against it.

A block of paper is put on the table with a lead-pencil, with the hope of
getting writing. This pencil is flipped clear across the room. I then take
the block of paper and hold it in the air: it is snatched violently from
me, in spite of all my efforts to retain it. At this moment, M. de
Fontenay, with his back turned to the light, sees a hand (a white hand and
not a shadow), the arm showing as far as the elbow, holding the block of
paper; but all the others declare that they only see the paper shaking in
the air.

I did not see the hand snatch the packet of paper from me; but only a hand
could have been able to seize it with such violence, and this did not
appear to be the hand of the medium, for I held her right hand in my left,
and the paper with arm extended in my right hand, and M. de Fontenay
declared that he did not let go of her left hand.

I was struck several times in the side, touched on the head, and my ear
was smartly pinched. I declare that after several repetitions I had enough
of this ear pinching; but during the whole seance, in spite of my
protestations, somebody kept hitting me.

The little round table, placed outside of the cabinet, at the left of the
medium, approaches the table, climbs clear up on it and lies across it.
The guitar in the cabinet is heard moving about and giving out sounds. The
curtain is puffed out, and the guitar is brought upon the table, resting
upon the shoulder of M. de Fontenay. It is then laid upon the table, the
large end toward the medium. Then it rises and moves over the heads of the
company without touching them. It gives forth several sounds. The
phenomenon lasts about fifteen seconds. It can readily be seen that the
guitar is floating in the air, and the reflection of the red lamp glides
over its shining surface. A rather bright gleam, pear-shaped, is seen on
the ceiling in the other corner of the room.

The medium, who is tired, asks for rest. The candles are lighted. Mme.
Blech returns the objects to their places, ascertains that the cakes of
putty are intact, places the smallest upon the little round table and the
large one upon the chair in the cabinet, behind the medium. The sitting is
resumed by the feeble glimmer of the red lantern.

The medium, whose hands and feet are carefully controlled by M. de
Fontenay and myself, breathes heavily. Above her head the snapping of
fingers is heard. She still pants, groans, and sinks her fingers into my
hand. Three raps are heard. She cries, "It is done" ("_E fatto_"). M. de
Fontenay brings the little dish beneath the light of the red lantern and
discovers the impression of four fingers in the putty, in the position
which they had taken when she gripped my hand.

Seats are taken, the medium asks for rest, and a little light is turned
on.

The sitting is soon resumed as before, by the extremely feeble light of
the red lantern. John is spoken of as if he existed, as if it was he whose
head we perceived in silhouette; he is asked to continue his
manifestations, and to show the impression of his head in the putty, as he
has already several times done. Eusapia replies that it is a difficult
thing and asks us not to think of it for a moment, but to go on speaking.
These suggestions of hers are always disquieting, and we redouble our
attention, though without speaking much. The medium pants, groans,
writhes. The chair in the cabinet on which the putty is placed is heard to
move. The chair comes forward and places itself by the side of the medium,
then it is lifted and placed upon the head of Mme. Z. Blech, while the
tray is lightly placed in the hands of M. Blech, at the other end of the
table. Eusapia cries that she sees before her a head and a bust, and
says, "_E fatto_" ("It is done"). We do not believe her, because M. Blech
has not felt any pressure on the dish. Three violent blows as of a mallet
are struck upon the table. The light is turned on, and a human profile is
found imprinted upon the putty.

Mme. Z. Blech kisses Eusapia upon both cheeks, for the purpose of finding
out whether her face has not some odor (glazier's putty having a very
strong odor of linseed oil which remains for some time upon the fingers).
She discovers nothing abnormal.

This discovery of a "spirit head" in the putty is so astonishing, so
impossible to admit without sufficient verification, that it is really
still more incredible than all the rest. It is not the head of the man
whose profile I perceived, and the beard I felt on my hand is not there.
The imprint has a resemblance to Eusapia's face. If we supposed she
produced it herself, that she was able to bury her nose up to the cheeks
and up to the eyes in that thick putty, we should still have to explain
how that large and heavy tray was transported from the other end of the
table and gently placed in the hands of M. Blech.

The resemblance of the imprint to Eusapia was undeniable. I reproduce both
the print and the portrait of the medium.[21] Every one can assure himself
of it. The simplest thing, evidently, is to suppose the Italian woman
imprinted her face in the putty.

But how?

We are in the dark as to this, or nearly so. I sit at the right hand of
Eusapia, _who rests her head upon my left shoulder_, and whose right hand
I am holding. M. de Fontenay is at her left, and has taken great care not
to let go of the other hand. The tray of putty, weighing nine pounds, has
been placed upon a chair, twenty inches behind the curtain, consequently
behind Eusapia. She cannot touch it without turning around, and we have
her entirely in our power, our feet on hers. Now the chair upon which was
the tray of putty has drawn aside the hangings, or portieres, and moved
forward to a point above the head of the medium, who remained seated and
held down by us; moved itself also over our heads,--the chair to rest upon
the head of my neighbor, Mme. Blech, and the tray to rest softly in the
hands of M. Blech, who is sitting at the end of the table. At this moment
Eusapia rises, declaring that she sees upon the table another table and a
bust, and cries out, "_E fatto_" ("It is done"). It was not at this time,
surely, that she would have been able to place her face upon the cake, for
it was at the other end of the table. Nor was it before this, for it would
have been necessary to take the chair in one hand and the cake with the
other, and she did not stir from her place. The explanation, as can be
seen, is very difficult indeed.

Let us admit, however, that the fact is so extraordinary that a doubt
remains in our mind, because the medium rose from her chair almost at the
critical moment. And yet her face was immediately kissed by Mme. Blech,
who perceived no odor of the putty.

[Illustration: PLATE IV. PLASTER CAST OF IMPRINT MADE IN PUTTY WITHOUT
CONTACT BY THE MEDIUM EUSAPIA PALADINO.]

[Illustration: PLATE V. EUSAPIA PALADINO, SHOWING RESEMBLANCE TO THE
IMPRINT IN PUTTY.]

Dr. Ochorowicz writes as follows apropos of these prints of faces and of
the study which he made of them at Rome:[22]

    The imprint of this face was obtained in darkness, yet at a moment
    when I held the two hands of Eusapia, while my arms were entirely
    around her. Or, rather, it was she who clung to me in such a way that
    I had accurate knowledge of the position of all her limbs. Her head
    rested against mine, and even with violence. At the moment of the
    production of the phenomenon a convulsive trembling shook her whole
    body, and the pressure of her head on my temples was so intense that
    it hurt me.

    At the moment when the strongest convulsion took place, she cried,
    "_Ah, che dura!_" ("Oh, how severe!") We at once lighted a candle and
    found a print, rather poor in comparison with those which other
    experimenters have obtained,--a thing due, perhaps, to the bad quality
    of the clay which I used. This clay was placed about twenty inches to
    the right of the medium, while her head was inclined to the left. Her
    face was not at all soiled by the clay, which was yet so moist as to
    leave traces upon the fingers when touched. Moreover, the contact of
    her head with mine made me suffer so much that I am absolutely sure it
    was not intermitted for a single moment. Eusapia was very happy when
    she saw a verification made under conditions in which it was
    impossible to suspect her good faith.

    I then took the tray of clay, and we passed into the dining-room in
    order to better examine the imprint, which I placed on a large table
    near a big kerosene lamp. Eusapia, who had fallen into a trance,
    remained for some moments standing, her hands resting upon the table,
    motionless and as if unconscious. I did not lose sight of her, and she
    looked at me without seeing anything. Then, with an uncertain step,
    she moved backward toward the door and passed slowly into the chamber
    which we had just left. We followed her, observing her all the while,
    and leaving the clay behind upon the table. We had already got into
    the chamber when, leaning against one of the halves of the double
    door, she fixed her eyes upon the tray of clay which had been left
    upon the table. The medium was in a very good light: we were separated
    from her by a distance of from six to ten feet, and we perceived
    distinctly all the details. All of a sudden Eusapia stretched her hand
    out abruptly toward the clay, then sank down uttering a groan. We
    rushed precipitately towards the table and saw, side by side with the
    imprint of the head, a new imprint, very marked, of a hand which had
    been thus produced under the very light of the lamp, and which
    resembled the hand of Eusapia. I have, myself, obtained head prints a
    dozen times, but always rather poor, owing to the quality of the clay,
    and often broken while the experiment was going on.

The Chevalier Chiaia, of Naples, who first obtained these fantastic
pictures through the agency of Eusapia, wrote as follows, in this
connection, to Count de Rochas:

    I have imprints in boxes of clay weighing anywhere between fifty-five
    and sixty-five pounds. I mention the weight in order to let you see
    the impossibility of lifting and transporting _with one hand alone_ so
    heavy a tray, even upon the supposition that Eusapia might, unknown to
    us, free one of her hands. In almost every case, in fact, this tray,
    placed upon a chair _three feet behind the medium_, was brought
    forward and placed very gently upon the table about which we were
    seated. The transfer was made with such nicety that the persons who
    formed the chain and held firmly the hands of Eusapia did not hear the
    least noise, did not perceive the least rustling. We were forewarned
    of the arrival of the tray upon the table by seven taps, which,
    according to our conventional arrangement, John struck in the wall to
    inform us that we could turn on the light. I did so at once by turning
    the cock of the gas-fixture which was suspended above the table. (We
    had never completely extinguished it.) We then found the tray upon the
    table, and, upon the clay, the imprint which we supposed must have
    been made before its transfer, and while it was behind Eusapia, in the
    cabinet where John usually materializes and manifests himself.

The totality of these observations (which are very numerous) leads us to
the thought that, in spite of the improbability of the thing, these
imprints are produced at a distance by the medium.

However, some days after the seance at Montfort-l'Amaury I wrote as
follows:

    These different manifestations are not to me equally authentic. I am
    not sure of all of them, for the phenomena were not all produced
    under the same conditions of certainty. I should wish to class the
    facts in the following order of decreasing certainty:

    1. Levitations of the table.

    2. Movements of the round table without contact.

    3. Mallet blows.

    4. Movements of the curtain.

    5. Opaque silhouette passing before the red lamp.

    6. Sensation of a beard upon the back of the hand.

    7. Touchings.

    8. Snatching of the block of paper.

    9. Throwing of the lead-pencil.

    10. Transference of the round table to the top of the other table.

    11. Music from the little box.

    12. Transfer of the guitar to a point above the head.

    13. Imprints of a hand and of a face.

    The first four events, having taken place in full light, are
    incontestable. I should put almost in the same rank Nos. 5 and 6. No.
    7 may perhaps be due very often to fraud. The last in the list, having
    been produced toward the end of the seance, at a time when attention
    was necessarily relaxed, and being still more extraordinary than all
    the others, I confess that I cannot admit it with certainty, although
    I can not understand how it could have been due to fraud. The four
    others seem genuine; but I should like to observe them anew; a man
    could wager ninety-nine to one hundred that they are true. I was
    absolutely sure of them during the seance. But the vividness of the
    impressions grows weak, and we have a tendency to listen only to the
    voice of plain common sense,--the most reasonable and the most
    deceptive of our faculties.

The first impression we get upon the reading of these reports is that
these different manifestations are rather vulgar, altogether banal, and do
not tell us anything about the other world--or about other worlds. Surely
it does not seem probable that any _spiritual being_ would take part in
such performances. For these phenomena are of an absolutely material
class.

On the other hand, however, it is impossible not to recognize the
existence of unknown forces. The simple fact, for example, of the
levitation of a table to a height of six and one-half, eight, sixteen
inches from the floor is not banal at all. It seems to me, speaking for
myself alone, so extraordinary that my opinion is very well expressed when
I say that I do not dare to admit it without having seen it myself, with
my own eyes: I mean that which is called seeing, in full light and under
such conditions that it would be impossible to suspect. While we are very
sure that we have proved it, we are at the same time sure that in such
experiments there emanates from the human body a force that may be
compared with the magnetism of the loadstone, able to act upon wood, upon
matter (somewhat as the loadstone acts upon iron), and counterbalancing
for some moments the action of gravity. From the scientific point of view,
that is a weighty fact in itself. I am absolutely certain that the medium
did not lift that weight of fifteen pounds either by her hands or by her
legs, or by her feet, and, furthermore, no one of the company was able to
do it. The table was lifted by its upper surface. We are, therefore,
certainly in the presence of an unknown force here which emanates from the
persons present, and above all from the medium.

A rather curious observation ought to be made here. Several times during
the course of this seance, and during the levitation of the table, I said,
"There is no spirit." Every time I said this two violent blows of
protestation were struck in the table. I have already remarked that,
generally, we are supposed to admit the Spiritualistic hypothesis and to
ask a spirit to exert himself in order that we may obtain the phenomena.
We have here a psychological matter not without importance. Still, it does
not seem to me, for all that, to prove the real existence of spirits, for
it might happen that this idea was necessary to the concentration of the
forces present and had a purely subjective value. Religious zealots who
believe in the efficacy of prayer are the dupes of their own imagination;
and yet no one can doubt that certain of these petitions appear to have
been granted by a beneficent deity. The Italian or Spanish girl who goes
to beg of the Virgin Mary that she will punish her lover for an infidelity
may be sincere, and never suspects the strangeness of her request. In
dreams we all converse every night with imaginary beings. But there is
something more here: the medium really duplicates herself.

I take the point of view solely of the physicist whose business is to
observe, and I say, whatever may be the explanatory hypothesis you may
adopt, there exists an invisible force derived from the organism of the
medium, and having the power to emerge from him and to act outside of him.

That is the fact: what is the best hypothesis to explain it? 1. Is it the
medium who herself acts, in an unconscious manner, by means of an
invisible force emanating from her? 2. Is it an intelligent cause apart
from her, a soul that has already lived upon this earth, who draws from
the medium a force which it needs in order to act? 3. Is it another kind
of invisible beings? Nothing authorizes us to affirm that there may not
exist, side by side with us, living, invisible forces. There you have
three very different hypotheses, none of which seems to me, as far as my
personal experience goes, to be as yet conclusively proved.

But there certainly emanates from the medium an invisible force; and the
participants, by forming the psychic chain and by uniting their
sympathetic wills, increase this force. This force is not immaterial. It
may be a substance, an agent emitting radiations of wave-lengths which
make no impression on our retina, and which are nevertheless very
powerful. In the absence of light rays it is able to condense itself,
take shape, affect even a certain resemblance to the human body, to act as
do our organs, to violently strike a table, or touch us.

It acts as if it were an independent being. But this independence does not
really exist; for this transitory being is intimately connected with the
organism of the medium, and its apparent existence ceases when the
conditions of its production themselves cease.

While writing these monstrous scientific heresies, I feel very deeply that
it is difficult to accept them. Still, after all, who can trace the limits
of science? We have all learned, especially during the last quarter of a
century, that our knowledge is not a very colossal affair, and that, apart
from astronomy, there is as yet no exact science founded upon absolute
principles. And then, when all is said, there are the _facts_ to be
explained. Doubtless it is easier to deny them. But it is not decent or
civil. He who has merely failed to find what satisfies him has no right to
deny. The best he can do is simply to say, "I know nothing about it."

The fact is that, as yet, we have not elementary data enough to enable us
to characterize these forces; but we ought not to lay the blame upon those
who study them.

To sum up, I believe that I am able to go a little farther than M.
Schiaparelli and affirm the certain existence of unknown forces capable of
moving matter and of counterbalancing the action of gravity. There is a
complex totality, as yet difficult to disentangle, of psychic and physical
forces. But such facts, however extravagant they may appear, are worthy of
coming within the sphere of scientific observation. It is even probable
that they tend powerfully to elucidate the problem (a matter of supreme
importance to us) of the nature of the human soul.

After the end of that seance of the 27th of July, 1897, as I desired to
see again the levitation of a table in full light, the chain was formed
_standing_, the hands lightly placed upon the table. The latter began to
oscillate, then rose up to a height of nine inches from the floor,
remained there several seconds (all the participators remaining on their
feet), and fell heavily back again.[23]

[Illustration: PLATE VI

PHOTOGRAPH OF THE TABLE RESTING ON THE FLOOR.

PHOTOGRAPH OF THE SAME TABLE RAISED TO A HEIGHT OF TWENTY-FIVE
CENTIMETRES. MADE BY M. G. DE FONTENAY.]

M. G. de Fontenay succeeded in getting several photographs by the
magnesium light. I reproduce two of them here (Pl. VI.). There are five
experimenters who are, from left to right, M. Blech, Mme. Z. Blech,
Eusapia, myself, Mlle. Blech. In the first photograph the table rests upon
the floor. In the second it floats in air, coming up as high as the arms,
at a height of about ten inches on the left and eight inches on the right.
I hold my right foot resting upon Eusapia's feet and my right hand upon
her knees. With my left hand I hold her left hand. The hands of all the
others are upon the table. It is therefore altogether impossible for her
to employ any muscular action. This photographic record confirms that of
Pl. I., and it seems to me difficult not to recognize its undeniable
documentary value.[24]

After this seance my most ardent desire was to see the same experiments
reproduced at my own house. In spite of all the care I took with my
observations, several objections can be taken to the absolute certainty of
the phenomena. The most important arises from the existence of the little
dark cabinet. Personally, I was sure of the perfect probity of the
honorable Blech family, and I am unable to accept the idea of any trickery
whatever on the part of any of its members. But the opinion of readers of
the formal report may not be so well assured. It was not _impossible_
that, even unknown to the members of the family, some one, with the
connivance of the medium, glided into the room, favored by the dim light,
and produced the phenomena. An accomplice entirely clothed in black and
walking barefoot would have been able to hold the instruments up in the
air, put them in movement, make the touches, and cause the black mask to
move at the end of a rod, etc.

This objection could be verified or quashed by renewing the experiments at
my house, in a room of my own, where I should be absolutely certain that
no confederate could enter. I should myself arrange the curtain, I should
place the chairs, I should be certain that Eusapia would come alone to my
apartments, she would be asked to undress and dress in the presence of two
lady examiners, and every supposition of fraud alien to her proper
personality would thus be annihilated.

At this epoch (1898) I was preparing, for _l'Annales politiques et
litteraires_, some articles upon psychic phenomena, which, revised and
amplified, afterwards formed my work, _The Unknown_. The eminent and
sympathetic editor of the review showed himself assiduous in examining
with me the best means of realizing this scheme of personal experiences.
Upon our invitation, Eusapia came to Paris to pass the month of November,
1898, and to devote eight soirees especially to us--namely, the 10th,
12th, 14th, 16th, 19th, 21st, 25th, and 28th of November. We had invited
several friends to be present. Each one of these seances was the subject
of a formal report by several of those who were present, notably by MM.
Charles Richet, A. de Rochas, Victorien Sardou, Jules Claretie, Adolphe
Brisson, Rene Baschet, Arthur Levy, Gustave Le Bon, Jules Bois, Gaston
Mery, G. Delanne, G. de Fontenay, G. Armelin, Andre Bloch, etc.

We met in my salon in the avenue de l'Observatoire, in Paris. There were
no special arrangements, except the stretching of two curtains in one
corner, before the angle of two walls, thus forming a kind of triangular
cabinet, the walls about which are there unbroken, without door or window.
The front of the cabinet was closed by these two curtains, reaching from
the ceiling to the floor and meeting in the middle.

It is before this kind of cabinet that the reader will please imagine the
medium to be seated, with a white wooden table (kitchen table) before her.

Behind the curtain, upon the plinth of the projection of a bookcase and
upon a table, we placed a guitar, also a violin, a tambourine, an
accordion, a music-box, cushions, and several small objects, which were to
be shaken, seized, thrown about by the unknown force.

The first result of these seances in Paris, at my house, was absolutely to
establish the fact that the hypothesis of a confederate is inadmissible
and ought to be entirely eliminated. Eusapia acts alone.

The fifth seance led me, moreover, to think that the phenomena take place
(at least a certain number) when the hands of Eusapia are closely held by
two controllers, that it is not generally with her hands that she acts, in
spite of certain possible trickeries; for it would be necessary to admit
(an abominable heresy!) that a third hand could be formed in organic
connection with her body!

Before every seance Eusapia was undressed and dressed again in the
presence of two ladies charged with seeing that she did not hide any
tricking apparatus under her clothes.

It would be a little long to go thoroughly into the details of these eight
sittings, and it would be partly to go over what has already been
described and commented upon in the first chapter, as well as in the
preceding pages. But it will not be uninteresting to give here the
estimate of several of the sitters, by reproducing some of the reports.

I will begin with that of M. Arthur Levy, because he describes very fully
the installation, the impression produced upon him by a medium, and the
greater part of the facts observed.

    Report of M. Arthur Levy

    (_Seance of November 16_)

    That which I am going to relate I saw yesterday at your house. I saw
    it with distrust, closely observing all that might have resembled
    trickery; and, after I had seen it, I found it so far beyond the
    things that we are accustomed to conceive that I still ask myself if I
    really saw it. Yet I must confess that I have not been dreaming.

    When I arrived at your salon, I found the furniture and all the other
    arrangements as usual. On entering, only a single change could be
    remarked at the left, where two thick curtains of gray and green rep
    concealed a little corner. Eusapia was to perform her wonders before
    this kind of alcove. This was the mysterious corner: I examined it
    very minutely. It had in it a little round uncovered table, a
    tambourine, a violin, an accordion, castanets, and one or two
    cushions. After this precautionary visit, I was certain that in this
    place at least there was no preparation, and that no communication
    with the outside was possible.

    I hasten to say that from this moment up to the end of the experiments
    we did not leave the room for a single minute, and that, so to speak,
    we had our eyes constantly fixed upon this corner, the curtains of
    which, however, were always partly open.

    Some moments after my examination of the cabinet Eusapia arrives,--the
    famous Eusapia. As almost always happens, she looks quite different
    from what I had anticipated. Where I had expected to see--I do not
    well know why, indeed--a tall thin woman with a fixed look, piercing
    eyes, with bony hands, and abrupt movements, agitated by nerves
    incessantly trembling under perpetual tension, I find a woman in the
    forties, rather plump, with a tranquil air, soft hand, simple in her
    manners, and slightly shrinking. Altogether, she has the air of an
    excellent woman of the people. Yet two things arrest the attention
    when you look at her. First, her large eyes, filled with strange fire,
    sparkle in their orbits, or, again, seem filled with swift gleams of
    phosphorescent fire, sometimes bluish, sometimes golden. If I did not
    fear that the metaphor was too easy when it concerns a Neapolitan
    woman, I should say that her eyes appear like the glowing lava fires
    of Vesuvius, seen from a distance in a dark night.

    The other peculiarity is a mouth with strange contours. We do not know
    whether it expresses amusement, suffering, or scorn. These
    peculiarities impress themselves on the mind almost simultaneously,
    without our knowing on which one to fix the attention. Perhaps we
    should find in these features of her face an indication of forces
    which are acting in her, and of which she is not altogether the
    mistress.

    She takes a seat, enters into all the commonplaces of the
    conversation, speaking in a gentle, melodious voice, like many women
    of her country. She uses a language difficult for herself and not less
    difficult for others, for it is neither French nor Italian. She makes
    painful efforts to make herself understood, and sometimes does this by
    mimicry (or sign-language) and by willing to obtain that which she
    wants. However, a persistent irritation of the throat, like a pressure
    of blood returning at short intervals, forces her to cough, to ask for
    water. I confess that these paroxysms, in which her face became deeply
    flushed, caused me great anxiety. Were we going to have the inevitable
    indisposition of the rare tenor, on the day when he was to be heard on
    the stage? Happily, nothing of the kind took place. It was rather a
    sign of the contrary, and seemed like a forerunner of the extreme
    excitement which was going to take possession of her on that evening.
    In fact, it is very remarkable that from the moment when she put
    herself--how shall I say it?--in condition for work, the cough, the
    irritation of the throat, completely disappeared.

    When her fingers were placed on black wool,--to be frank, upon the
    trousers cloth of one of the company,--Eusapia called our attention to
    the kind of diaphanous marks made upon them (the fingers), a
    distorted, elongated second contour. She tells us that that is a sign
    that she is going to be given great power to-day.

    While we are talking some one puts a letter-weigher on the table.
    Putting her hands down on each side of the letter-weigher, and at a
    distance of four inches, she causes the needle to move to No. 35
    engraved on the dial plate of the weigher. Eusapia herself asked us to
    convince ourselves, by inspection, that she did _not_ have a hair
    leading from one hand to the other, and with which she could
    fraudulently press upon the tray of the letter-weigher. This little
    by-play took place when all the lamps of the salon were fully lighted.
    Then commenced the main series of experiments.

    We sit around a rectangular table of white wood, the common kitchen
    table. There are six of us. Close to the curtains, at one of the
    narrow ends of the table, sits Eusapia; at her left, also near the
    curtains, is M. Georges Mathieu, an agricultural engineer at the
    observatory in Juvisy; next comes my wife; M. Flammarion is at the
    other end, facing Eusapia; then Mme. Flammarion; finally myself. I am
    thus placed at the right hand of Eusapia, and also against the
    curtain. M. Mathieu and myself each hold a hand of the medium resting
    upon his knee, and, furthermore, Eusapia places one of her feet upon
    ours. Consequently, no movements of her legs or arms can escape our
    attention. Note well, therefore, that this woman has the use only of
    her head and of her bust, which latter is of course without the use of
    the arms, and is in absolute contact with our shoulders.

    We rest our hands on the table. In a few moments it begins to
    oscillate, stands on one foot, strikes the floor, rears up, rises
    wholly into the air,--sometimes twelve inches, sometimes eight inches,
    from the ground. Eusapia utters a sharp cry, resembling a cry of joy,
    of deliverance; the curtain behind her swells out, and, all inflated
    as it is, comes forward upon the table. Other raps are heard in the
    table, and simultaneously in the floor at a distance of about ten feet
    from us. All this in full light.

    Already excited, Eusapia asks in a supplicating voice and broken words
    that we lessen the lights. She cannot endure the dazzling glare in her
    eyes. She affirms that she is tortured, wants us to hurry; "for," she
    adds, "you shall see fine things." After one of us has placed the lamp
    on the floor behind the piano, in the corner opposite the place where
    we are (at a distance of about twenty-three feet), Eusapia no longer
    sees the light and is satisfied; but we can distinguish faces and
    hands. Let it not be forgotten that M. Mathieu and I each have a foot
    of the medium on ours, and that we are holding her hands and knees,
    that we are pressing against her shoulders.

    The table is always shaking and makes sudden jolts. Eusapia calls to
    us to look. Above her head appears a hand. It is a small hand, like
    that of a little girl of fifteen years, the palm forward, the fingers
    joined, the thumb projecting. The color of this hand is livid; its
    form is not rigid, nor is it fluid; one would say rather that it is
    the hand of a big doll stuffed with bran.

    When the hand moves back from the brighter light, as it
    disappears,--is it an optical illusion?--it seems to lose its shape,
    as if the fingers were being broken, beginning with the thumb.

    M. Mathieu is violently pushed by a force acting from behind the
    curtain. A strong hand presses against him, he says. His chair is also
    pushed. Something pulls his hair. While he is complaining of the
    violence used upon him, we hear the sound of the tambourine, which is
    then quickly thrown upon the table. Next the violin arrives in the
    same manner, and we hear its strings sound. I seize the tambourine and
    ask the Invisible if he wishes to take it. I feel a hand grasping the
    instrument. I am not willing to let it go. A struggle now ensues
    between myself and a force which I judge to be considerable. In the
    tussle a violent effort pushes the tambourine into my hand, and the
    cymbals penetrate the flesh. I feel a sharp pang, and a good deal of
    blood flows. I let go of the handle. I just now ascertain, by the
    light, that I have a deep gash under the right thumb nearly an inch
    long. The table continues to shake, to strike the floor with redoubled
    strokes, and the accordion is thrown upon the table. I seize it by
    its lower half and ask the Invisible if he can pull it out by the
    other end so as to make it play. The curtain comes forward, and the
    bellows of the accordion is methodically moved back and forth, its
    keys are touched, and several different notes are heard.

    Eusapia utters repeated cries, a kind of rattling in the throat. She
    writhes nervously, and, as if she were calling for help, cries, "_La
    catena! la catena!_" ("The chain! the chain!"). We thereupon form the
    chain by taking hold of hands. Then, just as if she was defying some
    monster, she turns, with inflamed looks, toward an enormous divan,
    which thereupon _marches up to us_. She looks at it with a satanic
    smile. Finally she blows upon the divan, which goes immediately back
    to its place.

    Eusapia, faint and depressed, remains relatively calm. Yet she is
    dejected; her breast heaves violently; she lays her head on my
    shoulder.

    M. Mathieu, tired of the blows which he is constantly receiving, asks
    to change places with some one. I agree to this. He changes with Mme.
    F., who then sits at the right of Eusapia, while I am at her left.
    Mme. F. and I never cease to hold the feet, hands, and knees of the
    medium. M. F. sets a water bottle and a glass in the middle of the
    table. The latter's brisk, jolting movements overturn the water
    bottle, and the water is spilled over its surface. The medium
    imperatively requires that the liquid be wiped up; the water upon the
    table blinds her, tortures, paralyzes her, she says. M. F. asks the
    Invisible if he can pour water into the glass. After some moments the
    curtain advances, the carafe is grasped, and the glass seems to be
    half full. That takes place several different times.

    Mme. F., being no longer able to endure the blows given her through
    the curtain, exchanges seats with her husband.

    I put my repeating watch upon the table. I ask the Invisible if he can
    sound the alarm. (The mechanism of the alarm is very difficult to
    understand, delicate to operate, even for me, doing it every day. It
    is formed by a little tube cut in two, one half of which glides
    smoothly over the other. In reality, there is only a projection of
    one-fiftieth of an inch of thickness of tube, upon which it is
    necessary to press with the finger-nail and give quite a push in order
    to start up the alarm.) In a moment the watch is taken by the
    "spirit." We hear the stem-winder turning. The watch comes back upon
    the table without having been sounded.

    Another request is made for the alarm to sound. The watch is again
    taken; the case is heard to open and shut. (Now I cannot open this
    case with my hands: I have to pry it open with a tool like a lever.)
    The watch comes back once more without having sounded.

    I confess that I experienced a disenchantment. I felt that I was going
    to doubt the extent of the occult power, which had, nevertheless,
    manifested itself very clearly. Why could it not sound the alarm of
    this watch? In making my request, had I overstepped the limits of its
    powers? Was I going to be the cause of all the well-proved phenomena
    of which we have had testimony losing the half of their value? I said
    aloud:

    "Am I to show how the alarm is operated?"

    "No, no!" Eusapia warmly replies, "it will do it."

    I will note here that at the moment when I proposed to point out the
    mechanism, there passed through my mind the method of pressing upon
    the little tube. Immediately the watch was brought back to the table;
    and, very distinctly, three separate times, we heard it sound a
    quarter to eleven.

    Eusapia was evidently very tired; her burning hands seemed to contract
    or shrivel; she gasped aloud with heaving breast, her foot kept
    quitting mine every moment, scraping the floor and tediously rubbing
    along it back and forth. She uttered hoarse panting cries, shrugging
    up her shoulders and sneering; the sofa came forward when she looked
    at it, then recoiled before her breath; all the instruments were
    thrown pell-mell upon the table; the tambourine rose almost to the
    height of the ceiling; the cushions took part in the sport,
    overturning everything on the table; M. M. was thrown from his chair.
    This chair--a heavy dining-room chair of black walnut, with stuffed
    seat--rose into the air, came up on the table with a great clatter,
    then was pushed off.

    Eusapia seems shrunken together and is very much affected. We pity
    her. We ask her to stop. "No, no!" she cries. She rises, we with her;
    the table leaves the floor, rises to a height of twenty-four inches,
    then comes clattering down.

    Eusapia sinks prostrated into a chair. We sit there troubled, amazed,
    in consternation, with a tense and constricted feeling in the head, as
    if the atmosphere were charged with electricity.

    With many precautions, M. F. succeeds in calming the agitation of
    Eusapia. After about a quarter of an hour she returns to herself. When
    the lamps are again lighted, she is seen to be very much changed, her
    eye dull, her face apparently diminished to half its usual size. In
    her trembling hands she feels the pricking of needles which she asks
    us to pull out. Little by little she completely recovers her senses.
    She appears to remember nothing, not to comprehend at all our
    expressions of wonder. All that is as foreign to her as if she had not
    been present at the sitting. She isn't interested in it. So far as she
    is concerned, it would seem as if we were speaking of things of which
    she had not the faintest idea.

    What have we seen? mystery of mysteries!

    We took every precaution not to be the dupes of complicity, of fraud.
    Superhuman forces acting near us, so near that we heard the very
    breathing of a living being,--if living being it were,--such are the
    things our eyes took cognizance of for two mortal hours.

    And when, on looking back, doubts begin to creep into the mind, we
    must conclude that, given the conditions in which we were, the
    chicanery necessary to produce such effects would be at least as
    phenomenal as the effects themselves.

    How shall we name the mystery?

So much for the report of M. Arthur Levy. I have no commentary to make at
present upon these reports of my fellow-experimenters. The essential
thing, it seems to me, is to leave to every one his own exposition and his
personal judgment. I shall proceed in the same way with the other reports
which are to follow. I shall reproduce the principal ones. In spite of
some inevitable repetitions, they will surely be read with extreme
interest, especially when we take into consideration the high intellectual
standing of the observers.

    Report of M. Adolphe Brisson.

    (_Seance of November 10_)

    (There were present at this seance, besides the hosts of the occasion,
    M. Prof. Richet, M. and Mme. Ad. Brisson, Mme. Fourton, M. Andre
    Bloch, M. Georges Mathieu.)

    The following are occurrences which I personally observed with the
    greatest care. I did not once cease to hold in my right hand the left
    hand of Eusapia or fail to feel that we were in contact. The contact
    was only interrupted twice,--at the moment when Dr. Richet felt a
    pricking in his arm. Eusapia's hand, making violent movements, escaped
    from my grasp; but I seized it again after two or three seconds.

    1. After this sitting had begun,--that is, at the end of about ten
    minutes,--the table was lifted up away from Eusapia, two of its legs
    leaving the floor simultaneously.

    2. Five minutes later the curtain swelled out as if it had been
    inflated by a strong breeze. My hand, never letting go of that of
    Eusapia, pressed gently against the curtain, and I experienced a
    resistance, just as if I had pressed against the sail of a ship
    bellied out by the wind.

    [Illustration]

    3. Not only was the curtain puffed out, forming a big pocket, but the
    perpendicular edge of the curtain that touched the window moved
    automatically aside and drew back as if it were pushed by an invisible
    curtain holder, making nearly this kind of a movement.

    4. The curtain, inflated anew, took the form of a nose or of an
    eagle's beak, projecting above the table about eight or ten inches.
    This shape was visible for several seconds.

    5. We heard behind the curtain the noise of a chair rolling over the
    floor; by a first push it arrived as far as I was; a second push
    turned it upside down, its feet in the air, in the position shown. It
    was a heavy stuffed chair. Succeeding pushes moved it again, lifted it
    up, and made it turn somersaults; it finally came to a standstill
    almost in the place where it had fallen over.

    [Illustration]

    6. We heard the noise of two or three objects falling to the floor (I
    mean objects behind the curtain upon the centre-table). The curtain
    parted in the middle, and in the dim light the little violin appeared.
    Sustained in the air by an invisible hand, it came gently forward
    above our table, whence it settled down upon my hand and upon that of
    my neighbor on the left.[25]

    On two separate occasions the violin rose from the table and at once
    fell back again, making a vigorous leap, like a fish flopping upon the
    sand. Then it glided down to the floor, where it remained motionless
    until the end of the sitting.

    7. A new rolling noise was heard behind the curtain. This time it was
    the centre-table. A preliminary effort, quite vigorous, enabled it to
    rise half-way to the top of our table. By a second effort it got clear
    on top and rested upon my fore-arm.

    8. Several times I distinctly felt light blows upon my right side, as
    if made with the point of a sharp instrument. But the truth compels me
    to declare that these blows were no longer given after Eusapia's feet
    were held under the table by M. Bloch. I note this correlation of
    things without drawing from it any presumption against Eusapia's
    loyalty. I have so much the less reason to suspect her in that her
    left foot did not leave my right foot during the whole sitting.


    Report of M. Victorien Sardou

    (_Seance of November 19_)

    (There were present at this seance, besides the hosts of the evening,
    M. V. Sardou, M. and Mme. Brisson, M. A. de Rochas, M. Prof. Richet,
    M. G. de Fontenay, M. Gaston Mery, Mme. Fourton, M. and Mlle. des
    Varennes).

    I shall only relate here phenomena controlled by myself personally in
    the seance of last Saturday. Consequently, I say nothing of the
    arrangement of the apartment, of the experimenters, nor of the events
    which were first produced in the dark and which all the participants
    were able to authenticate,--such as cracking sounds in the table,
    levitations, displacements of the table, raps, etc., as well as the
    blowing out of the curtain over the table, the bringing on of the
    violin, of the tambourine, and so forth.

    Eusapia having invited me to take the place at her side which had been
    vacated by M. Brisson, I sat down on her left, while you preserved
    your place on her right. I took her left hand in my right hand, while
    my left hand placed upon the table was in contact with that of my
    neighbor, the medium insisting on this several times in order that the
    chain might not be broken. Her left foot rested upon my right foot.
    All through the experiment I never let go her hand for a single
    second. She grasped my hand with a strong pressure, and it followed
    her through all her movements. In the same way her foot always kept in
    contact with mine. My foot always kept touch with hers in all her foot
    scrapings on the floor, her shiftings of place, shrinkings,
    twitchings, etc., which never had anything suspicious in them, nor
    were they of such a nature as to explain the events which took place
    at my side, behind me, around me, and upon me.

    In the first place, and in less than a minute after I had been placed
    on the left of the medium, the curtain nearest to me was puffed out
    and brushed against me, as if impelled by a gust of wind. Then three
    times I felt upon my right side a pressure which lasted but for a
    moment, yet was very marked. At that moment we were in a very dim
    light, yet enough to make the faces and the hands of all who were
    present distinctly visible. After Eusapia's violent nervous
    contractions, struggles, and energetic pushes (precisely like those
    which I had seen in similar cases elsewhere and which only astonish
    those who have slightly studied these phenomena), suddenly the curtain
    nearest to me was blown forward with an astonishing propulsive power
    between Eusapia and me, in the direction of the table, entirely
    concealing from me the face of the medium; and the violin, which, with
    the tambourine, had, before my introduction, been replaced in the dark
    chamber, was hurled to the middle of the table, as if by an invisible
    arm. To accomplish this, the arm must have lifted the curtain and
    drawn it along with it.

    After this the curtain returned to its first position, but not
    completely; for it still remained puffed out a little between Eusapia
    and me, one of its folds remaining upon the edge of the table at my
    side.

    Then you took the violin and held it out at such a distance from the
    two curtains that it was wholly visible to the company; and you
    invited the occult agent to take it.

    This was done, the mysterious agent taking it back with him into the
    dark closet, with as much good will as he had shown in bringing it on.

    The violin then fell upon the floor behind the curtains, or portieres.
    One of these which was nearest to me resumed its vertical position,
    and for a time I heard upon my right upon the floor behind the
    curtains a kind of scrimmage between the violin and the tambourine,
    which were displaced, pulled about, and lifted, clashing and
    resounding at a great rate; and yet it was impossible to attribute any
    of these manifestations to Eusapia, whose foot never moved, but
    remained firmly pressed against my own.

    A little after, I felt against my right leg, behind the curtain, the
    rubbing of a hard body which was trying to climb upon me, and I
    thought it was the violin. And so it was, in fact; and, after an
    unsuccessful effort to climb higher than my knee, this apparently
    living creature fell with a bang upon the floor.

    Almost immediately I felt a new pressure upon my right hip, and
    mentioned the circumstance. You disengaged your left hand from the
    chain, and, turning toward me, twice made in the air the gesture of
    the director of an orchestra moving his baton to and fro. And each
    time, with perfect precision, I felt upon my side the repercussion of
    a blow exactly tallying your gesture, which reached me after the delay
    of a second more or less, and which seemed to me to correspond exactly
    to the time necessary for the transference of a billiard ball or a
    tennis ball from you to me.

    Some one, Dr. Richet, I believe, having spoken at that time of strokes
    upon the shoulders of the sitters in which the action and shape of a
    human hand was very marked, I will mention as a proof of his remark
    that I received in succession three blows upon the left shoulder (that
    is to say, the one most distant from the curtain and from the medium),
    more violent than the preceding ones; and this time the heavy pressure
    of the five fingers was very evident. Then a last blow with the flat
    of the hand, applied in the small of the back, without hurting me at
    all, was strong enough to make me lean forward, in spite of myself,
    toward the table.

    Some moments after, my chair, moving under me, glided over the floor,
    and was shifted in such a way as to leave my back turned a little in
    the direction of the dark closet.

    I leave to other witnesses the task of telling the results of their
    personal observations,--how, for example, the violin, having been
    picked up by you from the floor and replaced upon the table, was held
    out by Mme. Brisson, as you had already done, and lifted up in the
    same way in the sight of all, while I held the left hand of Eusapia,
    you her right hand, and with the hand which remained free you pressed
    the wrist of her left hand.

    Nor do I say anything of a hand-pressure through the opening in the
    curtain, having seen nothing of this myself.

    But that which I did see very well indeed was the sudden appearance of
    three very vivid little lights between my neighbor and myself. They
    were promptly extinguished and seemed like a kind of will-o'-the-wisp,
    similar to electric sparks coming and going with great rapidity.

    In short, I can only repeat here what I have said during the course
    of these experiments, "If I had not been convinced forty years ago, I
    should be this evening."


    Report of M. Jules Claretie.

    (_Seance of November 25_)

    (There were present at this sitting, in addition to the hosts of the
    occasion, M. Jules Claretie and his son, M. Brisson, M. Louis Vignon,
    Mme. Fourton, Mme. Gagneur, M. G. Delanne, M. Rene Baschet, M. and
    Mme. Basilewska, M. Mairet, photographer.)

    I note only the impressions I received after the moment when Eusapia,
    who had taken my hand at the time when M. Brisson was still seated by
    her, asked me to replace him. I am certain that I did not let go of
    Eusapia's hand during all the experiments. Every moment I felt the
    pressure of her foot upon mine, the heel being especially perceptible.
    I do not believe that I relaxed my fingers for a moment, nor released
    the hand that I held. I was struck with the throbbing of the arteries
    at the end of Eusapia's fingers: the blood bounded feverishly through
    them.

    I sat next the curtain. It goes without saying that it was drawn from
    right to left or from left to right just as it happened. That which I
    can't understand is that it could swell out until it floated over the
    table like a sail inflated by the wind.

    I felt at first a little light blow on my right side. Then, _through
    the curtain_, two fingers seized me and pinched my cheek. The pressure
    of the two fingers was evident. A blow more violent than the first hit
    me on the right shoulder, as if it came from a hard, square body. My
    chair was twice moved and turned, first backward, then forward.

    Those two fingers which pinched my cheek I had already felt--before I
    took my place at Eusapia's side--when I was holding over against the
    curtain the little white book which M. Flammarion had given me. This
    book was seized by _two naked fingers_ (I say naked, because the folds
    of the curtain did not cover them) and then disappeared. I did not see
    these fingers: I touched them, or they touched me, if you will. My
    son held out and handed over also a leather cigar-holder, which was
    grabbed in the same way.

    One of the persons present saw a rather heavy little music-box
    disappear in the same way.

    With hardly a moment's delay the box was removed from our side with
    some violence; and I can speak with the more feeling of the force of
    the projection and of the weight of the object, because it struck me
    under the eye, and this morning I still have upon my face the only too
    visible mark of it, and feel the pain of it. I don't understand how a
    woman seated by my side could have the strength to throw with such
    force a box which, so to speak, should have come from quite a
    distance.

    I observe, however, that all the phenomena are produced on the same
    side of the curtain; namely, behind it, or through it, if you will. I
    saw leafy branches fall upon the table, but they came from the side of
    the said curtain. Some persons assert that they saw a green twig come
    in through the open window which gives upon Cassini Street. But I did
    not see that.

    There was a little round table behind the curtain, very near me.
    Eusapia takes my hand and places it, held in hers, upon the round
    table. I feel this table shaking, moving. At a given moment I believe
    that I perceive two hands near by and upon mine. I am not deceived;
    but this second hand is that of M. Flammarion, who, on his side, is
    holding the hand of the medium. The round table bestirs itself. It
    leaves the floor, it rises. I have the feeling of this at once. Then,
    the curtain having lifted and, as it were, spread itself over the
    table, I can distinctly see what passes behind it. The round table
    moves; it rises; it falls.

    Suddenly tipping partly over, it rises and comes toward me, upon me.
    It is no longer vertical, but is caught between the table and me in a
    horizontal position. It comes with sufficient force to make me recoil,
    draw in my shoulders, and try to push back my chair to let this moving
    piece of furniture pass. It seems, like a living thing, to struggle
    between the table and me. Or, again, it seems like an animated being
    struggling against an obstacle, desiring to pass or move on and not
    being able to do so, being stopped by the table or by myself. At a
    given moment the round table is upon my knees, and it moves, it
    struggles (I repeat the word), without my being able to explain to
    myself what force is moving it.

    This force is a formidable one. The little table literally pushes me
    back, and in vain I throw myself backward to let it pass.

    Some of those present, M. Baschet among others, have said to me that
    at this moment it was upon two fingers. Two fingers of Eusapia push up
    the round table![26]

    But I, who had not lost my hold on her left hand nor her foot,--I, who
    had by me the little round table (quite visible in the semi-obscurity
    to which we had accustomed ourselves), saw nothing, nor did I perceive
    any effort on the part of Eusapia.

    I should like to have seen _luminous phenomena_ produced, visions of
    brilliant lights, of sudden gleams of fire. M. Flammarion hoped that
    we were going to see some of these. He asked for them. But Eusapia was
    evidently fatigued by this long and very interesting seance. She asked
    for "_un poco di luce_" ("a little light"). The lamps were relighted.
    Everything was finished.

    This morning I recall with a kind of anxious curiosity the least
    details of this very fascinating soiree. When we had returned to the
    observatory, on leaving our amiable hosts, I asked myself if I had
    been in a dream. But I said to myself, "We were present at the skilful
    performances of a woman prestidigitator; we witnessed only theatrical
    tricks." My son recalled to me the prodigies of skill of the brothers
    Isola. This morning, strange to say, reflection makes me at once more
    perplexed and less incredulous. We perhaps witnessed (we undoubtedly
    did witness) the manifestation of an unknown force which will
    hereafter be studied and perhaps one day utilized. I should no longer
    dare to deny the genuineness of Spiritualism. It isn't a question of
    animal magnetism: it is something else, I know not what; a _quid
    divinum_ (a divine something), although science will some day analyze
    it and catalogue it. That which perhaps astonished me the most was
    the curtain swelling out like a sail! Where did the puff of wind come
    from? A regular breeze would have been needed to put such life into it
    as that. However, I do not discuss: I give in my evidence. I have seen
    these things, observed them carefully. I shall think of them for a
    long time. I do not stop here. I shall seek an explanation. Possibly I
    shall find one. But this much is certain, that we ought to be modest
    in the presence of all that appears to us to be for the moment
    inexplicable, and that, before affirming or denying, we ought to wait,
    to reserve our judgment.

    In the mean time, while feeling of my right maxillary tooth, which is
    a little sore, I think of that line of Regnard and allow myself to
    mangle it a little while recalling that hard music-box,--

        "_Je vois que c'est un corps et non pas un esprit._"
        (I see that it is a body and not a spirit.)


    Report of Dr. Gustave Le Bon

    (_Seance of November 28_)

    (There were present at this seance, besides the hosts, M. and Mme.
    Brisson, MM. Gustave Le Bon, Baschet, de Sergines, Louis Vignon,
    Laurent, Ed. de Rothschild, Delanne, Bloch, Mathieu, Ephrussi, Mme. la
    Comtesse de Chevigne, Mmes. Gagneur, Syamour, Fourton, Basilewska,
    Bisschofsheim.)

    Eusapia is undoubtedly a marvellous subject. It struck me as something
    wonderful that, while I was holding her hand, she was playing on an
    imaginary tambourine to which the sounds of the tambourine that was
    behind the curtain accurately corresponded.

    I do not see how any trick is possible in such a case, any more than
    in the case of the table.

    My cigarette-holder was grasped by a very strong hand, which wrenched
    the object from me with a good deal of energy. I was on my guard and
    asked to see the experiment again. The phenomenon was so singular and
    so beyond all that we can comprehend that we must first try natural
    explanations.

    1. It is impossible that it could have been Eusapia. I was holding one
    of her hands and _was looking at the other arm_, and I placed my
    cigarette-holder in such a position that, _even with her two arms
    free_, she would not have been able to accomplish such a marvellous
    thing.

    2. It is not probable that it could have been an accomplice; but is it
    not possible that the unconscious mind of Eusapia suggested to the
    unconscious mind of a person near the curtain to pass a hand behind it
    and operate there? Everybody would be acting in good faith and would
    have been deceived by the unconscious element. This important point
    ought to be verified, for no experiment would be so valuable if it
    were once _demonstrated_.

    Could not Eusapia's departure be put off? We shall not have a similar
    opportunity, and we surely ought to clear up that phenomenon of the
    hand.

    It is very evident that the table was lifted; but that is a material
    phenomenon which one can readily grant. The hand which came to seize
    my cigarette-holder performed an act of the will implying an
    intelligence, but the other is nothing of the kind. Eusapia might lift
    a table to the height of three feet without my scientific conception
    of the world being changed by it; but to bring in the intervention of
    a spirit, that would be to prove the existence of spirits, and you see
    the consequences.

    As for the hand which seized the cigarette-case, it is absolutely
    certain that it was not that of Eusapia (you know that I am very
    sceptical and that I was looking about me); but close to the curtain,
    in the salon, there were a good many people, and several times you
    heard me ask people to stand aside from the curtain. If we two had
    been able to study Eusapia _absolutely alone_, in a room to which we
    had the key, the problem would soon be solved.

I have not been able to make this verification, the sitting at which Dr.
Le Bon was present having been the last which Eusapia had consented to
give at my house. But his objection is of no value. I am absolutely
certain that nobody glided behind the curtain, neither in this particular
case nor in any other. My wife, also, particularly occupied herself in
observing what took place in that part of the room and never was able to
discover anything suspicious. There is only one hypothesis; that is, that
Eusapia herself handled the objects. Since Dr. Le Bon declares that the
thing was impossible, he himself personally inspecting it, we are
compelled to admit the existence of an unknown psychic force.[27]

    Report of M. Armelin

    (_Seance of November 21_)

    (For this sitting I had asked three members of the Astronomical
    Society of France to exercise the severest control possible; namely,
    M. Antoniadi, my assistant astronomer at the observatory of Juvisy, M.
    Mathieu, agricultural engineer at the same observatory, and M.
    Armelin, secretary of the Astronomical Society. The last-named
    gentleman sent me the following report. There were also present M. and
    Mme. Brisson, M. Baschet, M. Jules Bois, Mme. Fourton, Mme. La
    Comtesse de Labadye.)

    At quarter of ten Eusapia takes her seat, her back to the place where
    the two curtains meet, her hands resting upon the table. At the
    invitation of M. Flammarion, M. Mathieu takes his seat at her right,
    charged with the duty of keeping constant watch upon her left hand,
    and M. Antoniadi is enjoined to do the same for her right hand. They
    also make themselves sure of her feet. At the right of M. Mathieu
    sits Mme. la Comtesse de Labadye; on the left of M. Antoniadi, Mme.
    Fourton. Facing Eusapia, between Mmes. de Labadye and Fourton, MM.
    Flammarion, Brisson, Baschet, and Jules Bois.

    The gas chandelier is lighted and the full light turned on. This
    chandelier is almost over the table. A little lamp with a shade is
    placed on the floor behind an easy-chair, near the opposite side of
    the room, in the direction of its greatest length, and to the left of
    the fireplace.

    At five minutes of ten the table is lifted from the side opposite to
    the medium and falls back with a bang.

    At ten o'clock it rises from the side of the medium, who withdraws her
    hands, the other persons holding their hands lifted up. The same
    effect is produced three times. The second time, while the table is in
    the air, M. Antoniadi declares that he is leaning on it with all his
    weight and is unable to lower it. The third time, M. Mathieu leans on
    it in the same way and experiences the same resistance. During this
    time, Eusapia holds her closed fist about four inches above the table,
    looking as if she were strongly grasping something. The action lasts
    several seconds. There is no doubt whatever about this levitation.
    When the table falls back, Eusapia experiences something like a
    relaxation after a great effort.

    At 10.03 the table is lifted clean off its four feet at once, at first
    on the side opposite to the medium, rising about eight inches; then it
    falls abruptly back. _While it is in the air, Eusapia calls her two
    neighbors to witness that they are closely holding her hands and her
    feet, and that she is not in contact with the table._

    Then light raps are heard in the table. Eusapia makes M. Antoniadi
    lift his hand about eight inches above the table and taps three times
    upon his hand with her fingers. The three taps are heard
    simultaneously in the table.

    To prove that she is not using either her hands or her feet, she sits
    down sidewise upon her chair on the left, stretches out her legs, and
    puts her feet on the edge of the chair of M. Antoniadi: she is in full
    view and her hands are held. At once the curtain is shaken in the
    direction of M. A.

    From 10.10 to 10.15, several times in succession, five raps are heard
    in the table. Each time the gas is turned down a little, and each time
    the table moves without contact.

    At 10.20 it balances itself, suspended in the air, and resting upon
    the two legs of the longer side. Then _it rises off of its four feet
    to a height of eight inches_.

    10.25. The curtain moves, and M. Flammarion says that there is some
    one behind it, that somebody is pressing his hand. He holds his hand
    out toward the curtain, at a distance of about four inches. The
    curtain is pushed out into something like a pocket made by a hand
    which is drawing near. The medium with nervous laugh cries, "Take it,
    take it." M. A. feels through the curtain the touch of a soft body,
    like a cushion. But the hand of M. F. is not taken. Objects are heard
    to move, including the bells of a tambourine.

    All of a sudden the medium, leaving M. Mathieu, stretches her hand
    above the table toward M. Jules Bois, who takes it. At this moment,
    behind the curtain, an object falls to the floor with a great noise.

    10.35. Eusapia, again freeing her right hand, lifts it up above her
    left shoulder, the fingers forward, at a distance of several inches
    from the curtain, and beats four or five strokes in the air which are
    heard to sound in the tambourine. Several persons think they see a
    will-o'-the-wisp through the gap between the curtains.

    Up to that point the gas has been gradually lowered. After the lapse
    of a full moment I find that I can no longer read, but I can
    distinguish very clearly the horizontal lines of my writing. I can see
    the hour perfectly by my watch, as well as the faces of those present,
    (that of Eusapia especially) turned toward the light. The gas is now
    completely extinguished.

    At 10.40, the gas being out, I can still read my watch, but with
    difficulty; I still see the lines of my writing, though without being
    able to read.

    Eusapia wants somebody to hold her head, which is done. Then she asks
    somebody to hold her feet. M. Baschet gets down on his knees under the
    table and holds them.

    M. Antoniadi cries, "I am touched!" and says that he has felt a hand.
    I have very distinctly seen the curtain puffing out. Mme. Flammarion,
    whom I see silhouetted on the bright glass of the window, her head
    leaning forward, goes behind the curtain in order to assure herself
    that the medium is not doing anything suspicious in the way of
    motions.

    One of the persons present having changed places, Eusapia utters
    complaints: "_La catena! la catena!_" ("The chain! the chain!") The
    chain is re-established.

    At 10.45 the curtain is inflated again. A bump is heard. The round
    table touches the elbow of M. Antoniadi. Mme. Flammarion, who has kept
    looking behind the curtain, says that she sees the round table turned
    over. Its feet are in the air, and it is moving to and fro. She thinks
    she sees glimmers of light near the floor.

    M. Mathieu feels a hand and an arm pushing the curtain against him. M.
    Antoniadi says that he is touched by a cushion; his chair is pulled
    and turns under him as if on a pivot. He is touched again on the elbow
    by some object.

    It is ascertained that M. Jules Bois is holding Eusapia's right hand
    above the table; M. Antoniadi assures us that he is holding her left
    hand, and M. Mathieu her feet.

    The curtain is again shaken twice; M. Antoniadi is hit in the back
    very hard, he says, and a hand pulls his hair. The only light
    remaining is the little lamp with a shade, behind an easy-chair at the
    farther end of the salon. I continue to write, but my strokes take all
    kinds of shapes.

    Suddenly, M. Antoniadi exclaims that he is enveloped by the curtain,
    which rests upon his shoulders. Eusapia cries, "What is this that is
    passing over me?" The round table comes forth beneath the curtain.
    Mme. Flammarion, who is standing opposite the window, and has kept
    looking behind the curtain, says that she sees some very white object.
    At the same moment M. Flammarion, Mme. Fourton, and M. Jules Bois
    exclaim that they have just seen a white hand between the curtains,
    above Eusapia's head; and, at the same moment, M. Mathieu says that
    his hair is being pulled. The hand we saw seemed small, like that of a
    woman or of a child.

    "If there is a hand there," says M. Flammarion, "could it perhaps
    grasp an object?" M. Jules Bois holds a book out toward the middle of
    the right-hand curtain. The book is taken and held two seconds. Mme.
    Flammarion, whom I see always silhouetted upon the bright glass of the
    window, and who is looking behind the curtain, _cries that she has
    seen the book pass through_.

    M. F. proposes to light up and verify. But everybody agrees in
    thinking that the curtain may have already changed its position. A
    moment afterwards the curtain is again puffed out, and M. Antoniadi
    says that he is hit four or five times on the shoulder. Eusapia has
    asked him more than ten times whether he is quite "_seguro_" (sure)
    that he has hold of her hand and her foot.

    "Yes, yes," he replies, "_seguro, segurissimo_" ("sure, quite sure").

    Mme. Fourton says that for the second time she has seen a hand
    stretched out and that this time it touched the shoulder of M.
    Antoniadi. M. Jules Bois says that for the second time he has seen a
    hand stretched out at the end of a small arm, the fingers moving, the
    palm forward. (It is impossible to decide whether these two visions
    were simultaneous or not.)

    We are getting accustomed to the almost complete darkness; I can still
    read "11.15" by my watch. M. Antoniadi says his ear is pinched very
    hard. M. Mathieu says he is touched. M. Antoniadi feels his chair
    pulled: it falls to the floor. He lifts it again and seats himself on
    it, and is again hit very hard on the shoulder.

    About 11.20, at the request of Eusapia, M. Flammarion replaces M.
    Mathieu. He holds her two feet and one hand; M. Antoniadi holds the
    other hand. The lamp is lowered still more. The darkness is almost
    complete. M. Flammarion, having remarked that an unknown physical
    force is evidently present, but perhaps not an individual personality,
    feels his hand seized all of a sudden by some one (or some thing), and
    is interrupted. Then, a little after, he complains that his beard is
    being pulled (on the side opposite the medium, where I am. I did not
    perceive anything).

    At 11.30 the lamp is turned up. It is comparatively bright in the
    room. The curtain, after all these movements, is seen to be more and
    more pushed aside, enveloping the head of Eusapia. Suddenly, above her
    head, we all see the tambourine slowly appear and fall upon the table
    with a noise like that of sheep-bells. It seems to me brighter than
    the feeble glimmer of the concealed lamp would justify and as if
    accompanied by white phosphorescent gleams; but they are perhaps
    flashes of light from its gilded ornaments, which, however, ought to
    appear yellower.

    When the lamp is turned down, the noise of moving furniture is heard;
    the round table is fetched clear up onto the top of the large table.
    It is removed, and the tambourine executes a dance all alone with a
    peculiar sound like the ringing of bells. Mme. Fourton says that she
    has had her hand pressed and her fore-arm pinched.

    At 11.45 the window curtain is closed in its turn; and, after a
    moment, we all see in the direction in which the cleft in the corner
    curtain ought to be, above Eusapia's head, a large white star of the
    color of Vega, though larger and of a softer light, and which rests
    motionless for some seconds, then is extinguished. Shortly after, a
    zigzag glimmer of light, of the same white color, runs over the
    right-hand curtain, tracing two or three upright lines of several
    inches in length, like an N very much elongated.

    In spite of the fact that night has fallen, there is still sufficient
    light entering by the two uncurtained windows, and proceeding from the
    vague glimmer of the lamp behind the easy-chair, to enable each one
    of us to distinguish his neighbors. Our silhouettes are outlined in
    the large mirror near us and above the sofa. The white collars of the
    men are clearly seen, their faces a little less clearly. Yet on my
    left I see very plainly M. Baschet, on my right Mme. Brisson, standing
    and holding her hand up to her face to shield the eyes. I also
    distinguish Mme. Flammarion, who has come and seated herself near her.

    M. Flammarion feels an object gliding over his hair. He begs Mme. de
    Labadye to take hold of it; and a music-box falls into his hands,
    which, before the seance, was placed upon the ogee, in the corner
    concealed by the curtain. M. Brisson has taken the place at the table
    formerly occupied by M. Flammarion, facing Eusapia. A cushion hits him
    full in the face. As I am approaching the mirror, I see the reflection
    of this passing cushion by the comparatively bright light at the far
    end of the room.

    M. Baschet seizes the object and rests his elbow upon it. It is
    snatched from him, flies over our heads, hits the mirror, falls upon
    the sofa, and rolls upon my foot. All this without my being able to
    perceive any movement on the part of the medium.

    Midnight draws near. The seance is adjourned.

    MM. Antoniadi and Mathieu then declare that the control with which
    they were charged has not been successful, and that they are not sure
    that they have always had hold of the medium's hands.


    Report of M. Antoniadi

    (_The Same Seance_)

    I shall give you an exact account of the role I played, that I may
    gratify your desire to know the truth.

    I restricted myself to ascertaining whether there was _a single
    phenomenon_ which could not be explained in the most simple manner,
    and I arrived at the conclusion that there was not. I assure you, on
    my word of honor, that my watchful, silent attitude _convinced me,
    beyond all manner of doubt, that everything is fraudulent, from the
    beginning to the end_; that there is no doubt that Eusapia shifts her
    hands or her feet, and that the hand or the foot that one is thought
    to control is never held tight or very strongly pressed at the moment
    of the production of the phenomena. My certain conclusion is that
    _nothing_ is produced without the substitution of hands. I ought to
    add that, at first, I was very much astonished when I was hit hard in
    the back, from behind the curtain, while I was very clearly holding
    _two hands_ with my right hand. Happily, however, at this moment, Mme.
    Flammarion having given us a little light, I saw that I held the
    _right_ hand of Eusapia and--yours!

    The substitution is made by Eusapia with extraordinary dexterity. In
    order to ascertain it, I was obliged to concentrate my mind upon her
    very slightest movements with the severest attention. But it is the
    first step that costs; and, once familiarized with her artifices, I
    predicted with decision _all_ the phenomena by the sensation of touch
    alone.

    Being a good observer, I am absolutely certain that I was not
    deceived. I was neither hypnotized, nor was I at all frightened during
    the "bringing in" of objects. And, as I am not a lunatic, I believe
    that a certain weight should be given to my affirmations.

    It is true that, during the seance, I was not sincere, disguising the
    truth of the efficacy of my control. I did that with the sole purpose
    of making Eusapia think that I was a convert to Spiritualism. I did
    this to _avoid scandal_. But, once the sitting was over, the Truth
    choked me, and I was most eager to communicate it to my great
    benefactor and official superior.

    It is not prudent to be too affirmative. It is for that reason that I
    have always been reserved in my interpretation of natural phenomena.
    Consequently, I am unable to be so terribly affirmative as to take
    oath to the absolute charlatanism of the manifestations of Eusapia,
    before, as Shakespeare says, I have "rendered assurance doubly sure."

    I have no personal ambition in the spiritistic line, and all the
    careful observations that I made during this seance of November 21 are
    only one stone the more contributed to the edifice of Truth.

    _It is not on account of prejudice_ that I do not believe in the
    reality of the manifestations, and I can assure you, if I were able to
    see _the least_ phenomenon that was really extraordinary or
    inexplicable, I should be the first to confess my error.

    The reading of several books has led me to admit the possible reality
    of these manifestations, but direct experience has convinced me of the
    contrary.

    My frankness in this report unhappily borders upon indiscretion. But
    frankness is here synonymous with devotion, for it would be to betray
    you if I were false for an instant to the sacred cause of Truth.


    Report of M. Mathieu.

    (_Seance of November 25_)

    The seance opens at 9.30. M. Brisson, controller on the left, puts his
    feet on Eusapia's feet; M. Flammarion, controller on the right, holds
    her knees. In a moment the table leans to the right, its two left feet
    are lifted and then it falls back; then follows the lifting of the two
    right feet, and finally the lifting of the whole table off of its four
    feet to a height of about seven inches above the floor (contact of
    feet certain and knees motionless). I take a photograph.

    At 9.37 a slight lifting on the left; then a lifting on the right, and
    a total levitation (photograph).

    During the levitations of the table the salon is lighted by a strong
    Auer burner. It is now extinguished and is replaced by a little lamp
    which is placed behind a fire-screen at the farther end of the room.
    Absolute control of the hands and of the feet made by MM. Brisson and
    Flammarion.

    M. Brisson is slightly touched on the right hip, and at this moment
    the two hands of Eusapia are plainly seen.

    At 9.48 the curtain shakes and then puffs out three times in
    succession. M. Brisson is again touched on the right hip; the curtain
    is drawn back as if by a curtain-band. M. Flammarion, who holds
    Eusapia's hand, makes three gestures and to each of his gestures
    corresponds a new divergence of the portiere. Eusapia recommends that
    we "give attention to the temperature of the medium; it will be found
    to be changed after each phenomenon."

    At 9.57 the light is diminished and is henceforth very feeble. The
    curtain bellies out, and at the same moment M. Brisson is touched;
    then the curtain is flung forcefully over the table. At the request of
    Eusapia, M. Delanne lightly touches her head behind, and the curtain
    slightly trembles.

    Eusapia asks that a window be partly opened, the one in the middle of
    the salon, saying that we shall see something new. M. Flammarion holds
    with his left hand the knees of the medium, and with his right hand
    holds the wrist, the thumb, and the palm of her right hand before him
    at the height of the eyes. M. Brisson holds the left hand. Eusapia
    seems to call something from the direction of the window, making
    gestures, and saying, "I will catch it." Then a little branch of
    privet comes and touches M. Flammarion's hand, apparently arriving
    from somewhere near the window. M. F. takes this branch. A moment
    later two spindle-tree branches come from behind the curtain at the
    height of M. Brisson's head and past the edge of the curtain, which is
    pulled up and back. The branches fall on the table.

    M. Brisson, all this time at Eusapia's left, is next touched on the
    hip, _at a moment when the hand of the medium is at the height of M.
    Flammarion's beard_. Then the chair of M. Brisson is pulled and pushed
    about. We hear distinctly, behind the curtain, sounds from the shaking
    of the round table, upon which is the tambourine. Certain vibrations
    of the tambourine are produced, corresponding to the movements of the
    round table. At this moment M. Brisson mentions the fact that he has
    been out of touch with the foot of the medium for about half a second,
    but he is then holding her two thumbs about ten inches apart, and M.
    Flammarion has her right hand close to his breast. The right hand of
    M. Brisson, holding the left of Eusapia, passes behind the curtain,
    and M. Brisson says that he has the impression of something like a
    dress-skirt puffed out against his ankle.

    Thereupon ensues new jolting and bumping of the round table and the
    tambourine, with displacement of the round table. (Undoubted control
    by MM. Flammarion and Brisson.)

    10.30. Clattering noises of the round table in the cabinet are heard.
    M. Flammarion makes gestures with his hand, and synchronistic
    movements of the table and of the tambourine take place in the dark
    cabinet.

    10.35. Eusapia asks for a few minutes' rest. The sitting is resumed at
    10.43. The violin and the bell are hurled with force through the cleft
    in the curtain (M. Brisson gives assurance that he holds Eusapia's
    left hand by the thumb, upon her knees, and M. Flammarion the entire
    right hand). At this moment a photograph is taken by flash-light.
    Cries and groans from Eusapia, blinded by the light.

    The sitting begins again some minutes afterward, and M. Jules
    Claretie, sitting at the left of M. Brisson, has his fingers twice
    touched by a hand. M. Baschet, who is standing away from the table,
    holds out a violin to the curtain: the violin is seized and thrown
    into the cabinet. He holds a book out to the curtain: this book is
    seized, but falls to the floor, _before the curtain_.

    M. Claretie presents a cigarette-holder and feels a hand which tries
    to seize it, but he resists and will not let it go. M. Flammarion asks
    him to let go of the object: the hand bears off the prize. A moment
    after, this object is thrown from the cleft between the two curtains
    against Mme. de Basilewska at the other end of the table. It had been
    both presented and removed at the middle of the curtain.

    At eleven o'clock Eusapia begs for a little more light. M. Claretie
    has become controller of the left in place of M. Brisson. He is
    touched on the left side. Then the round table is overturned while
    advancing toward the main table. M. Claretie perceives that his chair
    is moving backwards, as if pulled back; then he is hit on the shoulder
    and experiences a strong pressure under the arm-pit. The curtain
    suddenly approaches M. Claretie, brushes against him, and envelops
    both himself and the medium. M. Claretie is then pinched in the cheek.
    M. Flammarion presents to the curtain the hand of Mme. Fourton, and
    the two hands are pinched through the curtain.

    The music-box, which is in the dark cabinet, falls on the table; Mmes.
    Gagneur and Flammarion at the same moment make mention of a hand. M.
    Baschet presents the music-box to the curtain; a hand seizes it
    through the curtain, he resists, the hand pushes him away; he presents
    it again, the hand seizes it and throws it back, and the box thus
    thrown wounds M. Claretie, who is struck beneath the left eye. The
    tambourine is thrown forward upon the table after having remained
    suspended a moment above the head of the medium.

    At 11.15 a complete levitation of the table for seven or eight
    seconds. Absolute control by MM. Flammarion and Claretie. M.
    Flammarion has his knee pinched by a hand. Next the round table is
    transferred to the knees of M. Claretie and is forced upon him in
    spite of all his resistance. Levitations of the table take place in
    full light. Verification of the feet. The feet of one of the
    controllers are beneath, those of the other above, and those of the
    medium between the two.


    Report of M. Pallotti

    (_Seance of November 14_)

    (There are present at this seance, besides the hosts of the evening:
    M. and Mme. Brisson, M. and Mme. Pallotti, M. le Bocain, M. Boutigny,
    Mme. Fourton.)

    At the commencement of the sitting several levitations of the table
    took place, and, when I asked the spirit who was present if he could
    let me see my daughter Rosalie, I obtained an affirmative reply. I
    then made an agreement with the said spirit that a series of eight
    regular raps would indicate to me the moment when my dear daughter
    would be present. After some minutes of waiting, the number of raps
    agreed on was heard in the table. These raps were vigorous and made at
    fixed intervals.

    I found, at this time, that I was placed opposite to the medium,--that
    is to say, facing her,--at the other end of the table. When I asked
    the spirit to embrace me and caress me, I immediately felt an icy
    breath before my face, but yet without experiencing the least
    sensation of contact.

    When the medium announced the materialization of the spirit in these
    words, "_E venuta, e venuta_" ("She is here, she is here"), I
    distinguished over the middle of the table a spectral form, dim and
    confused, but which, little by little, grew brighter, and took the
    shape of the head of a young girl of the same stature as Rosalie.

    When objects, such as the music-box, violin, or the like, were
    unexpectedly brought before us, I saw very plainly the shape of a
    little hand emerging from the curtain that hung close by me, and which
    placed these different objects upon the table.

    I ought to declare that, during these inexplicable phenomena, the
    chain was not broken for a single moment: it would consequently have
    been materially impossible for one of us to have made use of his
    hands.

    I will now describe the last phenomena in which I was for a little
    while both actor and spectator. These events closed the seance.

    One of the company, M. Boutigny, who was affianced to my daughter,
    having left the table to give his place to one of the spectators, I
    saw him approach the curtain of which I have spoken, which at once
    gaped open by his side. I ascertained this fact very precisely.

    M. Boutigny then announced to us aloud that he was being very
    affectionately caressed. The medium, who was at this moment in an
    extraordinary state of agitation, kept saying, "_Amore mio, amore
    mio!_" ("My love, my love!"), and, addressing herself to me, called to
    me several times in the following words, "_Adesso vieni tu! vieni
    tu!_" ("Come at once, come!")

    I hastened to take the place which M. Boutigny occupied near the
    curtain, and I was scarcely there when I felt myself kissed several
    times. I was able for an instant to touch the head which was kissing
    me, which, however, drew back from the contact of my hands.

    I ought to say that, while these events were taking place, my eyes
    were carefully observing the medium as well as the persons who were by
    my side. I can therefore, boldly certify that I was not the victim of
    any illusion or subterfuge, and that the head which I touched was the
    head of a real and unknown person. I felt myself afterwards gently
    stroked several times, upon the face and head, the neck and the
    breast, by a hand which came out from behind the curtain. At last I
    saw the portiere move aside and a little hand, very moist, very soft,
    stretched out and placed on my right hand. Quick as thought, I reached
    my left hand to this place to seize it; but, after having held it
    closely pressed in mine for several seconds, it seemed to melt away
    between my fingers.

    Before closing, let me say, by way of additional authentication, that
    M. Flammarion had the extreme kindness to have this seance given for
    my family and myself, and it therefore took on a very markedly private
    character.

    The seance having lasted from 9.20 to 11.45 P.M., we several times
    asked the medium if she felt fatigued. Eusapia said no. It was only
    when the last experiment took place, when we (myself and my family)
    had been caressed and embraced, that the medium, feeling tired,
    decided to end the sitting.

    My wife is convinced, as I am, that she embraced her daughter,
    recognizing her hair and the general appearance of her person.


    Report of M. Le Bocain

    (_The Same Seance_)

    The following are some extraordinary phenomena which I observed during
    the course of this seance and of which I believe I can give a report
    as exact as it is impartial, having personally taken the most minute
    precautions to assure myself of the perfect fairness of the conditions
    under which these different wonders were produced.

    I only speak, be it understood, of circumstances or actions with which
    I myself was associated both as actor and as spectator.

    1. At the opening of the sitting and _during the time_ that the table
    was engaged in all sorts of noisy pranks, I clearly felt the pressure
    of a hand clasping me in a friendly way upon the right shoulder. In
    order to make the matters clear, I ought to depose that--

    a) I sat at the left of the medium and held her hand; that,
    furthermore, during the whole sitting her foot was placed on mine.

    b) That, with Eusapia's hand always tightly pressed in mine, I proved,
    by _suddenly_ placing it upon her knees, _at the very moment that the
    table was rising from beside us_, that her lower limbs were in a
    normal position and _absolutely motionless_.

    c) For these different reasons, it seems to me, in fact, _impossible_
    that Eusapia could have made any use whatever of these two limbs
    (which happened to be placed by me) to execute a movement, even
    unconscious, that could give rise to the least suspicion.

    2. At a certain point in the proceedings I felt on my right cheek the
    sensation of a fondling caress. I felt very distinctly that it was a
    real hand which was touching my skin, and nothing else. The hand in
    question seemed to me of small size, and the skin was soft and moist.

    3. Towards the end of the seance I felt upon my back a gust of cold
    air, and at the same time _I heard_ the curtain behind me slowly open.

    Then, when I turned around, very much puzzled, I perceived standing at
    the lower end of this kind of alcove a form,--indistinct, it is true,
    but not so much so that I could not recognize the silhouette of a
    young girl whose figure was slightly beneath the average. I ought to
    say here that my sister Rosalie was also of short stature. The head of
    this apparition was not very distinct. It seemed surrounded by a short
    of shaded aureole. The whole form of the statue, if I may so express
    myself, stood out very little from the dim obscurity from which it had
    emerged; that is to say, it was not very luminous.

    4. I addressed myself to the spirit in Arabic, in very nearly the
    following terms:

    "If it is really thou, Rosalie, who art in the midst of us, pull the
    hair on the back of my head three times in succession."

    About ten minutes later, and when I had almost completely forgotten
    my request, I felt my hair pulled three separate times, just as I had
    desired. I certify this fact, which, besides, formed for me a most
    convincing truth of the presence of a familiar spirit close about us.

    LE BOCAIN, _Illustrator_,
      _Rire, Pele-Mele, Chronique Amusante, etc._

I have restricted myself to presenting here these different reports,[28]
in spite of certain contradictions, and even because of them. The reports
mutually supplement each other and form a complete whole, through the
entire independence of each observer.

You see how complex the subject is, and how difficult it is to form a
radical conviction, an absolute scientific judgment. Some phenomena are
incontestably true: there are others which are doubtful and which we may
attribute to fraud, conscious or unconscious, and sometimes also to
illusions of the observers. The levitation of the table, for example, its
complete detachment from the floor under the action of an unknown force
acting in opposition to the law of gravity, is a fact which cannot
reasonably be contested.

I may remark, in this connection, that the table almost always rises
hesitatingly, after balancings and oscillations, while, on the contrary,
when it falls back it goes straight down at one swoop, alighting squarely
on its four feet.[29]

On the other hand, since the medium constantly seeks to release one hand
(generally her left hand) from the control designed to hinder her from
doing so, a certain number of the touches felt and of the displacements of
objects may be due to a substitution of hands. This behavior of hers will
be the subject of a special examination in the following chapter.

But it would be impossible by the whole force of the hand to produce the
violent movement of the curtain, which seems to be inflated by a
tempestuous wind, and projected to the very centre of the table, forming a
great hood around the heads of the sitters. To fling out the curtain with
such force, it would be necessary for the medium to rise and push on it as
hard as she could with her extended arms--not once merely, but again and
again. But how can she do this when she is all the while seated tranquilly
in her chair?

These experiments place us in a special environment or atmosphere, on the
different physical and psychical characters of which it is difficult to
form an opinion.

At the time of the last seance, during which M. and Mme. Pallotti are sure
of having seen, touched, and embraced their daughter, I saw nothing, at
that moment, of this spectral form, although it was only a few yards from
me, and although I had perceived, some moments before, the head of a young
girl. It is true that, out of respect for their emotion, I did not
approach their group. But I kept careful watch, and I perceived no one but
the living.

At the seance of November 10 the noise of a sonorous object notified us of
a displacement, a movement. We seem to hear the violin strings lightly
touched. It is, in fact, the little violin on the round table, which is
lifted to a height somewhat above that of the head of the medium, passes
into the opening between the two curtains, and appears before us with the
neck forward. The idea comes into my head to grasp this instrument during
its slow passage through the air; but I hesitate, because I wish to see
what will become of it. It comes as far as the middle of the table,
descends, then falls, partly upon the table, partly upon the left hand of
M. Brisson and the right hand of Mme. Fourton.

That was one of the most accurate observations that I made at this seance.
I did not let go of Eusapia's right hand for a single instant, and M.
Brisson did not for a moment let go of her left hand.

But in the face of phenomena so incomprehensible we always revert to
scepticism. In the seance of November 19 we had thoroughly resolved this
time not to leave any loophole for doubt as to the hands, to hinder every
attempt at substitution, and to have the most complete control of each
hand, without having our attention withdrawn from this object for a single
moment. Eusapia has only two hands. She belongs to the same zoological
species that we do, and is neither trimanous nor quadrumanous.

It was enough, then, that there were two of us; that each one took a hand
of the medium and kept hold of it between the thumb and the forefinger,
that no possible doubt might arise, drew in the elbows, and held the said
hand as far removed as possible from the axis of the medium's body and
pressed against our own person, so as to remove the objection about the
substitution of hands.

That was the essential object of this seance, as far as concerned M.
Brisson and me. He had charge of the left hand. I had charge of the
right. I need not add that I am as sure of the loyalty of M. Brisson as he
is sure of mine, and that, forewarned as we were, and holding this seance
for the express purpose of this control, we could neither of us be the
dupes of any attempt at fraud, so far as regards that occasion, at least.

The famous medium, Home, had several times spoken to me of a curious
experiment that he and Crookes made with an accordion held in one of his
hands and playing all by itself, without the lower end being held by
another hand. Crookes has represented this experiment by a sketch in his
memoir upon this subject. The medium is seen holding the accordion with
one hand in a kind of open-work cage, and the accordion is playing by
itself. I shall give the details of this matter farther on.

I tried the experiment in another way, by holding the accordion myself,
and not letting it be touched by the medium. The feats which we had just
witnessed, and which were performed while Eusapia had her hands securely
held, gave me the hope of succeeding, so much the more because we believed
that we had seen fluid hands in action.

I, therefore, take a little new accordion, bought that evening in a
bazaar, and, approaching the table and remaining in a standing position, I
hold the accordion by one side, resting two fingers upon two keys, in such
a way as to permit the air to pass in case the instrument should begin to
play.

So held, it is vertically suspended by the stretching out of my right hand
to the height of my head, and above the head of the medium. We make sure
that her hands are all the time tightly held and that the chain is
unbroken. After a short wait of five or six seconds I feel the accordion
drawn by its free end, and the bellows is immediately pushed in several
times successively; and at the same time the music is heard. There is not
the least doubt that a hand, a pair of pincers, or what-not, has hold of
the lower end of the instrument. I perceive very well the resistance of
this prehensible organ. All possibility of fraud is eliminated; for the
instrument is well above Eusapia's head, her hands are firmly held, and I
distinctly see the distention of the curtain as far as the instrument. The
accordion continues to make itself heard, and is pulled on so strongly
that I say to the invisible power, "Well, since you have such a good hold
on it, keep it!" I withdraw my hand, and the instrument remains as if
glued to the curtain. It is no longer heard. What has become of it? I
propose to light a candle to hunt for it. But the general opinion is that,
since things are going so well, it is better to make no changes in the
environment. While we are talking, the accordion begins to play,--a slight
and rather insignificant air. In order to do that, it must be held by two
hands. At the end of fifteen or twenty seconds it is brought to the middle
of the table (playing all the while). The certainty that hands are playing
it is so complete that I say to the Unknown, "Since you hold the accordion
so well, you can doubtless take my hand itself." I reach out my arm at the
height of my head, rather a little higher. The curtain inflates, and
through the curtain I feel a hand (a pretty strong left hand); that is to
say, three fingers and the thumb, and these grasp the end of my right
hand.

Let us suppose for an instant that the accordion could have been pulled by
one of Eusapia's hands, which she had released, lifted up, and screened
behind the curtain. It is a very natural hypothesis. Let us say that the
two controllers on the right and on the left respectively were cheated by
the dexterity of the medium. That is not impossible. But, then, that the
instrument might play, our heroine would have had to release her two hands
and leave the two controllers at loggerheads with their own hands. It is
something not to be thought of.

Apropos of the existence of a third hand, a fluid hand, created on the
spur of the moment, with muscles and bones (an hypothesis so bold that one
hardly dares to express it), I relate here what we observed during the
sitting of November 19.

M. Guillaume de Fontenay, with whom the experiments at Montfort-l'Amaury
were made, in 1897, at the home of the Blech family, had come on purpose
from the centre of France, with a great profusion of apparatus and of new
processes, to try to get some photographs. The medium appeared to be
enchanted with them, and toward the middle of the soiree said to us, "You
are going to have, this evening, something that you did not expect,
something which has never been accomplished by any other medium, and which
can be photographed as an unimpeachable record." She then explains to us
that I am to lift my hand up, while firmly holding hers by the wrist; that
M. Sardou, while holding her left hand, will keep watch over it above the
table, and that then her third hand will appear in the photograph, her
fluidic hand, holding the violin near her head, at some distance from her
right hand, behind her, and against the curtain.

We wait pretty long before anything happens. At length, the medium
trembles, sighs, recommends that we breathe deeply and thus aid her, and
we feel, rather than see, the moving of the violin through the air, with a
slight vibrating noise of the strings. Eusapia cries, "It is time, take
the photograph, quick, don't wait, fire!" But the apparatus does not work:
the magnesium won't kindle. The medium grows impatient, still holds out,
but cries that she cannot hold out much longer. We all vehemently clamor
for the photograph. Nothing moves. In the darkness, which is needed in
order that the plate in the camera shall not have to be veiled, M. de
Fontenay does not succeed in lighting the magnesium, and the violin is
heard to fall to the floor.

The medium seems exhausted, groans, laments, and we all regret this check
to the proceedings; but Eusapia declares that she can begin again, and
asks us to get ready. In fact, at the end of five or six minutes the same
phenomena are produced. M. de Fontenay explodes a chlorate of potassium
pistol. The light is instantaneous, but feeble. It enables us to see
Eusapia's left hand being held upon the table by M. Sardou's right hand,
her right hand held in the air by my left hand, and at a distance of about
twelve inches in the rear, at the height of one's head, the violin,
resting vertically against the curtain. But the photograph gives no
picture.

Eusapia now asks for a little light ("_poco di luce_"). The small
hand-lamp is lighted again, and the illumination is sufficient for us to
see each other distinctly, including the arms, the head of the medium, the
curtain, etc. The chain is formed again. The curtain flares widely out,
and M. Sardou is several times touched by a hand which gives him a good
whack on the shoulder, making him bend his head forward toward the table.
In the presence of this manifestation and of these sensations we have
again the impression that there has been a hand there, a hand different
from those of the medium (which we continue carefully to hold),--and from
ours, because we are holding each other's hands in the chain. Moreover,
there is no one near the curtain, which is plainly visible. I thereupon
remark, "Since there is a hand there, let it take from me this violin, as
it did day before yesterday." I take the violin by the handle and hold it
out to the curtain. It is at once taken and lifted, then falls to the
floor. I do not for a moment let go the hand of the medium. Yet I grasp
this hand with my right hand, for a moment, in order to pick up with my
left the violin that has fallen near me. As I stoop down to the floor, I
feel an icy breath upon my hand, but nothing more. I take the violin and
put it on the table; then I take again with my left hand the hand of the
medium, and, seizing the violin with my right, I hold it out again to the
curtain. But Mme. Brisson, peculiarly incredulous, asks me to let her take
it herself. She does so, holds it out to the curtain, and the instrument
is snatched from her, in spite of all the efforts that she makes to retain
it. Everybody declares they saw very distinctly this time.

The hands of the medium have not been let go a single minute.

It seems as if this experiment, made under these conditions, in sufficient
light, ought to leave no doubt about the existence of a third hand of the
medium which acts in obedience to her will. And yet!--

During this same soiree of November 19 I ask that the violin, which has
fallen to the floor, be brought again upon the table. We keep holding
carefully the medium's hands, M. Sardou her left hand and I her right.
Eusapia, wishing to give still more security, more certainty, proposes
that I take her two hands, the right as I am holding it, and her left
wrist in my right hand, her left hand always being held by M.
Sardou,--_the whole show of hands taking place on the table_. A noise is
heard. The violin is brought on, passes above our hands, thus
criss-crossed, and is laid down, farther on, in the middle of the table. A
candle is lighted, and the position of our hands is ascertained. They have
not moved. Some time after this phenomena, in the dim light, we all saw
will-o'-the-wisps shining in the cabinet. They were visible through the
cleft in the curtains, which at that time was rather wide. For my part, I
saw three of them, the first very brilliant, the others less intense. They
were not tremulous, nor did they stir in the least, and remained in view
scarcely more than a second.

M. Antoniadi having remarked that he is not always sure of holding her
left hand, Eusapia says to me in a flush of passion, "Since he is not
sure, take my two hands yourself again." I already hold the right, and am
absolutely certain of it. I thereupon take her left wrist in my right
hand, M. A. declaring that he will take care of the fingers. In this
position, Eusapia's two hands being thus held above the table, a cushion,
which is at my right upon the table, having been forcibly thrown there
some moments before, is seized and thrown over the sofa, brushing my
forehead on the left. Those who sit at the table and form the chain affirm
that the hands of the chain have not lost touch with each other.

Here is another circumstance recorded in the notes of Mme. Flammarion:

    We were almost in complete darkness,--the lamp, removed as far as
    possible from Eusapia, having only the dim glow of a night-lamp.
    Eusapia was seated at the experiment table,--between MM. Brisson and
    Pallotti, who were holding her two hands,--and almost facing this
    lamp.

    Mme. Brisson and I were seated some yards distant from Eusapia, one of
    us on the side and the other in the middle of the salon, Eusapia
    facing us, while we had our backs turned to the light. This allowed us
    to distinguish well enough everything that passed before us.

    Up to the moment when the event that I am going to relate took place,
    Mme. Brisson had remained almost as incredulous as I, apropos of the
    phenomena, and she had just been expressing to me in a low tone her
    regret at not having yet seen anything herself, when, all of a sudden,
    the curtain behind Eusapia began to shake and move gracefully back, as
    if lifted by an invisible curtain band,--and what do I see? The little
    table on three feet, and leaping (apparently in high spirits) over the
    floor, at the height of about eight inches, while the gilded
    tambourine is in its turn leaping gayly at the same height above the
    table, and noisily tinkling its bells.

    Stupefied with wonder, quick as I can I pull Mme. Brisson to my side,
    and, pointing with my finger at what is taking place, "Look!" said I.

    And then the table and the tambourine begin their carpet-dance again
    in perfect unison, one of them falling forcibly upon the floor and the
    other upon the table. Mme. Brisson and I could not help bursting out
    into laughter; for, indeed, it was too funny! A sylph could not have
    been more amusing.

Eusapia had not turned around. She was seen seated; and her hands, placed
before her, were held by the two controllers. Even if she had been able to
free both her hands, she would not have been able to take hold of the
round table and tambourine, except by turning around; and the two ladies
saw them leaping about all alone.

I observe to Eusapia that she must be very tired, that the seance has
lasted over two hours and has yielded extraordinary results, and that it
is perhaps time to end it. She replies that she desires to continue still
a little longer, and that there will be new phenomena. We accept with
pleasure, and sit down and wait.

Then she lays her head on my shoulder, takes my entire right arm,
including the hand, and putting my leg between hers, and my feet between
her feet, she held me very tight. Then she begins to rub the carpet,
drawing my feet along with hers, and squeezing me tighter than before.
Then she cries, "_Spetta! spetta!_" ("Look! look!"); then, "_Vieni!
vieni!_" ("Come! come!") She invites M. Pallotti to take a place behind
his wife and see what will happen. I must add that both of them had been
earnestly asking, for some minutes, if they might see and embrace their
daughter, as they had done at Rome.

After a new nervous effort on the part of Eusapia, and a kind of
convulsion accompanied by groans, complaints, and cries, there was a great
movement of the curtain. Several times I see the head of a young girl
bowing before me, with high-arched forehead and with long hair.

She bows three times, and shows her dark profile against the window. A
moment after we hear sounds from M. and Mme. Pallotti. They are covering
with kisses the face of a being invisible to us, saying to her with
passionate affection, "Rosa, Rosa, my dear, my Rosalie," etc. They say
they felt between their hands the face and the hair of their daughter.

My impression was that there was really there a fluidic being. I did not
touch it. The grief of the parents, revived and consoled at the same time,
seemed to me so worthy of respect that I did not approach them. But, as to
the identity of the spectral being, I believed it to be a sentimental
illusion of theirs.

I come now to the strangest circumstances of all, the most
incomprehensible, the most incredible, of any that we experienced in our
seances.

On November 21 M. Jules Bois presents a book before the curtain at about
the height of a man standing upright. The salon is dimly lighted by a
little lamp with a shade, set pretty well to one side. Yet objects are
seen with distinctness.

An invisible hand behind the curtain seizes the book. Then all the
observers see it disappear as if it had passed through the curtain. It is
not seen to fall before the curtain. It is an octavo, rather slender,
bound in red, which I have just taken from my library.

Now Mme. Flammarion, almost as sceptical as M. Baschet about these
phenomena, had glided past the window to the rear of the curtain, in order
to observe carefully what was passing. She hoped to detect a movement of
the medium's arm, and to unmask her, in spite of the courtesy she owed her
as her hostess. She saw very plainly Eusapia's head, motionless before the
mirror which reflected the light.

Suddenly the book appears to her, it having passed through the
curtain,--upheld in the air, without hands or arms, for a space of one or
two seconds. Then she sees it fall down. She cries, "Oh! the book: it has
just passed through the curtain!" and, pale and stupefied with wonder, she
abruptly retires among the observers.

The entire hither side of the curtain was plainly visible, because the
left portion of the left-hand curtain had been loosened from its rod by
the weight of a person who had sat down on the sofa where the lower part
of the curtain had been accidentally placed; and because a large opening
had been made fronting the mirror which filled the entire wall of the
farther end of the salon,--a mirror that reflected the light of the little
lamp.

If such an event had really taken place, we should be forced to admit that
the book went through the curtain without any opening, for the tissue of
the fabric is wholly intact; and we cannot suppose for a single moment
that it passed through at the side, the book having been held out about
the middle,--that is to say, about twenty-four inches from each side of
the curtain, the breadth of which is four feet.

Nevertheless, this book was seen by Mme. Flammarion, who was looking
behind the curtain; and it disappeared from the eyes of the persons who
were in front, notably M. Baschet, M. Brisson, M. J. Bois, Mme. Fourton
and myself. We were not expecting this miracle in any way; we were
stupefied by it; we asked what had become of the book, and it seemed as if
it had fallen behind the curtain.

Collective hallucination? But we were all in cool blood, entirely
self-possessed.

If Eusapia had been able to adroitly slip her hand around and seize the
book through the portiere, the bare outline of the book would not have
been seen, but a protuberance of the portiere.

How great a value the sight of this thing passing through a portiere would
have as a scientific datum, if one were only sure of the absolute honesty
of the medium,--if, indeed, this medium were a man of science, a
physicist, a chemist, an astronomer, whose scientific integrity would be
above suspicion! The mere fact of the possibility of fraud takes away
ninety-nine one-hundredths of the worth of the observation, and makes it
necessary for us to see it a hundred times before being sure. The
conditions of certainty ought to be understood by all investigators, and
it is curious to hear intelligent persons express surprise at our doubts,
and at the strict scientific obligation we are under to lay down these
conditions. In order to be sure of abnormalities like these levitations,
for example, we must make sure of them a hundred times over; not see them
once, but a hundred times.

It seems to us impossible that matter could pass through matter. You place
for example a stone upon a napkin. If one should tell you that he has
found it under the napkin, without any break in the continuity of the
tissue, you would not believe him. However, I take a piece of ice,
weighing say two pounds, and place it upon a napkin; I place both upon a
strainer, in the oven; the piece of ice melts, passes through the napkin,
and falls drop by drop into a basin. I put the whole thing into a freezing
machine, the melted water congeals again; the piece of ice weighing two
pounds has passed through the napkin.

It is very simple, you think. Yes, it is simple because we understand it.
But, of course, this is not the same case as that of the book. Yet, after
all, it is matter passing through matter, after a transformation of its
physical condition.

We might seek explanations, invoke the hypotheses of the fourth dimension,
or discuss the non-Euclidian geometry. It seems to me more simple,
however, to think that, on the one hand, these experiments are not yet
sufficient for us to make an absolute affirmation, and that, on the other
hand, our ignorance of everything is formidable and forbids us to deny
anything.

The phenomena of which I am speaking are so extraordinary that one is led
to doubt them, even when one feels assured that he has seen them. Thus,
for example, I noticed that M. Rene Baschet--my learned friend, present
editor of _Illustration_--affirmed before us all, during the seance and
afterward, that he saw with his own eyes, under the table, a head like
that of a young girl of about twelve years of age, together with the bust.
This head sank down vertically while he was looking at it and disappeared.
He made the affirmation on the 21st, repeated it on the 22d at a theatre
where we met, and on the 25th again at his home. Some time after, M.
Baschet was convinced that he had been deceived, that he had been the dupe
of an illusion. That is also possible. I was looking at the same time, as
well as other persons, and we did not see anything.

It is then very human, when we are thinking, some days later, of these
curious things, for us to suspect ourselves.

But there are prejudices less explicable. Thus, for example, at the seance
of November 28 a distinguished engineer, M. L., absolutely refused to
admit the levitation of the table, in spite of the evidence. Of this my
readers may judge for themselves. Here is a note which I extract from my
reports:

    M. L. tells me that the medium lifts the table _with her feet_, while
    resting her hands upon it. I ask Eusapia to draw back her feet under
    her chair. The table is lifted.

    After this second levitation, M. L. declares that he is not satisfied
    (although neither of the feet of the medium is under a foot of the
    table), and that we must begin the experiment again, without having
    _her legs_ touched at any point. The medium then proposes that her
    legs be fastened to those of M. L. A third levitation takes place,
    after the left leg (the incriminated one) of the medium has been bound
    to the left leg of M. L.

    This gentleman then declares that the hypotheses he has made, in order
    to explain the phenomenon, are null and void, but that there must be,
    all the same, a trick in the thing, because he does not believe in the
    supernatural.

    Neither do I believe in the supernatural. And yet there is no trick.

This manner of reasoning, rather common, does not seem to me scientific.
It is to claim that we know the limits of the possible and of the
impossible.

People who deny that the earth moves reason in just this way. That which
is contrary to common sense is not impossible. Common sense is the average
state of popular knowledge; that is to say, of general ignorance.

A man acquainted with the history of the sciences, and who reasons calmly,
cannot succeed in understanding the ostracism to which certain sceptics
subject unexplained phenomena. "It is impossible," they think. This famous
common sense on which they plume themselves is nothing after all, let me
say, but common opinion, which accepts habitual facts without
comprehending them, and which varies from time to time. What man of good
sense would formerly have admitted that we should one day be able to
photograph the skeleton of a living being, or store up the voice in a
phonograph, or determine the chemical composition of an inaccessible star?
What was science a hundred years ago, two hundred years, three hundred?
Look at astronomy five hundred years ago, and physiology, and medicine,
and natural philosophy, and chemistry. In five hundred years, in a
thousand years, in two thousand years, what will these sciences of ours
be? And in a hundred thousand years? Yes, in a hundred thousand years,
what will human intelligence be? Our actual condition will be to that what
the knowledge of a dog is to that of a cultivated man; that is to say,
there is no possible comparison.

We smile to-day at the science of learned men of the time of Copernicus or
Christopher Columbus or Ambroise Pare, and we forget that, in a few
centuries, savants will estimate us in the same fashion. There are
properties of matter which are completely hidden from us, and humanity is
endowed with faculties still unknown to us. We only advance very slowly in
the knowledge of things.

The critics do not always give proof that they possess a very compact
logical power. You speak to them of facts proved by centuries of
testimony. They challenge the value of popular testimony, and declare that
these uncultivated folks, these petty merchants, these manufacturers,
these laborers, these peasants, are incapable of observing with any
exactitude.

Some days after, you cite the savants, men whose competence has been
proved in the objective sciences of observation, which attest these very
facts, and you hear the sneerers answer that those savants are competent
witnesses in their special lines of study and work, but in nothing apart
from these.

So, after this fashion, all testimony is refused. They declare that the
thing, being impossible, cannot have been observed at all.

Of course there is room for a good deal of analysis in discussing the
claims of human testimony. But, if we suppress every piece of testimony,
what will there be left?--our native ignorance.

But, to tell the truth, there are some of these negative gentry who are
sure of everything, and who impose their aphorisms upon us with the
authority of a czar giving out his ukase or edict.

From these different experiments with Eusapia Paladino, including those
described in the first and second chapters, the impression is left that
the phenomena observed are, to a great extent, real and undeniable; that a
certain number may be produced by fraud; but that, in fact, the subject is
very complex. Again, certain movements simply belong to the material
order, while others belong at once to the physical order and the psychical
order. All this study is vastly more complicated than people in general
have any idea of. I am going to pass summarily in review other experiments
made by the same medium, and shall afterwards devote a special chapter to
the examination of frauds and mystifications.

Let us look, first, at other achievements of Eusapia, and select from them
whatever they also have to impart in the way of instruction or caution.




