CHAPTER IX

THE EXPERIMENTS OF SIR WILLIAM CROOKES


The learned chemist, Sir William Crookes, member of the Royal Society of
London, the author of several discoveries of the first rank (among which
should be placed the discovery, in 1861, of the metal, thallium), and of
ingenious experiments on "radiant matter," published his first researches
on the subject we are here considering in a review of which he was the
editor--the _Quarterly Journal of Science_.

I had the honor of contributing certain astronomical papers to this
journal.[62] I will first lay before my readers an extract from Mr.
Crookes's article of the 1st of July, 1871, entitled "Experimental
Investigation of a New Force," in which he describes his studies with
Home. I also had occasion myself more than once to hold conversation with
this medium.[63]

    Twelve months ago in this journal, July 1, 1870, I wrote an article,
    in which, after expressing in the most emphatic manner my belief in
    the occurrence, under certain circumstances, of phenomena inexplicable
    by any known natural laws, I indicated several tests which men of
    science had a right to demand before giving credence to the
    genuineness of these phenomena. Among the tests pointed out were, that
    a "delicately poised balance should be moved under test conditions;"
    and that some exhibition of power equivalent to so many "foot-pounds"
    should be "manifested in his laboratory, where the experimentalists
    could weigh, measure, and submit it to proper tests." I said, too,
    that I could not promise to enter fully into this subject, owing to
    the difficulties of obtaining opportunities, and the numerous failures
    attending the enquiry; moreover, that "the persons in whose presence
    these phenomena take place are few in number, and opportunities for
    experimenting with previously arranged apparatus are rarer still."

    Opportunities having since offered for pursuing the investigation, I
    have gladly availed myself of them for applying to these phenomena
    careful scientific testing experiments, and I have thus arrived at
    certain definite results which I think it right should be published.
    These experiments appear conclusively to establish the existence of a
    new force, in some unknown manner connected with the human
    organization, which for convenience may be called the Psychic Force.

    Of all the persons endowed with a powerful development of this psychic
    force, and who have been termed "mediums" upon quite another theory of
    its origin, Mr. Daniel Dunglas Home is the most remarkable, and it is
    mainly owing to the many opportunities I have had of carrying on my
    investigation in his presence that I am enabled to affirm so
    conclusively the existence of this force. The experiments I have tried
    have been very numerous, but owing to our imperfect knowledge of the
    conditions which favor or oppose the manifestations of this force, to
    the apparently capricious manner in which it is exerted, and to the
    fact that Mr. Home himself is subject to unaccountable ebbs and flows
    of the force, it has but seldom happened that a result obtained on one
    occasion could be subsequently confirmed and tested with apparatus
    specially contrived for the purpose.

    Among the remarkable phenomena which occur under Mr. Home's influence,
    the most striking, as well as the most easily tested with scientific
    accuracy, are--(1) the alteration in the weight of bodies, and (2) the
    playing of tunes upon musical instruments (generally an accordion, for
    convenience of portability) without direct human intervention, under
    conditions rendering contact or connection with the keys impossible.
    Not until I had witnessed these facts some half-dozen times, and
    scrutinized them with all the critical acumen I possess, did I become
    convinced of their objective reality. Still, desiring to place the
    matter beyond the shadow of doubt, I invited Mr. Home on several
    occasions to come to my own house, where, in the presence of a few
    scientific enquirers, these phenomena could be submitted to crucial
    experiments.

    The meetings took place in the evening, in a large room lighted by
    gas. The apparatus prepared for the purpose of testing the movements
    of the accordion, consisted of a cage, formed of two wooden hoops,
    respectively 1 foot 10 inches and 2 feet diameter, connected together
    by 12 narrow laths, each 1 foot 10 inches long, so as to form a
    drum-shaped frame, open at the top and bottom; round this 50 yards of
    insulated copper wire were wound in 24 rounds, each being rather less
    than an inch from its neighbor. The horizontal strands of wire were
    then netted together firmly with string, so as to form meshes rather
    less than 2 inches long by 1 inch high. The height of this cage was
    such that it would just slip under my dining-table, but be too close
    to the top to allow of the hand being introduced into the interior, or
    to admit of a foot being pushed underneath it. In another room were
    two Grove's cells, wires being led from them into the dining-room for
    connection, if desirable, with the wire surrounding the cage.

    The accordion was a new one, having been purchased by myself for the
    purpose of these experiments at Wheatstone's, in Conduit Street. Mr.
    Home had neither handled nor seen the instrument before the
    commencement of the test experiments.

    In another part of the room an apparatus was fitted up for
    experimenting on the alteration in the weight of a body. It consisted
    of a mahogany board, 36 inches long by 9-1/2 inches wide and 1 inch
    thick. At each end a strip of mahogany 1-1/2 inches wide was screwed
    on, forming feet. One end of the board rested on a firm table, whilst
    the other end was supported by a spring balance hanging from a
    substantial tripod stand. The balance was fitted with a
    self-registering index, in such a manner that it would record the
    maximum weight indicated by the pointer. The apparatus was adjusted
    so that the mahogany board was horizontal, its foot resting flat on
    the support. In this position its weight was 3 lbs., as marked by the
    pointer of the balance.

[Illustration: PLATE XII. CAGE OF COPPER WIRE, ELECTRICALLY CHARGED, USED
BY PROFESSOR CROOKES IN THE HOME ACCORDION EXPERIMENT.]

    Before Mr. Home entered the room the apparatus had been arranged in
    position, and he had not even the object of some parts of it explained
    before sitting down. It may, perhaps, be worth while to add, for the
    purpose of anticipating some critical remarks which are likely to be
    made, that in the afternoon I called for Mr. Home at his apartments,
    and when there he suggested that, as he had to change his dress,
    perhaps I should not object to continue our conversation in his
    bedroom. I am, therefore, enabled to state positively, that no
    machinery, apparatus, or contrivance of any sort was secreted about
    his person.

    The investigators present on the test occasion were an eminent
    physicist, high in the ranks of the Royal Society,[64] a well-known
    Serjeant-at-Law;[65] my brother; and my chemical assistant.

    Mr. Home sat in a low easy-chair at the side of the table. In front of
    him under the table was the aforesaid cage, one of his legs being on
    each side of it. I sat close to him on his left, and another observer
    sat close to him on his right, the rest of the party being seated at
    convenient distances round the table.

    For the greater part of the evening, particularly when anything of
    importance was proceeding, the observers on each side of Mr. Home kept
    their feet respectively on his feet, so as to be able to detect his
    slightest movement.

    The temperature of the room varied from 68 degrees to 70 degrees F.

    Mr. Home took the accordion between the thumb and middle finger of one
    hand at the opposite end to the keys (see Pl. XII A) (to save
    repetition this will be subsequently called "in the usual manner").

    Having previously opened the bass key myself, and the cage being drawn
    from under the table so as just to allow the accordion to be pushed in
    with its keys downwards, it was pushed back as close as Mr. Home's
    arm would permit, but without hiding his hand from those next to him
    (Pl. XII, Cut B). Very soon the accordion was seen by those on each
    side to be waving about in a somewhat curious manner; then sounds came
    from it, and finally several notes were played in succession. Whilst
    this was going on, my assistant went under the table, and reported
    that the accordion was expanding and contracting; at the same time it
    was seen that the hand of Mr. Home by which it was held was quite
    still, his other hand resting on the table.

    Presently the accordion was seen by those on either side of Mr. Home
    to move about, oscillating and going round and round the cage, and
    playing at the same time. Dr. A. B. now looked under the table, and
    said that Mr. Home's hand appeared quite still whilst the accordion
    was moving about emitting distinct sounds.

    Mr. Home still holding the accordion in the usual manner in the cage,
    his feet being held by those next him, and his other hand resting on
    the table, we heard distinct and separate notes sounded in succession,
    and then a simple air was played. As such a result could only have
    been produced by the various keys of the instrument being acted upon
    in harmonious succession, this was considered by those present to be a
    crucial experiment.

    But the sequel was still more striking, for Mr. Home then removed his
    hand altogether from the accordion, taking it quite out of the cage,
    and placed it in the hand of the person next to him. The instrument
    then continued to play, no person touching it and no hand being near
    it.

    I was now desirous of trying what would be the effect of passing the
    battery current round the insulated wire of the cage, and my assistant
    accordingly made the connection with the wires from the two Grove's
    cells. Mr. Home again held the instrument inside the cage in the same
    manner as before, when it immediately sounded and moved about
    vigorously. But whether the electric current passing round the cage
    assisted the manifestation of force inside, it is impossible to say.

    After this experiment, the accordion, which he kept holding in one
    hand, then commenced to play, at first chords and runs, and
    afterwards a well-known sweet and plaintive melody, which was executed
    perfectly in a very beautiful manner. Whilst this tune was being
    played I grasped Mr. Home's arm, below the elbow, and gently slid my
    hand down it until I touched the top of the accordion. He was not
    moving a muscle. His other hand was on the table, visible to all, and
    his feet were under the feet of those next to him.

    Having met with such striking results in the experiments with the
    accordion in the cage, we turned to the balance apparatus already
    described. Mr. Home placed the tips of his fingers lightly on the
    extreme end of the mahogany board, which was resting on the support,
    whilst Dr. A. B. and myself sat, one on each side of it, watching for
    any effect which might be produced. Almost immediately the pointer of
    the balance was seen to descend. After a few seconds it rose again.
    This movement was repeated several times, as if by successive waves of
    the psychic force. The end of the board was observed to oscillate
    slowly up and down during the experiment.

    Mr. Home now of his own accord took a small hand-bell and a little
    card match-box, which happened to be near, and placed one under each
    hand, to satisfy us, as he said, that he was not producing the
    downward pressure (see Fig. 3). The very slow oscillation of the
    spring balance became more marked, and Dr. A. B., watching the index,
    said that he saw it descend to 6-1/2 lbs. The normal weight of the
    board as so suspended being 3 lbs., the additional downward pull was
    therefore 3-1/2 lbs. On looking immediately afterwards at the
    automatic register, we saw that the index had at one time descended as
    low as 9 lbs., showing a maximum pull of 6 lbs. upon a board whose
    normal weight was 3 lbs.

    In order to see whether it was possible to produce much effect on the
    spring balance by pressure at the place where Mr. Home's fingers had
    been, I stepped upon the table and stood on one foot at the end of the
    board. Dr. A. B., who was observing the index of the balance, said
    that the whole weight of my body (140 lbs.) so applied only sunk the
    index 1-1/2 lbs., or 2 lbs. when I shook it. Mr. Home had been sitting
    in a low easy-chair, and could not, therefore, had he tried his
    utmost, have exerted any material influence on these results. I need
    scarcely add that his feet as well as his hands were closely guarded
    by all in the room.

    This experiment appears to me more striking, if possible, than the one
    with the accordion. As will be seen on referring to the cut (Fig. 3),
    the board was arranged perfectly horizontally, and it was particularly
    noticed that Mr. Home's fingers were not at any time advanced more
    than 1-1/2 inches from the extreme end, as shown by a pencil-mark,
    which, with Dr. A. B.'s acquiescence, I made at the time. Now, the
    wooden foot being also 1-1/2 inches wide, and resting flat on the
    table, it is evident that no amount of pressure exerted within this
    space of 1-1/2 inches could produce any action on the balance. Again,
    it is also evident that when the end farthest from Mr. Home sank, the
    board would turn on the farther edge of this foot as on a fulcrum.

    [Illustration: FIG. 3.]

    The arrangement was consequently that of a see-saw, 36 inches in
    length, the fulcrum being 1-1/2 inches from one end; were he,
    therefore, to have exerted a downward pressure, it would have been in
    opposition to the force which was causing the other end of the board
    to move down.

    The slight downward pressure shown by the balance when I stood on the
    board was owing probably to my foot extending beyond this fulcrum.

    I have now given a plain, unvarnished statement of the facts from
    copious notes written at the time the occurrences were taking place,
    and copied out in full immediately after.

    Respecting the cause of these phenomena, the nature of the force to
    which, to avoid periphrasis, I have ventured to give the name of
    _Psychic_, and the correlation existing between that and the other
    forces of nature, it would be wrong to hazard the most vague
    hypothesis. Indeed, in inquiries connected so intimately with rare
    physiological and psychological conditions, it is the duty of the
    inquirer to abstain altogether from framing theories until he has
    accumulated a sufficient number of facts to form a substantial basis
    upon which to reason. In the presence of strange phenomena as yet
    unexplored and unexplained following each other in such rapid
    succession, I confess it is difficult to avoid clothing their record
    in language of a sensational character. But, to be successful, an
    inquiry of this kind must be undertaken by the philosopher without
    prejudice and without sentiment. Romantic and superstitious ideas
    should be entirely banished, and the steps of his investigation should
    be guided by intellect as cold and passionless as the instruments he
    uses.

Apropos of this Mr. Cox wrote to Mr. Crooks:

    The results appear to me conclusively to establish the important fact,
    that there is a force proceeding from the nerve-system capable of
    imparting motion and weight to solid bodies within the sphere of its
    influence.

    I noticed that the force was exhibited in tremulous pulsations, and
    not in the form of steady continuous pressure, the indicator rising
    and falling incessantly throughout the experiment. The fact seems to
    me of great significance, as tending to confirm the opinion that
    assigns its source to the nerve organization, and it goes far to
    establish Dr. Richardson's important discovery of a nerve atmosphere
    of various intensity enveloping the human structure.

    Your experiments completely confirm the conclusion at which the
    Investigation Committee of the Dialectical Society arrived, after more
    than forty meetings for trial and test.

    Allow me to add that I can find no evidence even tending to prove that
    this force is other than a force proceeding from, or directly
    dependent upon, the human organization, and therefore, like all other
    forces of nature, wholly within the province of that strictly
    scientific investigation to which you have been the first to subject
    it.

    Now that it is proved by mechanical tests to be a fact in nature (and
    if a fact, it is impossible to exaggerate its importance to physiology
    and the light it must throw upon the obscure laws of life, of mind and
    the science of medicine) it cannot fail to command the immediate and
    most earnest examination and discussion by physiologists and by all
    who take an interest in that knowledge of "man," which has been truly
    termed "the noblest study of mankind."

    To avoid the appearance of any foregone conclusion, I would recommend
    the adoption for it of some appropriate name, and I venture to suggest
    that the force be termed the Psychic Force; the persons in whom it is
    manifested in extraordinary power Psychics; and the science relating
    to it Psychism as, being a branch of psychology.

The preceding article was published separately by William Crookes in a
special brochure which lies before me,[66] and which contains, in
addition, the following study, not less curious from the human and
anecdotical point of view than from the point of view of the experimenter
in physics:

    When I first stated in this journal that I was about to investigate
    the phenomena of so-called Spiritualism, the announcement called forth
    universal expressions of approval. One said that my "statements
    deserved respectful consideration"; another expressed "profound
    satisfaction that the subject was about to be investigated by a man so
    thoroughly qualified as," etc.; a third was "gratified to learn that
    the matter is now receiving the attention of cool and clear-headed
    men of recognized position in science"; a fourth asserted that "no one
    could doubt Mr. Crookes's ability to conduct the investigation with
    rigid philosophical impartiality"; and a fifth was good enough to tell
    its readers that "if men like Mr. Crookes grapple with the subject,
    taking nothing for granted until it is proved, we shall soon know how
    much to believe."

    Those remarks, however, were written too hastily. It was taken for
    granted by the writers that the results of my experiments would be in
    accordance with their preconceptions. What they really desired was not
    _the truth_, but an additional witness in favor of their own foregone
    conclusion. When they found that the facts which that investigation
    established could not be made to fit those opinions, why--"so much the
    worse for the facts." They try to creep out of their own confident
    recommendations of the enquiry by declaring that "Mr. Home is a clever
    conjurer, who has duped us all." "Mr. Crookes might, with equal
    propriety, examine the performances of an Indian juggler." "Mr.
    Crookes must get better witnesses before he can be believed." "The
    thing is too absurd to be treated seriously." "It is impossible, and
    therefore can't be."[67] "The observers have all been biologized (!)
    and fancy they saw things occur which really never took place," etc.

    These remarks imply a curious oblivion of the very functions which the
    scientific enquirer has to fulfill. I am scarcely surprised when the
    objectors say that I have been deceived merely because they are
    unconvinced without personal investigation, since the same
    unscientific course of _a priori_ argument has been opposed to all
    great discoveries. When I am told that what I describe cannot be
    explained in accordance with preconceived ideas of the laws of nature,
    the objector really begs the very question at issue, and resorts to a
    mode of reasoning which brings science to a standstill. The argument
    runs in a vicious circle: we must not assert a fact till we know that
    it is in accordance with the laws of nature, while our only knowledge
    of the laws of nature must be based on an extensive observation of
    facts. If a new fact seems to oppose what is called a law of nature,
    it does not prove the asserted fact to be false, but only that we have
    not yet ascertained all the laws of nature, or not learned them
    correctly.

    In his opening address before the British Association at Edinburgh
    this year (1871), Sir William Thomson said, "Science is bound by the
    everlasting law of honor to face fearlessly every problem which can
    fairly be presented to it." My object in thus placing on record the
    results of a very remarkable series of experiments is to present such
    a problem, which, according to Sir William Thomson, "Science is bound
    by the everlasting law of honor to face fearlessly." It will not do
    merely to deny its existence, or try to sneer it down. Remember, I
    hazard no hypothesis or theory whatever; I merely vouch for certain
    facts, my only object being--the _truth_. Doubt, but do not deny;
    point out, by the severest criticism, what are considered fallacies in
    my experimental tests, and suggest more conclusive trials; but do not
    let us hastily call our senses lying witnesses merely because they
    testify against preconceptions. I say to my critics, Try the
    experiments; investigate with care and patience as I have done. If,
    having examined, you discover imposture or delusion, proclaim it and
    say how it was done. But, if you find it be a fact, avow it
    fearlessly, as "by the everlasting law of honor" you are bound to do.

In this part of his work Professor Crookes recalls the experiments of
Count de Gasparin and of Thury (detailed above) on the phenomenon of the
movement of bodies without contact, a thing proved and demonstrated. We
need not recur to that. He adds that the ecteneic force of Professor Thury
and psychical force are equivalent terms, and that the nervous atmosphere
or fluid of Dr. Benjamin Richardson also belongs here.

Professor Crookes sent his observations to the Royal Society, of which he
is a member. The society refused his communications. The evidence goes to
show that it had only approved of the gifted chemist's mixing in
heretical and occult researches on consideration of his demonstrating the
fallacy of all those prodigies.

[Illustration: FIG. 4.]

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]

Professor Stokes, the secretary, refused to consider the subject at all,
or to inscribe even the title of the papers in the society's
publications. It was an exact repetition of what took place at the Academy
of Science in Paris in 1853. Professor Crookes scorned these arbitrary and
anti-scientific judgments and denials and answered them by publishing the
detailed description of his experiments. The following are the essential
points of this description:

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]

    On trying these experiments for the first time, I thought that actual
    contact between Mr. Home's hands and the suspended body whose weight
    was to be altered was essential to the exhibition of the force; but I
    found afterwards that this was not a necessary condition, and I
    therefore arranged my apparatus in the following manner:

    The accompanying cuts (Figs. 4, 5, 6) explain the arrangement. Fig. 4
    is a general view, and Figs. 5 and 6 show the essential parts more in
    detail. The reference letters are the same in each illustration. A B
    is a mahogany board, 36 inches long by 9-1/2 inches wide and 1 inch
    thick. It is suspended at the end, B, by a spring balance, C,
    furnished with an automatic register, D. The balance is suspended
    from a very firm tripod support, E.

    The following piece of apparatus is not shown in the figures. To the
    moving index, O, of the spring balance, a fine steel point is
    soldered, projecting horizontally outwards. In front of the balance,
    and firmly fastened to it, is a grooved frame carrying a flat box
    similar to the dark box of a photographic camera. This box is made to
    travel by clock-work horizontally in front of the moving index, and it
    contains a sheet of plate-glass which has been smoked over a flame.
    The projecting steel point impresses a mark on this smoked surface.

    If the balance is at rest, and the clock set going, the result is a
    perfectly straight horizontal line. If the clock is stopped and
    weights are placed on the end, B, of the board, the result is a
    vertical line, whose length depends on the weight applied. If, whilst
    the clock draws the plate along, the weight of the board (or the
    tension on the balance) varies, the result is a curved line, from
    which the tension in grains at any moment during the continuance of
    the experiments can be calculated.

    The instrument was capable of registering a diminution of the force of
    gravitation as well as an increase; registrations of such a diminution
    were frequently obtained. To avoid complication, however, I will only
    here refer to results in which an increase of gravitation was
    experienced.

    The end, B, of the board being supported by the spring balance, the
    end, A, is supported on a wooden strip, F, screwed across its lower
    side and cut to a knife edge (see Fig. 6). This fulcrum rests on a
    firm and heavy wooden stand, G H. On the board, exactly over the
    fulcrum, is placed a large glass vessel filled with water, I. L is a
    massive iron stand, furnished with an arm and ring, M N, in which
    rests a hemispherical copper vessel perforated with several holes at
    the bottom.

    The iron stand is two inches from the board, A B, and the arm and
    copper vessel, M N, are so adjusted that the latter dips into the
    water 1-1/2 inches, being 5-1/2 inches from the bottom of I, and 2
    inches from its circumference. Shaking or striking the arm, M, or the
    vessel, N, produces no appreciable mechanical effect on the board, A
    B, capable of affecting the balance. Dipping the hand to the fullest
    extent into the water in N, does not produce the least appreciable
    action on the balance.

    As the mechanical transmission of power by Mr. Home is by this means
    entirely cut off between the copper vessel and the board, A B, it
    follows that the power of muscular control is thereby completely
    eliminated.

    There was always ample light in the room where the experiments were
    conducted (my own dining-room) to see all that took place.
    Furthermore, I repeated the experiments, not only with Mr. Home, but
    also with another person possessing similar powers.

    [Illustration: FIG. 7.]

    _Experiment I._--The apparatus having been properly adjusted before
    Mr. Home entered the room, he was brought in, and asked to place his
    fingers in the water in the copper vessel, N. He stood up and dipped
    the tips of the fingers of his right hand in the water, his other hand
    and his feet being held. When he said he felt a power, force, or
    influence, proceeding from his hand, I set the clock going, and almost
    immediately the end, B, of the board was seen to descend slowly and
    remain down for about 10 seconds; it then descended a little farther,
    and afterwards rose to its normal height. It then descended again,
    rose suddenly, gradually sunk for 17 seconds, and finally rose to its
    normal height, where it remained till the experiment was concluded.
    The lowest point marked on the glass was equivalent to a direct pull
    of about 5,000 grains. The accompanying figure 7 is a copy of the
    curve traced on the glass.

    _Experiment II._--Contact through water having proved to be as
    effectual as actual mechanical contact, I wished to see if the power
    or force could affect the weight, either through other portions of the
    apparatus or through the air. The glass vessel and iron stand, etc.,
    were therefore removed, as an unnecessary complication, and Mr. Home's
    hands were placed on the stand of the apparatus at P (Fig. 4). A
    gentleman present put his hand on Mr. Home's hands, and his foot on
    both Mr. Home's feet, and I also watched him closely all the time. At
    the proper moment the clock was again set going; the board descended
    and rose in an irregular manner, the result being a curved tracing on
    the glass, of which Fig. 8 is a copy.

    [Illustration: FIG. 8.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 9.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 10.]

    _Experiment III._--Mr. Home was now placed 1 foot from the board, A B,
    on one side of it. His hands and feet were firmly grasped by a
    bystander, and another tracing, of which Fig. 9 is a copy, was taken
    on a moving glass plate.

    _Experiment IV._--(Tried on an occasion when the power was stronger
    than on the previous occasions.) Mr. Home was now placed three feet
    from the apparatus, his hands and feet being tightly held. The clock
    was set going when he gave the word, and the end, B, of the board
    soon descended, and again rose in an irregular manner, as shown in
    Fig. 10.

    The following series of experiments were tried with more delicate
    apparatus, and with another person, a lady, Mr. Home being absent. As
    the lady is non-professional, I do not mention her name. She has,
    however, consented to meet any scientific men whom I may introduce for
    purposes of investigation.

    [Illustration: FIG. 11.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 12.]

    A piece of thin parchment, A, Figs. 11 and 12, is stretched tightly
    across a circular hoop of wood. B C is a light lever turning on D. At
    the end, B, is a vertical needle-point touching the membrane, A, and
    at C is another needle-point, projecting horizontally and touching a
    smoked glass plate, E F. This glass plate is drawn along in the
    direction, H G, by clockwork, K. The end, B, of the lever is weighted
    so that it shall quickly follow the movements of the centre of the
    disc, A. These movements are transmitted and recorded on the glass
    plate, E F, by means of the lever and needle-point, C. Holes are cut
    in the side of the hoop to allow a free passage of air to the under
    side of the membrane. The apparatus was well tested beforehand by
    myself and others, to see that no shaking or jar on the table or
    support would interfere with the results. The line traced by the
    point, C, on the smoked glass was perfectly straight in spite of all
    our attempts to influence the lever by shaking the stand or stamping
    on the floor.

    [Illustration: FIG. 13.]

    _Experiment V._--Without having the object of the instrument explained
    to her, the lady was brought into the room and asked to place her
    fingers on the wooden stand at the points, L M, Fig. 11. I then placed
    my hands over hers to enable me to detect any conscious or unconscious
    movement on her part. Presently percussive noises were heard on the
    parchment, resembling the dropping of grains of sand on its surface.
    At each percussion a fragment of graphite which I had placed on the
    membrane was seen to be projected upwards about 1-50th of an inch, and
    the end, C, of the lever moved slightly up and down. Sometimes the
    sounds were as rapid as those from an induction-coil, whilst at others
    they were more than a second apart. Five or six tracings were taken,
    and in all cases a movement of the end, C, of the lever was seen to
    have occurred with each vibration of the membrane.

    In some cases the lady's hands were not so near the membrane as L M,
    but were at N O, Fig. 12.

    The accompanying figure 13 gives tracings taken from the plates used
    on these occasions.

    _Experiment VI._--Having met with these results in Mr. Home's absence,
    I was anxious to see what action would be produced on the instrument
    in his presence.

    Accordingly I asked him to try, but without explaining the instrument
    to him.

    [Illustration: FIG. 14.]

    [Illustration: FIG. 15.]

    I grasped Mr. Home's right arm above the wrist and held his hand over
    the membrane, about 10 inches from its surface, in the position shown
    at P, Fig. 12. His other hand was held by a friend. After remaining in
    this position for about half a minute, Mr. Home said he felt some
    influence passing. I then set the clock going, and we all saw the
    index, C, moving up and down. The movements were much slower than in
    the former case, and were almost entirely unaccompanied by the
    percussive vibrations then noticed.

    Figs. 14 and 15 show the curves produced on the glass on two of these
    occasions.

    Figs. 13, 14, 15 are magnified.

    These experiments _confirm beyond doubt_ the conclusion at which I
    arrived in my former paper; namely, the existence of a force
    associated, in some manner not yet explained, with the human
    organization, by which force increased weight is capable of being
    imparted to solid bodies without physical contact.

    Now, however, having seen more of Mr. Home, I think I perceive what it
    is that this psychic force uses up for its development. In employing
    the terms _vital force_, or _nervous energy_, I am aware that I am
    employing words which convey very different significations to many
    investigators; but after witnessing the painful state of nervous and
    bodily prostration in which some of these experiments have left Mr.
    Home--after seeing him lying in an almost fainting condition on the
    floor, pale and speechless--I could scarcely doubt that the evolution
    of psychic force is accompanied by a corresponding drain on vital
    force.

    To witness exhibitions of this force it is not necessary to have
    access to known psychics. The force itself is probably possessed by
    all human beings, although the individuals endowed with an
    extraordinary amount of it are doubtless few. Within the last twelve
    months I have met in private families five or six persons possessing a
    sufficiently vigorous development to make me feel confident that
    similar results might be produced through their means to those here
    recorded, though less intense.

These experiments continued to be the object of bitter and relentless
criticism on the part of the recognized authorities in science and
education in England. These persons absolutely refused to recognize their
value. Professor Crookes amused himself, at times, by replying to these
fantastic attacks, but, naturally, without convincing his uncompromising
opponents. It is unnecessary to reproduce these letters here; they can be
found in the French edition of Crookes's _Researches_. The learned chemist
did better still: he continued his researches into the domain of the
Unknown, and got still more remarkable results--still more extraordinary,
more inexplicable, more incomprehensible.

His notes continue as follows:

    Like a traveler exploring some distant country, the wonders of which
    have hitherto been known only through reports and rumors of a vague or
    distorted character, so for four years have I been occupied in pushing
    an inquiry into a territory of natural knowledge which offers almost
    virgin soil to a scientific man.

    As the traveller sees in the natural phenomena he may witness the
    action of forces governed by natural laws, where others see only the
    capricious intervention of offended gods, so have I endeavored to
    trace the operation of natural laws and forces, where others have seen
    only the agency of supernatural beings, owning no laws, and obeying no
    force but their own free will.

    The phenomena I am prepared to attest are so extraordinary and so
    directly oppose the most firmly rooted articles of scientific
    belief--amongst others, the ubiquity and invariable action of the
    force of gravitation--that, even now, on recalling the details of what
    I witnessed, there is an antagonism in my mind between _reason_, which
    pronounces it to be scientifically impossible, and the consciousness
    that my senses, both of touch and sight--and these corroborated, as
    they were, by the senses of all who were present,--are not lying
    witnesses when they testify against my preconceptions.

    But the supposition that there is a sort of mania or delusion which
    suddenly attacks a whole roomful of intelligent persons who are quite
    sane elsewhere, and that they all concur to the minutest particulars,
    in the details of the occurrences of which they suppose themselves to
    be witnesses, seems to my mind more incredible than even the facts
    they attest.

    The subject is far more difficult and extensive than it appears. Four
    years ago I intended only to devote a leisure month or two to
    ascertain whether certain marvellous occurrences I had heard about
    would stand the test of close scrutiny. Having, however, soon arrived
    at the same conclusion as, I may say, every impartial inquirer, that
    there was "something in it," I could not, as a student of nature's
    laws, refuse to follow the inquiry wheresoever the facts might lead.
    Thus a few months have grown into a few years, and, were my time at
    my own disposal it would probably extend still longer.

    My principal object will be to place on record a series of actual
    occurrences which have taken place in my own house, in the presence of
    trustworthy witnesses, and under as strict test conditions as I could
    devise. Every fact which I have observed is, moreover, corroborated by
    the records of independent observers at other times and places. It
    will be seen that the facts are of the most astounding character, and
    seem utterly irreconcilable with all known theories of modern science.
    Having satisfied myself of their _truth_, it would be moral cowardice
    to withhold my testimony because my previous publications were
    ridiculed by critics and others who knew nothing whatever of the
    subject, and who were too prejudiced to see and judge for themselves
    whether or not there was truth in the phenomena. I shall state simply
    what I have seen and proved by repeated experiment and test.

    Except where darkness has been a necessary condition, as with some of
    the phenomena of luminous appearances, and a few other instances,
    everything recorded has taken place _in the light_. In the few cases
    where the phenomena noted have occurred in darkness I have been very
    particular to mention the fact. Moreover, some special reason can be
    shown for the exclusion of light, or the results have been produced
    under such perfect test conditions that the suppression of one of the
    senses has not really weakened the evidence.

    I have said that darkness is not essential. It is, however, a
    well-ascertained fact that when the force is weak a bright light
    exerts an interfering action on some of the phenomena. The power
    possessed by Mr. Home is sufficiently strong to withstand this
    antagonistic influence; consequently, he always objects to darkness at
    his _seances_. Indeed, except on two occasions, when, for some
    particular experiments of my own, light was excluded, everything which
    I have witnessed with him has taken place in the light. I have had
    many opportunities of testing the action of light on different sources
    and colors,--such as sunlight, diffused daylight, moonlight, gas,
    lamp, and candle-light, electric light from a vacuum tube,
    homogeneous yellow light, etc. The interfering rays appear to be those
    at the extreme end of the spectrum.

Professor Crookes next proceeds to classify the phenomena observed by him,
going from the more simple to the more complex and giving in rapid review
under each head, a sketch of some of the facts. In the abridgment of his
report which follows I eliminate what has already been fully demonstrated
elsewhere in this book.

    FIRST CLASS: _The movement of Heavy Bodies with Contact, but without
    Mechanical Exertion._

    (This movement has been fully proved in this volume.)

    SECOND CLASS: _The Phenomena of Percussive and other Allied Sounds._

    An important question here forces itself upon the attention. _Are the
    movements and sounds governed by intelligence?_ At a very early stage
    of the inquiry, it was seen that the power producing the phenomena was
    not merely a blind force, but was associated with or governed by
    intelligence. Thus the sounds to which I have just alluded will be
    repeated a definite number of times. They will come loud or faint, and
    in different places at request; and by a pre-arranged code of signals,
    questions are answered, and messages given with more or less accuracy.

    The intelligence governing the phenomena is sometimes manifestly below
    that of the medium. It is frequently in direct opposition to the
    wishes of the medium. When a determination has been expressed to do
    something which might not be considered quite right, I have known
    urgent messages given to induce a reconsideration. The intelligence is
    sometimes of such a character as to lead to the belief that it does
    not emanate from any person present.

    THIRD CLASS: _The Alteration of Weights of Bodies._--(Experiments
    which have been already described.)

    FOURTH CLASS: _Movements of Heavy Substances when at a distance from
    the Medium._--The instances in which heavy bodies, such as tables,
    chairs, sofas, etc., have been moved, when the medium has not been
    touching them, are very numerous. I will briefly mention a few of the
    most striking. My own chair has been twisted partly round, whilst my
    feet were off the floor. A chair was seen by all present to move
    slowly up to the table from a far corner, when all were watching it.
    On another occasion an arm-chair moved to where we were sitting, and
    then moved slowly back again (a distance of about three feet) at my
    request. On three successive evenings a small table moved slowly
    across the room, under conditions which I had specially pre-arranged,
    so as to answer any objection which might be raised to the evidence. I
    have had several repetitions of the experiment considered by the
    Committee of the Dialectical Society to be conclusive, viz., the
    movement of a heavy table, in full light, the chairs turned with their
    backs to the table, about a foot off, and each person kneeling on his
    chair, with hands resting over the back of the chair, but not touching
    the table. On one occasion this took place when I was moving about so
    as to see how everyone was placed.

    FIFTH CLASS: _The Rising of Tables and Chairs off the Ground, without
    Contact with any Person._

    (We need not recur to these matters.)

    SIXTH CLASS: _The Levitation of Human Beings._--The most striking
    cases of levitation which I have witnessed have been with Mr. Home. On
    three separate occasions have I seen him raised completely from the
    floor of the room. Once sitting in an easy-chair, once kneeling on his
    chair, and once standing up. On each occasion I had full opportunity
    of watching the occurrence as it was taking place.

    There are at least a hundred recorded instances of Mr. Home's rising
    from the ground, in the presence of as many separate persons, and I
    have heard from the lips of the three witnesses to the most striking
    occurrence of this kind--the Earl of Dunraven, Lord Lindsay, and
    Captain C. Wynne--their own most minute accounts of what took place.
    To reject the recorded evidence on this subject is to reject all human
    testimony whatever; for no fact in sacred or profane history is
    supported by a stronger array of proofs.

    SEVENTH CLASS: _Movement of Various Small Articles without Contact
    with any Person._--(As in the case of the sixth class, this is well
    known to my readers.)

    EIGHTH CLASS: _Luminous Appearances._--These, being rather faint,
    generally require the room to be darkened. I need scarcely remind my
    readers again that, under these circumstances, I have taken proper
    precautions to avoid being imposed upon by phosphorized oil or other
    means. Moreover, many of these lights are such as I have tried to
    imitate artificially, but cannot.

    Under the strictest test conditions, I have seen a solid self-luminous
    body, the size and nearly the shape of a turkey's egg, float
    noiselessly about the room, at one time higher than any one present
    could reach standing on tiptoe, and then gently descend to the floor.
    It was visible for more than ten minutes, and before it faded away it
    struck the table three times with a sound like that of a hard solid
    body.

    During this time the medium was lying back, apparently insensible, in
    an easy-chair.

    I have seen luminous points of light darting about and settling on the
    heads of different persons; I have had questions answered by the
    flashing of a bright light a desired number of times in front of my
    face. I have seen sparks of light rising from the table to the
    ceiling, and again falling upon the table, striking it with an audible
    sound. I have had an alphabetic communication given by luminous
    flashes occurring before me in the air, whilst my hand was moving
    about amongst them. I have seen a luminous cloud floating upwards to a
    picture. Under the strictest test conditions, I have more than once
    had a solid, self-luminous, crystalline body placed in my hand by a
    hand which did not belong to any person in the room. _In the light_, I
    have seen a luminous cloud hover over a heliotrope on a side table,
    break a sprig off, and carry it to a lady; and on some occasions I
    have seen a similar luminous cloud visibly condense to the form of a
    hand and carry small objects about.

    NINTH CLASS: _The Appearance of Hands, either Self-Luminous or Visible
    by Ordinary Light._--During a seance in full light a
    beautifully-formed small hand rose up from an opening in a
    dining-table and gave me a flower; it appeared and then disappeared
    three times at intervals, affording me ample opportunity of satisfying
    myself that it was as real in appearance as my own. This occurred in
    the light in my own room, whilst I was holding the medium's hands and
    feet.

    On another occasion, a small hand and arm, like a baby's, appeared
    playing about a lady who was sitting next to me. It then patted my arm
    and pulled my coat several times.

    At another time, a finger and thumb were seen to pick the petals from
    a flower in Mr. Home's button-hole, and lay them in front of several
    persons who were sitting near him.

    A hand has been repeatedly seen by myself and others playing the keys
    of an accordion, both of the medium's hands being visible at the same
    time, and sometimes being held by those near him.

    The hands and fingers do not always appear to me to be solid and
    life-like. Sometimes, indeed, they present more the appearance of a
    nebulous cloud partly condensed into the form of a hand. This is not
    equally visible to all present. For instance, a flower or other small
    object is seen to move; one person present will see a luminous cloud
    hovering over it, another will detect a nebulous-looking hand, whilst
    others will see nothing at all but the moving flower. I have more than
    once seen, first an object move, then a luminous cloud appear to form
    about it, and, lastly, the cloud condense into shape and become a
    perfectly-formed hand. At this stage the hand is visible to all
    present. It is not always a mere form, but sometimes appears perfectly
    life-like and graceful, the fingers moving, and the flesh apparently
    as human as that of any in the room. At the wrist, or arm, it becomes
    hazy, and fades off into a luminous cloud.

    To the touch, the hand sometimes appears icy-cold and dead, at other
    times, warm and life-like, grasping my own with the firm pressure of
    an old friend.

    I have retained one of these hands in my own, firmly resolved not to
    let it escape. There was no struggle or effort made to get loose, but
    it gradually seemed to resolve itself into vapor, and faded in that
    manner from my grasp.

    TENTH CLASS: _Direct Writing._--(The learned chemist cites some
    remarkable examples obtained by him. We need not speak of them in this
    book.)

    ELEVENTH CLASS: _Phantom Forms and Faces._--These are the rarest of
    the phenomena I have witnessed. The conditions requisite for their
    appearance appear to be so delicate, and such trifles interfere with
    their production, that only on very few occasions have I witnessed
    them under satisfactory test conditions. I will mention two of these
    cases.

    In the dusk of the evening, during a _seance_ with Mr. Home at my
    house, the curtains of a window about eight feet from Mr. Home were
    seen to move. A dark, shadowy, semi-transparent form, like that of a
    man, was then seen by all present standing near the window, waving the
    curtain with his hand. As we looked, the form faded away, and the
    curtains ceased to move.

    The following is a still more striking instance. As in the former
    case, Mr. Home was the medium. A phantom form came from a corner of
    the room, took an accordion in its hand, and then glided about the
    room playing the instrument. The form was visible to all present for
    many minutes, Mr. Home also being seen at the same time. Coming rather
    close to a lady who was sitting apart from the rest of the company,
    she gave a slight cry, upon which it vanished.

    TWELFTH CLASS: _Special Instances which seem to point to the Agency of
    an Exterior Intelligence._--It has already been shown that the
    phenomena are governed by an intelligence. It becomes a question of
    importance as to the source of that intelligence. Is it the
    intelligence of the medium, of any of the other persons in the room,
    or is it an exterior intelligence? Without wishing at present to speak
    positively on this point, I may say that whilst I have observed many
    circumstances which appear to show that the will and intelligence of
    the medium have much to do with the phenomena, I have observed some
    circumstances which seem conclusively to point to the agency of an
    outside intelligence, not belonging to any human being in the room.
    Space does not allow me to give here all the arguments which can be
    adduced to prove these points, but I will briefly mention one or two
    circumstances out of many.

    I have been present when several phenomena were going on at the same
    time, some being unknown to the medium. I have been with Miss Fox when
    she has been writing a message automatically to one person present,
    whilst a message to another person on another subject was being given
    alphabetically by means of "raps," and the whole time she was
    conversing freely with a third person on a subject totally different
    from either.

    Perhaps a more striking instance is the following:

    During a _seance_ with Mr. Home, a small lath, which I have before
    mentioned, moved across the table to me, in the light, and delivered a
    message to me by tapping my hand, I repeating the alphabet, and the
    lath tapping me at the right letters. The other end of the lath was
    resting on the table, some distance from Mr. Home's hands.

    The taps were so sharp and clear, and the lath was evidently so well
    under control of the invisible power which was governing its
    movements, that I said, "Can the intelligence governing the motion of
    this lath change the character of the movements, and give me a
    telegraphic message through the Morse alphabet by taps on my hand?" (I
    have every reason to believe that the Morse code was quite unknown to
    any other person present, and it was only imperfectly known to me.)
    Immediately I said this, the character of the taps changed, and the
    message was continued in the way I had requested. The letters were
    given too rapidly for me to do more than catch a word here and there,
    and consequently I lost the message; but I heard sufficient to
    convince me that there was a good Morse operator at the other end of
    the line, wherever that might be.

    Another instance. A lady was writing automatically by means of the
    planchette. I was trying to devise a means of proving that what she
    wrote was not due to "unconscious cerebration." The planchette, as it
    always does, insisted that, although it was moved by the hand and the
    arm of the lady, the _intelligence_ was that of an invisible being who
    was playing on her brain as on a musical instrument, and thus moving
    her muscles. I therefore said to this intelligence, "Can you see the
    contents of this room?" "Yes," wrote the planchette. "Can you see to
    read this newspaper?" said I, putting my finger on a copy of the
    _Times_, which was on a table behind me, but without looking at it.
    "Yes," was the reply of the planchette. "Well," I said, "if you can
    see that, write the word which is now covered by my finger, and I
    will believe you." The planchette commenced to move. Slowly and with
    great difficulty the word "however" was written. I turned round and
    saw that the word "however" was covered by the tip of my finger.

    I had purposely avoided looking at the newspaper when I tried this
    experiment, and it was impossible for the lady, had she tried, to have
    seen any of the printed words, for she was sitting at one table, and
    the paper was on another table behind, my body intervening.

    THIRTEENTH CLASS: _Miscellaneous Occurrences of a Complex Character._

    (Professor Crookes here cites two examples of the _transference of
    matter through matter_,--a bell passing from neighboring room into
    that in which the seance was being held, and a flower separating from
    a bouquet and _passing through the table_.)

The spare at my disposal will not permit me to give more details here; but
all my readers must appreciate, as I do, the importance of these
experiments of the eminent chemist. I will especially call attention to
the proofs they afford of the presence of a mind or intelligence, other
than that of the experimenters; to the formation of hands and
spirit-forms; and to the passage of matter through matter.

These experiments date from the years 1871 to 1873. During the last
mentioned year, a new medium, endowed with particularly remarkable powers,
appeared in London, namely, Miss Florence Cook, who was born in 1856, and
was, therefore, seventeen in 1873. Since the preceding year (1872), she
had often seen the apparition by her side of a young girl. This spectral
form had taken a liking to her, and told her she was called _Katie King_
in the other world, and had been a lady called Annie Morgan during one of
her lives on earth. Some observers told marvellous stories of these
apparitions, which they also saw,--among them being William Harrison,
Benjamin Coleman, Mr. Luxmore, Dr. Sexton, Dr. Gully, the Prince of Sayn
Wittgenstein, who have all published accounts of them which breathe an
air of sincere belief. Professor Crookes got in touch with this new medium
in December, 1873. In _The Spiritualist_--a journal edited by Mr.
Harrison, at whose home several sittings had taken place--there appeared
in the numbers for February and March, 1874, two letters from Professor
Crookes. A few extracts from these letters here follow:

    I have reason to know that the power at work in these phenomena, like
    Love, "laughs at locksmiths."

    The seance of which you speak and at which I was present, was held at
    the house of Mr. Luxmore, and the "cabinet" was a back drawing-room
    separated from the front room in which the company sat by a curtain.

    The usual formality of searching the room and examining the fastenings
    having been gone through, Miss Cook entered the cabinet.

    After a little time the form of Katie appeared at the side of the
    curtain, but soon retreated, saying her medium was not well, and could
    not be put into a sufficiently deep sleep to make it safe for her to
    be left.

    I was sitting within a few feet of the curtain close behind which Miss
    Cook was sitting, and I could frequently hear her moan and sob, as if
    in pain. This uneasiness continued at intervals nearly the whole
    duration of the _seance_, _and once, when the form of Katie was
    standing before me in the room, I distinctly heard a sobbing, moaning
    sound, identical with that which Miss Cook had been making at
    intervals the whole time of the seance, come from behind the curtain
    where the young lady was supposed to be sitting_.

    I admit that the figure was startlingly life-like and real, and, as
    far as I could see in the somewhat dim light, the features resembled
    those of Miss Cook; but still the positive evidence of one of my own
    senses that the moan came from Miss Cook in the cabinet, whilst the
    figure was outside, is too strong to be upset by a mere inference to
    the contrary, however well supported.

    Your readers, sir, know me, and will, I hope, believe that I will not
    come hastily to an opinion, or ask them to agree with me on
    insufficient evidence. It is perhaps expecting too much to think that
    the little incident I have mentioned will have the same weight with
    them that it had with me. But this I do beg of them--Let those who are
    inclined to judge Miss Cook harshly suspend their judgment until I
    bring forward positive evidence which I think will be sufficient to
    settle the question.

    Miss Cook is now devoting herself exclusively to a series of private
    seances with me and one or two friends. The seances will probably
    extend over some months, and I am promised that every desirable test
    shall be given to me. These seances have not been going on many weeks,
    but enough has taken place to thoroughly convince me of the perfect
    truth and honesty of Miss Cook, and to give me every reason to expect
    that the promises so freely made to me by Katie will be kept.

    WILLIAM CROOKES.

Here is the second letter from the cautious investigator:

    In a letter which I wrote to this journal early in February last,
    speaking of the phenomena of spirit-forms which have appeared through
    Miss Cook's mediumship, I said, "Let those who are inclined to judge
    Miss Cook harshly suspend their judgment until I bring forward
    positive evidence which I think will be sufficient to settle the
    question."

    In that letter I described an incident which, to my mind, went very
    far towards convincing me that Katie and Miss Cook were two separate
    material beings. When Katie was outside the cabinet, standing before
    me, I heard a moaning noise from Miss Cook in the cabinet. I am happy
    to say that I have at last obtained the "absolute proof" to which I
    referred in the above-quoted letter.

    On March 12th, during a seance here, after Katie had been walking
    amongst us and talking for some time, she retreated behind the curtain
    which separated my laboratory, where the company was sitting, from my
    library which did temporary duty as a cabinet. In a minute she came to
    the curtain and called me to her, saying, "Come into the room and lift
    my medium's head up, she has slipped down." Katie was then standing
    before me clothed in her usual white robes and turban head-dress. I
    immediately walked into the library up to Miss Cook, Katie stepping
    aside to allow me to pass. I found Miss Cook had slipped partially
    off the sofa, and her head was hanging in a very awkward position. I
    lifted her on to the sofa, and in so doing had satisfactory evidence,
    in spite of the darkness, that Miss Cook was not attired in the
    "Katie" costume, but had on her ordinary black velvet dress, and was
    in a deep trance. Not more than three seconds elapsed between my
    seeing the white-robed Katie standing before me and my raising Miss
    Cook onto the sofa from the position into which she had fallen.

    On returning to my post of observation by the curtain, Katie again
    appeared, and said she thought she would be able to show herself and
    her medium to me at the same time. The gas was then turned out and she
    asked for my phosphorus lamp. After exhibiting herself by it for some
    seconds, she handed it back to me, saying, "Now come in and see my
    medium." I closely followed her into the library, and by the light of
    my lamp saw Miss Cook lying on the sofa just as I had left her. I
    looked round for Katie, but she had disappeared. I called her, but
    there was no answer.

    On resuming my place, Katie soon reappeared, and told me that she had
    been standing close to Miss Cook all the time. She then asked if she
    might try an experiment herself, and taking the phosphorus lamp from
    me she passed behind the curtain, asking me not to look in for the
    present. In a few minutes she handed the lamp back to me, saying she
    could not succeed, as she had used up all the power, but would try
    again another time. My eldest son, a lad of fourteen, who was sitting
    opposite me, in such a position that he could see behind the curtain,
    tells me he distinctly saw the phosphorus lamp apparently floating
    about in space over Miss Cook, illuminating her as she lay motionless
    on the sofa, but he could not see anyone holding the lamp.

    I pass on to a seance held last night at Hackney. Katie never appeared
    to greater perfection, and for nearly two hours she walked about the
    room, conversing familiarly with those present. On several occasions
    she took my arm when walking, and the impression conveyed to my mind
    that it was a living woman by my side, instead of a visitor from the
    other world, was so strong that the temptation to repeat a recent
    celebrated experiment became almost irresistible.

    Feeling, however, that if I had not a spirit, I had at all events a
    _lady_ close to me, I asked her permission to clasp her in my arms, so
    as to be able to verify the interesting observations which a bold
    experimentalist has recently somewhat verbosely recorded. Permission
    was graciously given, and I accordingly did--well, as any gentleman
    would do under the circumstances. Mr. Volckman will be pleased to know
    that I can corroborate his statement that the "ghost" (not
    "struggling" however) was as material a being as Miss Cook herself.

    Katie now said she thought she would be able this time to show herself
    and Miss Cook together. I was to turn the gas out, and then come with
    my phosphorus lamp into the room now used as a cabinet. This I did,
    having previously asked a friend who was skillful at shorthand to take
    down any statement I might make when in the cabinet, knowing the
    importance attaching to first impressions, and not wishing to leave
    more to memory than necessary. His notes are now before me.

    I went cautiously into the room, it being dark, and felt about for
    Miss Cook. I found her crouching on the floor.

    Kneeling down, I let air enter the lamp, and by its light I saw the
    young lady dressed in black velvet, as she had been in the early part
    of the evening, and to all appearance perfectly senseless; she did not
    move when I took her hand and held the light quite close to her face,
    but continued quietly breathing.

    Raising the lamp, I looked around and saw Katie standing close behind
    Miss Cook. She was robed in flowing white drapery as we had seen her
    previously during the seance. Holding one of Miss Cook's hands in
    mine, and still kneeling, I passed the lamp up and down so as to
    illuminate Katie's whole figure, and satisfy myself thoroughly that I
    was really looking at the veritable Katie whom I had clasped in my
    arms a few minutes before, and not at the phantasm of a disordered
    brain. She did not speak, but moved her head and smiled in
    recognition. Three separate times did I carefully examine Miss Cook
    crouching before me, to be sure that the hand I held was that of a
    living woman, and three separate times did I turn the lamp to Katie
    and examine her with steadfast scrutiny, until I had no doubt whatever
    of her objective reality. At last Miss Cook moved slightly, and Katie
    instantly motioned me to go away. I went to another part of the
    cabinet, and then ceased to see Katie, but did not leave the room till
    Miss Cook woke up, and two of the visitors came in with a light.

    Before concluding this article I wish to give some of the points of
    difference which I have observed between Miss Cook and Katie. Katie's
    height varies; in my house I have seen her six inches taller than Miss
    Cook. Last night, with bare feet, and not "tiptoeing," she was
    four-and-a-half inches taller than Miss Cook. Katie's neck was bare
    last night; the skin was perfectly smooth both to touch and sight,
    whilst on Miss Cook's neck is a large blister, which under similar
    circumstances is distinctly visible and rough to the touch. Katie's
    ears are unpierced, whilst Miss Cook habitually wears earrings.
    Katie's complexion is very fair, while that of Miss Cook is very dark.
    Katie's fingers are much longer than Miss Cook's, and her face is also
    larger. In manners and ways of expression there are also many decided
    differences.

After the observations summarized in these two letters Professor Crookes
continued his experiments at his own home, for a space of two months. The
result of all is embodied in the following statements made by Crookes
himself:

    During the week before Katie took her departure she gave seances at my
    house almost nightly, to enable me to photograph her by artificial
    light. Five complete sets of photographic apparatus were accordingly
    fitted up for the purpose, consisting of five cameras, one of the
    whole-plate size, one half-plate, one quarter-plate, and two binocular
    stereoscopic cameras, which were all brought to bear upon Katie at the
    same time on each occasion on which she stood for her portrait. Five
    sensitizing and five fixing baths were used, and plenty of plates were
    cleaned ready for use in advance, so that there might be no hitch or
    delay during the photographic operations, which were performed by
    myself, aided by one assistant.

    My library was used as a dark cabinet. It has folding doors opening
    into the laboratory; one of these doors was taken off its hinges, and
    a curtain suspended in its place to enable Katie to pass in and out
    easily. Those of our friends who were present were seated in the
    laboratory facing the curtain, and the cameras were placed a little
    behind them, ready to photograph Katie when she came outside, and to
    photograph anything also inside the cabinet, whenever the curtain was
    withdrawn for the purpose. Each evening there were three or four
    exposures of plates in the five cameras, giving at least fifteen
    separate pictures at each seance; some of these were spoilt in the
    developing, and some in regulating the amount of light. Altogether, I
    have forty-four negatives, some inferior, some indifferent, and some
    excellent.

    Katie instructed all the sitters but myself to keep their seats and to
    keep conditions; but for some time past she has given me permission to
    do what I liked--to touch her, and to enter and leave the cabinet
    almost whenever I pleased. I have frequently followed her into the
    cabinet, and have sometimes seen her and her medium together, but most
    generally I have found nobody but the entranced medium lying on the
    floor, Katie and her white robes having instantaneously disappeared.

    During the last six months Miss Cook has been a frequent visitor at my
    house, remaining sometimes a week at a time. She brings nothing with
    her but a little hand-bag, not locked. During the day she is
    constantly in the presence of Mrs. Crookes, myself, or some other
    member of my family, and, not sleeping by herself, there is absolutely
    no opportunity for any preparation even of a less elaborate character
    than would be required for enacting Katie King. I prepare and arrange
    my library myself as the dark cabinet, and usually, after Miss Cook
    has been dining and conversing with us, and scarcely out of our sight
    for a minute, she walks directly into the cabinet, and I, at her
    request, lock its second door, and keep possession of the key all
    through the seance. The gas is then turned out, and Miss Cook is left
    in darkness.

    On entering the cabinet, Miss Cook lies down upon the floor, with her
    head on a pillow, and is soon entranced. During the photographic
    seance, Katie muffled her medium's head up in a shawl to prevent the
    light falling upon her face. I frequently drew the curtain on one side
    when Katie was standing near, and it was a common thing for the seven
    or eight of us in the laboratory to see Miss Cook and Katie at the
    same time, under the full blaze of the electric light. We did not on
    these occasions actually see the face of the medium because of the
    shawl, but we saw her hands and feet; we saw her move uneasily under
    the influence of the intense light, and we heard her moan
    occasionally. I have one photograph of the two together, but Katie is
    seated in front of Miss Cook's head.

    During the time I took an active part in these seances Katie's
    confidence in me gradually grew, until she refused to give a seance
    unless I took charge of the arrangements. She said she always wanted
    me to keep close to her, and near the cabinet, and I found that after
    this confidence was established, and she was satisfied I would not
    break any promise I might make to her, the phenomena increased greatly
    in power, and tests were freely given that would have been
    unobtainable had I approached the subject in another manner. She often
    consulted me about persons present at the seances, and where they
    should be placed, for of late she had become very nervous, in
    consequence of certain ill-advised suggestions that force should be
    employed as an adjunct to more scientific modes of research.

    One of the most interesting of the pictures is one in which I am
    standing by the side of Katie; she has her bare foot upon a particular
    part of the floor. Afterwards I dressed Miss Cook like Katie, placed
    her and myself in exactly the same position, and we were photographed
    by the same cameras, placed exactly as in the other experiment, and
    illuminated by the same light. When these two pictures are placed over
    each other, the two photographs of myself coincide exactly as regards
    stature, etc., but Katie is half a head taller than Miss Cook, and
    looks a big woman in comparison with her. In the breadth of her face,
    in many of the pictures, she differs essentially in size from her
    medium, and the photographs show several other points of difference.

    But photography is as inadequate to depict the perfect beauty of
    Katie's face as words are powerless to describe her charms of manner.
    Photography may, indeed, give a map of her countenance; but how can it
    reproduce the brilliant purity of her complexion, or the ever-varying
    expression of her most mobile features, now overshadowed with sadness
    when relating some of the bitter experiences of her past life, now
    smiling with all the innocence of happy girlhood when she had
    collected my children round her and was amusing them by recounting
    anecdotes of her adventures in India?

      "Round her she made an atmosphere of life;
        The very air seemed lighter from her eyes,
      They were so soft and beautiful, and rife
        With all we can imagine of the skies;
      Her overpowering presence made you feel
        It would not be idolatry to kneel."

    Having seen so much of Katie lately, when she has been illuminated by
    the electric light, I am enabled to add to the points of difference
    between her and her medium which I mentioned in a former article. I
    have the most absolute certainty that Miss Cook and Katie are two
    separate individuals so far as their bodies are concerned. Several
    little marks on Miss Cook's face are absent on Katie's. Miss Cook's
    hair is so dark a brown as almost to appear black; a lock of Katie's,
    which is now before me, and which she allowed me to cut from her
    luxuriant tresses, having first traced it up to the scalp and
    satisfied myself that it actually grew there, is a rich golden auburn.

    One evening I timed Katie's pulse. It beat steadily at 75, whilst Miss
    Cook's pulse a little time after was going at its usual rate of 90. On
    applying my ear to Katie's chest I could hear a heart beating
    rhythmically inside, and pulsating even more steadily than did Miss
    Cook's heart when she allowed me to try a similar experiment after the
    seance. Tested in the same way, Katie's lungs were found to be sounder
    than her medium's, for at the time I tried my experiment Miss Cook was
    under medical treatment for a severe cough.

This mysterious being, this strange Katie King, had announced, from the
time of her first appearances, that she would be able to show herself in
this way for only three years. The end of this period was now approaching.

    When the time came for Katie to take her farewell I asked that she
    would let me see the last of her. Accordingly when she had called each
    of the company up to her and had spoken to them a few words in
    private, she gave some general directions for the future guidance and
    protection of Miss Cook. From these, which were taken down in
    shorthand, I quote the following: "Mr. Crookes has done very well
    throughout, and I leave Florrie with the greatest confidence in his
    hands, feeling perfectly sure he will not abuse the trust I place in
    him. He can act in any emergency better than I can myself, for he has
    more strength." Having concluded her directions Katie invited me into
    the cabinet with her, and allowed me to remain there to the end.

    After closing the curtain she conversed with me for some time, and
    then walked across the room to where Miss Cook was lying senseless on
    the floor. Stooping over her, Katie touched her, and said: "Wake up,
    Florrie, wake up! I must leave you now."

    Miss Cook then woke and tearfully entreated Katie to stay a little
    time longer. "My dear, I can't; my work is done. God bless you," Katie
    replied, and then continued speaking to Miss Cook. For several minutes
    the two were conversing with each other, till at last Miss Cook's
    tears prevented her speaking. Following Katie's instructions I then
    came forward to support Miss Cook, who was falling onto the floor,
    sobbing hysterically. I looked round, but the white-robed Katie had
    gone. As soon as Miss Cook was sufficiently calmed, a light was
    procured and I led her out of the cabinet.

One word more about this astonishing phenomenon. The medium Home,
employed, as we have seen, in the first experiments of Professor Crookes,
gave it to me as his personal opinion that Miss Cook was only a skilful
trickster, and had shamefully deceived the eminent scientist, and as for
mediums, why _there was only one absolutely trustworthy and that was
himself, Daniel Dunglas Home_! He even added that the fiance of Miss Cook
had given striking proofs of her extreme cantankerousness!

He who has observed at close hand the rivalries of mediums--which are as
strongly marked as those of doctors, actors, musicians and women--will
not, it seems to me, find in this talk of Home any intrinsic value
whatever. But I must confess that this matter of Katie King is really so
extraordinary that I am forced to try every possible explanation before
admitting its truth. This is also the opinion of Mr. Crookes himself.

    In order to convince myself (says he) I was constantly on my guard,
    and Miss Cook readily assisted me in all my investigations. Every test
    that I have proposed she has at once agreed to submit to with the
    utmost willingness; she is open and straightforward in speech, and I
    have never seen anything approaching the slightest symptom of a wish
    to deceive. Indeed, I do not believe she could carry on a deception if
    she were to try, and if she did she would certainly be found out very
    quickly, for such a line of action is altogether foreign to her
    nature. And to imagine that an innocent school-girl of fifteen would
    be able to conceive and then successfully carry out for three years so
    gigantic an imposture as this, and in that time would submit to any
    test which might be imposed upon her, would bear the strictest
    scrutiny, would be willing to be searched at any time, either before
    or after a seance, and would meet with even better success in my own
    house than at that of her parents, knowing that she visited me with
    the express object of submitting to strict scientific tests--to
    imagine, I say, the Katie King of the last three years to be the
    result of imposture does more violence to one's reason and common
    sense than to believe her to be what she herself affirms.

It will perhaps not be superfluous to round out these accounts of William
Crookes by giving an extract from the journal _The Spiritualist_ of the
29th of May, 1874.

    From the beginning of the mediumship of Miss Cook, the spirit Katie
    King or Annie Morgan, who had produced the greater portion of the
    physical part of the manifestations, had announced that she would not
    be able to be with her medium longer than three years, and that after
    that time she would say good-bye to her forever.

    The end of that period came last Thursday; but before leaving her
    medium, she gave her friends three more seances.

    The last took place on Thursday, the 21st of May, 1874. Among the
    spectators was Prof. William Crookes.

    At 7.23 in the evening Professor Crookes led Miss Cook into the dark
    cabinet, where she lay down upon the floor, her head resting on a
    cushion. At 7.28 Katie spoke for the first time, and at 7.30 she
    showed herself outside of the curtain in her full form. She was
    dressed in white, short sleeves and bare neck. She had long light
    auburn hair of a rich tint, falling in curls on each side of her head
    and down her back to her waist. She wore a long white veil which was
    not drawn down over her face more than once or twice during the
    sitting.

    The medium wore a light blue merino robe. During almost the whole of
    the seance, Katie remained standing before us. The curtain of the
    cabinet was drawn aside and all could distinctly see the medium lying
    asleep, having her face covered with a red shawl, in order to shield
    it from the light. Katie spoke of her approaching departure and
    accepted a bouquet which Mr. Tapp had brought her, as well as a bunch
    of lilies offered by Mr. Crookes. She asked Mr. Tapp to untie the
    bouquet and to put the flowers before her on the floor. She then sat
    down in the Turkish style and asked all to sit around her in the same
    way. Then she divided the flowers and gave to each a little bouquet
    tied up with a blue ribbon.

    She then wrote letters to some of her friends, signing them "Annie
    Owen Morgan," saying that was her true name during her life on earth.
    She also wrote a letter to her medium, and chose for her a rosebud as
    a good-bye gift. Katie then took the scissors, cut off a lock of her
    hair and gave some of it to all of us. She then took Mr. Crookes' hand
    and made the tour of the room, pressing the hand of each of us in
    turn. She then sat down again and cut off several pieces of her robe
    and of her veil for remembrances. Seeing such holes in her robe (she
    being seated all this while between Mr. Crookes and Mr. Tapp), some
    one asked her if she could repair the damage, as she had done on
    previous occasions. She then held the cut part of the robe in the
    light, gave one rap upon it, and instantly that part was whole and
    unblemished as before. Those near her touched and examined the stuff,
    with her permission. They affirmed that there was neither hole nor
    scam, nor anything added at the very place where an instant before
    they had seen holes several inches in diameter.

    She next gave her last instructions to Mr. Crookes. Then, seeming
    fatigued, she added that her force was disappearing, and repeated her
    good-bye to everyone in the most affectionate manner. All present
    thanked her for the wonderful manifestations which she had given them.

    While she was directing toward her friends a last grave and pensive
    look, she let fall the curtain, and it hid her from our view. We heard
    her waking up the medium, who begged her with tears to remain a little
    longer. But Katie said, "It is impossible, my dear; my mission is
    accomplished; God bless you!" And we heard the sound of a kiss. The
    medium then came out among us wholly exhausted and in a state of deep
    dismay.

Such are the experiments of Sir William Crookes. I have restricted myself
to relating his own personal observations, as set forth by himself. The
story of Katie King is truly one of the most mysterious, the most
incredible, to be found in the whole history of Spiritualistic research,
and is at the same time, one of the cases that have been most scrupulously
studied by the experimental method, including photography.

The medium, Miss Florence Cook, married in 1874 Mr. Elgie Corner, and,
from that time on, her contributions to psychical research almost ceased.
I have several times been assured that she also had been caught in the
very act of cheating. (Always that feminine hysteria!) But the
investigations of Crookes were conducted with such care and competence,
that it is very difficult to refuse our credence. Besides, this scientist
was not the only one to study the mediumship of Florence Cook. Among other
works that may be consulted on this subject is one containing a large
number of proofs and testimonies, as well as several photographs (alluded
to above).[68]

These recorded cases, or testimonies, form a collection of records, the
study of which is most instructive. The study of the great chemist surpass
the rest, to be sure, but it does not diminish the intrinsic value of the
others. All the observations agree and mutually confirm each other.

As to the explanation of the phenomena, Crookes thinks that we cannot
discover it. Was this apparition what it claimed to be? There is nothing
to prove it.

Might it not be a _double_ of the medium, a product of her psychic force?

The learned chemist did not change his opinion (as has been claimed) about
the authenticity of the phenomena studied by him. In an address delivered
at a meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science,
held at Bristol in 1898, and of which he was President, he expressed
himself as follows:

    No incident in my scientific career is more widely known than the part
    I took many years ago in certain psychic researches. Thirty years have
    passed since I published an account of experiments tending to show
    that outside our scientific knowledge there exists a Force exercised
    by intelligence differing from the ordinary intelligence common to
    mortals. This fact in my life is, of course, well understood by those
    who honored me with the invitation to become your President. Perhaps
    among my audience some may feel curious as to whether I shall speak
    out or be silent. I elect to speak, although briefly.

    To enter at length on a still debatable subject would be to insist on
    a topic which,--as Wallace, Lodge and Barrett have already
    shown,--though not unfitted for discussion at these meetings, does not
    yet enlist the interest of the majority of my scientific brethren. To
    ignore the subject would be an act of cowardice, an act of cowardice I
    feel no temptation to commit.

    To stop short in any research that bids fair to widen the gates of
    knowledge, to recoil from fear of difficulty or adverse criticism, is
    to bring reproach on science. There is nothing for the investigator to
    do but to go straight on, "to explore up and down, inch by inch, with
    the taper, his reason;" to follow the light wherever it may lead, even
    should it at times resemble a will-o'-the wisp.

    I have nothing to retract. I adhere to my already published
    statements. Indeed, I might add much thereto. I regret only a certain
    crudity in those early expositions, which, no doubt justly, militated
    against their acceptance by the scientific world. My own knowledge at
    that time scarcely extended beyond the fact that certain phenomena new
    to science had assuredly occurred, and were attested by my own sober
    senses, and, better still, by automatic record.

    I was like some two-dimensional being who might stand at the singular
    point of a Riemann's surface, and thus find himself in infinitesimal
    and inexplicable contact with a plane of existence not his own.

    I think I see a little farther now. I have glimpses of something like
    coherence among the strange elusive phenomena; of something like
    continuity between those unexplained forces and laws already known.
    This advance is largely due to the labors of another Association of
    which I have also this year the honor to be President--the Society for
    Psychical Research. And were I now introducing for the first time
    these inquiries to the world of science I should choose a starting
    point different from that of old. It would be well to begin with
    _telepathy_; with the fundamental law, as I believe it to be, that
    thoughts and images may be transferred from one mind to another
    without the agency of the recognized organs of sense, that knowledge
    may enter the human mind without being communicated in any hitherto
    known or recognized ways.

    Although the inquiry has elicited important facts with reference to
    the mind, it has not yet reached the scientific stage of certainty
    which would entitle it to be usefully brought before one of our
    sections. I will therefore confine myself to pointing out the
    direction in which scientific investigation can legitimately advance.

    If telepathy take place we have two physical facts--the physical
    change in the brain of A, the suggester, and the analogous physical
    change in the brain of B, the recipient of the suggestion. Between
    these two physical events there must exist a train of physical causes.
    Whenever the connecting sequence of intermediate causes begins to be
    revealed the inquiry will then come within the range of one of the
    sections of the British Association. Such a sequence can only occur
    through an intervening medium. All the phenomena of the universe are
    presumably in some way continous, and it is unscientific to call in
    the aid of mysterious agencies when with every fresh advance in
    knowledge it is shown that ether vibrations have powers and attributes
    abundantly equal to any demand--even to the transmission of thought.
    It is supposed by some physiologists that the essential cells of
    nerves do not actually touch, but are separated by a narrow gap which
    widens in sleep while it narrows almost to extinction during mental
    activity. This condition is so singuarly like that of a Branly or
    Lodge coherer as to suggest a further analogy.

    The structure of brain and nerve being similar, it is conceivable
    there may be present masses of such nerve coherers in the brain whose
    special function it may be to receive impulses brought from without
    through the connecting sequence of ether waves of appropriate order of
    magnitude. Roentgen has familiarized us with an order of vibrations of
    extreme minuteness compared with the smallest waves with which we
    have hitherto been acquainted, and of dimensions comparable with the
    distances between centers of the atoms of which the material universe
    is built up; and there is no reason to suppose that we have here
    reached the limit of frequency. It is known that the action of thought
    is accompanied by certain molecular movements in the brain, and here
    we have physical vibrations capable from their extreme minuteness of
    acting directly on individual molecules, while their rapidity
    approaches that of the internal and external movements of the atoms
    themselves.

    Confirmation of telepathic phenomena is afforded by many converging
    experiments, and by many spontaneous occurrences only thus
    intelligible. The most varied proof, perhaps, is drawn from analysis
    of the sub-conscious workings of the mind, when these, whether by
    accident or design, are brought into conscious survey. Evidence of a
    region below the threshold of consciousness has been presented, since
    its first inception, in the "Proceedings of the Society for Psychical
    Research;" and its various aspects are being interpreted and welded
    into a comprehensive whole by the pertinacious genius of F. W. H.
    Myers.

    A formidable range of phenomena must be scientifically sifted before
    we effectually grasp a faculty so strange, so bewildering, and for
    ages so inscrutable, as the direct action of mind on mind.

    An eminent predecessor in this chair declared that "by an intellectual
    necessity be crossed the boundary of experimental evidence, and
    discerned in that matter, which we, in our ignorance of its latent
    powers, and notwithstanding our professed reverence for its Creator,
    have hitherto covered with opprobrium, the potency and promise of all
    terrestrial life." I should prefer to reverse the apophthegm, and to
    say that in life I see the promise and potency of all forms of matter.

    In old Egyptian days a well-known inscription was carved over the
    portal of the temple of Isis: "I am whatever hath been, is, or ever
    will be; and my veil no man hath yet lifted." Not thus do modern
    seekers after truth confront Nature,--the word that stands for the
    baffling mysteries of the Universe. Steadily, unflinchingly, we
    strive to pierce the inmost heart of Nature, from what she is to
    re-construct what she has been, and to prophesy what she yet shall be.
    Veil after veil we have lifted, and her face grows more beautiful,
    august, and wonderful, with every barrier that is withdrawn.

It would be difficult to find truer thought better expressed. It is the
language of true science, and is also the expression of the highest
philosophy.




