CHAPTER VI.

Eight days passed since Johann's departure before the young man again stood
at the sculptor's door. Alas! in that silent and gloomy house, the click of
the hammer striking the stone, the cutting of the chisel on the marble, the
cheerful voices of the pupils, and the pure voice of Mina, singing her love
lay in the morning or canticle at eve, were no longer heard. The great
window of the atelier was opaque and black, and no spark of light appeared
in the house save where the weak and pale light of a little lamp shone
through the window of the young girl's room, at the top of the house, and
seemingly shadowed by the angel's wings.

Johann sprang from his horse, tapped lightly at the door, and, throwing
aside his travelling cloak, hastened to question the old servant.

"Where is your young lady?"

"Above in her room. Her malady hath much increased since last we saw you."

"And Master Sebald?"

"Is at her side. She speaks and weeps in her delirium, and the master
desires that we should not approach her."

"But I may enter," said Johann. "Fear nothing, Martha, I will not disturb
her--you well know that, when I departed, it was to bear a message for
Demoiselle Mina."

Martha allowed the young traveller to pass, and he ascended the stairs
rapidly yet softly, and glided noiselessly into Mina's room, of which the
door stood half open.

Beneath the thick curtains of the bed, under a canopy of dark blue damask,
the white form of the sculptor's daughter was dimly outlined, indistinct
and floating like a shadow, and scarcely perceptible, save where the yellow
ray of the silver lamp lit up two sparkling, ardent, agitated flames from
beneath her dark lashes. How dry and desolate, and even fearful, were those
late sweet glances, now glittering with the fires of fever! Tears would
bring more gladness to her father's heart than that wild splendor. So
thought Johann as he softly entered and hid behind a large arm-chair in his
eagerness to escape those burning glances.

By the side of the bed Master Sebald sat gloomy and silent in a high-backed
ebony chair. His grief-worn countenance and gray head rested upon a hand
which seemed to Johann to have grown, even in the few days of his absence,
more yellow and thin. The other hand was stretched toward the bed, and held
clasped that of Mina. The old man watched every movement, every look, every
sigh of his daughter. A moan from time to time broke from her lips; then
she pushed back with her thin fingers the waves of golden hair which fell
over her pale forehead, and began to speak in short, gasping tones:

"Wilt thou pardon me, my father?" said she. "Once thou hadst confidence in
me and wert happy. Nothing was wanting to thee; neither the grace of God
nor the respect of man; neither success nor genius. Ah! my father, when I
reflect that thou mightest always have been so, hadst thou no daughter! Why
came I ever into this world, or why died I not in my cradle? Then thou
wouldst have mourned me, but with different tears with sweet and tender
tears--tears of hope and benediction; thou wouldst have placed me in my
little coffin, and, when afterward thou wouldst think of me, thou wouldst
cease to weep, saying: I am a happy father, whose family is in
heaven--there have my pious wife and angel babe flown.'"

{673}

Here sobs interrupted her voice. A heart-broken sigh from the father
replied.

The sick girl for a moment was silent, breathing painfully, and wiping away
with her hand the drops of sweat which stood upon her brow. Then with a
still more mournful voice, she continued:

"Instead of that I grew, I lived, and I loved in vain. Father! my tombstone
must bear the thorns of grief the black cross of penitence. It will be a
sad sight--my last dwelling. Mockery will sound around it; the passer-by
will point it out scornfully, but, if thy malediction floats not over it,
my father--if thou wilt there shed a tear on the green turf--"

"O my Mina! my only child, talk not of maledictions or tombs--I love thee.
I tremble for thee, I pardon thee--and thou wilt live and yet be happy. Who
can say that Otho has proved false? Who knows that old Hans is not
mistaken? Who knows that we may not see him once more, generous, true, and
loving thee, my Mina?"

"We will never see him more. He loves me no more, my father. If old Hans
were mistaken--if the lady of Horsheim were not to wed Otho, Johann would
long ere this have returned. Thinkest thou the good youth would delay to
bring me glad tidings? No--he is generous, devoted, and tender. Why could I
not love him? I have been very weak, alas! but father, rememberest thou not
how tall and gracious was the count! How handsome he seemed with his red
plume overhanging his black hair, and his fine form encased in his steel
cuirass! And his voice that went so straight to the heart! his simple
grace! his gentle nobleness! Who would not have loved such a gentleman? And
thou, my father, didst thou not first love him?'

"Yes, I loved him, Mina; and I would yet esteem him."

"Contemn him not, father; and, above all, seek not to be avenged on him!"
cried the girl, in a fit of sudden terror. "Should a proud cavalier like
him espouse a poor maiden like me--one who is not even a lady? Thou hast
genius and glory, my father; but thou hast no escutcheon. I should have
loved Johann; he had such respect for thee--such devotion for me; he would
have given thee a happy old age, and me a peaceful life; he loved me and
would have sacrificed himself for me--he, who could find heart to see me
happy in another's arms. Oh! when Johann returns, tell him that I was not
ungrateful, and that, if heaven is opened to me, I will there pray for
him."

Again her words were interrupted by a stifled sob; she turned, and her eyes
fell upon the great arm chair. She cried out, with fixed gaze and trembling
lips:

"Johann is here--and weeping! Why speaks he not?"

Then old Sebald turned and saw the young man.

"Come hither!" he cried. "Thou hast been at Horsheim; what hast thou seen?
See how pale--how burning--how pitifully sick she is. Speak, my son; say
that old Hans erred when he named the husband of the Countess Gertrude!"

Johann, erect and pale, for a moment did not reply; he made a few timid
steps toward the old sculptor, and whispered as softly as he could:

"O master! why ask me now? Why force me to tell my tidings in her
presence?"

And seeing a gesture of Mina's, he ceased. As low as he had spoken, she had
heard. She lifted her eyes, clasped her hands, and made an effort to speak.

"Thou seest, father, that I was right," she murmured. "Thanks, Johann; thou
hast proved thy courage and thy goodness, of heart, and I rejoice that I am
yet able to bid thee farewell. But one last question--answer, if thou
lovest me. When will Otho's marriage take place?"

{674}

"In ten days," sobbed Johann.

"'Tis very soon," replied Mina, shuddering. "My heart will be scarcely
cold, and a single green bud will not have appeared over my grave. But may
the earth be green, and the sky blue, and life sweet to him."

Saying these words, she crossed her hands upon her breast, and, speaking no
more, remained thus for long hours, without even casting a look upon the
weeping Johann or upon her heart-broken father.

The physician soon came, and after him the priest. The first had marvellous
secrets to cure the body; the latter had pious consolation and words of
peace for the soul. But they sought in vain to cure the body or strengthen
the soul of Mina. Each day, each hour, each moment stole a spark of the
waning fire of life; her grief was too great for so frail a form to bear,
and one evening at the end of July, ten days after Johann's return, she
closed her eyes forever, holding her father's hand in hers and the crucifix
to her lips. Johann was at her feet and received her last look. She had
near her in dying the Supreme Consoler of heaven and her only two friends
on earth, and there was in her last moments a tenderness which the heart of
the youth never forgot.


  Chapter VII.

Two days after, when the body of Mina had been deposited at sunset in the
cemetery at Baden, Sebald and Johann, the master and pupil, found
themselves alone in the atelier. Strange! It was Johann, the younger, that
seemed the most afflicted, most crushed. His eyes were swollen, his cheeks
pale, his step tottering, and his face covered with tears. Old Sebald
seemed much less changed; a few furrows the more on his brow, a few more
white hairs on his head, were the only visible tokens of his grief. His
step was as firm, his bearing as proud as before; but a strange, steady
glare, glowing and piercing, showing little trace of weariness or tears,
shone from his eyes, and it was this look that the master fixed upon his
pupil as they entered the atelier that made Johann shudder before its clear
and threatening light.

"Johann," said the master, "it is now my turn to ask thee a question.
Sawest thou Otho of Arneck when thou wert at the castle of the Countess
Gertrude?"

"Ay, master," replied the young man, with flushed face.

"Spokest thou with him?"

"Ay, truly."

"Didst say to him that I prayed his presence, or, at least, that he should
explain himself? That I was in deepest sorrow, and Mina sick unto death?"

"Yea, truly, my master."

"And what response made he?"

"That he, too, was grieved; but that his word was pledged, and that until
his marriage he might not leave the castle of the countess. The soft
remembrances of youth, he added, mar not, among wise men, the projects of a
riper age."

"'Tis well, Johann, and I thank thee," replied the sculptor. "I now know
what I wished to know, and resolution is taken."

Then he rose from his arm-chair threw a gloomy glance around the wall of
the studio.

"I return hither no more," murmured. "Here have I toiled thirty years with
upright heart and pure hands. Nothing that I have here completed has been
sullied or profaned. I feared and served God; I honored and I loved man. I
then had a right to give purity to my virgins, the light of faith to my
martyrs, the halo of love to my cherubims. But now all is lost--faith,
renown, and child. Holy images! I cannot touch ye with bruised heart and
violent hands; hating and cursing men, I may not mould the august form of
the God of love. Therefore, no more will I appear in this retreat; its
windows shall remain darkened, its door closed. I will carry with me only
my grief, my memories, and this," he cried, seizing a sculptor's chisel
with a short, polished, and keen blade, upon which he gazed with his
strange look, as he gripped it with feverish strength in his hand.

{675}

"Speak not so. O my master! clasp not that steel so tightly," cried Johann.
"That will bring thee little of consolation or hope. Look for solace for
thy sorrows to this," he said, holding an ivory crucifix before his
master's eyes. "It was pressed to Mina's dying lips; she hath bequeathed it
to us. Recallest thou not, my master, her smile as she gazed upon it? 'Twas
because beneath the shadow of the cross even death seems sweet. There is
the only refuge, and there will I find shelter. The world hath had but
little of joy for me, and I but little of love for the world. The prior of
the Augustines hath promised me a cell, and I will be happy, there to pass
my life, praying or working beneath the poor robe of a monk, and preserving
the memory and crucifix of Mina."

"It is well, my son," replied Koerner. "To each one his own succor and
light, his own strength and safety. If, thanks to the priest's purer cross,
thou findest calm and resignation, may I not seek the encouragement and
strength of my sculptor's chisel? Who may say, that, without these walls, I
am not destined to achieve some work that will immortalize my name and
console my heart? Then, why not leave to a father's grief the hope of
glory, of triumph, and--this little sculptor's tool?" demanded the old man,
with flushed face and sparkling eyes.

"I wish thee triumph and glory, my master. But yet, if thou canst do so,
remember, when thou art active, diligent, and famous, that thy old pupil
Johann, who would not be an artist and became a monk, will never cease to
bless thee and to think of thee in his prayers."

So saying, the youth, weeping, kissed old Sebald's hand and left the
dwelling, carrying with him the crucifix, his last and only treasure. When
he had departed, Sebald Koerner, too, left the studio, after casting a last
look on the bas-reliefs, the balcony, the mouldings, and the statues. He
double-locked the door and took away the key, and, issuing from his house,
he walked for a long time through the fields. Arriving at length at the
side of a deep pool near the foot of the hills, he bent over the tranquil
waters and dropped the key therein.

The water plashed and the waves hastened in increasing rings from the spot,
and then became even more clear and peaceful than before--stilling
themselves ere the key had touched the bottom. Sebald then again stood
erect, with his icy glance and strange smile, yet grasping the chisel in
his hand, and then concealing it in his bosom as if it were a dagger.


  Chapter VIII.

One morning the Baron Otho of Arneck and the young Countess Gertrude, now
his dear lady and noble wife, were partaking in their house in Baden of
their morning collation of fruits, hydromel, and spiced cakes. How charming
seemed their repast, since they enjoyed it together. The cakes were
exquisite, the hydromel of the sweetest; the cups were of gold, the cloth
of fine brocade; Gertrude beautiful and loving. What was needed to complete
Otho's happiness?

When the young baroness had clapped her hands to order away the breakfast
service, the servant who entered approached the knight, bearing on a silver
plate a piece of parchment folded in the form of a letter.

"What have we here?" asked the noble lady. "Another invitation? Indeed,
Otho, they become wearisome. We are allowed no rest, although happiest
together."

"It is indeed an invitation, but not one for thee, my cherished one,"
replied Otho, when he had cast his eyes over the missive.

"In good sooth! And who is it who dares so soon to attempt to separate thee
from thy wife?"

{676}

"An unfortunate man, and as such thou must forgive him," replied Otho,
smiling.

"And what demands he?"

"Thou shalt hear, sweet one."

And the knight, unfolding the sheet of parchment, read these words aloud to
the baroness:

"An old friend--a once dear friend prays the Baron of Arneck to grant him a
moment's converse for the sake of their common affection and of his unhappy
lot. The Baron Otho is happy; that is a reason why he should seek to pay
his debt of gratitude to heaven by aiding the unfortunate. Let him, then,
not refuse this prayer which a friend's voice addresses to him.

"For many reasons, which the writer will explain by word of mouth, the
meeting should be in the burial-ground of Baden; for the old friend of the
Baron of Arneck can no longer have the honor of receiving him in his house,
hereafter forever closed and accursed. The Baron of Arneck is expected
tomorrow morning at six of the clock."

"How strange a letter! How strange a meeting-place!" cried Gertrude,
turning pale. "Canst imagine, Otho, who hath addressed it thee?"

"Some banished friend. Thou knowest, Gertrude, that at the accession of the
present margrave many nobles of Baden were exiled, and among them were some
old friends of my father, and without doubt it is one of them who hath
written this."

"But--but, Otho--why should he choose such a place of tryst? A place so
solemn, so fearful! where there are only the dead and their tombs?"

"'Tis the time and place that should reassure thee, my cherished one. One
harboring designs of evil would have appointed a forest, mayhap, or a
hostel; but never a burial-place, where no Christian man would do aught of
wrong, and, my sweet wife, nor my father nor I had ever friend among
infidels."

"Thou wilt go, then?" said Gertrude.

"Of a surety."

"Alone?"

"Even so, for, if it be a proscribed exile who seeks me, our varlets must
not know of his presence."

"But fearest thou no danger, Otho? When thou wert alone, thou mightest
laugh at prudence; but now, canst thou forget that I am here? that I love
and tremble for thee?"

"Fear not, my love. Even if this request should hide a snare--which I
credit not--remember that the guards of the cemetery would not give
entrance to a party of armed men, and that against one I have my skill to
defend me and this," said he, drawing from his belt a pointed and
keen-edged dagger. "But imagine not vain terrors, my Gertrude. He who hath
written me hath mayhap for long years tasted naught of tenderness or joy,
and our happiness should render us the more kind to the unfortunate."

The young wife felt proudly moved at these noble words of her husband, and
the happy pair began their preparations for the margrave's reception, and
spoke no more of the strange meeting of the morrow.

Otho, however, did not forget it; and scarcely had he perceived the first
rosy tints of day when he arose and donned his pourpoint and cloak.
Gertrude yet slept, and, after kissing his wife's forehead and tenderly
stroking her flaxen hair, he sallied gayly forth.

Half an hour later saw him in the burial ground; but, although he had
arrived before the hour appointed, saw that the unknown was already there.

A beautiful August morning spread its freshness and virginal splendor over
the earth; turtle-doves cooed in the tall yew trees; and sparrows, pursuing
each other among the lindens and lilac bushes, showered the dew drops which
glittered upon the leaves in a rain of diamonds over the green turf;
daisies lifted their little white heads and rosy crowns above the
grass-grown graves; and the grim tombstones, and even the black crosses,
seemed to cast aside their sombre look and to dress themselves almost gayly
in the growing sunlight.

{677}

"If Gertrude were here, she would cease to tremble," murmured Otho,
advancing. "Who could fear in the midst of the melody yon tiny songsters
pour forth, or surrounded by this light, this perfumed air, and walking in
so verdant a sod?"

There was, however, a dark stain amid all this splendor. In an angle at the
foot of a lofty ash stood a man whose tall form and black attire were
sharply outlined in the surrounding brightness.

"Yonder is my unknown," thought Otho, and with a few rapid strides he
approached him.

The man stood motionless, his head bowed upon his breast, his eyes fixed
upon an oblong space upon which the grass had not yet begun to grow.

"Thou art doubtless he who hath called me hither," said Otho. "I am the
Baron of Arneck."

The stranger quickly raised his head and threw back the hood of his mantle,
exhibiting to the young knight's gaze thin locks of snow-white hair, and a
face on which sorrow had traced more furrows than age.

"Master Koerner!" cried Otho, joyfully stretching forth his hand. "But why
so much mystery and solemnity? You needed but to call me to your side,
dearest master, if grief or calamity threatened, and, whatever might have
conspired to keep me back, I had obeyed the summons; and, indeed, I have
heard that you were afflicted, but I hope that the Demoiselle Mina hath
fully recovered from her illness."

"She is healed, indeed," replied old Sebald again, lowering his eyes to the
bare spot of earth.

"If I have not before presented myself at your house," continued Otho, who
felt it necessary to offer some explanation, but who could not without
blushing attempt it, "it was because I felt it well to silence by my
absence the slanders of envious tongues, and, believe me, my master, that
such a resolution cost me dear. For you, excellent master, I hold deep
respect and warm friendship, and I honor and admire your daughter, who to
me is a model of beauty, of wisdom, and of modesty. Her praises are ever
upon my lips, and sweet memories of her in my heart."

"'Tis well--very well," murmured the old sculptor; "but be careful, Sir
Knight, you are treading upon her grave!"

And with trembling hand and flashing eyes, he pushed Otho, who unwittingly
had trod upon the turfless space, back, back, far from the grave.

"Can this be true?" cried the knight, turning pale. "Mina dead! sleeping
here! She so young, so beautiful, so tenderly loved! And you called me not,
master, to accompany her to the tomb to weep with you!"

"You are very generous, Sir Knight; but what I would demand of you is not
your tears."

"Need you, then, friends or aid? You know, Master Koerner, that since I
have known you I have been but too glad to place my influence, my relations
at your service, and I would now gladly offer you the benefit of my
fortune. Speak quickly, I pray you. Command of me what you need or desire."

"I will first relate to you a tale of truth, and then demand vengeance of
you," replied the old man, in calm tones but with glittering eyes. "Sir
Knight, you presented yourself at my dwelling with the fervor of an artist
and the submission of a pupil. You sought, you said, a nobler and holier
goal than success at court or the triumphs of war; you wished with ardent
heart and zealous hand to produce the sacred images of our Saviour, his
virgin Mother, and the saints. And I believed you, Sir Knight; for to me
art was more glorious, more fruitful, more divine than aught else on earth,
because in art I found my mission, my recompense, my safety, and my life.
But you deceived me; you, who pride yourself on your name of gentleman;
and, while feigning to study my art, you were killing my daughter.
{678}
Reply not; deny not my words," continued Sebald, fixing a lurid gaze upon
Otho, whose words died on his lips. "She loved you, and for your sake died.
But before condemning you, justice commands me to hear you. You yourself
have just said Mina was wise, beautiful, and pure; that you lauded her
virtues to the world: why, then, did you not wed her?"

"Because--because--" stammered Otho, blushing--"because, Master Sebald,
your daughter was not noble. You well know, my dear master, that the
customs of the nobility are sacred. Many a one of us is forced to silence
the voice of his heart, lest, as they say, a stain should be cast on his
escutcheon. Why was Mina a burgess's daughter and not a countess? But you
yourself understand, my old master, that I, whose ancestors were counted
among the companions of Charlemagne--that I could not take for my wife the
daughter of a sculptor, without title, without crest or quarterings."

Otho pronounced these words in a low voice, with drooping head and downcast
eyes. He dared not meet the glance of the sculptor, who remained a moment
silent, and then spoke:

"Otho of Arneck, you have crushed the father and slain the child. As you
say, the sculptor has neither title nor quarterings, but he has an arm for
vengeance!"

And springing furiously forward, more rapid than thought in his movement,
the old man, his eyes gleaming, but his hand grasping firmly the glittering
chisel, flung himself upon the baron, and before the latter could draw the
dagger from his girdle, the steel disappeared in the folds of his velvet
doublet and buried itself in his breast. The hand that aimed it was firm,
the blow was sure; the chisel as of old failed not to perform its master's
will; and Otho of Arneck fell upon the bare space of ground--fell, never
more to rise, upon the very spot where Mina lay cold and dead.

"Thou dost well--thou art avenged," gasped the fallen man, fixing his
glazing eyes upon Sebald. "In thy place I had done likewise--but--in
honorable combat--for I--I am a knight and noble. But I truly loved Mina."

His head dropped back, his limbs relaxed, and he was silent. The clear red
blood of youth and health flowed from the wound and stained the bare earth.

Sebald, with his arms folded upon his breast, gazed upon his work.

"Let his blood flow on," he murmured at length; "let it moisten her coffin,
as it should. And now I shall deliver myself to justice. My vengeance as a
father and my mission as a sculptor are fulfilled."

He turned away and walked with rapid steps from the cemetery, leaving his
weapon still fixed in the baron's body.


  Chapter IX.

A few weeks after the occurrences detailed in the last chapter, on a dull,
gray day of the autumn of 1435, a crowd of the burgesses of Baden assembled
in the great hall of justice to listen to the judgment to be pronounced
against Master Koerner, the sculptor. "Who," said they, "would have
imagined a few months since that a man so peaceful and just to all, an
artist so skilful, so fervent a Christian, would be dragged to that seat of
infamy?" They would as soon have expected to hear the judges condemn them
themselves to death and to see themselves led by the grand-provost to the
gibbet. Master Sebald a criminal! Master Sebald an assassin! Alas for poor
humanity, if that were all sixty years of virtue could bring forth!

Nevertheless, there he was, the artist criminal--the white-haired murderer
standing erect before the magistrates in their robes of ermine and
carnation, before the ivory image of Christ crucified, with its black
velvet background, which hung above their seats.
{679}
There he stood while near him on a table lay the mute witnesses against
him: the velvet pourpoint, stiff with blood; the fine linen tunic, now
reddish brown in its hue; the murderous chisel, with its once gleaming
blade dark and rusty and covered with a crust of clotted blood.

Several witnesses were called: the servant who received from Master Sebald
the treacherous letter, which he delivered to Count Otho; the keeper of the
burial-ground, who testified to having seen the accused enter the field the
dead on the morning of the twenty-second of August. But tears flowed
fastest when the Countess Gertrude, the youthful widow of the baron, gave
her deposition. While relating her mournful story, the noble lady swooned
several times, and her beauty, her placid face, and long, closed lashes,
and raving flaxen hair, unfastened and rolling in masses over her black
robe, moved the auditory that more than once the life of the assassin
seemed in instant danger.

But the depositions of witnesses were almost useless. The most striking
evidence of his crime was the chisel lying there, still covered with the
victim's blood. And when the president, after declaring to Master Sebald
the crime of which he stood accused, asked, pointing to the blood-stained
weapon, "Dost thou recognize thy chisel?" the old sculptor replied:

"Yes: it is mine."

"And thou seest that with it was the life of the Baron of Arneck taken.
Canst thou say by whose hand he came to his death?"

"Yes--by mine," replied Master Sebald unhesitatingly.

"So thou hast already declared in delivering thyself up to the hands of
justice," said the president. "But that declaration, made in a moment of
trouble and grief, was insufficient. It needed a public avowal to confirm
it. But one question more: Thou hadst doubtless motives for the commission
of so barbarous an act?"

"Assuredly," replied the sculptor. "No man kills wantonly one who was for
three years his pupil and his friend."

"What cause, then, impelled thee?"

The prisoner remained silent for a moment, bowed his head still lower,
clasped his hands tight together, and bit his lips till the blood trickled
from them; then he replied:

"No; my motives were too holy. I will not tell them."

"Reflect, accused," said the president. "It is because thy motives were
grave that they should be revealed. Reflect; and say why such a crime
sullies thy once pure hands."

"No," repeated Sebald, "I am ready to die, but the history of my crime dies
with me."

Then a young man dressed in the habit of an Augustine novice, who had
obtained the favor of remaining by the side of the accused, rose, and in a
timid voice addressed the judges:

"Although, my lords, I know not fully Master Sebald's motives, I may,
perhaps, suspect them. There are moments in the lives of the wisest and of
the most just when the heart may harden and the judgment err under the goad
of some great grief. Remember, my lords, that Master Koerner has lost his
only child, and you, who knew the daughter, can conceive the grief of the
father."

"Johann! be silent!" cried old Sebald, rising, trembling and furious. "Let
the dead sleep in their graves. Their agony is past, and mine needs no
increase. I make no avowals--I desire no defence. The crime was mine--the
vengeance was mine, and I seek but to die with my secret!"

The old man fell back exhausted by this burst of indignation, and the young
friar, covering his face with his hands, sank upon his knees before his
master upon the stone floor, while the president glanced around upon his
colleagues, as if to read their judgment in their faces.

"Before such a resolution," said he, "further questions were useless."

Then he called upon the prisoner to stand erect and listen to his sentence,
which the clerk proceeded to read.

{680}

"Master Sebald Koerner, sculptor and burgess of the good city of Baden,
having been convicted of having, on the morning of August twenty-second
last past, treacherously wounded and killed the noble Otho Rayner, Baron of
Arneck, and esquire to his highness the margrave, is condemned to die by
the halter."

"Accused, hast aught to say?" asked the president when the reading of the
doom was ended.

"Nothing," replied Master Sebald, bowing with folded arms before the
judges.

The president covered his head with his black furred robe, and continued:

"Master! the justice of man hath pronounced thy doom, and will soon be
satisfied. With a common criminal our office would here end, and but a few
words of exhortation to repentance would accompany him to the executioner.
But, criminal as thou art, we cannot forget that for sixty years thou wast
our neighbor and our friend, and that those hands now red with murder have
carved many a pure and holy image to strengthen and lift our souls toward
God.

"How canst thou, whose works have so long glorified our Lord, now refuse to
repent? Hast thou not read a thousand times the command, 'Thou shalt not
kill'? Hast never reflected upon our Saviour's agony--his wounded hands,
his lance-pierced side, his crown of thorns, the blows his face received,
his shames, his griefs, avenged only by the words, 'Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do'? Thou hast thought upon all this; thou hast
even modelled with thy hands the bloody scenes of thy Redeemer's life; and
yet thou couldst not learn to forgive--thou, who wast but a man!"

Here the president was for a moment silent, overcome by his emotion, and
the old sculptor, as if shaken in his fierce resolve and gloomy pride by
the words of his judge, slowly lifted his head and cast a troubled look
around. "In the bitterness of thy heart," continued the president, "in the
madness of thy wrath, all this thou didst forget; and yet to recall it all
to mind, thou neededst but to lift thine eyes. Gaze not on us, Master
Sebald; bear thy glances higher, and see above us the pallid face, the
wounded form, the holy eyes of him who loved more than thou, who suffered
more than thou, and who only avenged himself upon his torturers by saving
them from death, albeit at the price of his own blameless life. Harken to
me, betrayed friend! that Man-God had, too, a friend, and was betrayed by
the kiss of that friend; listen, unhappy father! that Father was sold,
scourged, crucified by his children. And if this God, reviled, dishonored,
avenged not himself, was it not to set man an example of forgiveness? Thou
hast not yet expiated thy crime, Master Koerner, and the hand of the
executioner will soon deliver thee to a higher Judge. Christ will await
thee at the gibbet, just and inflexible. Gaze on him ere thy death, poor
sinner, with faith and love, for thy Judge is also thy Saviour."

So speaking, the president uncovered his head and pointed solemnly to the
ivory crucifix. The eyes of Master Koerner followed the uplifted hand and
rested on the agonized face of Christ. Then their fixed and stony glare
grew soft; their dry and burning lustre grew moist; his lips quivered; he
clasped his hands, and, after some moments of fierce struggling with
himself, the old artist murmured in a trembling voice:

"Christ! God of the wretched--God of fathers alas! since Mina's death never
have I turned mine eye to thee!"

His head fell once more upon his breast and his voice was choked in a sob,
while Johann at his side lifted his hands toward heaven in an ecstasy of
joy and gratitude.

There was a murmur and a motion in the crowd; then all was silence again as
the voice of the president arose once more:

{681}

"A ray of grace from on high hath illumined thee; let us pray that it may
conduct thee through the gates of death to eternal light, I have a few
words more to address thee. The court, while punishing as it should the
crime of the murderer, forgets not the merits of the artist. It therefore
accords thee, to lessen the bitterness of thy last moments, the favor thou
mayst most desire. Reflect, Master Sebald, ere thou fixest thy choice. Any
grace thou mayst demand shall be accorded, any save life."

A murmur of astonishment and joy ran through the crowd, which was hushed
only to hear the old sculptor's reply. Master Sebald remained long silent,
but at length rose and spoke:

"I would not ask life were I free to do so," he answered. "My life hath
already been too long, and she whom I love awaits me beyond the grave. But
you have spoken of expiation, my lord, and it seems to me that even here
below my death would not afford a complete one. My life, ended at the
gibbet, may satisfy the justice of man; but what shall I do to appease the
anger of my God? Dare I appear before him with no penitential act to plead
for my pardon; no work of reparation wherein sweat and tears I might have
washed my blood-stained hands? Repentance came while I gazed upon yon
crucifix; in carving another, pardon might perhaps descend upon me from
heaven. If the court will for a few weeks prolong my life, as I now see
Christ's image before me, so will I produce it in the stone!" cried he with
enthusiasm. "I ask not to quit my prison to live in the midst of men. No!
let me be immured in a dungeon, let my door be sealed until I leave it to
go to my death. Let but a ray of sunlight enter, that I may see to model
the august countenance of my God, while I remain there with the thoughts of
eternity and the remembrance of my crime for my only companions."

"Master Koerner," replied the judge, "thy request is that of a good
Christian and a noble artist, and the court accords it with joy, in the
hope that the work of thy last days may bring thee pardon and salvation.
Thou wilt be led back to thy dungeon, and, before its door closes upon
thee, all thou mayst require for thy work will be brought thee."

The judges arose and retired. Johann, radiant with joy, and his grief
almost consoled, accompanied his old master to the prison, and then sought
the stone, the clay--all that the sculptor could need. Even the fatal
chisel, cleansed of its stains, was brought to him bright and shining, like
the soul of the criminal which, stained by sin, would soon be cleansed by
grief and labor.

Then the old sculptor passed his hand over his seamed brow and hollow
cheeks and called for a mirror. The door was then built up with stone and
mortar, and only an opening large enough for his food to be passed through
was left, and Master Sebald stood alone in the cell which he was only to
leave to pass to the gibbet.


  Chapter X.

Solitude was the cradle of creation; solitude is the never-ceasing fountain
wherein exhausted souls are refreshed. Not without an object did the
prophets begin their mission in the desert. Who would leave after him an
immortal name must retire from the haunts of men, and in solitude examine
his soul ere he speaks to mankind from the rostrum, or with the pen, the
chisel, or the pencil. When the busy hum of the world has faded away into
silence, when he hears no voice but that of his heart within, and nature
without, and God above, he will then feel the flame which brings
immortality. The voice he hears will be that of truth; the hand which
stretches toward him that of justice; and all the strength of the one and
the charms of the other will glow in his work.

Master Sebald's dungeon was the most real, the most complete of solitudes.
Thick walls of gray granite, upon which shone green and slimy traces of the
dampness that filled the air, formed a circle around him without an angle,
a recess, an irregularity on which the weary eye might rest.
{682}
A plank and a truss of straw were his bed; a block of stone was his only
seat; there was no door, for such was old Sebald's wish. Light alone--sweet
light--was not denied the captive, but flowed abundant and golden through a
large opening in the vaulted roof. But by day only was the boon granted,
and then it bore with it no sight of that world where men dwelt, no view of
the sunlit waters, the green fields, or the feathered children of the air.
Nothing of these could he enjoy; nothing but that flood of day flowing from
the open heaven upon the criminal's brow, like the gaze of Eternal Love,
ever open to hearts that yearn for it; and nevertheless, when Master Sebald
thus found himself immured in a living tomb, when nothing of earth remained
to him save stone walls, his modelling clay, and his chisel, then
inspiration of a greater power than it had ever before felt filled his
soul, and in that inspiration and in his work he would have found joyful
companions; he would have been happy, were it not that two dark and
vengeful guests found lodgment in his breast, sorrow and remorse.

His remorse was for his crime, his sorrow for his child. They wore deeper
the furrows in his brow; they made his hair whiter, his step more feeble
and uncertain; they sunk his eyes deeper in their sockets. They tortured
him in his weary watchings; they gave form to his dreams and broke and
almost banished slumber; they stood before him when he worked or
prayed--his former hate and his former love; his victim and his child. The
golden hair of his Mina glittered in wild waves before his eyes; he saw the
manly face of Otho pale and contracted with agony, while the gushing blood
poured from his wound; he closed his eyes, but still their forms stood
before him, both beckoning to the threshold of that world where eternity
begins.

The old master commenced his work, ever surrounded by these sad companions.
Ever hearing the last murmurs of Otho, the last sighs of Mina, he carved
the holy cross and the summit of Calvary; then the shameful scroll; then
the sacred form. Ever haunted by his visions of the dead, he knew better to
give to the divine Crucified the writhing of living agony joined to the
beginning rigidity of death; he remembered the last quivering of human
strength and the mysterious folds of the winding-sheet. It was only when he
came to carve the face of Christ that imagination and memory ceased to
furnish him a model. Mina's passionate grief and pious resignation; the
mingled humiliation, repentance, grief, and rage of the murdered Otho could
give naught to be reproduced in the countenance of a God. He must seek his
model elsewhere; and Master Sebald had not asked for his mirror in vain.

Standing erect before his work, he began to chisel the face of Christ; and
for the first time since his prison walls closed upon him he gazed upon his
own reflection. The long gaze upon his white head and his grief-worn
features satisfied him.

His own face was a book, a book of sorrows speaking most eloquently,
wherein all bitterness, all failings, all regrets, and all terrors, the
dreams of the artist, the humiliation of the master, the friend betrayed,
the sufferings, of the father, the anguish of the condemned, had inscribed
their memories and left their foot-prints. The agony of Master Sebald was
already long, and had been cruel and stormy. Ah! the remembrances of Otho's
treachery were as the wounds in the hands and feet; the brand of dishonor
upon his brow was as the crown of thorns; and the last wound, the stab of
the lance, was the loss of Mina. So, that after long contemplating his own
features, the old sculptor knelt humbly before the work he had begun.

"Pardon, O Christ!" he said, "if I, a weak mortal, an unworthy and sinful
man, dare, in carving thy sacred lineaments, trace mine. But I design not,
O Lord! to show thee happy and full of peace, or radiant and glorious.
{683}
I promised to present thee suffering, suffering even the death of the
cross; I suffer that of the gibbet. A friend betrayed thee; a friend
betrayed me. Thou wast loaded with insult and ignominy; I too had good
cause to blush before my judges. Thou weepest over the sins of men, thy
children; I over my child's grave. And as, O Lord! thou wert man as well as
God, I may not offend thee in copying the anguish, the griefs, the
sufferings that have left their print upon my brow. All these thou knowest,
O Lord! but remorse thou couldst not know. That will I keep to myself, and
in its stead I will place radiance, hope, and splendor of divinity. Ay,
hope! for even on the cross didst thou hope and call upon thy Father!"

Here the old sculptor ceased, and bent before his work, while the shadows
of despair darkened his brow. Then he cast a troubled look upon the statue,
a look in which anguish mingled with prayer, confidence with terror.

"And can I hope?" he murmured. "Mina is in heaven. Shall I again see her?"

But no voice replied, and, sighing, he stood again erect. Then after a few
moments of silent meditation he seized his chisel, and, making the sign of
the cross, recommenced his work, and the stone seemed to breathe, to
quiver, to palpitate as, one by one, the suffering lines came forth. Truly
in Master Sebald's mirror were grief and unpitying and unending pain.

And he worked in spite of the gnawings of hunger, the want of sleep, the
cold of the winter. He had ever within him strength and fire--the strength
of expiation, the fire of penitence. But as he worked, his form became more
stooped, and his eye less sure; his blood flowed feebler through his veins,
and his breath grew more quick and gasping. But he needed but mind and
hand, and his mind was clear, and his hand carved bravely still. And what
cared he for the failing of an exhausted body? If, day by day, his face
grew thinner, his eyes cavernous, his lips tighter, was not his model for
all that the more real? Was it not a dying Christ he was carving?

At last his work was done. When the last blow of the chisel had been given,
when the stone had received the final touch, when Christ hung there
wounded, quivering, breathing, sublime, Master Sebald knelt before his work
and bowed his forehead to the earth. The sculptor demanded his pay; the
criminal his pardon. He prayed fervently and long; and when he rose, he
knew that his child called, and that the hour of his deliverance was nigh,
and, walking to the narrow opening which formed his only means of
communication with men, he called aloud to his jailer:

"My Christ is finished! My task is done! Unseal the door and lead me to the
executioner."

But it was not the executioner that came, but the judge; and he, the first
to enter the dungeon, when he lifted his eyes, fell upon his knees with
clasped hands; for what he saw seemed no image of stone, but a living
Christ, suffering and dying before him. Struck with astonishment and
admiration, he called his colleagues and sent for monseigneur the bishop,
and his highness the margrave, that all might see the Christ of the
condemned. The dungeon of Master Sebald was too narrow for the multitude of
visitors who crowded before the holy image; they talked of carrying it to
one of the courts of the city, or to the Grand Place, that all the faithful
might mourn and be edified by so sacred a spectacle. But Master Sebald
opposed this project and asked a further boon:

"Ah!" cried he, "if you think this work of my hands merits aught but favor,
consecrate it to a holy remembrance; place it in the cemetery where my
daughter reposes. Christ should be upon her tomb, to speak to her of hope,
and on the tomb of him--of--_him_ too, to speak to him of
forgiveness."

{684}

We may add that the sculptor's request was quickly granted, for in those
happy days there were sheriffs who believed, and judges of tender hearts.
They were very backward, and very far behind our enlightened age in those
days, although gunpowder had just been invented. Besides, the councillors
of the margrave held sacred things in respect, and did not regard
cemeteries as mere charnel-houses.

They carried, then, with great pomp, Master Sebald's statue to the
cemetery; and, for the first time since his imprisonment began, the old man
saw the crowd of men, the green leaves, the tomb of his daughter, and the
white clouds of heaven.

He saw the blessing of the cross; he saw Mina's tomb consecrated; and then,
taking his chisel, he graved upon the pedestal, as a last farewell, the
inscription which, as we have seen, yet remains, and asked the time
appointed for his execution. But murmurs arose in the crowd which soon
swelled to violent clamors. Could so repentant a man, so old and true an
artist, be given over to the gibbet! The people surrounded the magistrates;
the magistrates turned to the councillors; the councillors turned to the
margrave; and after a short deliberation the president of the tribunal
declared to Master Koerner that, in consideration of his genius, of his
piety, and of his repentance, he should still live; pardon was granted him.

"Is life a boon?" murmured the old artist, sadly bowing his head. "But I
await the mercy of God. He is more generous than man."

He had not long to wait, for two days after, in the gray, early morning,
they found him cold and dead upon his daughter's grave, his head resting
upon the base of the crucifix. His hopes were realized; God opened his
prison-doors.

......

Such is the legend of the sculptor and his work--a legend which offers a
simple and characteristic picture of the ages of confiding faith, when the
Christian placed his hopes, the injured his vengeance, the criminal his
repentance, and the artist his genius, at the foot of the cross.

------

  Original.

  The Indissolubility Of Christian Marriage.


  Number Two.


It is evident that Jesus Christ intended to legislate and did legislate in
regard to marriage. The commandment which he gave, requiring the marriage
contract to be respected as inviolable and indissoluble, is a law, has the
force of a law, and is obligatory, not only upon ecclesiastical, but also
upon civil legislators and judges. There is no power upon earth, either in
the church or in the state, which has power to abrogate or change it. We do
not pretend that this law was promulgated to the Jewish people, or to pagan
nations, directly and immediately. Our Lord legislated immediately only for
those who should become the subjects of his kingdom by baptism. For all
others, he legislated only mediately, by promulgating to all mankind the
precept to embrace his faith and be baptized into his church, and thus to
bring themselves under the entire code of Christian law. The unbaptized are
subject to the natural law only in regard to marriage, as in everything
else; and their marriage is not a sacrament, but a merely natural contract.
{685}
What we maintain is, that the law regarding _Christian_ marriage has
been established by the sovereign authority of Jesus Christ for all the
baptized, and that this law respects the very essence of marriage as a
contract, invalidating all pretended marriages which are not in accordance
with it. All ecclesiastical legislators are, therefore, bound to legislate
in conformity with this law. They must treat all marriages sanctioned and
ratified by the law of Christ as valid and binding, and all others as null
and void. All Christians must act in the same manner. And in Christian
states, as all law-givers and judges are bound to act according to their
conscience, and in conformity with the divine law, and as the revealed law
of Jesus Christ respecting marriages is the supreme rule of the Christian
conscience, having the force of a divine law, they are bound to make it the
rule of all their enactments and judgments.

Some Protestant writers deny that our Lord intended to legislate respecting
matrimony, and affirm that he merely laid down a rule of morality. This is,
however, an unmeaning statement. He could not give a moral precept
respecting matrimony without legislating. The essential morality of the
question is determined by the law determining the conditions, motives, and
obligations of the contract. Morality consists in conformity to this law,
immorality in violating it. Our Lord could not, therefore, command anything
as required by morality, or forbid anything as immoral, in relation to the
essentials of marriage, without reenacting an already existing law, or
promulgating a new law, defining the conditions by which a marriage is
rendered a valid or an invalid contract.

The very circumstances and terms of his utterance on the subject show that
he did legislate. Moses legislated on the subject, and permitted to men
divorce in certain cases, with the privilege of remarriage to both parties.
Our Lord expressly revokes this permission, so far as his own disciples are
concerned, and declares that, according to the Christian law, whoever
divorces his wife and marries another, or whoever marries a divorced party,
must be held guilty of adultery. This is an act of legislation, for it is a
law declaring null and void for the future certain marriages which, under
the Mosaic law, were valid. Now, there is no civil law which can make a
contract declared invalid by the divine law valid, binding, or lawful, or
which can invalidate a contract made valid by the divine law. It is true
that our Lord did not enact any civil law, properly so called, with civil
penalties annexed to it, for the Jewish people, or for any Gentile nation.
But he prescribed the standard according to which all legislators in
Christian states are bound to make their civil laws.

The question now comes up, How are we to ascertain what the law of Jesus
Christ is, and what is the law itself? We have discussed the last question
in part, in our former number, in which we endeavored to show that the
texts of Scripture in which we are informed concerning the precept given by
Christ concerning marriage, properly understood, sustain the Catholic
doctrine of the indissolubility of marriage. We have now to show how the
Catholic doctrine and the law of the Catholic Church are established with
an infallible certainty, and with a force absolutely obligatory on the
conscience.

It is evident enough that the notion of legislators and judges attempting
to discuss and decide upon the true meaning of texts of Scripture is
absurd. Such a proceeding would never lead to any uniformity of legislation
if attempted, and it would never be attempted in any community where
principles of sound jurisprudence prevailed. Who, then, are to decide upon
the meaning of these texts, if the ultimate appeal is to them? The
Protestant clergy? They cannot agree among themselves.
{686}
Even in the earliest and best days of Puritanism in New England, when a
comparatively strict doctrine and legislation respecting marriage
prevailed, there was a serious difference among the clergy respecting the
lawful grounds of divorce. Moreover, the Protestant clergy do not claim the
right of interpreting the Scripture. The laity have an equal right, and
each individual has it for himself. Rationalists claim also the right of
making reason the criterion of the truth of the doctrine of Scripture and
the teachings of Jesus Christ. It is therefore plain that it is a futile
proceeding to attempt to make the text of Scripture a standard of
legislation or public sentiment in regard to marriage. The result which has
actually been produced is an inevitable result, namely, that the prevalent
opinion and sentiment in the community, based on their common sense, will
regulate legislation in regard to marriage and divorce. This common sense
is not an enlightened and elevated common sense, proceeding from sound,
rational, and moral principles. It is a low, irrational sense, derived from
passion, self-interest, expediency, and a perverted reason, which tends
continually to degenerate more and more, and whose logical consequences may
be seen developing themselves every day under our own eyes.

The law established by Jesus Christ is not and cannot be based upon the
texts of the sacred historians who inform us of the fact that he did
promulgate such a law. These texts are not the law, and the enacting force
does not proceed from them. They may be cited in proof of the fact that the
law was made, and in proof of what the law was. The law itself was verbally
proclaimed by our Lord, and its force dates from and depends upon that
verbal enactment. The historical account given by the evangelists added
nothing to it, and the comments of the apostles upon it are mere allusions
to it, or exhortations to keep it, which presuppose its existence. It was a
part of the unwritten law of the church handed down by tradition, whose
legitimate expositors were the apostles and their successors. Our Lord must
have instructed the apostles fully on the subject, and they must have
transmitted full and explicit instructions on the same subject to the
bishops and clergy to whom the government of the church was committed. As
occasion required, the unwritten Christian common law was embodied in
canons by episcopal councils, and thus became statute law. The true method
of fixing decisively the real scope and contents of the divine legislation
of our Lord is, therefore, to investigate the legislation of the church
from the earliest times.

The doctrine defined by the Council of Trent upon which the modern
canonical law of the Catholic Church is based, is too well known to need
any statement. It is evident that this definition was no innovation, but
merely a solemn declaration of the doctrine universally received in the
Catholic Church, levelled against the innovations of Protestants. The mere
fact that the indissolubility of marriage has been recognised in the
Catholic Church and enforced under the severest penalties, and that it has
been also recognised and protected by the civil law of Europe, until
Protestantism brought in a disastrous change, is sufficient to prove that
the church received her law from Jesus Christ or the apostles. So severe a
law, one so inconvenient to individuals, one so contrary to the established
legislation of both Jews and Gentiles, could never have been established
and enforced by any other than a divine authority, and in the origin of the
Christian community. If a milder law had ever prevailed in the church, an
attempt to establish a stricter one would have met a violent opposition.
History would record the struggle, the pages of the fathers would bear
witness to the difference of opinion and the mutual discussion of the
question by the opposing parties. Councils would have been called to decide
it, and, if any change had been generally enforced in favor of a stricter
law, either it would have been based on reasons supposed to justify or
require the abrogation of an indulgence formerly granted, or, if not, the
previous existence of this indulgence would have been denounced as a
corruption, and these who maintained it would have been condemned.
{687}
The quiet, undisturbed continuity of the tradition and practice of the
church from the earliest ages proves that no serious and widespread
difference of doctrine ever arose, but that the modern Catholic doctrine of
the indissolubility of marriage held undisputed sway from the beginning.
The opponents of this doctrine cannot pretend to establish any clear
tradition in their own favor. They can only endeavor to obscure the
evidence of the tradition sanctioning the Catholic doctrine.
Notwithstanding their efforts, the chain of evidence from St. Augustine
back to Origen, Justin Martyr, and Hermas, including all the canons which
still remain, and which were enacted by ecclesiastical councils, is
unbroken and conclusive, as may be seen by consulting those Catholic
authors who have written scientific treatises on the subject. The whole
discussion is, however, of little practical value, except as showing the
necessity of the infallibility of the church in defining doctrine and her
supreme authority in judging moral questions, and as corroborating the
proof that she possesses this infallible and supreme authority. The real
question at issue is, whether marriage is a sacrament confided to the
guardianship of the church, and regulated by a law of which the church is
the supreme judge, or whether it is a natural contract under the control of
the civil law. The Protestant world has taken the latter side of the
alternative. Consequently, the case of marriage comes to this issue; what
civil laws respecting marriage and divorce are best calculated to promote
happiness, morality, social and civil prosperity and well-being?
Legislatures and courts must decide the question, while churches,
clergymen, moralists, writers, etc., can exercise no other influence than
that of argument and persuasion. These arguments must be drawn from reason
and the natural law. They must bear upon the point that the strength and
perpetuity of the marriage bond is useful and necessary for the
preservation of society. The doctrine of Scripture and the authority of
religion can only be brought in to increase the motives and sanctions of
the natural law.

It is useless to hope that the doctrine of the indissolubility of marriage
will ever be adopted either in theory or practice as the result of
reasoning on the principles of either the natural law or the moral code of
Christianity, by those who reject the infallibility of the Catholic Church.
It is also useless to hope that the Protestant clergy and jurists will ever
agree together as to the proper ground of divorce, and the proper
safeguards of marriage, much less that they will agree in adopting the
opinions of the most rigorous school among them, as sustained by their able
and learned advocate, President Woolsey, in The New-Englander. The only
thing in the power of the Protestant clergy and their lay coadjutors is, to
diminish and retard the destructive tendency of the false principle they
have admitted into theology and legislation by their denial of the Catholic
doctrine regarding marriage. In this direction they may do something, and
it is to be desired that they should exert themselves to the utmost to do
all they can. The clergy may exert a certain moral and religious influence
by acting according to some fixed principles and laws in regard to
performing the marriage ceremony and admitting or excluding persons from
communion. Also by preaching and writing on the obligations of marriage,
the blessings which flow from unions which are hallowed by perfect and
lifelong fidelity to conjugal and parental duties, and the evils which are
the consequence of infidelity and frequent separations. Jurists and
statesmen may reform the administration of law in the courts so as to
decrease the facility of obtaining divorce, and secure to all parties a
thorough protection of all the rights guaranteed to them by the civil law.
{688}
Physicians and others may do good by pointing out the physical and social
evils which flow from the violation of those laws on which the
multiplication and healthy development of the race depend. So far as
individuals are induced to marry in accordance with the dictates of pure
affection and enlightened prudence, to observe the moral laws of the
married state, and to remain faithful to each other until death, and so far
as divorces and re-marriages are rendered less numerous, so far good will
be done, and the well-being of society promoted. We desire most heartily
that the utmost possible success may attend these well-meant efforts.
Nevertheless, we cannot flatter our Protestant friends with any expression
of our own conviction that this success will be anything more than placing
a breakwater in the way of the current that is sweeping away the Christian
institution of marriage. The principles and institutions which make society
Christian, the traditions which connect it with the past and give it
Christian and moral vitality, have been received and retained from the
Catholic Church. As these are gradually abandoned and lost, society
possesses no power to recover and restore them. Christian societies outside
the church, and states composed of persons who are nominally Christian but
out of Catholic communion, bear within them the principle of dissolution,
without possessing any sufficient principle of recuperation. The Catholic
Church alone possesses a divine law given by revelation which she is
competent to explain and authorised to enforce, and which is a principle of
perpetual life, capable of resisting every tendency to disease and death,
and of renewing every decayed national constitution, restoring every
degenerate people, and continually repeating the work wrought in the first
formation of Christendom. Protestantism is a tubercular deposit in the
centre of the bosom of society. Its necessary result is spiritual, moral,
intellectual, and finally, physical death. As in the case of a person
smitten with tuberculosis, there may be for a long time many portions of
the lungs unaffected, much health and strength in the organs and limbs of
the body, and an increase of cerebral excitement and activity, although the
principle of death which will finally stop all vital activity is slowly and
surely gaining upon the principle of life; so with those portions of
Christendom which are smitten with heresy. There is much health and vigor
remaining as the effect of the original state of sound, integral, Catholic
life. Many individuals remain essentially sound in their belief and upright
in their practice. There is even a flush on the surface of society, a
hectic brilliancy in the eye of intellect, a fevered activity of thought
and action, which is mistaken for genuine, healthful vigor and vitality.
The boastful, shallow organs of public sentiment, whose real doctrines are
infidel, but who are forced to wear a little smear of popular religion on
their face, pretend, with an assurance equally sickening and ridiculous, to
read lectures and give advice to the Vicar of Christ and the bishops of the
Catholic Church on great moral and social questions. Their changes are rung
with monotonous and unmeaning repetition upon railroads, telegraphs, steam,
newspapers, heavy guns, and progress. The Catholic Church is denounced as
the great obstacle in the way of modern society, because she adheres to the
steadfast, unchanging affirmation of eternal principles of truth, law, and
justice. Her complete spoliation is urged as the great means of hastening
the march of society toward its goal. It is vain to expect an argument
which has any solidity, or even the pretence of an answer which is grave
and serious, to the reasonings and expostulations of those who point out
the deadly symptoms which are concealed beneath this hectic activity and
betrayed by this boastful demeanor. An ill-bred sneer, an unmeaning
platitude, or a frivolous display of rhetoric is all that can be expected.
{689}
Nevertheless, those who are able to think, and who have some real
solicitude for progress in truth, in sound morality, in Christian virtue,
in solid well-being and happiness, on the part of society and their
fellow-men, will not be able to shut their eyes to the evident symptoms
which prove that a deadly disease, already far advanced, is feeding on the
vitals of the social organism. These symptoms have been pointed out by
Protestant clergymen and medical writers, and we refer to their startling
statements as evidence of the virulence and extent of the moral ulcer which
is eating up the vitals of society and destroying the original, American
population of the country. It is not the matter of a few divorces granted
to married persons whose rights are judicially proved to have been violated
in a flagrant manner, which is of such great importance. While the ancient
laws of the states were rigidly enforced, and the number of divorces
granted was small, the community received no grievous injury. The great
evil which is so alarming, and is working such deplorable effects, consists
in the great number of divorces granted, the facility with which they are
obtained, and the flippant, shameless disregard of all judicial decorum by
the courts of law. Behind all this is another evil, the violation of the
morality of the conjugal state. The authors of Protestantism have opened
the door to all these disorders by their denial of the indissolubility and
sacramental character of matrimony, and their concession of the right to
judge and decide upon the whole subject of the marriage contract to the
civil power. The door which they have opened they cannot close. There is no
protection for the sacredness of marriage at all adequate to the
necessities of the case, except in a doctrine, a law, and a system of
practical morality, promulgated and enforced by a church which has power
over the conscience, and is acknowledged as possessing an authority
delegated by Jesus Christ. The utter weakness and helplessness of
Protestantism, and the absolute necessity of a return to the Catholic
Church in order to save society and civilization, has been manifested in
England and the United States in a more startling and sudden manner than
could have been anticipated twenty years ago by the most sagacious prophet
of the future. We wait with interest and anxiety to see what will be done
by those who believe that the secession of the sixteenth century was really
a reformation, and that the salvation of the human race is to be looked for
from the principles of Luther and Calvin. At present, these principles
appear to be tending to the abrogation of the institution of marriage in
the Christian sense of the word, and the introduction of a species of
polygamy worse than that of Mormonism.

------

{690}


    Original.

    Mea Culpa.

    By Richard Storrs Willis.


    I.

  All through my fault, my own most grievous fault!
  This the chagrin and inward smart of sin.
  Nor others' blame can my poor cause exalt--
  Naught but myself t' accuse, without, within!
    And thus to my God heavy-hearted I cry,
    _Mea culpa, meet maxima culpa!_
    And thus to the mother of Jesus I sigh,
    _Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa!_

    II.

  O God! the past, the wicked past forgive!
  The spectre-sins that haunt my soul dispel.
  Deeper than mirth, alas! they frowning live;
  Beneath my smiles, in memory's caves they dwell!
    And thus to Saint Michael, archangel, I plead,
    _Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa:_
    And thus to Saint John with regret I concede,
    _Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa!_

    III.

  _Ponder my love_--a Saviour's voice would fall,
  When tempted sore, in youth's delirious hour.
  _Ponder my love_--O kind and gracious call!
  And yet from life I plucked each poison-flower!
    And thus to Saint Peter and Paul I exclaim,
    _Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa:_
    And thus to all saints and you, brothers, proclaim,
    _Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa!_

    IV.

  Ah! well, dear Lord, here in my guilt I bow.
  What else to do, where else to go, than home?
  Joyless, distrest, a contrite suppliant now,
  Heartsick of sin, homesick for thee, I come!
    Ye saints and you, brothers, to Christ for me pray
    _Peccavi, mea maxima culpa!_
    Alas! my dear Jesus, 'tis all I can say,
    _Mea culpa, mea maxima culpa!_

------

{691}


  From The Dublin University Magazine.

  Solutions of Some Parisian Problems.

  Cabs And Their Patron.

The admirers of French novels have made acquaintance with some of the
French representatives of our own carboys and carmen in the French
metropolis. They are aware that their cabs or cabriolets are called
_Fiacres_, and they are naturally desirous to know why they should be
called by a name which by a little aspiration sounds unmistakably Irish.
This trifling question has set some archaeological antiquaries by the ears.
The following appears to be the genuine solution: Sanval, author of
"Recherches sur les Antiquités de Paris," (end of seventeenth century.)
said that, about forty years previous, a certain Nicholas Sauvage, agent to
the proprietor of the Amiens coaches, and owner of a large house in the Rue
Saint Martin, the front of which was adorned with the _enseigne_ of
Saint Fiacre, kept from forty to fifty horses in his stables, and also cabs
for the convenience of the public at rather a dear figure. His
establishment became so noted that all coaches for hire came to be called
Fiacres.

Menage, in his "Origines de la Langue Françoise," 1684, gave a like
account, but described the effigies of St. Fiacre as adorning the front of
a house in Rue Saint Antoine.

Both writers appear to have been in error. A satiric Mazarinade dating
1652, and bearing for title the "Royal Supper of Pontoise," etc., has the
following lines descriptive of the embarrassment of the worshipful
supper-eaters when they wished to return home at a late hour to Paris:

  "C'était pour avoir des Carrosses,
  Ou l'on attelle Chevaux rosses,
  Dont les cuirs tout rappetassés,
  Vilains, crasseux, et mal passés,
  Représentoient le simulacre,
  De l'ancienne Voiture à Fiacre
  Qui fut le premier du métier,
  Qui louoit carosse au Quartier
  De Monsieur de Saint Thomas à Louvre."
  [Footnote 241]

    [Footnote 241:
    It (the embarrassment) was to provide cabs
    To which they yoke poor hack horses,
    Whose leathers all shrunken,
    Ugly, greasy, and badly dressed,
    Represent the ghost
    Of the old cab belonging to Fiacre,
    Who was the first of the trade,
    That hired out carriages at the Quarter
    Of Monsieur St. Thomas of the Louvre.]

Fiacre may have prospered in his business, and unprincipled rivals have
carried out his idea, and adopted the effigies of the saint after whom the
poor cabman was called. Thus Sanval may have seen the pictured saint
presiding over the useful articles (originally let out at three sous the
drive) in Rue Saint Martin, and Menage may have seen a rival, Rue Saint
Antoine. It is more likely that the plagiarists appropriated for their
vehicles the name of the saint than that of the humble individual, the
inventor of the system.

Saint Fiachra was of that noble band of Irish missionaries who spread
themselves over the Continent soon after the island was converted. St.
Virgil became patron of Saltzburg, St. Killian of Franconia, St. Gall of
Switzerland, St. Columbanus of the Vosges and of Bobbio in Italy. St.
Fiachra was gladly welcomed by the bishop of Meaux in the seventh century,
and devoted his services to the care of an hospital. The cabriolet drivers
and (if we remember aright) the market gardeners of Paris honor him as
their patron.


  Mysteries Of The Rue D'Arbre ?ec. [Illegible]

No visitor will fail to visit the church of St. Germain d'Auxerrois, the
parish church, as it may be called, of the inmates of the Tuileries, and
within a few stones' throw of that luxurious but not very comfortable
residence.
{692}
The possession of the most finely furnished apartments will not give much
pleasure to the dweller who is uncertain whether he may not be ejected from
them to-morrow. The triple portal of the church dates from the middle of
the thirteenth century, and the low steeple from a much earlier period.
Owing to the late demolitions, the exterior of the church can now be
examined with more convenience and pleasure than of yore, and many a
saunterer will be surprised to see, arranged along the frieze of a lateral
chapel projecting into the Rue d'Arbre Sec, various portions of a carp,
separated from one another by roses, (architectural, to wit,) here a head,
there a body, and then (a rose intervening) a tail. As far as the
information got from passers-by extends, he must remain in ignorance of the
cause of the strange ornamentation, but he may learn it here at
second-hand, our authority being the archaeologist M. Didron. An individual
inhabitant of the adjoining street (perhaps a fish-monger) had got
permission to add this chapel to the old edifice; and to connect his name
(_Tronçon_, a piece cut away) with the building, he devised this
ingenious plan.

Another pious and equally ingenious dweller in the same street, who dealt
in poultry, did so well in business that she built a new house at the
corner, and in front erected a pious monument. Her name being Anne, she got
a sculptor to execute a group for her, namely, St. Anne, mother of the
Blessed Virgin, teaching her daughter to read. Having thus secured her name
from oblivion, she got her occupation transmitted to after-times by having
various fowl sculptured in bas-relief on the plinth. Alas! how are casual
visitors to know, when admiring the group, that it was executed at the
expense of Anne the poulterer of the street of the withered tree; and who
is aware of the circumstance from which the street itself got its name in
old times?

In days when pilgrimages were in fashion, a certain house of entertainment
in that street was much in favor with the really devout, as well as the
wanderers who had returned in life from the Holy Land. These had brought
home intelligence of a wonderful tree which had annually produced leaves
and fruit in the vicinity of Hebron, from the days of Adam to that on which
our Lord was crucified. [Footnote 242] On that day it withered, and,
according to the assertion of the pilgrims, would remain sapless till the
Holy City would be in the possession of a Christian power. Such a legend
was calculated to make a deep impression on the customers of the auberge,
for which an open-air artist was soon called on to execute the effigies of
the famous dry tree for a sign. Afterward the inn communicated its name to
the street.

    [Footnote 242: Near Hebron is an oak of great dimensions and of great
    age; but the acorn from which it sprung was not planted for ages after
    Abraham's time.]


  Slang Banished From The Stage.

Some objectionable things, which, when they assume troublesome proportions,
are extinguished by public opinion amongst ourselves, are stifled by the
strong hand of power in France. In 1859, a warning was given to those
theatres in Paris which were suspected of a leaning to _Argot_,
(slang,) that they should for the future accept no piece in which it
prevailed. So the poor gamins, who enjoy a play from the _Paradis_ of
the theatre, could no more relish the phraseology of their peculiar world
and their peculiar philosophy. The higher powers argued thus: "Argot is the
ordinary communication between formats of all descriptions, whether they
plot against the peace and well-being of society, or bewail their
misfortunes at the bagne; _ergo_, it is not a fit and proper dialect
to be spoken before gentlemen and ladies, honest citizens and their wives
and children; _ergo_, it must not be spoken." So the poor gamin of
vicious propensities must be content in his hours of relaxation to learn
the language of that half of the world to which he does not belong.

{693}

Yet many of his pet words are not of a low or disreputable origin. Such is
the word _Binette_, nowhere heard now except among the folk who live
by their wits, and yet presenting a noble and sublime image in the days of
the Grand Monarque, in fact, no less an object than his flowing and
majestic peruke. Binette of the Rue des Petits Champs (street of the little
fields) was his majesty's hair-dresser, and a great man would feel his
dignity outraged if a hint was given that his wig was not
_confectioned_ by the great Binette. Now from Caesar to the wisp that
stops a bung-hole, the descent is not greater than between the Binette (the
wig, not the man) of the seventeenth and that of the nineteenth century.

In thieves' Latin _ardent_ represents a candle. The thief has
accurately preserved the vocabulary of the Hotel Rambouillet, the Holland
House of the seventeenth century. One of the _Precieuses_ of that
temple of literary elegance, when directing the lackey to snuff the candle,
would thus express herself: "_Inutile, ostez le superflu de cet
ardent!_" [Footnote 243]

    [Footnote 243: This anecdote reminds us of a tradition not forgotten
    among the gyps of T.C.D. A very learned fellow, dismounting from his
    steed some time during the dark ages, said to a little boy, "Juvenile,
    circumambulate the quadruped round the quadrangle, and I shall
    recompense thee with a pecuniary remuneration."]

The gamin is not great on the subject of verbal roots: he uses the words,
but does not trouble himself about the quarter from whence they come. He is
not aware that his own name is the _galopin_ (tavern-boy) of the
middle ages. When he says that such or such article of dress, or food, or
what you will, is _chouette_, (nice,) he is merely retaining the
_souef_ (doux) of the old French poetry. His friend is his
_copin_, the _compaign_ (comrade) of old times; the boy he
despises is a _capon_, the name applied to the Jews in the days of
Philip the Fair. His _rigolo_ comes to him from the verb
_rigoler_, (to amuse one's self,) so often used in _Maistre
Pathelin_, our Village Lawyer, a farce of the fifteenth century. An
umbrella is a _rifflard_ with him, though he is little aware that it
gets that name from _Mons. Rifflard_, the "Paul Pry" of the _Petite
Ville_ of Picard.

Edouard Fournier, in his Enigmes des Rues de Paris, relates this
characteristic anecdote on the subject of slang. It is the antithesis of
O'Connell's victory over the fish-woman.

  "A lady of the Halles (Fish Market) had one day a war of words with a
  _meraicher_, (market gardener,) and, ye gods! such words as they
  were! She told off one by one her relentless rosary of abuse. A
  grave-looking man stood still, and attentively listened to the explosion
  of the wonderful vocabulary.

  "'Not bad, not bad,' said he from time to time. At last came the famous
  phrase, 'You're no better than a melon,' and it served for finale to the
  torrent of invectives--for the bouquet to the fire-work of coarse words.

  "'Very well, indeed!' cried the grave man. 'And why very well?' said I.
  'Because,' said he, 'this woman has just rendered homage to the
  literature which I profess.' 'How?' 'She has nearly spoken Greek. Yes,
  indeed, monsieur, the language of Homer. She has just honored this
  bumpkin with the epithet [Footnote 244] which Thersites, in the second
  book of the Iliad, line 235, applied to the Grecian kings in council.'"

    [Footnote 244: The word used by Thersites is [Greek text], plural of
    [Greek text], soft or ripe, as applied to fruit, and figuratively to
    inactive or effeminate persons.]


  An Unhealthy Suburb.

With any one's experience of the worst parts of the existing cities of
Europe, it would be hard for him to realize the condition of the Quartier
Montmartre in former days. The terrible description in Victor Hugo's
romance gives only one small phase of it. All the results of extreme
poverty, vice, negligence, and thorough laziness united to make a scene of
squalor and wretchedness without parallel. There was no thought of removing
nuisances, and at this day a section of some heaps of the old strata
presents as curious a variety of substances as were ever discovered by the
great Abbeville explorer himself. Some future professor, descended from Mr.
Chaillu's gorilla, finding various evidences of human workmanship so far
below the ordinary platform of the human family in A.D. 2500. will set them
down as a deposit of the year 10,000 A.C.
{694}
Many a police-raid was effected on the inhabitants of the Cour des
Miracles, of the Rue Temps-Perdu, of that of the _Vide Gousset_,
(pickpocket,) of the Bout-du-Monde, of the Ville-Neuve; many hundreds
seized and sent to the Salpetrière (house of correction) or to La Nouvelle
France, (Canada,) and yet the wretched little dens in the filthy,
ill-smelling lanes would not fail to get new tenants. "Unfeeling nobles,
bad government!" say we. At last in the days of Louis XIII. it was
announced that any artisan choosing to settle in the quarter might exercise
his trade without let or hindrance, or paying duty or incurring expenses
incidental to the carrying on of trades in other portions of the city.
Makers of articles of household furniture chiefly availed themselves of the
privilege; a better class of inhabitants took possession, and the
atmosphere improved.

This (northern) quarter of the city has been, from the earliest times,
incommoded by the number of streams arising among the northern and eastern
hills adjoining the city, (Paris lying in a natural bowl-like cavity,) and
endeavoring to find their way under houses and streets to the Seine. Many
efforts have been made from time to time, to provide courses for these
troublesome rivulets in channels arched over or open to the day; yet so
late as 1855 some houses in the Faubourg Montmartre were filled to the
ground floor by subterranean inundations; the inhabitants wondering what
could bring water into their kitchens and cellars, and they so much above
the level of the Seine. At the present time, under the strong volition of
the emperor, an effective attempt is being made at the formation of a large
subterranean river and its feeders.


  Begging A Thriving Business.

Many visitors to the existing exhibition, while exploring and admiring the
Place de Carrousel and its surroundings, will scarcely dream of the space
between the Tuileries, the Louvre, and the Palais Royal having been once
occupied by an hospital for three hundred poor blind men. This at present
magnificent quarter was a poor place in the days of St. Louis, and there
were the straggling habitations built. Dust-heaps and filth of many kinds
distinguished the locality, and in this uninviting spot the three hundred
blind endured life from the days of good Saint Louis.

At its first institution, the hospital was a mere night refuge--a retreat
where the blind men were sure of a house over their heads and a sort of bed
to sleep on after their _criailleries_ all day through the streets.
The old charities were seldom complete in themselves. The pious founders
did a certain portion of the good work, leaving to the public an
opportunity of completing it. Philip the Fair added a dress stamped with
the fleur de lys, and the poor blind man thus equipped was on a level with
_Edie Ochiltree_, and so privileged, he "_tote jor ne finit de
braire,_" (the whole day he ceased not his braying,) as an old writer
coarsely expressed himself.

There was a parallel to this institution in higher quarters, even in
literary regions. In the College of Navarre, placed under the highest
patronage, the pupils went in the morning through the streets, stretching
out the hand, and crying, "Bread, bread for the poor scholars of Madame de
Navarre!"

The three hundred were well looked after, all things considered. They had a
poor-box in every church of France. They were privileged not only to beg at
the doors, but even to exercise their quest in the church itself. A
difficulty arose from the circumstance of some churches affording to the
"King's Bedesmen" a better harvest than others. All or most would naturally
crowd to fleece the richest and most charitable congregations, and dire
confusion would ensue.
{695}
But there were heads equal to the emergency. Once a year an auction
was held; a good church was set up, bedesmen bid for its possession; it was
knocked down to the best small batch of bidders, and the money they gave
then, or as they made it, put into a common fund. The least well off or
least speculative got the worst stands, but they received their share of
the money arising from the auction.

This exceptional state of things continued till within the second half of
last century, when the office of grand almoner became invested in the
Cardinal de Rohan. The wretched habitations of the three hundred, their
poor church left to ruin, the dust-heaps and pools of evil odor with which
they were surrounded, so badly harmonized with the neighborhood of the
Palais Royal, the Tuileries, and the Louvre, between which they lay, that
it entered the speculative mind of the cardinal that it would be a
profitable business to remove the poor inmates to a more cleanly and
comfortable domicile, and sell the large plot of land on which the
straggling settlement reposed. A solvent company was found, the land
disposed of for six millions of livres, and the Hotel of the Black
Musketeers, Rue de Charenton, was purchased for the blind men at somewhat
less than half a million. This took place in 1779, and since then the
churches and the streets have been relieved from the annoyance of the
_state_ beggars. They still occupy the Hotel Rue de Charenton, and the
curious traveller now passing down the magnificent Rue Rivoli, with palaces
on either hand, can scarcely persuade himself that the space round him was,
less than a century since, a dedalus of dirty lanes and ill-kept, squalid
dwellings.


  The Morgue And Its Derivation.

"Whoe'er was at Paris must needs know the Grève" was said and sung three
half-centuries ago. Whoever was or was not at Paris must have heard of the
Morgue, where the bodies of unknown persons who have met with sudden deaths
were exposed for some days, to be recognised by their friends. Perhaps he
is not aware of the cause of applying to the temporary abode of the quiet
dead a name implying such a different idea. The dismal little building is
now not to be found in its old locality, Quai du Marché Neuf, south side of
the Cité.

In the great as well as the little Chatelet (prison) of past days there was
a room called the little prison, where new-comers were brought "to sit for
their portraits," that is, undergo a rigorous inspection as to their
features by the lower officials of the place. Readers of Pickwick's
incarceration will not require an elaborate description of the process.
Now, such a sharp and supercilious scrutiny of the countenance is expressed
by the word _Morgue_. The humorist, D'Assoucy, has left a description
of the inspection he underwent on such an occasion, and the terror into
which he was thrown by a long sharp knife, wielded by a short, broad, and
fat officer, but which was only designed to cut away the ribbons that
secured his breeches, and the band of his hat, and thus remove all
available instruments of self destruction in the Grand Chatelet.

When this apartment changed its destination, and became a place of exposure
for the dead, it continued to retain its name; and, on the destruction of
the building, the title went to the sinister-looking edifice built for the
same purpose. While the Chatelet remained, the sisters of the hospital
convent of St. Catherine, corner of the streets of St. Denis and of the
Lombards, bestowed the rites of sepulture on the poor remains not
recognized. The other specialty of the good sisters was the relief of poor
women in destitute circumstances.

{696}

The easily led populace of Paris were long under the impression that a
visit to the Morgue, and the consequent withdrawal of a corpse, would cost
the friends a hundred and one crowns. So the bereaved families were seldom
in a hurry with their visit. In vain did the lieutenant of police in 1736
endeavor to undeceive them.

In 1767, a gentleman, taking the packet boat from Fontainebleau to Paris,
quitted the conveyance rather hurriedly, leaving a case behind him. After
some little delay it was opened, and much terrified were the assistants at
finding what appeared the body of a young man who had been strangled. A
commissary of police was called on, accompanied by a surgeon. A
procès-verbal was drawn up by them, and the body sent to the Morgue to be
identified. Soon after, the negligent or guilty passenger arrived in a
hurry at the office of the boat, and asked for the forgotten parcel. His
request was followed by his seizure and presentation before the worthy
magistrate, who had so laudably done his duty. On being charged with the
murder, he burst into a fit of laughter, and covered the poor official with
confusion by announcing that the corpse of the strangled man was a mummy
which he was just after bringing from Egypt, and had forgotten to carry
away with the rest of his luggage. In order to get his property out of the
dead-house, he was obliged to make application to the lieutenant of police,
and this circumstance soon scattered the news far and near. A few nights
after, all Paris was breaking its sides in the theatre laughing at an
uproarious farce by Saconnet, displaying in the richest colors the wisdom
and skill of the police commissary and the surgeon. Repeated instances were
made by these gentlemen to the minister, M. de Sartines, to restrain the
representation. On the last time he observed: "Toleration is a virtue which
I love to practise to the utmost limits allowable." The piece had a run of
forty nights.


  A King And Minister Well Matched.

Among the many puzzles met in history and biography is the retaining of his
place by Louvois, prime minister to Louis XIV. Every student of history is
aware of the great self-esteem which dwelt within the monarch; and it would
be natural to suppose that, in order to retain his favor, officer or
minister should diligently cultivate obsequiousness, and have no will or
opinion but that of his master. It was not so, however, with this minister;
and it is a historic fact that the king resolved on a great public
undertaking on account of a difference he had with his minister in their
guesses at the breadth of the window at which they were standing. Louis
said it was such a breadth, Louvois guessed it was an inch or two more or
less, and insisted on the exactness of his eye-calculation so persistently
that the king called for a ruler to decide the matter, and resolved on a
transaction which he knew would be distasteful to his opinionative
contradictor.

In Louis' reign, and under the superintendence of Louvois, was raised the
noble pile of the Invalides--a building which will be, or ought to be, at
least, visited by every one who takes interest in the well being of men who
have suffered in the defence or for the glory of their country. Mansard,
the architect, who has given his name to French attics (_Mansardes?_)
was much incommoded by the impatience of the minister, whose self
appreciation would be content with nothing less than the carving of his
bourgeois coat of arms in the neighborhood of the royal achievement
wherever it was set up. He gained only mortification by the movement, as
Louis had them all effaced. The great man was enraged at this instance of
disrespect, and was obliged to content himself with a posthumous revenge.
He would be buried at the Invalides, and, through the complaisance of the
curé, M. de Mauray, it was done. His body was laid in one of the vaults,
but, after all, was not allowed to remain there. The king's parasites gave
him information, and the corpse was removed.

{697}

Louvois, fearing that something of this kind would happen, was resolved to
attach his memory to the Invalides by surer means. In one mansarde he got
sculptured a barrel of powder in the act of explosion, signalizing the war
he had originated; in another, a plume of ostrich feathers; and, in two
others, an owl and a bat, all emblematic of his high dignity, his wisdom,
and wakefulness. The masterpiece, however, was a wolf, the upper part only
seen, surmounted by a tuft of palm-leaves, holding the _OEil de Boeuf_
between his forepaws and looking intently into the court. Thus was a pun in
marble executed: _(le) Loup voit_ (the wolf is looking)--Louvois, both
having the same sound, and the great man's name inseparably connected with
the Invalides.

------

  Original

  Playing With Fire.


There was a fine specimen in Birmingham, the other day, of a style of
theological disputation which we hoped had gone out of vogue. A poor wretch
named Murphy, a paid agent of the London Protestant Electoral Union, had
been travelling for some months about the counties of Stafford and Warwick,
circulating obscene tracts upon the confessional, ranting about priests and
nuns, retailing all the absurd and wicked stories against the Catholic
religion which have formed the stock in trade of a certain class of zealots
and religious demagogues for the last three hundred years; and very
naturally his disgusting tirades had stirred up a dangerous sort of public
feeling. The lower classes of the Protestants were taught to look upon the
Catholics as savage, wild beasts, given up to all manner of immoral
practices, enemies to all human happiness, thirsting for blood, rapine, and
revolution, and wedded to the stake, the faggot, and the thumb-screw. The
lower classes of the Catholics were compelled to bear the taunts and
insults which were certain to be provoked by this rage of popular
prejudice, and moreover to listen to the grossest attacks upon what they
held in most affectionate reverence. Of course, sensible Protestants, as
well as educated Catholics, felt nothing but pity and contempt for the
ravings of such a man as Murphy; but unfortunately it is not educated and
sensible people who make all the trouble in the world, nor were they
educated and sensible people who formed the bulk of Mr. Murphy's audiences.
Wherever he went, he made a popular disturbance. Blows and brickbats
followed in his train like dust behind rolling wheels. The magistrates in
one town confiscated his books on account of their indecency. At last he
came to Birmingham. The mayor and council refused him the use of a public
hall, but his disciples built him an immense wooden tabernacle; and there,
while an angry crowd raged and threatened about the doors, he began a five
weeks' course of lectures on the atrocities of popery. What an instructive
contrast was then presented! In the streets Catholic priests were going
about among the mob, begging and commanding them to drop their menacing
hands and withdraw peaceably to their homes. In the tabernacle this fiery
ranter was declaring that every Catholic priest was "a murderer, a
cannibal, a liar, and a pickpocket;" that the papists were thirsting for
his blood, but durst not take it; that they might pelt him with stones, but
God would put forth his arm and prevent his being hurt; they might raise
their bludgeons against him, but God would ward off the blows.
{698}
Need anybody ask what was the result of all this? A riot broke out and
raged for two days; and, as always happens in riots, the greater part of
the disorder and destruction was caused not by those who began the fray,
but by professional thieves and rowdies who seized the opportunity to
plunder.

Now, of course, we have no desire to apologize for the unwarrantable mode
taken by the Birmingham Catholics to silence this itinerant preacher.
Rioting is both a great blunder and a great crime. But who was the more to
blame? Was it the pulpit mountebank who pelted his audience with well-nigh
intolerable insults, or the uneducated laborers who resented them? Our Lord
tells us, when we are smitten upon one cheek, to turn the other; but we all
know that the custom of human nature is to smite back. If you first stir up
the angry passions of a crowd of excitable Irishmen, and then dance into
the midst of them, and dare them to come on, it will not be surprising if
you dance out again with a bloody nose and a torn coat. If you shake your
fist at a man, and assure him that he cannot hit you if he tries ever so
hard, it is very probable that he will try; and if you are hurt, you will
have yourself to blame. It is not safe to go near gunpowder with a lighted
candle. All England seems to have thought as we do about the Birmingham
affair, and Murphy has been unanimously awarded the responsibility for the
outrage by the ministers in parliament, and by all the respectable
newspapers, even by such prejudiced journals as The Times.

There have been many religious riots in Great Britain and America, but the
story is nearly always the same. They have had them in Birmingham before;
they have had them in Belfast and Dublin. Lord George Gordon got up a
famous one in London, and Gavazzi was the cause of one in Montreal. The
Native American movement in 1844 gave us two dreadful riots in
Philadelphia, and, but for the firmness and sagacity of Bishop Hughes,
would have provoked another in New-York. In the train of the Know-Nothing
excitement ten years later followed a long array of incendiary preachers,
some of whom were proved to have been expressly hired to provoke
disturbance; and what was the result? Churches were sacked, torn down,
burned, or blown up with gunpowder in Manchester and Dorchester,
New-Hampshire, in Bath, Maine, and in Newark, New-Jersey. A church in
Williamsburg was barely saved from the flames by the opportune arrival of
the military. A street-preacher in New-York named Parsons was very nearly
the cause of a riot in December, 1853; but in this instance also Archbishop
Hughes succeeded in keeping the Catholics quiet. All over the country, in
fact, rapine and incendiarism seemed rampant; but The New-York Tribune
justly observed: "It is worthy of remark that, while five or six Catholic
churches in this country have been destroyed or ruined by an excited
populace, not a single Protestant church can be pointed out which Catholics
have even thought of attacking."

No reasonable man will deny that the frantic sort of propagandism which
stirred up all these acts of violence does more harm to its own cause than
to that of its adversaries. No honest and rational Protestant wants to
trust his defence to a Murphy or a Parsons. The street ranters are
dangerous allies and despicable enemies. But the trouble is that after the
fools have made the disturbance there are always knaves ready to keep it
alive. No sooner had the excited Catholics begun to throw stories at the
Birmingham tabernacle than the scourings of the jails, the pestiferous
brood of the slums and alleys, began to sack the pawnbrokers' and jewellers
shops. And then down came from London a member of Parliament--the
notorious Mr. Whalley, whose incessant attacks upon popery in the House of
Commons are a standing matter of laughter; and he and Murphy made speeches
side by side, one not much more sensible than the other.
{699}
We shall, no doubt, see the Protestant Electoral Union, of which both these
gentlemen are pillars and ornaments, trying to make political capital out
of the affair. So, too, in the United States: there has always been a
political organization at the back of the zealots who have stirred up
religious riots, and there have always been politicians to scramble for the
fruits of bigotry, if not to plant the seed.

Is there any reason why we may not have in New-York a repetition of the
outrages of Birmingham or Philadelphia? Heaven be praised! we have not, so
far as we know, a Protestant Electoral Union; but we have Whalleys enough,
and as for Murphies, the world is full of them. There is no need to build a
tabernacle; with us they speak through the press. A lie shouted from a
platform is not more dangerous than a lie sent flying over the country in
the pages of a newspaper. If you want to produce a quick sensation with a
good bouncing calumny, the best way perhaps is to speak it out by word of
mouth; but for permanent effect commend us to print. There is an American
journal which has been acting the part of a Murphy for a long time past,
and has lately been flying at popery with more rage than ever. In a recent
number of Harper's Weekly there was a horrible story of the confessional in
Rome, which might rival the wildest romances of Mrs. Radcliffe. It showed
us a sinner getting absolution before he could summon courage to confess
his sins, and a young girl murdered by monks and buried under the church
pavement; "for in that wonderful but priest-ridden city," says the writer,
"the papal clergy act almost with impunity." And the other day, in the same
paper, there was a picture of a Roman confessional, a row of penitents
kneeling before it, while a priest leaned over the door and absolved them
by tapping each one on the head with a rod. This wonderful device, as our
Catholic readers will at once perceive, was borrowed from the symbolical
wand of office borne by the penitentiaries at the Roman court; but Harper's
Weekly puts the whole sacrament into the tap of the wand. "This," says the
editor, "is a faithful representation of the manner in which sins are
forgiven in the confessionals of St. Peter's at Rome." And then follows a
long article, in the true Murphy vein, about confession, and indulgences,
and purgatory, and many other points of Catholic doctrine. The pope, we are
told, claims the power of damning souls to _hell_, and admitting whom
he pleases into heaven. The holiness which he rewards is not Christian
holiness; the sins which he punishes with eternal fire are not the sins
which Christ denounced. "Sincere penitence as a ground of forgiveness has
been practically laid aside, and simple confession has taken its place."
Indulgences are mere merchandise, and money will at any time buy a soul out
of purgatory, just as "the performance of certain arbitrary ceremonies
which have no more connection with vital Christianity than had the rites of
pagandom" will open the gates of heaven. Then the writer, after assuring us
that the pope is afraid of America, passes on to the ridicule of relics,
and of many pious practices, and winds up his article with a prediction
that the Christian world will sooner or later be freed from all these
mummeries and superstitions, and all mankind be sensible and enlightened
Protestants.

Now, to what does all this tend? We dare say the writer of this tirade
supposed he was telling the truth, but what was his purpose in telling it?
Did he expect to make converts by it? When we seek to be reconciled with an
enemy, do we begin by insulting him? Will it dispose an adversary to listen
to your arguments with a favoring ear if you open the discussion by
spitting in his face, and calling him a fool, and reviling all that he
holds in highest respect? Billingsgate is not gospel. When the Holy Ghost
came down upon the apostles on the day of Pentecost, those chosen preachers
of divine truth did not straightway begin to blackguard the Jews.
{700}
When St. Paul preached at Antioch, he did not call the pagan pontiffs
"ragamuffins," as Mr. Murphy called the Catholic clergy, nor did he try to
convert the Jews by saying of their high priest what the Birmingham
Boanerges said of the pope, that he was "the greatest old rag and bone
grubber in the universe." And does the Journal of Civilization expect to
convert Catholics by caricaturing the pope, and telling scandalous stories
about the church, and burlesquing her doctrines? As we said before, we feel
bound to presume that the writer believed all he said; but it was so easy
for him to know better. The doctrine which he ascribes to Catholics we so
earnestly repudiate in all our books, in all our pulpits, and in all our
practical life, that we have a good right to complain indignantly, and to
charge him with a carelessness hardly more pardonable than dishonesty.

We say this carelessness is a very grave offence, because such calumnies
against religious bodies never have but one effect--exasperation, and
possibly riot. There is just the same material for a riot in New-York that
there was in Birmingham. There are ignorant and hot-headed men, both
Protestants and Catholics, who are ready enough to come to blows if you
once charge them full of religious ire, and then bring them in contact; and
there are thieves and street brigands enough in any large city to push on
the work of destruction when once it has been started. We know very well
that a hundred such stories and pictures would never make a riot by
themselves. We know very well that there are not a half dozen Catholics in
New-York who would be wicked and silly enough to resent such insults with
violence. What we complain of is, that vituperation and calumny can hardly
fail to create a dangerous antagonism of feeling which, at any unforeseen
provocation may ripen into bloodshed. Once teach opposing classes of the
people to loathe each other, and how long will the public peace be safe?
Let papers like Harper's Journal of Civilization (bless the mark!) keep on
stirring up the bad old blood, reviving the dead old lies, reawakening
dormant prejudices, and filling the two denominations with mutual hatred,
and the least little spark may suddenly kindle the whole hateful mass into
a sweeping conflagration. Argue with us, if you will, and we will meet you
in the calm, gentle, Christian spirit without which all controversy must be
worse than useless. Tell us that we are wrong, if you think so, and we will
show you wherein we are right. Surely a Christian minister can discuss
mooted questions of theology without flinging his Bible at his adversary's
head. Civilized gentlemen can talk over their differences without loading
each other with vile epithets. There is only one way in which religious
disputation can be profitable or even tolerable; let us come to that way at
once; but, above all, no more lies; no more playing with fire.

------

{701}

  Original.

  Christianity And Its Conflicts. [Footnote 245]

 [Footnote 245:
  Christianity and its Conflicts, Ancient and Modern.
  By E. E. Marcy, A.M. New-York:
  D. Appleton & Co., Broadway. 1867. Pp. 480.]


The title of this work indicates that its scope is very comprehensive, and
that its execution involves a great deal of practical labor and research.
The author says in his preface that he has aimed "to display Christianity
as it was established by Jesus, as it has been developed and perpetuated by
the apostles and their successors, and to correct the erroneous impressions
which so generally exist respecting it, and also endeavored to exhibit a
general outline of the various conflicting elements which have been arrayed
against the Christian system up to the present time."

He has been as good as his word, for he has given us an instructive and
able sketch of the heathen philosophers and religions, and of the corrupt
social conditions which opposed themselves to the introduction of
Christianity; of the struggle for so many ages with the barbarism of
Europe; and, finally, in what we consider by far the most vivid and
interesting portions of his work, he has laid bare the character, effects,
and tendencies of what is called the Reformation, and the present condition
of Christendom, religious, social, and political.

To judge his work correctly, we must bear in mind that the author is a
layman, the business of whose life has not been the study of theology. A
man of liberal education, a physician, and of eminence in his profession,
his attention has been drawn to the consideration of the grand problems of
man's destiny; he has studied and reflected upon them, realized their
importance, and given us the result, as he says, "for the sole purpose of
vindicating truth and the religion of Christ."

The testimony of an intelligent and cultivated layman on the subject of
religious truths has a peculiar value; for, although it may not be so
accurate and full in a theological sense, it often presents the arguments
in a more popular form, and with a personal conviction which impresses the
minds of many with a peculiar force. The author evidently feels deeply on
the subjects on which he writes. A citizen of the world, he feels a deep
interest in both the temporal and spiritual well-being of his fellows. As
he contemplates either false principles or the evil conduct of individuals,
the sentiment of indignation rises within him, and he expresses himself
frequently in animated and glowing language, and with a sort of passionate
energy which will be considered, no doubt, by those who do not sympathize
with him, as a blemish. We wish he had toned down some of his expressions
to avoid giving needless offence, and that appearance of exaggeration which
to the minds of some might cast suspicion upon the solid merit of his
conclusions. We regret particularly his political allusions. Without
entering at all into the merits of party politics, we wish they had been
kept out of this book altogether; or, if the author must pay off one
political party, we wish he had executed an equal and impartial justice
upon the other. There is enough of political selfishness, corruption, and
bribery in either political party to excite the indignation of every honest
man.
{702}
But we must not exact too much of a layman who has his strong political
views, and who considers it timely and for the public good to give them a
decided expression. What would be unbecoming in one in holy orders may be
permitted to a layman in the busy walks of life. We are not disposed to
forgive so easily the way in which he has spoken of New England. This
section of the country contains all sorts of people and all sorts of
opinions, good, bad, and indifferent. There may be more radicalism, more
scepticism, and more fanaticism here than elsewhere. It is a question we
think it idle to enter upon. The same principles prevail and have prevailed
in other sections of the country. It is wrong to single out New England or
its inhabitants to be held up to the scorn, ridicule, or hatred of the rest
of the country. It is quite too much the fashion nowadays to do so, and we
cannot too strongly reprobate a practice which sets one section of the
country at variance with another, perpetuates ill feeling and hatred, and
aggravates the very mischief it aims to remove. But we all know that those
who take warm interest in political questions are apt to have very decided
opinions and to express them in a corresponding manner, and we can well
afford to pass them by without allowing our equanimity to be too much
ruffled by them; and whatever may be the political opinion of any man, or
however much he may differ from our author, he must, we think, give him
credit for his courage and pluck in the fearless manner he comes out with
them.

But let us come to the solid merits of the volume. The author shows us, in
the first chapter, the terrible corruption of morals and the false
philosophy prevailing at the time of the introduction of Christianity, and
the fearful struggle which it had with paganism. He deduces therefrom the
necessity of miracles and a proof of their truth. This is timely and
judicious, when a silly criticism is striving to overturn all the ideas of
common sense on this subject, and to destroy the historical testimony of
the truth of revelation. We hope this will be read and reflected upon by
those who have confused ideas on this subject.

He proceeds to give us an account of the doctrines taught by our Lord Jesus
Christ, and holds up in relief the demand which he made on our unqualified
submission and assent to all the truths which he taught and all his
precepts. This is faith, and the foundation of religion and salvation. To
believe in Christ is to believe all that he taught and to do all he
commanded. As we are more fully aware what is the real meaning of the word
"faith," we can understand better the true character of the Christian
religion. We notice some inaccuracies of expression, and sometimes desire a
more profound insight into the matter, but find embodied a great deal of
useful information which may thus be brought within the reach of many who,
if we may judge from the ignorance displayed in the religious publications
of the day, have the most erroneous ideas on the subject.

He shows the identity of the church instituted by Christ and the Catholic
Church, tracing the history of the church from its foundation up to the
time of the Reformation, and discussing those doctrines which are held in
the Catholic Church, though rejected by those who have separated from her.
The picture he portrays of the condition of the world at the commencement
of the Reformation is most opportune. Protestant writers have endeavored to
force the conviction on the minds of their readers that all or the greater
part of the progress of civilization has taken place since that event.
Nothing can be more untrue. The author proves to us that a continual
progress had been in course for centuries in a healthy and steady
advancement; and when we connect this with the account which follows of the
effects of this great historical event, in removing the restraints which
held man's pride and selfish passions within bounds; of the discord,
violence, and civil war which were the uniform result everywhere; we are
filled with regret that the harmonious development of the physical and
spiritual life of the nations, under the auspices of the church, was ever
interfered with.
{703}
It would have been a beautiful sight to have seen Europe, a commonwealth of
nations, bound together by the tie of one religious faith and the same
principles of morality, submitting their differences, without the necessity
of immense standing armies and ruinous wars, to the mild arbitration of him
whom they all acknowledged to be the Vicar of Christ, and the guardian of
Christian justice and morality. We must ask ourselves, not where we are
now, but what we would have attained had our efforts been combined, rather
than wasted in opposing one another.

The church fulfilled her duty up to this time, against the obstacles thrown
in her way by the flood of barbarism which overflowed all Europe. She
christianized and civilized the people. She was constantly occupied in
reforming abuses; and, if such existed at the time of the Reformation, we
must acknowledge that there was every disposition to reform them within the
body of the church herself, without the least need of throwing off her
legitimate authority. This book ought to clear up many misapprehensions
only too common in the public mind.

We then have an account of the doctrines of the reformers, drawn from their
own writings, followed by interesting and graphic sketches of the personal
characteristics of Luther, Calvin, and others. That of Luther is peculiarly
piquant, and is authenticated completely by copious extracts from his own
writings and those of his friends and associates.

We hope the advocates of the Reformation, for the honor of their cause,
will keep the first reformers as much out of sight as possible, and cease
to compare them to St. Paul and the apostles. Their doctrines are pretty
well exploded, and, when brought forward as distinct propositions, are
reprobated by the universal sense of mankind. Unfortunately they still live
in a covert and hidden way to work out their evil and bitter fruits, as the
author fully shows in the subsequent parts of his work.

Those who represent the reformers as saints, have a strange idea of
sanctity or even common decency. Dr. Marcy, in view of their immoral
eccentricities, adopts the most charitable construction possible in the
case of Luther and some others. We will let him speak for himself:

  "From an amiable, chaste, temperate, and devout man, he (that is, Luther)
  became violent, ferocious, intemperate, licentious, blasphemous, and
  sanguinary. From a firm, unwavering, and happy believer in the truths of
  the church, he became the victim of innumerable doubts, changes,
  perplexities, and fierce torments. From a condition of mental
  tranquillity and intellectual equilibrium, he leaped into a state of
  maniacal excitement with a very great perversion of all his intellectual
  powers and faculties. As an innovator he habitually saw spectres, men
  with tails, horns, claws, features of animals, and was pursued and
  tormented by these morbid fantasies. A volume of these abnormal
  manifestations might be cited in support of our position, but we have
  presented a sufficient number to enable the impartial reader to form a
  just conclusion of Luther's sanity or insanity."

After this account of the reformers and their opinions, we have a striking
account of the fruits of their doctrines in Europe and America up to this
present time. It deserves to be read and reread. He calls attention to a
fact of which we are all too well cognizant, the miserable religious
discussions introduced and ever on the increase since the Reformation.
"Until the innovating revolution of the sixteenth century, the faith of
Christendom had been a unit; there were no divisions, no dissensions, no
false teachers or false doctrines in the Christian household. Men, women,
and children knew only one church, one faith, and one form of worship, and
were contented and happy in their religious convictions.
{704}
So universal was this unity, so thoroughly grounded was this faith, and so
general was the practical observance of the duties of religion, that
scepticism, the novelties of individuals, irreligion, and immorality were
comparatively rare. The Christian church had been made up of converts from
numerous nations and races, and there had been a continual struggle for
more than fifteen centuries between the church on the one hand and these
elements of ignorance and evil on the other; the church had finally
triumphed, true Christian civilization had fairly gained the ascendency
over barbarism, and a universal reign of Christian unity and concord was
rapidly dawning over the whole world, when suddenly the innovations of
Germany broke in upon this unity and harmony, arrested the onward progress
of Christianity, and deluged the world with distracting novelties, creeds,
and sects." Incessant wars and rapid deterioration of morals complete the
picture, the main outlines of which we can verify from our own observation.
In this connection the author has, we are glad to see, taken up the
favorite argument and grand trump card of the opponents of the Catholic
church, which is thus expressed: "Contrast the condition of Protestant and
Catholic countries, and see how much superior in wealth, intelligence, and
progress the former are to the latter." He shows that, when the facts are
not carefully manipulated and prepared for the purpose, there is no very
great contrast after all. He says: "Macaulay has contrasted the United
States and Mexico; Italy and Scotland; Spain and Holland; Prussia and
Ireland; candor should have induced this eminent writer to have made more
equal and just comparisons, as France and England, Belgium and Holland,
Austria and Prussia, Mexico, Peru, and Brazil with the Sandwich Islands and
other recently converted nations."'

Making the comparison, not merely in regard to wealth and outward show, but
taking into account the statistics of crime, he shows that Catholic
countries are far in advance of their Protestant rivals in virtue and
morality.

It is perfectly astonishing how the current idea in Protestant society
tends to deify materialism.

Worldly prosperity and accumulation of wealth we unblushingly put forward
as the conclusive test of the truth or falsity of religious faith. Our Lord
said, "Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust
doth corrupt, but lay up treasures in heaven;" but a host of clerical and
lay gentlemen and philosophers shout themselves hoarse with the cry; "Your
Catholics have not the religion of Christ, for you do not seek after money
half hard enough. You are a deal too simple in your way of living; you
ought to multiply your cravings and desires more, and live a deal more
artificially than you do." Listen to Lecky, one of the great modern lights;
quoted by Dr. Marcy: "An accumulation of capital is therefore the first
step of civilization, and this accumulation depends on the multiplication
of wants. ... Hence the dreary, sterile torpor that characterized those
ages in which the ascetic principle has been supreme, while the
civilizations which have attained the highest perfection have been those of
ancient Greece and modern Europe, which were most opposed to it." Liebig,
quoted in a work of Youmans recently published, gives us this queer
definition: "Man's superiority to the beast depends essentially in his
faculty of discovering inventions for the gratification of his wants, and
it is the sum of them among a people which embraces the conception of their
'civilization.'" We feel much ashamed of our old-fashioned ignorance, but
really we used to think man's superiority over the beast consisted
essentially in his possessing an immortal soul. Dr. J. W. Draper launches
out in the following grandiloquent condemnation of the "Roman Church:"
{705}
"How different the result had it abandoned the obsolete absurdities of
patristicism"--we suppose he means the teaching of the fathers of the
church handed down to them from the apostles--"and become imbued with the
spirit of true philosophy--had it lifted itself to a comprehension of the
awful magnificence of the heavens above and the glories of the earth
beneath, had it appreciated the immeasurable vastness of the universe, its
infinite multitude of worlds, its inconceivable past duration." Poor old
church, why did you not abandon the consideration of the unseen world and
the inconceivable duration of eternity, and confine your attention to
astronomy and geology? Why teach men that God takes an interest in them
personally and holds them accountable, when he has created so many worlds
and rocks to take up their attention? This is philosophy with a vengeance,
the philosophy which is summed up by St. Paul in the short phrase. "Let us
eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die."

Greece and Rome reached the acme of this material civilization before they
fell. England at present seems to occupy their place. Kay, in his social
history of the English people, exposes the misery and vice of the great
mass the population, which, like the smothered fire of a volcano, may burst
out and involve the land in a universal ruin and desolation.

It is well for us to take warning in time, for, in the headlong race after
money and material enjoyment, we are getting civilized to such a degree
that we seem to be in danger of outrunning all the antiquated notions of
honor and honesty. Our late upheaval of society, the unsettled state of
things, the insecurity of property, the enormous prices of labor and
living, are beginning to make us realize that "all is not gold that
glitters," and we feel confident that many a one will accept Dr. Marcy's
fearless _exposé_ of false civilization with thankfulness, and draw
the logical conclusions.

In this connection is shown also the reason why our own country displays so
much greater advance in material prosperity than either Mexico or the
countries of South America; a reason, we are truly sorry to say,
substantiated by overwhelming testimony. It is this: The native population
of our own country, though a simple, innocent, warm-hearted people, who
received us with open arms, were hunted down and destroyed like wild beasts
in New England, Virginia, and elsewhere. In Mexico and South America they
still live and occupy the country. Here we have made a blank to be filled
by a full-blown European civilization of the growth of centuries; there
millions of the original people have been reclaimed from barbarism, are
living, increasing in number, and steadily progressing toward the mark we
have attained. Dr. Marcy tells truth in eloquent but indignant forms when
he says: "It is quite true that this Mexican Indian race is inferior by
nature to the Anglo Saxon or the Frank. It is quite true that the children
of those who were rude savages a few generations ago have not the
intelligence, or the energy, or the enterprise of the shrewd, money-loving
Puritan. It is quite true that the souls of these simple-minded children of
Montezuma are not wholly absorbed in the love of gain and of worldly pride
and ambition; but, nevertheless, they live, and can look upon the
consecrated graves of their fathers back to the days of Cortez; they
_still live_, and can worship in spirit and truth the God who created
them and gave them their country; they _still live_, and can behold
cities, towns, churches, schools, and cultivated fields, where their
fathers only saw dense forests and savage wildernesses; they _still
live_, and bless the church and the priests who have been their
preservers and benefactors."

Our Lord Jesus Christ came to preach the gospel to the poor, and it is the
glory of the Catholic Church that her great heart has always beat warmly
and tenderly for the souls and bodies of the poor and down-trodden races of
mankind.
{706}
Her history on this continent is a history of a long line of true
imitations of Jesus Christ, and of the peaceful triumphs of his cross.
Wherever Protestantism prevailed, we have, as an unvarying result, the
speedy extermination by fire and sword of the aborigines. Even this is held
up by some writers as conclusive of the superior claims of Protestantism.
Their argument, divested of all ambiguity, would sound thus: "The red man
was in the way of our development, we shot him and cleared the track. What
is the use of making a fuss about shooting Indians or other inferior races?
It is a great deal better to do that than to try to keep the poor devils to
be a burden to themselves and to us. We Protestants understand better than
you weak-minded and superstitious Catholics how to deal with such matters,
and this proves that we, and not you, have the true Christianity." We speak
thus strongly because we feel strongly the impudence with which such
writers attribute to Christianity itself the grossest violations of its
very first principles.

Let us excuse our forefathers as much as we can, but, in the interest of
the religion of Christ, let us not call their crimes virtues. There was
nothing in their religion powerful enough to enlighten their ignorance or
to control their passions; they had no church to lay down the stern,
undeviating principles of morality, and no confessional to apply them to
the individual conscience; and, therefore, as soon as an Indian stole a
horse or a cow, or plundered a hen-roost, his death and the extermination
of his tribe was a necessary and immediate consequence. And for the want of
the same authoritative moral restraint, according to many Protestant
writers who have taken the alarm, we are now on the high road to
exterminate ourselves.

The Rev. J. Todd, D.D., a Congregational divine, all honor to him for his
conscientious candor, says, speaking of the disparity in the natural
increase of our foreign and native-born population, and of the immoral
causes of it: "There is nothing in Protestantism that encourages or
connives at it, but there is a vast ignorance as to the guilt of the thing.
But in the Catholic Church human life is guarded at all stages by the
confessional, by stern denouncement, and by fearful excommunications."

The divine wisdom of the Founder of the sacrament of confession is most
signally vindicated in these few pithy words, which we leave to the
reflection of the reader.

In the concluding portions of his work the author gives some most
interesting statistics of the growth and proportions of infidelity and
scepticism in our country, of the results of Catholic and Protestant
missions among the heathens, and of the state of religion throughout the
world. These make his work more complete, and will be received gladly by
many who have not had their attention called to these facts before. We
think they add very much to the completeness of the work, and it was a
happy idea of the author to put them in. Dr. Marcy's book ought to do a
great deal of good, and we do not doubt that it will. The number of
unpalatable truths told in it, and the direct, incisive way in which they
are told, have provoked and will provoke much unfavorable comment. Every
effort will be made to discredit it. It will be called vituperative, false,
and calumnious. Its truth--and Dr. Marcy has taken good care to back up all
his assertions with the best of evidence--is the best refutation of all
such accusations. We find every day all sorts of false and calumnious
statements, circulated without a particle of proof, in the books, the
periodicals, and newspapers of the land, against the persons and the
doctrines we hold most dear. It is of little use to reply, the lie is
circulated and the reply is left unnoticed. Our opponents take all their
representations of our doctrines and practices, at second hand, from the
writings of our deadliest enemies, and never think it worth while to verify
their statements by looking at the statements of our own councils and
standard writers.
{707}
This treatment is absolutely unfair, and the most respectable are blind to
its meanness, where we are concerned; but let the Catholic writer tell the
outspoken truth and back it up by genuine testimony of their own writers
and partisans, and the cry is at once raised of "calumnious, incendiary,
malicious," etc. etc. It will be easier to raise a cry against this book
than to answer its statements. When Marshall published his history of
Christian Missions, with its thousands of references to the most
unsuspected Protestant witnesses, we looked for a reply which would be
something more than merely throwing dust in the eyes of the public, but we
have looked in vain up to this time; its statements have never been
answered. So we feel sure it will be with this book. It may be called hard
names, but it will not be seriously answered. If it will be thoughtfully
read, we shall feel content. It will then, at least, be answered, as we
prefer to see all honest representations of the truth answered, by the
removal of prejudice, the correction of many false ideas which prevail
concerning our holy faith, and the consequent desire, which we pray may
arise in not a few sincere minds, to examine more fully into its character
and the grounds of its claims to be the true religion of Jesus Christ.

------

  From Chambers's Journal.

  Thermometers.


An ordinary thermometer consists, as everybody knows, of a glass tube,
fixed to a scale. This tube contains a fine bore, and has a bulb blown at
one extremity. Some liquid, generally mercury or alcohol, is introduced
into the tube, the air is driven out, and the tube is sealed. The quantity
of fluid, say mercury, admitted into the tube is so regulated that at
common temperatures the bulb and a portion of the bore are filled. The
remainder of the bore, which is empty, affords space for the mercury to
rise. This arrangement renders very perceptible the alterations in the
volume of the mercury due to changes of temperature, a very slight increase
or diminution of volume causing the mercury to rise or to fall appreciably
in the fine bore. After sealing, the scale has to be adjusted to the tube,
and the instrument is complete.

Thermometers of the most accurate make are called standard thermometers. In
their manufacture, numerous precautions are necessary from the very outset.
Even in so simple a matter as the choice of the tube of glass much care is
requisite. The bore has to be tested, in order to ensure that it is of
uniform capacity throughout. It is found that tubes, as they come from the
glass-house, contain a bore wider at one extremity than the other. The bore
is, in fact, a portion of a very elongated cone. In a hundredweight of
tubes, not more than half a dozen or so can be picked out in which the bore
is perfectly true. The bore is tested in a very ingenious though simple
manner. A bulb is blown, and a very small quantity of mercury is admitted
into the tube about as much as will fill an inch and a half of the bore. By
alternately cooling and heating the bulb, this delicate thread of mercury
is driven from one end of the tube to the other, and during this process
its length is carefully measured in all parts of the tube.
{708}
Should the length of the mercury alter in various situations, it is evident
that the capacity of the bore is not uniform throughout, and the tube must
be rejected. In blowing the bulb, an elastic ball, containing air, is used.
The ordinary method of blowing glass bulbs by means of the breath is found
to cause the introduction of moisture into the tube.

The size of the bulb has next to be considered. A large bulb renders the
instrument slow in its indications of change, owing to the quantity of
mercury that has to be acted on. On the other hand, if the bulb is too
small, it will not contain sufficient mercury to register high
temperatures, unless the bore is exceedingly fine.

The shape of the bulb is of importance. Spherical bulbs are best adapted to
resist the varying pressure of the atmosphere; while cylindrical bulbs
expose larger surfaces of mercury, and are therefore preferred for more
delicate instruments. Various plans have been suggested in order to obtain
thermometers of extreme sensitiveness for delicate experiments. Some have
been made with very small thin bulbs, to contain a very small quantity of
mercury; but in these the indicating column is generally so fine, that it
can only be read by the aid of a powerful lens. Instruments have been
contrived with spiral or coiled tubular bulbs; but the thickness of glass
required to keep these in shape nullifies the effect sought to be
obtained--namely, instantaneous action. Messrs. Negretti & Zambra, the
well-known meteorological instrument-makers, have recently succeeded in
constructing a thermometer which combines sensitiveness and quickness of
action, and which presents a good visible column. The bulb of this
thermometer is of a gridiron form. The reservoir is made of glass, so thin
that it cannot be blown; it can only be formed by means of a spirit-lamp;
yet its shape gives it such rigidity that its indications are not affected
by altering its position or by standing it on its bulb. The reservoirs of
the most delicate of these instruments contain about nine inches of
excessively thin cylindrical glass, the outer diameter of which is not more
than the twentieth of an inch, and, owing to the large surface thus
presented to the air, the indications are positively instantaneous. This
form of thermometer was constructed expressly to meet the requirements of
scientific balloon ascents, to enable the observer to take thermometric
readings at precise elevations. It was contemplated to procure a metallic
thermometer; but, on the production of this perfect instrument, the idea
was abandoned.

The shape and size of the bulb having been determined, the workman next
proceeds to fill the tube. This is effected by heating the bulb while the
open end of the tube is embedded in mercury. Upon allowing the bulb to
cool, the atmospheric pressure drives some mercury into the tube. The
process is continued until sufficient mercury has entered. The mercury used
in filling should be quite pure, and should have been freed from moisture
and air by recent boiling. It is again boiled in the tube after filling;
and when the expulsion of air and moisture is deemed complete, and while
the mercury fills the tube, the artist dexterously removes it from the
source of heat, and at the same moment closes it with the flame of a
blow-pipe. It sometimes happens that in spite of every care a little air
still remains in the tube. Its presence is detected by inverting the tube,
when, if the mercury falls to the extremity (or nearly so) of the bore,
some air is present, which, of course, must be removed.

The thermometer, after being filled, has to be graduated. Common
thermometers are fixed to a scale on which the degrees are marked; but the
graduation of standards is engraved on the stem itself, in order to insure
the greatest possible accuracy. The first steps in graduating are to
ascertain the exact freezing-point and the exact and to mark on the tube
the height of the mercury at these points.
{709}
The freezing-point can be determined with comparative ease. Melting ice has
always the same temperature in all places and under all circumstances,
provided only that the water from which the ice is congealed is pure. The
bulb and the lower portion of the tube are immersed in melting ice; the
mercury descends; the point where it remains stationary  is the
freezing-point, and is marked on the tube.

The determination of the boiling-point is more difficult. The boiling-point
varies with the pressure of the atmosphere. The normal boiling temperature
of water is fixed at a barometric pressure of 29.922 inches of mercury
having the temperature of melting ice, in the latitude of 45, and at the
level of the sea. Of course, these conditions rarely if ever co-exist; and
consequently the boiling-point has to be corrected for errors, and reduced
for latitude. Tables of vapor tension, as they are called, computed from
accurate experiments, are used for this purpose. Regnault's tables, the
most recent, are considered the best.

An approximate boiling-point is first obtained by actual experiment. A
copper boiler is used, which has at its top an open cylinder two or three
inches in diameter, and of sufficient length to allow a thermometer to be
introduced into it, without touching the water in the boiler. The cylinder
is surrounded by a second one, fixed to the top of the boiler, but not
entering it, the two being about an inch apart. The outer cylinder is
intended to protect the inner one from contact with the cold external air.
The thermometer to be graduated is placed in the inner cylinder, and held
there by a thong of India-rubber. As the vapor of the boiling water rises
from the boiler into the cylinder, it envelops the thermometer, and causes
the mercury to ascend. As the mercury rises, the tube is gradually lowered,
so as to keep the top of the mercury just visible above the cylinder. When
the mercury becomes stationary, the position of the top of the column is
marked on the tube; and the boiling-point, subject to corrections for
errors, is obtained.

The freezing and boiling points being determined, the scale is applied by
dividing the length between the two points into a certain number of equal
degrees. This operation is performed by a machine called a dividing-engine,
which engraves degrees of any required width with extreme accuracy.

The scale used in the United Kingdom, in the British colonies, and in North
America, is that known as Fahrenheit's. Fahrenheit was a philosophical
instrument maker of Amsterdam. About the year 1724, he invented the scale
with which his name is associated. The freezing point of his scale is 32
degrees, the boiling-point 212 degrees, and the intermediate space is
composed of 180 degrees. This peculiar division was thus derived. The
lowest cold observed in Iceland was the zero of Fahrenheit. When the
thermometer stood at zero, it was calculated to contain a volume of mercury
represented by the figures 11,124. When plunged into melting snow, the
mercury expanded to a volume represented by 11,156; hence the intermediate
space was divided into thirty-two equal portions or degrees, and thirty-two
was taken as the freezing-point of water. [Footnote 246] Similarly, at the
boiling-point, the quick-silver expanded to 11,336. Fahrenheit's scale is
convenient in some respects. The meteorological observer is seldom troubled
with negative signs, the divisions of the scale are numerous, and tenths of
degrees give all the minuteness usually requisite.

    [Footnote 246: Mr. Balfour Stewart has lately concluded a series of
    experiments at the Kew Observatory, by which he has accurately
    determined the freezing-point of mercury. The experiments, conducted
    with great care, have shown that the freezing-point of mercury, like
    that of water, is constant, and that it denotes a temperature of -37.93
    F. The freezing-point of mercury will now be used as a third point in
    graduating thermometers which are intended to register extreme
    temperatures.]

{710}

In 1742, Celsius, a Swede, proposed zero for the freezing-point, and 100
degrees for the boiling-point, all temperatures below freezing being
distinguished by the negative sign (-). This scale is known as the
Centigrade. It is in use in France, Sweden, and in the south of Europe; it
has the advantage of decimal notation, with the disadvantage of the
negative sign.

Reaumur's scale is in use in Spain, Switzerland, and Germany. It differs
from the Centigrade in this, that the freezing and boiling points are
separated by 80 degrees instead of 100 degrees.

It would not be difficult to construct a scale which should combine all the
advantages of Fahrenheit's and of the Centigrade. Freezing-point should be
fixed at 100 degrees; and boiling-point should be fixed at as many hundred
divisions or degrees above 100 degrees as might be agreed on by practical
men as most convenient. The advantages of decimal notation would thus
remain as in the Centigrade scale, and the minus sign would be got rid of.

And now, having applied the scale, and having exercised every precaution,
can we congratulate ourselves on possessing a perfect instrument?
Disheartening as it may appear, the standard instrument of to-day may not
be accurate to-morrow. It is more than probable that the freezing point
will become displaced. This curious phenomenon has never been
satisfactorily explained. Messrs. Negretti & Zambra, in their treatise on
Meteorological Instruments, (a work which abounds with information of a
most interesting nature,) say, in reference to displacement of the freezing
point, that "either the prolonged effect of the atmospheric pressure upon
the thin glass of the bulbs of thermometers, or the gradual restoration of
the equilibrium of the particles of the glass after having been greatly
disturbed by the operation of boiling the mercury, seems to be the cause of
the freezing-points of standard thermometers reading from a few tenths to a
degree higher in the course of some years." To obviate this small error, it
is the practice of the makers in question "to place the tubes aside for
about six months before fixing the freezing-point, in order to give time
for the glass to regain its former state of aggregation. The making of
accurate thermometers is a task attended with many difficulties, the
principal one being the liability of the zero or freezing-point varying
constantly; so much so, that a thermometer that is perfectly correct
to-day, if immersed in boiling-water, will be no longer accurate; at least,
it will take some time before it again settles into its normal state. Then,
again, if a thermometer is recently blown, filled, and graduated
immediately, or, at least, before some months have elapsed, though every
care may have been taken with the production of the instrument, it will
require some correction; so that the instrument, however carefully made,
should from time to time be plunged into finely-pounded ice, in order to
verify the freezing-point."

------

  From The Month.

  The Tuscan Peasants And The Maremna.


The Maremna is, in summer, the word that drives the sleep from many an
Italian woman's pillow as she thinks of the perils that her husband, her
brother, or her betrothed is encountering as he reaps the fertile harvest,
and gains, at the risk of his life, the wages that will enable him and his
to live through the winter. "A me mi pare una Maremna amara" is the burden
of the song with which many a child is rocked to sleep. And with reason.
The Maremna is the Littorale or shores of the Tuscan Sea; and there the
coasts that bound the blue waters of the Mediterranean are lined by tangled
jungles and pestilential marshes, whence at each sunset arises the baleful
fever, which, passing in scorn over the ruined cities that its pernicious
breath has depopulated, creeps along like the sleuth-hound until it finds
the hardy mountaineer returning from his day of labor, and smites him with
the wasting blight which saps his strength.
{711}
Yet year after year do the sons of Italy descend with unwearied energy to
these valleys and deadly plains, to reap the crops that have grown uncared
for but luxuriantly, death and disease stalking behind them, and the fear
of falling victims to the power of the evil air urging them to increased
exertions, in order that they may earlier return and share their scanty
gains with their wives and children. They march gayly, too, often singing
alternately in their rough monotone the songs they have composed
themselves, cheerful in the consciousness that they are fulfilling a duty;
and this although knowing that they have to fight a foe against whom
neither courage nor energy nor strength can avail, but whose damp breath
appears to draw the marrow from their bones and fill them with fever;
sometimes sending them weak and emaciated, useless as workmen, to their
native homes; sometimes in a few hours laying their bodies low, to lie, far
from family and friends, in unconsecrated ground.

When the Italian peasants speak of the Maremna, they mean that district of
Italy which runs along the shores of the Mediterranean from Monte Nebo and
the mountains south of Leghorn over the flat marshes of the Tuscan shores,
and the desolate promontory of Monte Cervino, as far as the sunny shores of
Sorento and Amalfi. To the south of the Tuscan frontier the (to English
ears) more familiar name of Campagna is applied to the whole of that
portion of the Maremna which lies within the ancient Agro Romano; still
further to the south the word Maremna becomes identical with what are
called the Pontine Marshes. The mountaineers of Modena, Parma, and Tuscany
call the country which they periodically visit, whether south or north,
Maremna: the inhabitants frequently give it a local name. Undefined as are
its boundaries, and almost unknown to geography as is its name, its
characteristics are much the same throughout; everywhere we meet the same
wide plains, tangled jungles, ruined cities, wooded hills, ever-recurring
swamps and morasses; throughout the whole district the same terrible ague,
the same desolating fever, the fatal influence of the malaria, rage with
destructive effect. Although often characterized as a swamp or a marsh, yet
the Maremna by no means consists of plains like the fens; on the contrary,
there are several high mountains, which run down even into the sea: the
land near the coast is, however, in general flat.

Part of the Maremna is cultivated, and produces grain; the greater portion,
however, is kept for pasture. As soon as the herbage begins to fail on the
mountains of Tuscany, the peasants drive their flocks down to the pastures
of the Maremna. There they remain six or seven months. The women and
children are left at home, and the men and boys during this time bear all
the privations, hardships, and dangers. An Italian poet exclaims: "Alas,
how often do they return home bowed down by fever! how often do they never
return! for, where they sought to earn the sustenance of their families,
they meet with death." While some descend with their flocks and act as
shepherds, the majority are there for the purpose of cutting wood, making
charcoal and potash; their last work is to reap the hay and corn, and then
those who are left alive return. Part of their wages has already been sent
home; the remainder they bring with them.

Halfway between Leghorn and Pisa stands the old church of St. Pier d'Arena.
It is very large, and built as nearly as possible to resemble the form of a
ship. In old days the sea reached this point, and the name 'Arena' points
to the strand on which the church was built. Tradition states it was here
St. Peter landed on his visit to Italy, and the church was built to
commemorate the event.

{712}

One October, now many years ago, after a visit to this church, I met a
troop of shepherds and their flocks on their march to the Maremna. The
procession must have covered half a mile of ground. Never yet have I looked
on a troop of these sunburnt children of the south as they were wending
their way to a land whence all would not return, without saluting them even
as I would a forlorn hope advancing to attack the breach of a fortress.
Soldiers of duty, "Morituros vos saluto." And higher is the courage and
deeper is the love that impels these brave men, singing as they go, to
encounter the fever and thirst and pestilential air of the Maremna, than
that which animates many even of those soldiers who fight for God and king
and fatherland.

Tears rose to the eyes of my companion as they passed. The flocks and herds
marched first, all "ruddled," that is, marked with red, to show to whom
they belonged. The procession was headed by the bell-wethers, with their
curved horns; in close attendance upon them are tall, handsome,
woolly-haired sheep-dogs, of a larger breed than ours, and with their necks
defended by a collar studded with nails, the projecting points of which
often turn the scale in the case of an encounter with the wolves. Nor are
these the only robbers against which these vigilant watchers defend the
sheep: if a human beast of prey, in shape of a thief, lies lurking in the
ditches that border the roadside, watching an opportunity for seizing a
lamb, they detect him and compel him to show himself. At night, too, they
march round the nets that enclose the little encampment, and give the weary
guardians time to sleep. Before they go to sleep, the peasants light a
fire, and make cheese and ricotti, (a sort of Devonshire cream,) with which
they repay the owner of the soil for leave to encamp on his grounds. As the
milk is far more plentiful on their return in May, a spirit of natural,
even-handed justice makes them generally contrive, both going and
returning, to halt at the same stations. A necessary member of this company
is the poet, or scribe, (_scrivano_.) To him is entrusted the task of
composing, or else writing down and correcting, the "Respects" which each
Tuscan shepherd is bound to send to his sweetheart. Collections of these
rustic poems have lately been made and published. They are full of pathos
and tenderness; the heart of the young exile yearns not only for his
_dama_, (sweetheart,) but for the beauties of the country he has left
behind him. Not his the harp to sing of festive banquets or goblets crowned
with flowers; he loves the streams of fresh water, the flowering grass, the
cultivated terraces, the pure air of his mountain home. Nature herself, and
sorrow, the nurses of beauty, have breathed on him a spirit of truth and
poetry as distinct from the sickly sentimentality and vice so often found
in modern verse, as is the wild rider of the Arabian desert from the puny
jockey who wins our handicaps. Strange, indeed, it would be if these poems,
written in danger, absence, and exile, possessed not a fragrance all their
own--one, however, that seems to escape not only in the most literal
translation, but even when, under a slightly different form, they appear in
the works of their more highly educated countrymen.

Independently of the troops that march almost patriarchally with their
flocks and herds, like Abraham and Jacob, peasants often go down in gangs
of five or six to look for work; sometimes, though rarely, necessity
compels them to take with them their wives, and, if grown up, their
children. In this case they almost invariably travel in one of the long,
narrow, covered cars of the country. The men trudge along in groups of five
or six, with their best clothes in a bundle slung to a stick, and, if by
any possible contrivance it can be managed, with a gun upon their shoulder;
for game of all kinds, roe, deer, wild boars, porcupines, woodcock, and
snipe abound.
{713}
I once saw these groups arriving, one after another, at a seaport town near
the Gulf of Genoa, until they reached the number of 500 or 600: these all
sailed in a steamer to Corsica, to till the rich ground of that island. In
a fortnight the steamer returned, and freighted itself with an equally
large cargo of laborers. Many go to Sardinia, a still more unhealthy
island: their chief occupation there is mostly to fell the forests which
have been bought by speculators. Some find work at the Grand Ducal
Ironworks at Follonica, and at the mines in the interior of the island of
Elba; others help to till the Maremna, the soil of which is so fertile
that, if it lies one year fallow, it requires but to have the seed thrown
broadcast over it in order to yield every alternate year, and without
further tillage, a most magnificent crop. Others help to clear away the
forest and the thicket, and prepare the ground for future years, and thus
aid in the great works for reclaiming this land of jungle and fever that
have been now carried on for so many years; others simply to make charcoal
or potash, and to live by selling game at the neighboring towns. To sing
the songs of their native villages is their chief pleasure. In the daytime
one man will begin to sing at his work, and then another catches the
refrain, and begins in turn. At night, too, round the fire, (which is said
to scare away the fever,) they sing songs and tell their old stories, and
repeat their legends of saints and miracles. Thus it happens that they
return to their native villages, speaking the pure Tuscan language
undefiled by the patois of Corsica or the miserable jargon of the other
islands.

The fever often attacks them, and they have to return home with their work
half done; often a father will have to send back his son, fearful that he
may die on the road, but conscious that, though he seems hardly able to
crawl, the lad's only chance of safety lies in his reaching the pure air of
the mountains before it is too late.

If all goes well, they arrive at home by the 24th of June, the feast of St.
John. As they near their native place, the more active and eager members of
the different parties press on; and as soon as they are descried from the
village, a group is formed to meet them and welcome them back; then, too,
do the wives learn what their husbands have earned and whether they have
had a good year.

We may fancy the inhabitants who have remained at home, assembling at the
old tower that bars the entrance to the village, eagerly asking and hearing
the news of the winter. "Old Giuseppe" has had a good year; Peppe da
Cacciono has had a touch of the maremna, but he got better; Renzo of
Cognocco's dead, died of "la perniciosa." "Poor fellow! God rest his soul!"
is the reply. "He had a bad attack last year; we never thought to see him
again." And then they will visit Renzo's family and condole with them.

Not only do they bring back news to their own, but to all the villages that
they pass through. Before the eve of St. John you may often, as the Abbé
Tigri says, "meet a group of five or six, burnt nearly black with the sun,
in their worst dress, and wearied out by the long journey. _Ben
tornati_, welcome back!" you cry. "Do you come from far? Poor fellows,
how tired you seem!" "It is nothing now, sir," they say, "for we are going
home; but it was a hard time this spring." And, with that smile of singular
brightness which no poverty or suffering seems able to drive from their
face, they pass by.

The maremna is more accessible now than when we last visited and travelled
through it. The works that were originated and so sedulously carried on by
the former government have been continued by the present, and have
fertilized and rendered comparatively healthy large portions of the country
which were formerly desolate and pestilential: a railroad has been made,
which familiarizes many a modern traveller with the country under its
present aspects, but tempts him to hurry by much that is interesting and
would have rewarded a longer sojourn.
{714}
We may endeavor in some future number to describe the impression made upon
us by this portion of Etruria, and to lead the reader

  "By lordly Volaterra,
     Where scowls the far-famed hold
   Piled by the hands of giants
     For god-like kings of old;
   By sea-girt Populonia,
     Whose sentinels descry
   Sardinia's snowy mountain-tops
     Fringing the southern sky.

  "By the drear bank of Ufens,
     Where flights of marsh-fowl play,
   And buffaloes lie wallowing
     Through the hot summer day;
   By the gigantic watch-towers,
     No work of earthly men,
   Whence Cora's sentinels o'erlook
     The never-ending fen,
   To the Laurentian jungle,
     The wild-hog's reedy home."

------

  Miscellany.


_Pagan Irish Sepulchral Pillar-Stones_.--That standing stones were
used during pagan times in Ireland as sepulchral monuments appears certain;
for we find in the description of the royal cemetery of Brugh-na-Boinne, as
given in the Dinnsenchus contained in the Book of Ballymote, fol. 190,
translated and published by the late Dr. Petrie, in his treatise on the
Round Towers of Ireland, the following: "The _pillar-stone_ of Buidi
the son of Muiredh, where his head is interred." We also find quoted by the
same eminent antiquary, from the Leabhar-na-h-hide, an account of the death
of Fothadh in the battle of Ollarba, fought, according to the Four Masters,
in A.D. 285, with a description of his grave, in which is recorded, "And
there is a _pillar-stone_ at his carn; and an ogumis on the end of the
_pillar-stone_ which is in the earth." The earliest sepulchral
monuments mentioned in the Annals of the Four Masters are _carns_,
(large heaps of stones,) and _murs_ or _tuiams_, (mounds of
earth,) now more generally known by the name "barrow." However, that
pillar-stones may even then have been in use appears probable; for in the
opening paragraph of those Annals there is, "From Fintan is named Feart
Fintain" (that is, Fintain's grave) "over Loch Deirgdheire." The place is
still called by this name, and is situated on the northern slopes of the
Arra mountains, overlooking Lough Derg, county Tipperary. There is a
_pillar-stone_ at the grave, from which the hill is called
Laghtea.--G. Henry Kinahan, _in Athenoeum_.



_The Monks' Model Farm in Algeria_.--The Mois Agricole contains an
interesting account of the Trappist Model Farm at Cheragas, in Algeria. In
1843, Marshal Bugeaud granted the Trappists one thousand two hundred
hectares of land, on which, two years afterward, three hundred thousand
francs were expended by the order in buildings. The stock of animals on the
farm is now magnificent. The Trappist cows each yield sixteen quarts of
milk a day, in a country where the native cows do not yield more than
goats; and the sheep and pigs are equally fine. A large quantity of honey
is also produced at Cheragas. There are in the establishment one hundred
and eight monks, of whom twenty-two belong to the choir, and ten are
priests. Twenty lay workmen are constantly employed at the convent, and
every poor or sick wayfarer is entitled to claim or receive aid or work
there. When the emperor visited the establishment, he discovered, to his
surprise that upward of a dozen of the monks had been soldiers of the
imperial guard. They explained to him that, after the severe discipline and
simple fare of the French army, the Trappist rule, ascetic as it is, did
not appear harsh to them.

------

{715}


    Original.

    New Publications.


  The Monks Of The West, from St. Benedict to St. Bernard.
  By the Count de Montalembert, Member of the French Academy.
  Authorized translation. Vols. I., II., III. William Blackwood & Sons,
  Edinburgh and London, 1861, 1867. For sale by the Catholic Publication
  Society, 126 Nassau street, New York.

These volumes bring down the history of monasticism to the year 633. The
third contains the history of monasticism in England, Ireland, and
Scotland, embracing a very full account of St. Columba and the institute of
Iona. It is very appropriately dedicated to the Earl of Demarara. The ill
health of the author has delayed the completion of his great work. We
understand, however, that two more volumes are published in France, and are
now being translated into English. The writings of Montalembert belong to
the highest class of French literature. The present work treats of a topic
of the greatest importance and interest to all students and educated
persons, but especially to all devout Catholics. English literature has
resounded for three centuries with calumnies, denunciations, and senseless,
ignorant ravings against monastic orders. Of late, we begin to hear a
different story from the most enlightened portion of Protestant writers.
These writers are, however, careful to qualify what they say in praise of
the nunneries of former times by a somewhat wearisome and monotonous
reiteration of the assurance that monastic institutions are worn out,
obsolete, contrary to progress, and unfit for the present age. It is time,
therefore, for the Catholic voice to make itself heard on the subject. The
illustrious and noble author is a believing and devout Catholic as well as
a learned historian and a most eloquent writer. His work is well
translated, and published in a style suitable to its choice excellence. It
should find a place in the library of every clergyman, every religious
house, seminary, and college, and on the table of every educated Catholic
layman. We would recommend it also to our Protestant friends, were we not
aware that most of them are afraid or ashamed to buy a Catholic book. Those
of them at least who pretend to agree with the church of the first six
centuries ought not to be afraid of it, as it comes down no later than A.D.
633.


    The Trinity

    Control Your Passions

    Heroism In The Sick-room

    Is The Sacrifice Of The Mass Of Human Or Of Divine Institution?

    Why Did God Become Man?

  Being Tracts   Nos. 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24 of the Catholic Publication
  Society's Tracts. New York: The Catholic Publication Society, 126 Nassau
  street.

The Catholic Publication Society continues to issue its useful and
instructive tracts. We give above the titles of those last published. Our
readers will find them to be in every respect equal to the former ones.
They will also be pleased to learn that the Society has obtained a House of
Publication, established in a first-class locality, No. 126 Nassau street,
New York, where all its publications can be had, together with all Catholic
books and pamphlets published either in this country or in England and
Ireland. The Society now everywhere meets with approval and encouragement.
Rev. Father Hecker lately visited the cities of Pittsburg, Cincinnati,
Wheeling, and Harrisburg, at which places he lectured in favor of the
Society. The Rt. Rev. Bishops and Rev. clergy gave him the most cordial
receptions, and very generous contributions were made for the object in
Pittsburg, Cincinnati, and Wheeling. Upon his return he lectured also at
St. Peter's church, Brooklyn, with the like success. Depots for the
Society's publications are now established at Mr. Quigley's in Pittsburg,
and at Benziger Bros. in Cincinnati, at which all that is issued by the
Society can be procured for the same price as they are sold in New-York.

Father Hecker also intends visiting Europe this summer, to form relations
with the publishing houses of Dublin, London, and Paris, and will accept
the invitation proffered him to assist at the great Catholic Congress which
is to meet at Malines next September.

{716}

Our readers are already aware, from the article on Catholic Congresses in
our last number, how much has been done by the Belgian Congresses for the
diffusion of cheap Catholic literature. We trust Father Hecker may be able
to derive much useful information from what he will see and hear at
Malines, and turn it to good account for the furtherance of our own efforts
in the same direction. We are much gratified to see that the project of a
Catholic Congress suggested by our article has been warmly applauded on all
sides. Several of our journals, among which we notice the _Freeman's
Journal_, the _Boston Pilot_, the _New York Tablet_, and the
_Catholic Standard_ of Philadelphia, have noticeable editorial
articles on the subject in its favor. It is important, in case a congress
should be convened in our own country, that some one should attend this one
in Belgium, in order to obtain a knowledge of the plan and method of
organizing and conducting these assemblies.


  The First Age of Christianity and the Church.
  By John Ignatius Döllinger, D.D.,
  Professor of Ecclesiastical History
  in the University of Munich, etc.
  Translated by H. N. Oxenham, M.A. Oxford.
  London: Allen & Co., 1860.
  2 vols. 12mo. New York: The Catholic
  Publication Society.

These two volumes are worthy of the perusal of every scholar. They form the
introductory portion of Döllinger's great work on Ecclesiastical History,
now in course of preparation, and are replete with the results of his vast
learning. At the same time, the reader of ordinary intelligence and
education need not be afraid of them. They are not dry or pedantic, but
written in a style of natural simplicity and freshness which makes them
attractive and entertaining as well as instructive. The translation, by an
excellent scholar and good writer, is extremely well done, and the
mechanical execution is in the best London style. Even the Dublin Review
has condescended to praise this work, and therefore those who might suspect
that it contains any peculiar opinions of what is called the 'Germanizing'
school need not fear anything on that score. Dr. Döllinger is a sound,
orthodox divine, and sincerely loyal to the holy see. The Roman theologians
have controverted some of his opinions very strongly, but they have never
called in question his orthodoxy, and we have good reason to believe that
the Holy Father regards him with esteem and paternal affection as a true
son of the church, who is doing her good service. The organs of that
theological school in Germany which Dr. Döllinger is supposed to sympathize
with the least always speak of him in the most respectful terms, even when
criticising some of his statements very unsparingly. Some of our Catholic
friends in England are not quite so charitable and moderate as the more
thoroughly ripened theologians of Europe. They seem disposed to erect
theological doctrines never defined or imposed by the authority of the holy
see into a standard of orthodoxy, and to question the thorough loyalty of
those who do not fully agree with themselves. Odious terms, such as the
nickname of 'mini-misers,' invented by that very dogmatical publication the
Dublin Review, are applied to them, and, in general, a quarrelsome kind of
domestic polemics seems getting quite the vogue among a portion of the
Catholic writers of England. We agree with F. Perrone, the great Roman
theologian, that this is an evil much to be deprecated, and likely to do
mischief. We do not sympathize with all that Dr. Döllinger has written, but
we feel bound to condemn the disparaging tone in which some of the writers
alluded to are wont to speak of him, and of others like him, who venture to
make use of the liberty allowed by the church respecting questions not
finally decided by authority. Happily, the present work is one about which
there can be no difference of opinion. It is a thoroughly learned, and at
the same time a readable and plain history of the first foundation of
Christianity by Christ and his apostles; and we feel sure that it will
contribute much to the edification of all who read it.


  Poems. By Eliza Allen Starr. 12mo, pp.
  224. Philadelphia: H. McGrath.

Miss Starr is already favorably known to the readers of THE CATHOLIC WORLD
by various poetical contributions to our pages. She writes with remarkable
grace and tenderness, with a very beautiful simplicity of style, and a
religious elevation of thought which ought to make her volume welcome in
every good Christian family.
{717}
The poetic impulse with her is neither a morbid yearning to sing imaginary
woes, nor a mere fancy for the jingle of sweet words. Her verses express
genuine and healthy feeling, and their tone is most melodious when her harp
is strung to sacred themes. There is at times a mild tinge of melancholy in
the book--a melancholy as of one who has suffered and struggled; but
through it all shines the radiance of religious happiness, as though it
were not all imaginary which the author sings in the character of "The
Sacristan":

  "Within thine altar's shade,
   Lord, I my nest have made,
       No more to roam:
   Thine own abiding-place
   Is mine for future space,
       My rest, my home.

    ....

  "The earth, the air, the sea
   Rejoice to serve with me,
       With me to wait;
   For prostrate nature sighs
   To see her Lord disguise
       His heavenly state."

The little poem entitled "Espousals" is also full of real, unaffected
piety:

  "Haste to thy nuptials sweet
     With glowing feet,
   Thy inmost chamber fair,
     O heart! prepare,
   Therein, with joy, to bring
     Thy spouse and king.

  "I see his coming light
     Disperse my night!
   O radiant orb of day!
     Thou may'st delay
   To quench thy feeble rays
     In heaven's own blaze.

  "Lo! seraph tongues of flame
     Announce that name
   Whose echoed sweetness clings
     Where'er it rings;
   And thus informs with sound
     Remotest bound.

  "O happy ears! attend,
     And lowlier bend!
   I feel his noiseless pace
     Through heaven's blue space;
   The stars but strew his floor,
     And thus adore.

  "Celestial presence dear!
     Thou Godhead near!
   I yield my soul, my sense;
     Omnipotence!
   Behold, prepared, thy throne;
     Oh! claim thine own!"

In a different strain, but very pretty and delicate, is the following
"Song of Welcome":

  "My lonely days grew lonelier,
     The shadows spread apace,
   When on me, like a morning sun,
     Arose thy smiling face:
   Sad tears, sad tears, my joyful cheeks,
     Keep not of you a trace.

  "The summer skies which o'er me bend
     In beauty so benign
   Are not so blue as the happy eyes
     Now beaming into mine!
   Heart's love, heart's love, what sun could cheer
     If thine should cease to shine!"

We commend Miss Starr's little volume with all heartiness, and we rejoice
that American Catholic literature has received so welcome an addition to
its scanty poetical stores. We ought not to omit a word of compliment to
the publisher for the liberal manner in which he has brought it out. The
rich cream paper, the clear type, and the excellent binding are signs of a
new era in the Catholic book manufacture at which we all must rejoice.


  First Historical Transformations of Christianity.
  From the French of Athanase Coquerel the Younger,
  by E. P. Evans, Ph.D. 12mo. Boston: W. V. Spencer, 1867.

This is a very weak and flippant production from the pen of a French
rationalistic Protestant, who imagines that he is a philosopher of history.
He pretends to show us various forms which pure Christianity has been made
to assume by the different apostles, doctors, or sects who in turn took
upon themselves to be its expositors. Of course, as Monsieur Coquerel the
Younger would think, they each and all made bad work of it, from St. Peter
down to the last publishing medium of spiritism. It is truly deplorable
that the pure Christianity which Monsieur Coquerel the Younger now sees in
all its simplicity should have had the misfortune to be thus Judaized,
Hellenized, Paulized, Peterized, Joannized, Romanized, and diversely
_ized_ by the Fathers of the church and heretics; and may we not also
add, Protestantized and Coquerelized?

{718}

Let us see what is the Christianity of Jesus according to Monsieur
Coquerel's gospel: "In short, the whole instruction of Jesus can be
included in the following formula: the work to be accomplished is the reign
of God in all consciences; the universal motive through which this reign is
to be established, the essential fact of this reign, is love, of which the
twofold manifestation is pardon and new or eternal life; and these two
manifestations presuppose two facts, whose certainty has no need of proof--
sin and immortality. Thus reducing all Christianity to a single formula, it
may be said that Jesus revealed to all sinners the eternal compassion of
the God of holiness, their Father." (P. 65.) This cant about pardon and the
new life in the mouth of one who rejects the divinity of Jesus Christ, who
is unwilling to impose the belief in his miracles upon any sincere
Christian, (_sic_,) and who thinks the doctrine of hell is rank
nonsense, would need explanation, did we not gather from a previous
sentence that Monsieur Coquerel the Younger is as shallow a theologian as
he is a philosopher. Speaking of our Lord, he says: "He has such an
absolute certainty of the power of God, and of the efficacy of the good and
the true; such a full confidence in the perfectibility of guilty man; such
a high esteem for human nature, _wholly sinful_ as it is, that, in his
eyes, the elevation, the healing, the salvation, the enfranchisement of
every soul that is willing to return to God and love him are not an object
of the slightest doubt." (P. 64.) Beside this we place one other quotation,
which we think will suffice: "Liberal Protestants are constantly asked
where they would fix the boundary which separates Christians from those who
are not Christians. _Each man has the right to solve this formidable
problem in the light of his own conscience!_" (P. 75.) And this man
pretends to lecture the world for transforming Christianity to suit its own
notions! We would advise Monsieur Coquerel the Younger to review his logic.



  Critical And Social Essays,
  reprinted from the New York Nation.
  12mo, pp. 230. New York: Leypoldt & Holt.

It is a good deal to say of a newspaper nowadays that it is possible to
collect from its columns in the course of two years a whole volume of
essays passably well worth preserving. And many of the essays in this neat
little book are much better than passable. Of course one does not look for
deep philosophy or strikingly original thought in the ephemeral papers
dashed off for a week's entertainment, and sent flying over the country on
the wings of the periodical press. It is enough if the subject be
attractive, the argument mainly just, the style fluent, and now and then
striking. The essays from _The Nation_ generally fulfil these
conditions, and afford very agreeable recreation for odd intervals of
leisure. The cold and almost cynical spirit of criticism, and the utter
lack of enthusiasm and sympathy, which have done so much to deprive _The
Nation_ of that influence in public affairs to which its literary merit
entitles it, appear in a more favorable light in the pages of a book than
in the columns of a periodical. Book-readers have time to appreciate graces
of style, and to roll sweet morsels of thought and phrase under their
tongues; but the journalist in America must deal with a different public,
and must serve them with coarser materials. His weapon must be not the
scalpel or the lancet, but the axe and the bludgeon.


  Fathers And Sons. A Novel.
  By Ivan Sergheievitch Turgenef.
  Translated from the Russian, with the approval
  of the author, by Eugene Schuyler, Ph. D.
  12mo, pp. 248. New-York: Leypoldt & Holt.

The object of this novel is to contrast the generation which is just
passing away in Russia with the generation that is taking its place--the
old lords of the soil, still half-bewildered by the inroads of civilization
upon their semi-savage life, and the young party of progress, intoxicated
with the new ideas of emancipation, the new learning, the new habits, and
the new morality which is fast breaking up the old Tartar feudalism. We can
well believe the translator's assertion that a tempest was raised by the
appearance of the book in Russia. The portraits are flattering to neither
generation, and they are so life-like that it is impossible to doubt they
are substantially accurate representations of both. As a work of fiction,
Fathers and Sons is particularly interesting to us. Artistically speaking,
it is a very good novel indeed, and it is moreover almost the first glimpse
we have had of the fictitious literature of a country toward which
Americans are, whether rightly or wrongly, especially attracted. It gives
us a better view of daily life in Russia than any book of travel or
observation with which we are acquainted--better not only because clearer,
but also because it is of necessity perfectly undistorted.
{719}
But the picture is painful enough. For most of the characters in the story
the author evidently has no love; but even the best of them are singularly
unamiable. And we close the volume with the reflection that, if there is no
better life in Russia than the life he paints; if the men and women whom he
brings before us are fair types of the average culture and virtue of the
empire; if the fathers have no intelligence, and the sons neither human
affection nor religion, the future of Russia must be far different from
what modern writers are fond of predicting. The morality of the story is
bad, but its badness is so transparent that it can hurt nobody. There is an
offensive tinge of sensualism in it, too, and this is less apparent, and
therefore more dangerous.



  Barbarossa: A Historical Novel of the Seventh Century.
  By Conrad Von Bolanden.
  1 vol. 12mo, pp. 486. Philadelphia: Eugene Cuminiskey. 1867.

The historical novel is a difficult one to write. To strictly follow the
bare facts of history will make the work dull to most readers of light
literature; and to allow the imagination full play in working out its
scenes and representing them as if they had been actual occurrences will
offend the student of history. The middle ages, however, are full of matter
for the historical novelist. We have too few gleaners in this prolific
field. We can remember only one attempt of the kind in the English language
within the last decade of years. William Bernard McCabe, in his "Bertha,"
has done good service toward making known, in a popular manner, the designs
of the Emperor Frederick to become universal emperor, or _Pontifex
Maximus_, as he hoped to be one day called.

The present work is a translation from the German, and describes the
political workings of Frederick's ambition; his conquests in Italy, and the
capture of Rome; his attempt to set up and install in that city his tool,
the antipope Pascal, in opposition to the lawful successor of St. Peter,
Alexander III.; all these events are well told. The interest of the story
is kept up by introducing two lovers--a knight, the follower of Frederick,
and an Italian lady, who, of course, marry at the conclusion of the tale.
The character of Frederick's prime minister, Dassel, is well portrayed, and
shows that, with all the emperor's strength of mind, he was, after all,
only the puppet of his wily minister.

A little more elegance might have been observed by the translator,
especially in the first part of the story, where carelessness and
incorrectness of expression occur several times. For instance, we are told
in one sentence that "Suddenly Otho of Wittelsbach advanced hurriedly,"
which sounds too much after the fashion of a _Ledger_ story. Again,
news is brought to Frederick of the surrender of Cinola to the Milanese,
when the following dialogue occurs: "What is the strength of the Milanese?"
"About three hundred men." "Have they burned the castle?" "_I am ignorant
of that fact, sire._"

But these are, after all, but slight defects, and do not mar the beauty of
the tale. We can heartily recommend the work to the readers of light
literature, as both instructive and entertaining, two things which are not
always combined in the historical novel.


  Appleton's Annual Cyclopaedia for 1866.

This volume is an improvement on the preceding one, in one respect at
least, that is, in the summary which it gives of the progress of the
physical sciences. It contains, as usual, a condensed history of the year,
and is ornamented with fine, spirited engravings of three very notorious
public characters: the King of Prussia, Bismarck, and Girabaldi. It is well
worthy of a place in every library, and is, in fact, almost indispensable
as a book of reference.



  Notes On Doctrinal And Spiritual Subjects.
  By the late Frederick W. Faber, D.D., of the Oratory.
  Vol. II. London: Richardson & Son. New York:
  The Catholic Publication Society.

With the character of Father Faber's writings most of our readers are well
acquainted, and we have already given a special notice of them in a review
of the first volume of this work. The present volume contains a large
number of his hitherto unpublished writings, among which are sketches of
discourses upon the notes of the church, treatises upon the sacrament,
controversial lectures spiritual conferences, and various miscellaneous
papers.
{720}
They are of especial value to the younger members of our clergy, to whom we
commend them as furnishing ample matter for sermons, instructions, and
lectures.


  The Man With the Broken Ear.
  Translated from the French of Edmond About,
  by Henry Holt. 12mo, pp. 254. New York: Leypoldt & Holt.

The ingenuity and wit of this story cannot make amends for its grossness.
The novels of M. About's previously rendered into English were enough to
show that he cared nothing for the good opinion of Catholics, and in this
grotesque tale he has equally shown his disregard for the tastes of refined
people of every creed. Still, it is fair to say in his praise that the
contrasts of character which form the chief feature of the book are
admirably managed, and the dialogue sparkles with vivacity. Mr. Holt, who
is both publisher and translator, has acquitted himself in his double
function with noteworthy credit.


  Cummiskey's Juvenile Library: Florie's Series.
  12 vols. 16mo. Translated from the French.
  E. Cummiskey, Publisher, 1037 Chestnut street, Philadelphia.

This is a very interesting series of children's stories. They are well
translated and published in good style.


  Stories On The Commandments

  Caroline; Or, Self Conquest

  The Seven Corporal Works Of Mercy and Matie's Troubles.

  P. F. Cunningham, Philadelphia.

Those three volumes are an addition to this publisher's well-selected list
of tales for the young. Although they are published in the same style as
The Young Catholic Library, the stock and workmanship is much inferior.

Books for children's use should be published in a more durable form.


  Beauties Of Faith; Or, Power Of Mary's Patronage.
  Leaves from the Ave Maria. P. O'Shea, New York.

The first part of this volume is taken up with short stories illustrative
of the power of Mary's patronage. The second part contains the beautiful
story of Cobina, by Mrs. Anna H. Dorsey. Altogether it forms a volume of
very interesting matter.


  Coaina, The Rose Of The Algonquins.
  By Mrs. Anna H. Dorsey. P. O'Shea, New York.

Since writing the above, the story of Coaina comes on our table in another
shape from the same publisher. This is a charming Indian tale. We cannot
see the wisdom of using it to swell the bulk of the volume of selections
mentioned above, after having issued it as a separate volume. If those who
have facilities for publishing would give us translations or reprints of
the many excellent books of this kind published in France, Germany, and
England, they would do us greater service.


  Manual of the Lives of the Popes, Etc.
  By J. C. Earle. Reprinted from the
  English Edition. Baltimore: Murphy & Co.

This neatly printed little book is useful as a catalogue of the popes, and
a record of some of the principal facts in their reigns. It has no critical
value in regard to disputed or doubtful questions, and pretends to none.


  Books Received.

From P. O'Shea, New York. The Science of Happiness;
or, Beatitudes in Practice. By Madame Bourdon. 1 vol. 16mo. Price, $1.

From D. Appleton & Co., New York. Appleton's
Hand-Book of American Travel. By E. Hall. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 283.

From Leypoldt & Holt, New York. Co-operative
Stores; their History, Organization, and Management.
Based on the recent German work of Eugene Kichter. pp. 131. Price, 50
cents.

From P. O'Shea, New York. Rosa Immaculata; or,
The Tower of Ivory, or the House of Anna and Joachim.
By Mary Josephine. 1 vol. 12mo, pp. 250. Price, $2.

------

{721}


    The Catholic World


    Vol. V., NO. 29. September, 1867.



  "Rome or Reason." [Footnote 247]

    [Footnote 247: The Jesuits in North America in the Seventeenth Century.
    By Francis Parkman. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. 1867. 8vo, pp. 468.

    The Professor at the Breakfast-Table; with the Story of Iris. By Oliver
    Wendell Holmes. Boston; Ticknor & Fields. 1866. 12mo, pp. 410.

    Rationalism and Catholicism. Inquirer, Cincinnati, May 26, 1867.]


Mr. Parkman understands and describes very well the Indian character--a
very simple character, and within the range of his comprehension. There is
nothing deep or impenetrable in the Indian, and his ideas, habits, and
customs are invariable. He is a child in simplicity, but he is cunning,
fierce, treacherous, ferocious, more of a wild beast than a man--a true
savage, nothing more, nothing less. Mr. Parkman has lived with him, studied
his character and ways, and may, as to him, be trusted as a competent and
faithful guide, save when there is a question of superstition, in which the
Indian abounds, or of religion, which he accepts with more docility and
ease than many learned and scientific white men.

Mr. Parkman may also be trusted for the purely material facts of the Jesuit
missions among the Indians in the seventeenth century, and he narrates them
in a style of much artistic grace and beauty; but of the motives which
governed the missionaries, of their faith and charity, as well as of their
whole interior spiritual life, he understands less than did the "untutored
Indian." His judgments, reflections, or speculations on the spiritual
questions involved are singularly crude, marked by a gross ignorance not at
all creditable to a son of "The Hub." He claims to be enlightened, to be a
man of progress, and he has indeed advanced as far as Sadduceeism, which
believes in neither angel nor spirit; but the savage retains more of the
elements of Christian faith than he appears to have attained to. He is
struck, as every one must be, by the self-denial, the disinterestedness,
the patient toil, the unwearying kindness, superiority to danger or death,
and heroic self-sacrifices and martyrdom of the missionaries; but he sees
in them only the workings of a false faith, superstitious missions, and a
fanatic zeal. The Jesuit who left behind all the delights and riches of
civilization, gave up all that men of the world hold most dear, braved all
the dangers of the forest, of the savage, performed fatiguing journeys,
underwent the inclemencies of the climate and the seasons, suffered hunger
and thirst, in want of all things, submitted to captivity, tortures,
mutilations, and death, was, in his judgment, a poor, deluded man; his
faith, which bore him up or bore him onward, was an illusion, and his
charity, which never failed or grew cold, was only an honest but mistaken
zeal! Do men gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?

{722}

It cannot be said that Mr. Parkman has overrated the marvellous labors and
sacrifices of the Jesuits for the conversion of the North American Indians;
but he is mistaken in supposing that they stand out as anything singular or
extraordinary in the general history of Catholic missions. They did well;
they were brave, indefatigable, self-denying, heroic, and cold must be the
heart that can read their story without emotion; but their high qualities
and virtues are due to their general character as Catholics, not to their
special character as Jesuits. Non-Catholic writers are very apt to consider
that Jesuits are a peculiar sect, in some way distinguishable from the
Catholic Church, and that their merits belong to them not as Catholic
priests and missionaries, but as Jesuits. What Mr. Parkman admires in them
is really admirable; but its glory is due to Catholic faith and charity,
which the Jesuit has in common with all Catholics, and he has toiled no
harder, braved no more dangers, suffered no greater hardships, or a more
cruel and horrid death, or met them with a spirit no more heroic than have
other Catholic missionaries among heretics and infidels, from the apostles
down to the last martyr in China, Anam, or Oceanica. It has been only by
such suffering and such deeds as Mr. Parkman narrates, that the world has
been converted to the Christian faith and retained in the Catholic Church.
At all times, since the descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost,
has the Catholic Church nursed in her bosom, and sent into the world to
preach Christ and him crucified, men not at all inferior in faith and love,
in patient endurance, and heroic self sacrifice to the Jesuit missionaries
among the North American Indians. She has never wanted laborers,
confessors, martyrs; and a religion that never fails to create and inspire
them is not, and cannot be, a false religion, a delusion, a fanaticism. It
is only in the Catholic Church you find or have ever found them. Let her
have the credit of them.

The Professor at the Breakfast Table has been for some time before the
public, and every body has read it. Its author has, we believe, a high
reputation in the medical profession, and certainly has attained to
distinction as a poet and as a writer of prose fiction. He has wit and
pathos, a lively imagination, and a keen sense of the ludicrous. The snake
portion of his Elsie Vonner is horrible, but several of the characters in
that remarkable book are admirably drawn--are real New England characters,
drawn as none but a New Englander could draw them, and perhaps, none but a
New Englander can fully appreciate. He is like many of the descendants of
the old Puritans, who, having lost all faith in the Calvinism of their
ancestors, still identify it with Christianity, and float in their feelings
between the memory of it and a vague rationalism and sentimentalism which
is simply no belief at all. He would like to be a Christian, to feel that
he has faith, something on which he can rest his whole weight without fear
of its giving way under him, but he knows not where to look for it. He
finds many attractions in the Catholic Church, but, thinking that she holds
what so offends him in the faith of his ancestors, he dares not trust her.

There is a large class of educated, thinking, and even serious-minded
Americans who turn away from the church and refuse to consider her claims,
not because she differs from the Protestantism in which they have been
reared, but because she does not, in her spirit and teaching, differ enough
from it. Those outside of the church, and who credit not the evangelical
cant against her, identify her teaching with Jansenism, regard Jansenists
as the better class of Catholics, and Jansenism is a form of Calvinism, and
Calvinism is a system of pure supernaturalism, while the active American
mind cannot consent that nature should count in the
religious life for nothing.
{723}
It would, perhaps, relieve them a little if they knew that not only the
Jesuits condemned Jansenism, but the church herself condemns it, and
Jansenists are as much out of the pale of the church as are Calvinists or
Lutherans themselves. So-called orthodox Protestants were formerly in the
habit of charging Catholics with rationalism and Pelagianism, and even now
accuse them of denying the doctrines of grace or salvation through the
merits and grace of Jesus Christ. This fact alone should suffice to teach
such men as the Professor at the Breakfast-Table that the difference
between Catholicity and Puritanism is much greater than they suppose.

The Professor, in defending himself against the change of want of respect
for Puritanism, says, pp. 154-155: "I don't mind the exclamation of any old
stager who drinks Madeira worth from two to six Bibles a bottle, and burns,
according to his own premises, a dozen souls a year in segars, with which
he muddles his brains. But as for the good and true and intelligent men we
see all around us, laborious, self-denying, hopeful, helpful--men who know
that the active mind of the age is tending more and more to the two poles,
Rome and Reason, the sovereign church or the free soul, authority or
personality, God in us or God in our masters, and that, though a man may by
accident _stand_ half-way between these two points, he must
_look_ one way or the other--I don't believe they would take offence
at anything I have reported." From the connection in which this is said,
and the purpose for which it is said, it is clear that the Professor holds
that the active mind of this century is tending either Romeward or
Reasonward, that the doctrines held by his Puritan ancestors and so-called
orthodox Protestants can be sustained only by the authority of a sovereign
church, and that we must accept such authority, or give up all dogmatic
belief, and allow the free, unrestricted use of reason.

The writer in the Cincinnati Inquirer seems to agree with him. A certain
Protestant minister, an Anglican, we presume, had said in a sermon, that
"the church's greatest enemies are now Catholicism and rationalism." The
writer, in commenting on this proposition, says: "Catholicism is the
theology of authority; rationalism, the theology of reason;" and
"Protestantism is Catholicism with a dash of rationalism, or rationalism
with a dash of Catholicism." Both represent Catholicity and reason as
standing opposed each to the other, as two opposite poles, and each makes
as does the age no account of the _via media_ church receiving the
shots of both reason and authority, and discharging its double battery in
return against each.

Now, is it not time that thinking men, and authors who claim intelligence
and mean to be just, should stop this contrasting of Rome or authority and
reason? The cant has become threadbare, and men of reputation and taste
should lay it aside as no longer fit for use. It does not by any means
state the fact as it is, for there is not the least discrepancy between the
church and reason, nor is there, in accepting and believing the revealed
word of God on the authority of the church proposing it, the least
surrender of reason or nature. The Catholic has all of reason that belongs
to human nature, and full opportunity to exercise it; and his soul is as
free as the soul can be, and he is, in fact, the only man that has really a
free soul. If God is in his masters, he is also in him. He has no less
internal light because he has external light, and no less internal freedom
because he has external authority. The Professor is quite mistaken in
presenting the church and reason as two opposite poles. Nay, his
illustration is not happy, for the two poles, if we speak geographically,
belong to one and the same globe, and are equally essential to its form and
completeness, and, if we speak magnetically, and mean positive and negative
poles, they are only the two modes in which one and the same substance or
force operates, and certainly in Catholic faith both authority and reason
are alike active, and mutually concur in producing one and the same result.

{724}

It is only when we borrow our views of Catholicity from the theology of the
Reformation, or suppose that it is substantially the same, that the
authority of the church can be regarded as opposed to reason or repugnant
to nature. He who has read the fathers has discovered in them no abdication
of reason or want of intellectual freedom; and he who is familiar with the
mediaeval doctors knows that no men can use reason more freely or push it
further than they did. Melchior Cano, a theologian of the sixteenth
century, in his Locis Theologicis, a work of great authority with
Catholics, enumerates natural reason as one of the common-places of
theology, whence arguments may be drawn to prove what is or is not of
faith. A school of philosophers have latterly sprung up among Catholics,
called traditionalists, who would seem to deny reason and to found science
on faith; but they have fallen under censure of the Holy See, and been
required to recognize that reason precedes faith, and that faith comes as
the complement of science, not as preceding or superseding it. By far the
larger part of the errors condemned in the syllabus of errors attached to
the Encyclical of the Holy Father, dated at Rome, 8th of December, 1864,
are errors that tend to destroy reason and society. The church has always
been vigilant in vindicating natural reason and the natural law.

But the Reformation was a complete protest against reason and nature, and
the assertion of extreme and exclusive supernaturalism. In Luther's
estimation reason was a stupid ass. The reformers all agreed in asserting
the total depravity of human nature, and in maintaining the complete moral
inability of man. According to the reformed doctrines, man never actively
concurs with grace, but in faith and justification is wholly impotent and
passive. Man can think only evil, and the works he does prior to
regeneration, however honest or benevolent, are not simply imperfect, but
positively sins. This was the reformed theology which the writer of this
article had in his boyhood and youth dinged into him till he well-nigh lost
his reason. The church has never tolerated any such theology, and they who
place her and reason in opposition are really, whether they know it or not,
charging her with the errors of Protestantism, which she has never ceased,
in the most public, formal, and solemn manner, to condemn. There are, no
doubt, large numbers included under the general name of Protestants, who
imagine that the Reformation was a great movement in behalf of intelligence
against ignorance, of reason against authority, mental freedom against
mental bondage, of rational religion against bigotry and superstition; but
whoever has studied the history of that great movement knows that it was no
such thing--the furthest from it possible. It was a retrograde movement,
and designed in its very essence to arrest the intellectual and theological
progress of the race. Its avowed purpose was the restoration of primitive
Christianity, which, whatever plausible terms might be adopted, meant, and
could mean only, to set the race back some fifteen hundred years in its
march through the ages, and to eliminate from Christendom all that
Christianity for fifteen centuries had effected for civilization. The
Protestant party, was by its own avowal, the party of the past, and, if
there are Protestants who are striving to be the party of the future, they
succeed only by leaving their Protestantism behind, or by transforming it.

The church has always been on the side of freedom and progress, and the
normal current of humanity has flowed and never ceased to flow from the
foot of the cross down through her communion; and whatever life-giving
water has flowed into Protestant cisterns, it has been from the
overflowings of that current, always full.
{725}
You who are outside of it, save in the application of the truths of science
to the material arts, have effected no progress. You have worked hard, have
been often on the point of some grand discovery, but only on the point of
making it, and are as far from the goal as you were when Luther burnt the
papal bull, or suffered the devil to convince him of the sin of saying
private masses. You have always found your works after a little while
needing to be recast, and that your systems are giving way. You have been
constantly doing and undoing, and never succeeding. Save in the physical
sciences and some achievements in the material world, you are far below
what you were when you started. Of course, you do not believe it, because
you confound change with progress, and you count getting rid of your
patrimony increasing it. It is idle to tell you this, for you have already
fallen so low that you place the material above the spiritual, and the
knowledge of the uses of of steam above the knowledge and love God.

Rome or reason, Rome or liberty, is not the true formula of the tendencies
of the age; nor is it Catholicism or rationalism, but Catholicity or
naturalism. The extremes opposed to Catholicity are, on the one hand,
exclusive supernaturalism, or a supernaturalism that condemns and excludes
the activity of nature, and, on the other, exclusive naturalism, or a
naturalism that denies and excludes all communion between God and man, save
through natural laws, or laws impressed on nature by its Creator, and held
to bind both him and it. Your evangelicals are exclusive supernaturalists,
as were the great body of the Protestant reformers; Auguste Comte, J.
Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer, Mr. Parkman, and the Professor are exclusive
naturalists, who deny the reality of all facts or phenomena not explicable
by natural laws or natural causes. All the sciences, since Bacon, are
constructed on naturalistic principles, and theology, philosophy, or
metaphysics, which cannot be constructed without the recognition of the
supernatural, are rejected by our _savans_ as vain speculations or
idle theories without any basis in reality. They belong to the age of
ignorance and superstition, and will never be recognized in an age of light
and science. As the church clings to them, insists upon them, she is behind
the age, and they who adhere to her are to be tolerated and pitied as we
tolerate and pity idiots and the insane, unless, indeed, they are clothed
with more or less power; then, indeed, we must make war on them and
exterminate them.

Few who have studied this age with any care will question the fidelity of
this picture. The active living mind of this age unquestionably tends
either to this exclusive naturalism or to the Catholic Church, which is the
synthesis of the natural and the supernatural, of authority and freedom,
reason and faith, science and revelation. Protestantism, which is exclusive
supernaturalism, it is becoming pretty well understood, cannot be
sustained. It cannot be sustained by reason, for it rejects reason; it
cannot be sustained by authority, for in rejecting the church it has cast
off all authority, but that of the state, which has no competency in
spirituals. It has supported its dogmas, as far as it has supported them at
all, on Catholic tradition, the validity of which it denies. This cannot
last, for, where people are free to think and have the courage to reason
without let or hinderance from the state, they will not long consent to
affirm and deny tradition in one and the same breath. They will either fall
into the naturalistic ranks or be absorbed by the Catholic Church, and it
is useless to trouble ourselves with them as Protestants.

The naturalists or rationalists, by far the most numerous, and in most
Protestant or non-Catholic states already the governing body, are repelled
from the church by their supposition that all the substantial difference
between her and Jansenists or Calvinists is, that in the one case
super-naturalism is taught and explained by a living authority, claiming a
divine commission, and in the other it is not taught at all, but collected
by grammar and lexicon from a book said to have been written by divine
inspiration.
{726}
The Catholic theory is the more logical and more attractive of the two, but
both alike discard reason, and insist on the submission of the
understanding to an external authority, and it matters little whether the
authority is that of the church or of a book written many ages ago. In
either case the faith is proposed on authority, which assumes to command
the reason and to deprive the soul of her natural freedom. I am forbidden
to think and follow my own convictions, and must, on pain of everlasting
perdition, believe what others bid me, whether it accords with my own
reason or not. This, we take it, is the view entertained by the worthy
Professor, and the writer of this many years ago preached it, and counted
the Professor himself among his hearers, if not among his disciples. Now,
we need not, after the explanation we have given, say that this view is
altogether wrong. The Protestant asserts the supernatural in a sense that
excludes or supersedes nature, and, therefore, natural reason; the Catholic
adopts as his maxim, _Gratia supponit naturam_, and asserts the
supernatural as the complement of the natural, or as healing,
strengthening, and elevating it to the plane of the supernatural, or a
destiny far superior to any possible natural beatitude. This is in the
outset a very important difference, for, if grace supposes nature, the
supernatural the natural, the authority on which we are required to believe
the supernatural may aid, may strengthen, or illumine natural reason, but
cannot supersede it or deprive it of any of its natural activity and
freedom. The supernatural adds to the natural, according to Catholic faith,
but takes nothing from it. The prejudice excited by Protestantism against
the supernatural cannot bear against it as asserted by Catholicity.

But we would remind our naturalistic friends that nature does not suffice
for itself. It is impossible by nature alone to explain the origin or
existence of nature. The ancients tried to do it, but they failed. Some
attempted to do it by the fortuitous combination of eternally existing
atoms, others made the universe originate in fire, in water, in air or
earth, as some moderns try to develop it from a primitive rock or gas, or
suppose it originally existed in a liquid or a gaseous state, whence it has
grown into its present form. But whence the primitive rock or the gas?
whence the fire, water, air, or earth? whence the original germ? Naturalism
has no answer. We have a natural tendency, strong in proportion to the
strength and activity of our reason, to seek the origin, the principles,
the causes of things, but this tendency nature can not satisfy, because
nature has not her origin, principle, or cause in herself. For this reason
Mr. Herbert Spencer relegates origin and end, principles and causes, and
whatever pertains to them to the region of the unknowable, and maintains
that we can know only phenomena, and therefore that science consists simply
in observing, collecting, and classifying phenomena, not in the explication
of phenomena by reducing them to their principle and referring them to
their cause or causes.

We can know phenomena, but not noumena, is asserted by the reigning
doctrine among physicists, which is as complete a denial of reason as can
be found in any of the reformers. It reduces our intelligence to a level
with that of the brutes that perish, for what distinguishes our
intelligence from theirs is precisely reason, which is the faculty of
attaining to principles or causes--first causes and final causes--both in
the intellectual and the moral order, while brutes have intelligence only
of phenomena. Hence, philosophers, who define things _per genus et per
differentiam_, define man a rational animal, or animal plus reason.
{727}
To our physicists, like the Lyells and the Huxleys, or to such philosophers
as Mr. Stuart Mill, who knows not whether he is Mr. Stuart Mill or somebody
else, whether he is something or nothing, this amounts to very little; for
they, the physicists, we mean, are specially engaged in collecting facts to
prove that man is only a developed chimpanzee or gorilla, and that the
human intelligence differs only in degree from the brutish. But, then, what
right have they to complain that belief in the supernatural tends to
degrade human nature, to deprive reason of its dignity, and man of his
glory? Moreover, this restriction of our power of knowing to simple
phenomena, never satisfies reason, which would know not only phenomena, but
noumena, and not only noumena, but principles, causes, the principle of
principles and the cause of causes, the origin and end of all things, that
is, God, and God as he is in himself. You cannot, except by brutalizing men
to the last degree, suppress this interior craving of reason to penetrate
all mysteries, to explore all secrets, and to know all things, nor can you
by reason alone appease it. Do you propose to suppress nature, extinguish
reason, and call it promoting science, vindicating the dignity of man?

Reason can never be made to believe that all reality is confined to what
Mr. Herbert Spencer calls the knowable, and we the intelligible. There is
nothing of which reason is better or more firmly persuaded than that there
is more reality than she herself knows or can know. Reason asserts her own
limitations, and will never allow that she can know no more because there
is nothing more to be known. The intelligible does not satisfy her, because
in the intelligible alone she cannot find the explication of the
intelligible, or, in other words, she cannot understand the intelligible
without the superintelligible; for, though she cannot without divine
revelation grasp the superintelligible, she can know this much, that the
superintelligible is, and that in it the intelligible has its root, its
origin, cause, and explication. Here is a grave difficulty that every
exclusive rationalist encounters, and which is and can be removed only by
faith. Nature, reason; science alone never suffices for itself, as all our
savans know, for where their knowledge ends they invent hypotheses. It is
not that reason is a false or deceptive light, but that it is limited, and
we have not the attribute of omniscience any more than we have that of
omnipotence.

So is it with our craving for beatitude. Whether God could or could not
have so constituted man, without changing his nature as man, that he could
rest in a natural beatitude, that is, in a finite good, we shall not
attempt to decide; but this much we may safely assert, as the united
testimony of the sages and moralists of all ages and nations, and confirmed
by every one's own experience, that nothing finite, and whatever is natural
is finite, can satisfy man's innate desire for beatitude. "Man," says Dr.
Channing, "thirsts for an unbounded good." The sum of all experience on the
subject is given us by the wise king of Israel, "_Vanitas vanitatum, et
omnia vanitas_--Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, the ear with hearing, nor the heart with knowing. We
turn away with loathing from the finite good as soon as possessed, and
which the moment before possession we felt would, if we had it, make us
happy. The soul spurns it, and cries out from the depths of her agony for
something that can fill up the void within her, and complete her happiness
by completing her being. We need not multiply words, for the fact is old,
and all the world knows it. Nature cannot satisfy nature, and the soul
looks, and must look beyond it, for her beatitude. So much is certain.

Hence it is that men in all ages and nations have never been able to
satisfy either their reason or their craving for happiness with nature
alone, and have, in some form, recognized a supernatural order, or a
reality of some sort above and beyond nature, whence comes nature herself.
{728}
Neither atheism, or the resolution of God into natural laws or forces, nor
pantheism, or the absorption of natural laws or forces into the Divine
Being itself, has ever been able to satisfy the man of a real philosophic
or scientific genius, because either is sophistical and self-contradictory.
Either is repugnant to the natural logic of the human understanding or the
inherent laws of thought. Even such naturalists as Agassiz and our Dr.
Draper find it necessary to recognize in some sense a Supreme Being or God,
although, for the most part, like the old Epicureans, they leave him idle,
with little or nothing to do. But God, if he exists at all, must be
supernatural, and the author of nature. If God is supernatural and the
creator of nature, he must have created nature for himself, and then nature
must have its origin and end in him, and therefore in the supernatural.
Man, then, has neither his origin nor end in the natural, and neither
without the supernatural is explicable or knowable; without a knowledge of
our origin and end, or an answer to the questions, whence came we? why are
we, and how? and whither go we? we can have no rule of life, cannot
determine the positive or the relative value of any line of conduct, and
must commit ourselves to the mercy of the winds and waves of an unknown
sea, without pilot, chart, rudder, or compass.

Nor is even this enough. Not only is the natural inexplicable without the
supernatural, but even the intelligible, too, is not intelligible without
the superintelligible, as we have already said. We know things, indeed, not
mere phenomena, but we do not know the essences of things, and yet we know
that there is and can be nothing without its essence, and that the ground
and root of what is intelligible in a thing is in its unknown and
superintelligible essence. So in the universe throughout. God, as creator,
as universal, eternal, necessary, immutable, and self-existent being, is
intelligible to us, and the light by which all that is intelligible to us
is intelligible; but we know that what is intelligible to us is not God in
his essence, and that what in him is intelligible to us has its source, its
reality, so to speak, in this very superintelligible essence. Hence it
follows that to real science of anything we need to know the supernatural,
and by faith, or analogical science, at least, the superintelligible. We
cannot satisfy nature without the science and possession of the essences or
substances of things, and therefore not without faith, "for faith is the
substance of things to be hoped for," the evidence of things not seen.
_Fides est rerum substantia sperandarum, argumentum non apparentium_,
according to St. Paul, who, even they who deny his inspiration, must yet
admit was the profoundest philosopher that ever wrote. We think he was so
because divinely inspired, but the fact that he was so no competent judge
can dispute. St. Augustine owes his immense superiority over Plato and
Aristotle chiefly to his assiduous study of the epistles of St. Paul, which
throw so strong a light not only on the whole volume of Scripture, but on
the whole order of creation, and the divine purpose in the creation and the
redemption, regeneration, justification, and glorification of man through
the incarnation of the Word, and the cross and passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

But as we can know even by faith the superintelligible, the unknowable of
Mr. Herbert Spencer, which even he dares not assert is unreal or
non-existent, only by divine or supernatural revelation, it follows, that
without such revelation, no science satisfactory to natural reason herself
is possible. There is, then, and can be no antagonism between revelation
and science, faith and reason, or supernatural and natural. The two are but
parts of one whole, each the complement of the other. This dialectic
relation of the two terms asserted by Catholic theology is denied by
Protestant theology either to the exclusion of nature and reason, or to the
exclusion of both the supernatural and the superintelligible, and hence the
dualism which rends in twain the whole non-Catholic world, and presents
revelation and science, reason and faith, authority and liberty, natural
and supernatural, church and state, heaven and earth, time and eternity,
God and man, as mutually hostile terms, forever irreconcilable.
{729}
The non-Catholic world does not know or it forgets that the church presents
the middle term that unites and reconciles them, and that the Catholic
feels nothing of this interior struggle of two mutually destructive forces
which rends the hearts and souls of the wisest of non-Catholics, not
because he does not think or has abdicated reason, as the Professor
imagines, but precisely because he does think, and thinks according to the
truth and reality of things. He has unquestionably his struggles between
the flesh and the spirit, between virtue and vice, between temptations to
sin and inspirations to holiness, but presents in his life none of those
fearful internal tragedies so frequently enacted among serious and earnest
non-Catholics, and which make up so large and so distressing a portion of
the higher and more truthful portion of non-Catholic literature.
Non-Catholic poetry, when not a song to Venus or Bacchus, is either a
fanciful description of external nature, scenes, and events, or a low wail
or a loud lament over the internal tragedies caused by the struggle between
faith and reason, belief and doubt, hope and despair, or vainly to
penetrate the mysteries of life and death, God and the universe. Catholic
poetry, Catholic literature throughout, knows nothing of those tragedies,
is peaceful and serene, and is therefore less interesting to those who are
not Catholics. We have (we speak personally) had some experience of those
interior struggles, and many a tragedy has been enacted in our own soul,
but it is with difficulty we can recall them; in the peace and serenity of
Catholic faith and hope they have almost faded from the memory, and yet the
period of our life since we became a Catholic has been with us the period
of our freest and most active and energetic thought. If we have worn
chains, we have not been conscious of them, and they certainly cannot have
been very heavy, or have eaten very deeply into the flesh. The reason of it
is that we find in Catholic faith and theology the two elements which in
the non-Catholic world are in perpetual war with each other, perfectly
reconciled, and mutually harmonized.

The peace the Catholic finds is not the sort of peace that was said to
reign in Warsaw. The Professor is greatly mistaken if he supposes it is
obtained by the suppression of reason, or that reason is forgotten in the
engrossing nature or artistic perfection of the external services of the
church. The offices of the church are beautiful, grand, and, if you will,
imposing, but they are all provocative of thought, meditation, reflection,
for they all symbolize the greatest of all mysteries--God dying for the
creature's sin, God become man, that man may become God. Take away this
great mystery, and the offices of the church become meaningless,
purposeless, powerless. Without faith in that mystery to which they all
refer, and which they at every instant recall, they would be no more
imposing than the pomp and music of a military review or a concert in
Central Park. From first to last they challenge our faith, and, if there
were any discrepancy between our faith and reason, they would in a
thoughtful mind bring it up in distinct consciousness, instead of
suppressing or making us forget it. A Lord John Russell could call the
sublime services of the church "mummery," and such do the mass of
Protestants regard them. To the profane all things are profane, and the
offices of the church are really edifying only to those who believe the
mystery of the Incarnation. Unbelievers who are not scoffers may admire
their poetry and the music which accompanies them, but would admire equal
poetry and music in the theatre just as much, and perhaps even more.

{730}

No; the peace of the Catholic is a real peace. Neither faith nor reason,
revelation nor science, authority nor liberty is suppressed; but all real
antagonism between them is removed, and they are seen and felt to be but
congruous parts of one dialectic whole. Peace reigns because the mutually
hostile parties are really reconciled, and made one. The Professor, no
doubt, will smile at our assertion, and set it down to our simplicity or
enthusiasm, but we have this advantage of him, that we know both sides, and
taught or might have taught him more than thirty years ago the philosophy
he brings out so racily at the breakfast table.

Our nature was constructed by the supernatural for the supernatural, and it
can no more live its normal life without a supernatural medium than it
could have sprung into existence without a cause above and independent of
itself. Regeneration is, therefore, as necessary to enable it to attain its
destiny or beatitude as generation was to usher it into natural existence.
Hence it is that, when men cast off in their belief and affections the
supernatural, and live as natural men alone, they sink even below their
normal nature, and lose even their natural light and strength, live only a
life which the Scriptures call death, the death which Adam underwent in
consequence of his disobedience to the divine order. When men undertake by
their simple natural reason to construct a system of philosophy, they
construct systems which natural reason herself rejects. Reason disdains her
own work, and hence pure rationalists never construct anything that will
stand, and they build up systems only to be demolished by themselves or
successors. Of the systems in vogue in our youth not one is now standing,
and we have seen them replaced by two or three new generations of systems
that have each in turn gone the way of all the earth; and, unless we
speedily follow them, we may be called to write the epitaphs of those now
revelling in the heyday of their young life. The thing is inevitable,
because our nature was made to act in synthesis with the supernatural, and
is only partially itself when compelled to operate by itself alone.

This fact that man's normal life demands the supernatural, and that his own
reason, though not able to know the superintelligible, or to say what it
is, yet assures him that there is a superintelligible, fits him by nature
to receive the supernatural revelation of the superintelligible; for it
only supplies an indestructible and deeply felt want of his nature. His
reason needs it and his nature craves it, and when receiving it relishes it
as the hungry man does wholesome and appropriate food. As the natural and
supernatural, the intelligible and superintelligible, are not contradictory
or mutually repellant orders, but parts of one complete and indissoluble
whole, only ordinary evidence is required to prove the fact of revelation;
and as God is infinitely true, truth itself, his word, when we know that we
have it, is ample authority, the highest possible, and the best of all
conceivable reasons, for believing the revelation. So faith in a
supernatural revelation, in whatever is proved to be the word of God, is,
so far from being repugnant to reason or requiring an abdication of reason,
the highest and freest act of reason possible.

The Professor objects to believing on the authority of the church, but we
do not believe the revelation on the authority of the church; we take on
her authority only the fact that it is divine revelation; the revelation
itself we believe on the veracity of God. But, if we considered the church
as a mere body, collection, or company of men, however wise, learned, or
honest we might regard them, we should not hold her authority sufficient
for believing that what she proposes as the revelation really is
revelation. Every man taken individually is fallible, and no possible
number, union, or combination of fallibles can make an infallible, and only
an infallible authority is competent to declare what God has or has not
revealed. The church is more than a collection, body, or company of
individuals, as the human race, what our liberals call humanity, is more
than an aggregation of individuals.
{731}
There is, indeed, no humanity without individuals, but it is not itself
individual, or dependent on individuals for its existence. The positivists,
who would call no individual man divine, pretend that humanity is divine,
and worship it as God. What the race is to individual men in the order of
generation, that, in some sense, is the church to them in the order of
regeneration. She lives not without them, but does not live by them. She is
the regenerated race, and bears to Jesus Christ, the incarnate Word, who
was with God and who is God, the relation, in the order of regeneration,
that the human race bears to Adam, its natural progenitor, and therefore
she lives a divine and human life, which she receives not from her members,
but imparts to them. Jesus Christ is the progenitor of regenerated
humanity, and this regenerated humanity is in the largest sense what we
call the church, in which sense it includes all the faithful, the laity as
well as their pastors and teachers.

The church, again, is the body of our Lord, in which dwelleth the Holy
Ghost. Individuals are to her what the particles which the body assimilates
are to the body. There is no body without them, yet they are not,
individually or collectively, the body. The life of the body is not derived
from them, for the body, by a vital process, assimilates them to itself,
not they the body to themselves. The body, when suffering from a fever or
when deprived of food, assimilates them only feebly, and wastes away or
grows thin, and, when dead, assimilates them not at all, which shows that
the vital power which carries on the process of assimilation is in the
body, not in the particles, a fact far better known to the Professor than
to us, and a fact, too, which may help remove the difficulties sciolists
imagine in the way of the resurrection of the body.

The vital power or principle which gives life to the body and enables it to
carry on the process of assimilation and elimination, the church teaches,
is the soul, for she has defined that the soul is the _form_ of the
body, _Anima est forma oorporis_. But this has nothing to do with our
present purpose. The vital principle, the life of the church, is our Lord
Jesus Christ himself. The Holy Ghost dwells in her as the soul in the body,
animates her, guides and directs her, and therefore is she one, holy and
Catholic, as he is one, holy and Catholic, infallible by his perpetual
presence and assistance as he is infallible. The Word incarnate explicates
his life in her as Adam explicates his life in the race. The infallibility
is from the presence and assistance of the Holy Ghost, and is in her very
interior life. The Word is in her, a living Word, and the infallibility
attaches to her, to this interior Word which she lives, but not to
individuals as such in her communion. The pope regarded as a man,
irrespective of his office, is no more infallible than he is impeccable, or
than is any Christian believer.

But the church as a body has her organs, and as a visible body she has
visible organs, through which she teaches the truth she has received and
expresses the life she lives. These organs are the bishops or pastors in
communion with their visible head, the successor in the See of Rome of
Blessed Peter, the Prince of the Apostles. We call them organs of the
church, inasmuch as the faith and love, the truth and life, they express is
her life, which in turn is the life of him who said, "Because I live ye
shall live also," and, "Behold, I am with you all days, even to the
consummation of the world!" and who expressly declares himself "the way,
the truth, and the life." The infallibility of the church comes from the
indwelling Word and the assistance of the Holy Ghost; the infallibility of
the organs comes from the infallibility of the church.

{732}

Now, supposing the church to be what we represent her to be, we presume
even the Professor will acknowledge her to be fully competent to teach
without error the revelation supernaturally made and committed to her, for
the revelation committed to her is deposited externally with her bishops
and pastors, and internally in her living and unfailing faith, in her very
life and interior consciousness. It is both a recorded and a present living
revelation, which she is living and explicating in her continuous activity,
the Word spoken from the beginning, and the Word speaking now. "Say not,"
says St. Paul, (Rom. x. 6-8,) "in thy heart: Who shall ascend into heaven?
that is, to bring Christ down: or who shall descend into the deep? that is,
to bring up Christ again from the dead. But what saith the Scripture? The
word is near thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart: this is the word of
faith, which we preach." This was addressed by St. Paul to Christian
believers, "to all that are at Rome, the beloved of God, called to be
saints," and shows that the Christian not only hears the word in his ears,
but has it in his mouth, in his heart, that is, in his very life, and he
lives and breathes it. It is the very element of his soul, and he can have
no higher certainty, not even in case of a mathematical demonstration, than
he has that his faith is true, and that it is the living God he believes.
The Professor, then, in regard to the faithful, has no ground for asserting
as he does an antithesis between "Rome and reason, the sovereign church and
the free soul, God in our masters and God in us;" for Rome is the highest
reason, the sovereign church is both external and internal, and God is both
in us and in our teachers. We have not only the veracity of God as the
ground of our faith, but a divinely constituted and assisted medium of
bringing us to it, and sustaining it in us.

The church undoubtedly teaches the faith or divine revelation which has
been committed to her through her pastors and doctors. But the competency
of these to teach follows from the fact that they can teach only in union
with the church; that she authorizes their teaching, and is ever present to
correct them if they err, and that they are even externally commissioned by
our Lord himself to teach what he has revealed. A mere external commission,
which we know historically was given to the apostles and their successors,
would not of itself give the capacity to teach or ensure infallibility in
teaching; but he who has all power in heaven and in earth, who is God as
well as man, and is himself "the way, the truth, and the life," assuredly
would not, and could not, without belying his essential and immutable
nature, issue a commission to teach and command all nations to hear and
obey them as himself, without taking care that they should have the ability
to teach his word and to teach it infallibly. That he does this is pledged
in the very issue and in the words of the commission itself: "All power is
given to me in heaven and in earth. Go ye, therefore, and teach all
nations; baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you; and, behold, _I am with you_ all days, even to the
consummation of the world." (St. Matt xxviii. 18-20.)

This external commission is all that needs to be proved by external
evidence to the world outside of the church, and there is no more intrinsic
difficulty in proving it than there is in proving the commission of George
Washington as general of the American army in the Revolution, of Lord
Raglan as commander-in-chief to the day of his death of the British forces
employed in the Crimean war, or any other historical fact whatever. The
unbroken existence of the church founded by the apostles from their day to
ours, and the uniform testimony she has universally and uninterruptedly
borne to the fact, would suffice to prove it, even had we no other proofs
or evidence. The church, without citing her in her supernatural character,
and taking her simply as an historical witness, is all that is needed, for
she is a standing monument of the fact.
{733}
In her corporate capacity she spans the whole distance of time from the
apostles, and at each intervening moment she has been a present witness of
the fact, testifying to what was present before her. The church as a
corporation, without any appeal to her mystic character, has not been
subject to any succession of time, has known no lapse of years, and is as
present today to the events of the apostolic times as she was when those
events occurred. She is at any moment we choose their contemporary, and, as
a contemporary witness to extraordinary facts, her testimony is as good for
us as was that of the apostles themselves to their personal contemporaries.
Indeed, it is literally and truly the same, for her corporate existence
from the time of the apostles to ours, or her historical identity, is
unquestionable.

We are not now citing the continuous existence of the church for anything
but the simple external fact of the external commission given by our Lord
himself to his apostles. To that fact, whatever you think of her, she is a
competent witness, and, having constantly testified to it from that day to
this, her testimony is conclusive. Assume, then, the fact of the external
commission, to which we who are Catholics need no external testimony, since
we find the highest of all possible testimony in the internal life of the
church, all the rest follows of itself. What the church believes, and
teaches through her pastors and doctors, or what they in unison with her
and her faith teach as the revelation of God committed to her, is his
revelation, and we believe it because we believe him. Then we believe she
is what she professes to be, the living body of our Lord, who lives in her
and is her life, and through whom the Holy Ghost carries on the work of
regeneration and glorification of all souls that do not resist him, but by
his assistance coöperate with him.

Now, where in all this, from the first to the last, find you any
discrepancy between Rome and Reason, the sovereign church and the free
soul, between God in us and God in our masters? There is no discrepancy.
There is more in it than natural reason by her own light knows, but nothing
against reason, or which reason does not feel that she needs for own full
and normal development. There is in it more than there is in nature,
because our destiny, our end, that is, our supreme good, like our origin,
lies in the supernatural order, not the natural, for our nature can be
satisfied with no finite or created good, and it needs no argument to prove
that the natural is not capable of itself of attaining to the supernatural.
To assert the supernatural as the means of elevating nature to the plane of
a supernatural destiny and of enabling it to reach it, assuredly is not to
discard or to depress nature.

The difficulties which exclusive rationalists and naturalists feel in the
case grow out of their supposition that Rome teaches that the intelligible
and superintelligible are identical with the natural and supernatural, and
that the natural and supernatural are two separate worlds, each standing
opposed to the other, or two contradictory plans or systems, with no real
nexus or medium of reconciliation between them, that is, that Rome, saving
her authority to teach and govern, teaches Protestantism. The intelligible
and superintelligible are distinguishable only in relation to our limited
intelligence, but in the real order are identical, one and the same, and
would be seen to be so by an intelligence capable of taking in all reality
at one view. The natural and supernatural are distinguishable, but not
separable, any more than is the effect from the cause. They are simply
distinct parts of one complete system, or one dialectic whole, united as
well as distinguished by the creative act of God. They are expressed, in
the Christian or teleological order, by the terms generation and
regeneration. Man is created by the supernatural, but the race is
explicated in the order of generation by natural laws; in the order of
regeneration, by the election of grace. Generation is initial; regeneration
is teleological, and completes generation, or places man on the plane of
his end, as generation places the individual on the plane of his natural
existence.

{734}

Now, it is clear that without generation there can be no regeneration, as
without regeneration the end is not attainable. The two terms express two
processes, or the two itineraries of creation--the procession of existences
from God as First Cause by way of creation and their explication by natural
laws, and the return of existences by means of supernatural grace to God,
without absorption in him, as their end or Final Cause. The natural order
or generation, the order explicated by natural laws, proceeds from and is
sustained by the supernatural, for God is supernatural, since he is the
author of nature; the end, or the final cause, is supernatural, since it is
in God; the medium of return, then, must be also supernatural, since the
natural is not and cannot be adequate to a supernatural end. Evidently,
then, there is and can be no opposition between the natural and
supernatural but the opposition between the cause and effect, the medium
and the end, the part and the whole. The supernatural is necessary to
originate, sustain, and complete the natural. Hence, the difficulties
created or suggested by Protestant theology have no place in relation to
the teachings of Rome. Protestantism escapes an eternal war only by
supposing either the natural or the supernatural; Rome escapes it by
reconciling the two, or presenting in the real order the medium of their
union.

We may now dispose of the question of miracles and supernatural visions,
etc., which excite the disdain or contempt of Mr. Parkman and his class of
thinkers or no-thinkers. Man exists from, by, and for the supernatural.
Christianity is supernatural, and is the medium, and the necessary medium,
by which man attains his end, or supreme good. It is teleological, and
hence the whole teleological life of man is supernatural. The supernatural
is that which God does immediately by himself; the natural is that which he
does mediately through the action of second causes or so-called natural
laws, as generation, germination, growth, etc., which are in the secondary
order explicable by natural or created causes. Now, as the supernatural is
the origin, medium, and end of man, and as Christianity or the teleological
order unites dialectically--really unites, as God and man are really united
in the Incarnation--the natural and supernatural, there is and can be no
_à priori_ difficulty or antecedent improbability that God, in
preparing the introduction in time of the Christian order, and in carrying
it on to the end for which he creates it, should intervene more or less
frequently by his direct and immediate action--action upon nature, if you
will, but without the agency of natural causes. The whole Christian order,
on its divine side, though included in the original plan or decree of
creation, is an intervention of this sort. Grace is the direct action of
God the Holy Ghost in regenerating the human soul, elevating it to the
plane of its destiny, and enabling it to persevere to the end. The part
assigned to natural agents is ministerial only, or signs through which
grace is signified. The direct and immediate action of God is normal in the
order of Christianity, and, therefore, in no sense repugnant to the order
of nature.

What, then, is a miracle? It is not a violation or suspension of the laws
of nature, but a specific effect in the visible order produced by the
direct and immediate action of God, for some purpose connected with the
teleological order of creation, or the order of regeneration as
distinguished from the order of generation. That he should do so from time
to time, as seems to him good, is only in analogy with the very order he
sustains for the perfection or completion of creation. There are, then, no
_à priori_ objections to miracles. Hume's pretence that no testimony
can prove a miracle, for it is more probable that men will lie than it is
that nature will go out of her course, is of no weight, because nature does
not work a miracle, nor does it in a miracle go out of its course.
{735}
The miracle is worked by God himself, and is in the teleological order of
nature. Being wrought in the visible order, a miracle is as probable and as
provable as any other historical event. The only questions are, is the
event not explicable by natural causes? and are the proofs sufficient to
prove it as an historical fact? No more evidence is needed to prove it than
is required to prove any historical fact in the natural order itself. If a
real miracle, it is as easily proven as a natural event.

No doubt many things pass for miracles which are explicable by natural
causes, and many visions are taken to be supernatural which have nothing
supernatural about them. We do not hold ourselves bound by our Catholic
faith to believe all the marvellous occurrences recorded in the lives of
the saints, or treated as such in popular tradition, were really miracles,
wrought by the direct and immediate action of the Almighty. We are bound to
believe only according to the evidence in each particular case. Credulity
is as little the characteristic of Catholics as is scepticism itself. We
are in relation to alleged particular miracles as free to exercise our
reason and judgment as we are in regard to any other class of alleged
historical facts, and to sift and weigh the testimony in the case. That
miracles are possible, are not improbable, have never ceased in the church,
and are daily wrought among the faithful, we fully believe; but, when it
comes to this or that particular fact or event alleged to be a miracle, we
exercise to the full our critical judgment, and follow what seems to us the
weight of evidence. The alleged appearance of our Lady to the young
shepherds of La Salette is possible and not improbable, but before we can
be required to believe it we must have sufficient evidence of the fact.

Mr. Parkman in his quiet way smiles at the credulity of the good Jesuit
fathers, who seem to believe the stories of Indian magic, witchcraft, or
sorcery which they relate; but has he any evidence that there is no Satan,
and that evil spirits are mere _entia rationis?_ Can he prove that
magic, witchcraft, sorcery, _diablerie_, in any or all its forms, is
impossible or even improbable? All the world from the earliest and in the
most enlightened ages have believed in what the Germans call the Night-side
of Nature, and no man has any right to allege so universal a belief is
unfounded, except on very strong and convincing reasons. Has he such
reasons? Can he disprove the whole series of facts recorded? Can he deny
the facts alleged by our modern necromancers or spiritists, or prove not
that some of them are, but that all of them, are explicable without the
supposition of some superhuman agency? Doubtless there is much illusion,
delusion, cheatery, but is there not also much inexplicable without satanic
influence? Can he say that there is no Satan, that there are no fallen
creatures superior to man in strength and intellect, who harass him, beset
him, possess him, or that tempt him, and perform lying wonders well fitted
to deceive him, and to draw him away from the worship of the true God,
though, of course, unable to harm against the consent of his will? Their
deviltry is superhuman, but not by any means supernatural, and they who
speak of it as supernatural entirely mistake its character. As in the case
of miracles, while we concede the general principle, when we come to
particular facts attributed to satanic agency, we use our critical
judgment, and are, we confess, very slow to believe, and hard to be
convinced.

We think we have said enough to prove that it is time to leave off the cant
about the despotism of Rome, and to desist from placing the church in
contrast with the free soul. The two poles are rationalism and
supernaturalism; Catholicity combines both in their real synthesis, a
synthesis founded in the creative act of God which really connects creator
and creature in one harmonious whole.
{736}
They who do not perceive it are ignorant of the teachings of Rome, and are
mere sciolists. They have taken only superficial views of both reason and
religion, and have far more reason to deplore their lack of light than to
boast of their intelligence. There is infinitely more in this old church
than is dreamed of in their philosophy.

Yet nobody pretends that the church teaches the details of science, and
leaves nothing for the human intellect to observe, to investigate, to
arrange, and classify. The church is Catholic, because she teaches in her
doctrine, whether known by natural reason or only by divine revelation, the
universal ideal, or the Catholic principles of all the real and all the
knowable; but she does not teach all the details of cosmology, history,
chemistry, mechanics, geography, astronomy, geology, zoology, physiology,
pathology, philology, or anthropology. She teaches the ideal or general
principles of all the sciences, and teaches them infallibly, and thus gives
the law to all scientific investigation, which _savans_ in their
inductions and deductions are not at liberty to transgress. Our
philosophers and _savans_ are perfectly free to explore nature in all
possible directions, but they are not free to invent hypotheses and
theories not reconcilable with the universal principles she teaches, or to
oppose their conjectures to the principles she asserts, because all such
conjectures or theories are unscientific and false. The ethnologist is free
to investigate the characteristics of the different races and families of
men, but not free to deny the unity of the human race itself, or the
descent of all men from one and the same primitive pair, who must have been
immediately created and instructed by God himself. But this is saying no
more than that the mathematician is not free to reject his axioms, or the
geometrician his definitions; and we may add that, if our scientific men
would take the principles the church teaches as their guide, they would
find themselves much more successful in their observation and
classification of natural phenomena, and save themselves from the ridicule
which they now incur.

It follows from this that the sciences are not absolutely independent of
the supervision of the church, and that she goes not out of her province
when she censures officially theories, hypotheses, and conjectures which
contradict the ideal truth committed to her charge. They by contradicting
her principles are proved to be unsound and unscientific. But so long as
the scientific confine themselves to facts and real principles, and do not
run or attempt to run athwart the truth, they are perfectly free. The
church interferes with them only when they impugn by their speculations the
universal principles of things. The people, again, are free to adopt the
form of government which they judge best, and civil governments are free to
pursue the policy they judge the wisest and most prudent, so long as they
contravene no principle or dictate of moral justice; and the individual is
free to choose the calling in life he prefers, and to pursue it without let
or hinderance from the church, so long as he violates no divine precept or
law of God.

There is no doubt some restraint here, for the church excludes neither
authority nor liberty. Liberty without authority is license, and as great
an evil as authority without liberty, which is tyranny or despotism. The
scientific, if truly scientific, study to know reality, the real and
unmixed truth, which is alike independent of her and of them, and they can
obtain it only by conforming to the immutable principles of things,
according to which God has created and governs the universe. The church
approves and encourages free thought and free inquiry, but she certainly
does not permit her children, under pretence of free thought, free inquiry,
or of science, to subvert the very principles on which all science, even
thought itself, depends, or to degrade human nature and abase the dignity
of reason by theories that deprive man of his humanity and rank him with
the beasts that perish.
{737}
Such liberty is repugnant to the very essence of science, and cannot be
entertained for a moment by any one who is anything more than a developed
chimpanzee or gorilla. It is license, not liberty, and introduces only
intellectual anarchy.

There is, too, a moral order in the universe, and the good of the
individual and society can be secured only by conformity to it. No man, no
nation, no society, no government has or can have the right to do wrong.
The rejection of the restraints of the great fundamental principles of
truth in science and the sciences, and of justice in the individual and in
society, is the greatest of evils, and it is therefore that the church has
it for her office to unite in an indissoluble synthesis both liberty and
authority. To make the fact that she unites authority with liberty, and
tempers each with the other, a ground of reproach against her is no proof
of wisdom. She allows man all the liberty God gives him, and to ask for
more is absurd.

In teaching the great principles of truth in all orders, and in judging of
their explication and application, the church is infallible, but she is not
infallible in the details of science. She is infallible in teaching
whatever our Lord has commanded her, has revealed to her, and is realizing
in her life, but not necessarily in matters not included in the faith. Her
infallibility does not imply the scientific infallibility of all Catholics.
It is no objection to her and no embarrassment to Catholics, that her
children in the details of science have more or less erred. Others may be
as well acquainted with these details as Catholics, and the scientific
superiority of Catholics is in their knowledge of the great scientific
principles, or what in science is ideal and catholic. Others may know the
facts of history as well, but none can so well know the ideas or principles
which govern the historical development of the race, and the science or
philosophy of history. The same may be said of all the other sciences.

To fully develop and exhaust the great question we have touched upon in
this article would require a volume, indeed many volumes. We have aimed
rather at giving the principles and method of their solution than at giving
the solution itself. We have left much for the reader to do for himself by
his own thought and study. It is as necessary that readers should think
freely and wisely as that authors should, for mind can speak only to mind.
But we trust that we have said enough to vindicate Rome from the charges
preferred against her, and to prove that they who take pleasure in reviling
her or her faithful children have little reason to boast of their
intelligence or to claim to be the more advanced portion of the race.

------

{738}

  Impressions of Spain.

  By Lady Herbert.


The journey to Madrid was uneventful. One more day was spent in Cordova;
once more they visited that glorious mosque; one more day and night was
spent in wearisome diligences and stifling wayside stations, and then they
found themselves again established in their old comfortable quarters at the
"Puerta del Sol."

It was a relief to think that the "lions" of the place had been more or
less visited, and that all they had to do was to return to the places of
previous interest, and thoroughly enjoy them. The cold during their former
visit had precluded their making any expeditions in the neighborhood, which
omission they now prepared to rectify. Spending the first few days in
seeing their old friends, and obtaining letters of introduction from them,
our travellers resolved that their first excursion should be to the
Escurial.


  The Escurial and Toledo.

A railroad is now open from Madrid which passes by the palace; so at
half-past six, one morning, they took their places in the train, which soon
carried them away from the cultivated environs of the city to a country
which, for desolation, wildness, and grandeur, resembles the scenery at
Nicolosi in the ascent of Etna. In the midst of this rugged mass of rocks
and scrubby oak-trees, the large gloomy Escurial rises up, under the
shadow, as it were, of the snowy jagged peaks of the Sierra Guadarama,
which forms its background. There is a picture of it, by Rubens, in the
gallery at Longford Castle, near Salisbury, which gives the best possible
idea of the complete isolation of the great building itself, and of the
savage character of the whole of the surrounding country.

Leaving the train, our party went to present their letters to the
principal, Padre G----, who very kindly showed them everything most worth
seeing in the place. It is a gigantic pile of masonry, built by Philip II.
as a thanksgiving for the success of the battle of St. Quentin, and in the
shape of a grid-iron, being dedicated to St. Laurence, on the day of whose
martyrdom the vow was made. "Celui qui faisait un si grand voeu doit avoir
eu grande peur!" was the saying of the Duke of Braganza; and the gloomy,
cold, gray character of the whole place is but the reflex of the king's
temperament. He employed the famous architect Herrera, whose genius was,
however, much cramped by the king's insistence on the shape being
maintained. It was finished in 1584.

The Jeronimite monks have been scattered to the winds, and the convent has
been turned into a college; they have about 250 students. The church is
large and solemn, but bare and uninviting, dismal and sombre, like all the
rest. The choir is up-stairs, with fine carved stalls, among which is that
of Philip II., who always said office with the monks. The painted ceiling
is by Luca Giordano. The choir-books are more than 200 in number, in virgin
calf, and of gigantic size; some of them are beautifully illuminated. At
the back, in a small gallery, with a window looking on the great piazza
below, is the famous white marble Christ, the size of life, by Benvenuto
Cellini, given to Philip II. by the Grand Duke of Florence. On certain days
it is exposed to the people from the window; but wonderful as may be its
anatomy, the expression is both painful and commonplace. Beneath the church
is the famous crypt containing the bodies of all the kings and queens of
Spain since Charles V., arranged in niches round the octagonal chapel.
{739}
Each niche contains a black marble sarcophagus; the kings on the right, and
the queens on the left. Here mass is always said on All Souls' Day, and on
the anniversaries of their deaths. The present queen came once, and looked
at the empty urn waiting for her, but did not repeat the experiment. "I
have come once of my own freewill," she is supposed to have said, "but the
next time I shall be brought here without it." It is a dismal
resting-place; the damp, cold, slippery stairs by which you descend into it
from the church seem to chill one's very blood, and the profound darkness,
only lit up here and there by the flicker of the guide's torch, with the
reverberation caused by the closing of the heavy iron door, till the
thoughts with visions of death, uncheered by hope, and of a prison rather
than a grave. Ascending with a feeling of positive relief to the church
above, Padre G---- took them into the sacristy, which is a beautiful long,
low room, with arabesque ceilings, and at the further end of which is a
very fine picture by Coello, representing the apotheosis of the "Forma," or
miraculous wafer: the heads are all portraits, and admirably executed. At
the back is the little chapel or sanctuary where the "Forma" is kept and
exhibited twice a year. Charles II. erected the gorgeous altar with the
following inscription:

  En magni operis miraculum intra miraculum mundi,
  coeli miraculum consecratum.

The legend states that at the battle of Gorcum, in 1525, the Zuinglian
heretics scattered and trampled on the Sacred Host, _which bled_; and
being gathered up and carefully preserved by the faithful, was afterward
given by Rudolph II. to Philip II., which event is represented in a
bas-relief. In this sacristy are also some vestments of which the
embroidery is the most exquisite thing possible; the faces of the figures
are like beautiful miniatures, so that it is difficult to believe they are
done in needlework. [Footnote 248]

    [Footnote 248: In the Dominican convent of Stone, in Staffordshire, the
    same exquisite work is now being reproduced; which proves that the art
    is not, as is generally supposed, extinct.]

But the great treasures of this church are its relics, of which the
quantity is enormous. They are arranged in gigantic cupboards or
"étagères," stretching from the floor to the ceiling, the doors of which
are carefully concealed by the pictures which hang over them, above both
the high altar and the two side altars at the east end. There are more than
7,000 relics, of which the most interesting are those of St. Laurence
himself, (his skull, his winding-sheet, the iron bars of his gridiron,
etc..) the head of St. Hermengilde, sent to the king from Seville, and the
arm and head of St. Agatha. The reliquaries are also very beautiful, some
of them of very fine cinquecento work. These are down-stairs. Up-stairs is
a kind of secret chapel, where there are some things which were still more
interesting to our travellers. Here are four MS. books of St. Theresa's,
all written by her own hand; her Life, written by command of her confessor.
Padre Bánez, with a voucher of its authenticity from him at the end; her
Path of Perfection; her Constitutions and Foundations; also her inkstand
and pen. Her handwriting is more like a man's than a woman's, and is
beautifully clear and firm. There is also a veil worked in a kind of
crochet by St. Elizabeth of Hungary, and sent by her to St. Margaret; a
beautiful illuminated Greek missal, once belonging to St. Chrysostom; a pot
from Cana in Galilee; a beautifully carved ivory diptych; the body of one
of the Holy Innocents, sent from Bethlehem; some exquisite ivory and coral
reliquaries, etc. From the church our party went up by a magnificent
staircase to the library, which though despoiled, like everything else
during the French invasion, still contains some invaluable books and MSS.
{740}
There is an illuminated Apocalypse of the fourteenth century, most
exquisitely painted on both sides; a very fine copy of the Koran; many
other beautiful missals; and in a room down-stairs, not generally shown to
travellers, are some thousands of manuscripts, among which are a wonderful
illuminated copy of the Miracles of the Virgin, in Portuguese and Gallego,
of the eleventh century, most quaint and funny in design and execution;
also a very curious illuminated book of chess problems and other games,
written by order of the king Alonso el Sabio. It is a library where one
might spend days and days with ever-increasing pleasure, if it were not for
the cold, which, to our travellers, fresh from the burning sun of Seville,
seemed almost unendurable. The cloisters, refectory, and kitchens are all
on the most magnificent scale. In the wing set aside for the private
apartments of the royal family, but which they now rarely occupy, the thing
most worth looking at is the tapestry, made in Madrid, at the Barbara
factory, (now closed,) from drawings by Teniers and Goya. They are quite
like beautiful paintings, both in expression and color, though some of the
subjects and scenes are of questionable propriety. There is a suite of
small rooms with beautiful inlaid doors and furniture; a few good pictures,
(among a good deal of rubbish,) especially one of Bosch, known as that of
The Dog and the Fly; and a very interesting gallery or corridor, covered
with frescoes, representing the taking of Granada on the one side and the
battle of St. Quentin on the other, the victory of Lepanto occupying the
spaces at the two ends. These frescoes are very valuable, both as portraits
and as representing the costumes and arms of the period. They were said to
be facsimile copies of original drawings, done on cloths on the actual
spots. That of St. Quentin was specially interesting to one of the party,
whose ancestor fought there, and in whose house in England (Wilton Abbey)
is still shown the armor of Ann Conétable de Montmorency, of the Duc de
Montpensier, of Admiral Coligni, and of other French prisoners taken by him
in that memorable battle. Beyond this gallery is the little business-room
or study of Philip II., with his chair, his gouty stool, his writing-table,
his well-worn letter book, and two old pictures, one of the Seven Deadly
Sins, the other an etching (of 1572) of the Virgin and Saints. Out of this
tiny den is a kind of recess, with a window looking on the high altar in
which he caused his couch to be laid when he was dying. The death-struggle
was prolonged for fifty-three days of almost continuous agony, during which
time he went on holding in his hand the crucifix which Charles V. had when
he expired, and which is still religiously preserved. The gardens in front
of this magnificent palace are very quaint and pretty, the beds being cut
in a succession of terraces overlooking the plains below, and bordered with
low box hedges cut in prim shapes, with straight gravel walks, beautiful
fountains, and marble seats. But it is not difficult to understand why the
poor queen prefers the sunny slopes of La Granja, or even the dulness of
the green avenues of Aranjuez, to this gloomy pile, where the snow hardly
ever melts in the cold shade of those inner courts, and where all the
associations are of death in its most repulsive form. Above the Escurial,
half-way up the mountain, is a rude seat of boulder stones, from whence it
is said Philip II. used to watch the progress of the huge building.

Returning to the railway station, our travellers walked down the hill and
through a pleasantly wooded avenue to a little "maisonnette" of the
Infanta, built for Charles IV. when heir-apparent, and containing some
beautiful ivories and Wedgwoods. The gardens are pretty and bright, but the
whole thing is too small to be anything but a child's toy. An accident on
the line, somewhere near Avila, detained our party for six mortal hours at
a wretched little wayside station, of which the authorities flatly refused
to put on a short special train, although there were a large number of
passengers, in addition to our travellers, waiting, like them, to return to
Madrid.
{741}
But the Spanish mind cannot take in the idea of any one being in a hurry.
"Ora!" "Mañana!" (By and by! To-morrow!) are the despairing words which
meet one at every turn in this country. In this instance, neither horses
nor carriages being procurable, by which the journey to Madrid (only twenty
miles) could have been accomplished with perfect facility by road, our
travellers had nothing left for it but to wait. Patience, and such sleep as
could be got on a hard bench, were their only resource until one in the
morning, when the night express fortunately came up, and, after some demur,
agreed to take them back to Madrid.

Too tired the following day to start early again for Toledo, as they had
intended, our party took advantage of the kindness of the English minister
to see the queen's private library, which is in one of the wings of the
large but uninteresting modern palace. The librarian good-naturedly showed
them some of the rarest of his treasures: among them is a beautiful missal,
bound in shagreen, with lovely enamel clasps and exquisite illuminations,
which had belonged to Queen Isabella of Castile; her arms, Arragon on one
side and Castile on the other, were worked into the illuminations on the
cover. There was a still older missal illuminated in 1315, in which is
found the first mention of _St. Louis_ in the Kalendar. Here also are
some of the first books printed in type, and a very fine MS. Greek copy of
Aristotle.

Afterward, they came to a distant room, where Dr.---- found what he had
long sought for in vain--a quantity of the MS. letters of Gondomar,
minister from Spain to our King James I., giving an amusing and gossiping
account of people and things in England at that time. In this library is
also a very curious and interesting MS. life of Cardinal Wolsey.

In the evening, one of our party paid a visit to the Papal Nuncio,
Monsignor B----, a very kind, clever, and agreeable man, living in a quaint
old house, with a snug library, in which hangs a pretty oil painting of
Tyana, a picturesque country near Barcelona, of which he is archbishop.
From him, and from the venerable Monsignor S----, bishop of Daulia, she
obtained certain letters of introduction to prelates and convents, which
were invaluable in her future tour, and procured for her a kind and
courteous welcome wherever she went.

The following morning, after a five o'clock mass in the beautiful little
chapel of the sisters of charity, our travellers started for Toledo by
rail, passing by the Aranjuez, the "Sans-Souci" of the Spanish queen, where
all the trees in Castile seem to be collected for her special benefit, and
where the sight of the green avenues and fountains is a real refreshment
after the barren and arid features of the rest of the country.

Toledo is a most curious and beautiful old town, built on seven hills, like
Rome. The approach to it is by a picturesque bridge over the Tagus, which
rushes through a rent in the granite mountains like a vigorous Scotch
salmon-river, and encircles the walls of the ancient city as with a girdle.
Passing under a fine old Moorish horse-shoe arched gateway, a modern zigzag
road leads up the steep incline to the "plaza," out of which diverge a
multitude of narrow tortuous streets, like what in Edinburgh are called
"wynds," as painful to walk upon as the streets of Jerusalem. However,
after a vain attempt to continue in the Noah's Ark of an omnibus which had
brought them up the steep hill from the station, and which grazed the walls
of the houses on each side from its width, our travellers were compelled to
brave the slippery stones and proceed on foot. The little inn is as
primitive as all else in this quaint old town, where everything seems to
have stood still for the last five centuries. Leaving their cloaks in the
only available place dignified by the name of "Sala," and swallowing with
difficulty some very nasty coffee, they started off at once for the
cathedral, which stands in the heart of the city, surrounded by convents
and colleges, and with the archiepiscopal palace on the right.
{742}
It is a marvel of Gothic beauty and perfection. Originally a mosque, it was
rebuilt by Ferdinand, and converted by him into a Christian church, being
finished in 1490. In no part of the world can anything be seen more unique,
more beautiful, or more effective than the white marble screen, with its
row of white angels with half-folded wings, guarding the sanctuary of the
high altar, and standing out sharp and clear against the magnificent dark
background formed by the arched naves and matchless painted glass, which,
in depth and brilliancy of color and beauty of design, exceeds even that of
Seville. "Shall you ever forget the blue eyes of those rose-windows at
Toledo?" exclaimed, months after, Dr.---- to one of the party, who was
dwelling with him on the wonderful beauties of this matchless temple.
[Footnote 249]

    [Footnote 249: Incredible as it may seem, the guide-books state that
    there are no less than 750 stained glass windows in this cathedral.]

The choir is exquisitely carved, both above and below; the stalls divided
by red marble columns. Of the seventy stalls, half are carved by Vigarny
and half by Berruguete: each figure of each saint is a study in itself. The
high altar is a perfect marvel of workmanship, the "reredos" or "retablo"
representing the whole life and passion of our Lord. At the back is the
wonderful marble "trasparente," which Ford calls an "abomination of the
seventeenth century," but which, when the sun shines through it, is a
marvel for effect of color and delicacy of workmanship. The Moorish altar
still remains at which Ferdinand and Isabella heard mass after their
conquest of the Saracens; and close to this altar is the spot pointed out
by tradition as the one where the virgin appeared to St. Ildefonso and
placed the chasuble on his shoulders. It is veiled off, with this
inscription on the pillar above:

  Adorabimus in loco ubi steterunt pedes ejus.

The fine bas-relief representing the miracle was executed by Vigarny.
Fragments of Saracenic art peep out everywhere, especially in the Sala
Capitular, or chapter-room, of which the doorway is an exquisite specimen
of the finest Moorish work, and the ceiling likewise. In this chapter-room
are two admirable portraits of Cardinal Ximenes and Cardinal Mendoza, said
to have been taken from life. The monuments in the side chapels are very
fine, especially one of St. Ildefonso, whose body had been carried by the
the Moors to Zamora, and was there discovered by a shepherd, and brought
back again; of Cardinal Mendoza; of the Constable Alvaro de Luna; and of
several Spanish kings. Here also rests the body of St. Leocadia, martyred
in the persecution under Diocletian, and to whom three churches in Toledo
are dedicated. During the wars with the Moors, her body was removed to
Italy, and thence to Mons; but was brought back by Philip II. to her native
city, and is now in an urn in the sacristy. At the west end of the
cathedral is a very curious chapel, where the Muzarabic ritual is still
used. This appears to be to the Spaniards what the Ambrosian is to the
Milanese, and was established by Cardinal Ximenes. The sacristy is a real
treasure-house, containing an exquisite tabernacle of gold brought by
Christopher Columbus, incensories, chalices, crosses, and reliquaries, in
gold and enamel, and "cristal de roche," (some given by Louis of France,)
and the missal of St. Louis, of which the illuminations are as fine as any
in the Vatican. The robes, mantles, and ornaments of the Virgin are
encrusted with pearls and jewels. Cardinal Mendoza removed one side of the
marble screen of the high altar to make room for his own monument. In
contrast to this, is another archbishop's tomb, near the altar of the
miraculous Virgin. They wanted to give him a fine carved sepulchre, and
were discussing it in his presence a short time before his death.
{743}
He insisted on a simple slab, with the following words:

  "Hic jacet pulvis, cinis, nullus."

Close to the bénitière at the south entrance, is a little marble slab
attached to the pillar, and on it a little soft leather cushion, which had
excited the curiosity of one of our party on entering. On returning for
vespers, she found laid on it a fine little baby, beautifully dressed, with
a medal round its neck, but quite dead! One of the canons explained to her
that when the parents were too poor to pay the expenses of their children's
funerals, they brought the little bodies in this way for interment by the
chapter. The cloisters to the north of the cathedral are very lofty and
fine, and decorated with frescoes; and the doors with their magnificent
bronze bas-reliefs, in the style of the Florence baptistery, and gloriously
carved portals, are on a par with all the rest. The "Puerta del Perdon,"
and the "Puerta de los Leones," especially, are unique in their gorgeous
details, and in the great beauty and life-like expression of the figures.

The chapter library is in good order, and contains some very fine editions
of Greek and Latin works: a Bible belonging to St. Isidore; the works of
St. Gregory; a fine illuminated Bible given by St. Louis; a missal of
Charles V.; a fine Talmud and Koran; and some very interesting MSS. In the
ante-room are some good pictures.

The palace of the archbishop is exactly opposite the west front of the
cathedral. No one has played a more important part in the history of his
country of late years than the present Archbishop of Toledo. High in the
favor and counsels of the queen, he at one time determined, for political
reasons, to leave Spain and settle himself in Italy, but was recalled by
the voice of both queen and people, and remains, beloved and honored by
all; and although upward of eighty years of age, and rather deaf, is still
a perfect lion of intellectual and physical strength. He received our
travellers most kindly, and in a fatherly manner invited them to breakfast,
and afterward to be present at a private confirmation in the little chapel
of his palace, at which ceremony they gladly assisted. He afterward sent
his secretary, a most clever and agreeable person, who spoke Italian with
fluency, to show the ladies the convent of Sta. Teresa, situated in the
lower part of the town. This convent was started, like all the rest of the
saint's foundations, amidst discouragements and difficulties of all kinds.
The house which had been promised her before her arrival was refused
through the intrigues of a relative of the donor; then the vicar-general
withdrew his license; and St. Theresa began to fear that she would have to
leave Toledo without accomplishing her object. Through the intervention of
a poor man, however, she at last heard of a tiny lodging where she and her
sisters could be received. It was a very humble place, and there was but
one room in it which could be turned into a chapel; but that was duly
prepared for mass, and dedicated to St. Joseph. Poor and meagre as the
sanctuary was, it struck a little child who was passing by, by its bright
and cared-for appearance, and she exclaimed: "Blessed be God! how beautiful
and clean it looks!" St. Theresa said directly to her sisters: "I account
myself well repaid for all the troubles which have attended this foundation
by that little angel's one 'Glory to God.'"

Afterward, all difficulties were smoothed; a larger house was built; and
the poor Carmelites, from being despised and rejected by all, and in want
of the commonest necessaries of life, were overwhelmed with supplies of all
kinds, so that one of them, in sorrow, exclaimed to St. Theresa: "What are
we to do, Mother? for now it seems that we are no longer poor!"

{744}

It was this very house which our travellers now visited, and a far cheerier
and brighter one it is than that of Seville. It contains twenty-four
sisters: among their treasures are the MS. copy of St. Theresa's Way of
Perfection, corrected by the saint herself, and with a short preface
written in her own hand; a quantity of her autograph letters; a long letter
from Sister Ann of St. Bartholomew; St. Theresa's seal, of which the ladies
were given an impression; the habit she had worn in the house, etc., etc.
But the most curious thing was the picture, painted by desire of the saint,
of the death of one of the community. We will tell the story in her own
words: "One of our sisters fell dangerously ill, and I went to pray for her
before the Blessed Sacrament, beseeching our Lord to give her a happy
death. I then came back to her cell to stay with her, and on my entrance
distinctly saw a figure like the representations of our Lord, at the bed's
head, with His arms outspread as if protecting her, and he said to me: 'Be
assured that in like manner I will protect all the nuns who shall die in
these monasteries, so that they shall not fear any temptation at the hour
of death.' A short time after, I spoke to her, when she said to me:
'Mother, what great things I am about to see!' and with these words she
expired, like an angel." St. Theresa had this subject represented in a
fresco, which is still on the wall of the cell. Here also she completed the
narrative of her life, now in the Escurial, by command of Padre Ibañez, and
here is her breviary, with the words (which we will give in English)
written by herself on the fly-leaf:

  "Let nothing disturb thee;
   Let nothing affright thee;
   All passeth away;
     God only shall stay.
   Patience wins all.
   Who hath God needeth nothing.
     For God is his All."

Leaving this interesting convent, our travellers proceeded to San Juan de
los Reyes, so called because built by Ferdinand and Isabella, and dedicated
to St. John. It was a magnificent Gothic building; but the only thing in
the church spared by the French are two exquisite "palcos" or balconies
overlooking the high altar, in the finest Gothic carving, from whence
Ferdinand and Isabella used to hear mass: their ciphers are beautifully
wrought in stone underneath. Outside this church hang the chains which were
taken off the Christian prisoners when they were released from the Moors.
Adjoining is the convent, now deserted, and the palace of Cardinal Ximenes,
of which the staircase and one long low room alone remain. But the gem of
the whole are the cloisters. Never was anything half so beautiful or so
delicate as the Moorish tracery and exquisite patterns of grape-vine,
thistle, and acanthus, carved round each quaint-shaped arch and window and
door-way. Festoons of real passion flowers, in full bloom, hung over the
arches from the "patio" in the centre, in which a few fine cypresses and
pomegranates were also growing, the dark foliage standing out against the
bright blue sky overhead, and beautifully contrasting with the delicate
white marble tracery of this exquisite double cloister. It is a place where
an artist might revel for a month.

Their guide then took them to see the synagogues, now converted into
Christian churches, but originally mosques. Exquisite Saracenic carvings
remain on the walls and roofs, with fine old Moorish capitals to the
pillars, of their favorite pine apple pattern, and beautiful colored
"azulejos" (tiles) on the floors and seats. Several of the private houses
which they afterward visited at Toledo might literally have been taken up
at Damascus and set down in this quaint old Spanish town, so identical are
they in design, in decorations, and in general character. The nails on the
doors are specially quaint, mostly of the shape of big mushrooms, and the
knockers are also wonderful. Could the fashion, once in vogue among "fast"
men in England, of wrenching such articles from the doors, be introduced
into Spain, what art treasures one could get! but scarcely anything of the
sort is to be bought in Toledo.
{745}
After trying in vain to swallow some of the food prepared for them at the
"fonda," in which it was hard to say whether garlic or rancid oil most
predominated, our travellers toiled again in the burning sun up the steep
hill leading to the Alcazar, the ancient palace, now a ruin, but still
retaining its fine old staircase and court-yard with very ancient Roman
pillars. From hence there is a beautiful view of the town, of the Tagus
flowing round it, and of the picturesque one-arched bridge which spans the
river in the approach from Madrid, with the ruins of the older Roman bridge
and forts below. The Tagus here rushes down a rapid with a fine fall,
looking like a salmon-leap, where there ought to be first-rate pools and
beautiful fishing; and then flows swiftly and silently along through a
grand gorge of rocks to the left. By the river-side was the Turkish
water-wheel, or "sakeel," worked by mules. The whole thing was thoroughly
Eastern; and the red, barren, arid look of the rocks and of the whole
surrounding country reminded one more of Syria than of anything European.
Our travellers were leaning over the parapet of the little terrace-garden,
looking on this glorious view, when a group of women who were sitting in
the sun near the palace-gates called to their guide, and asked if the lady
of the party were an Englishwoman, "as she walked so fast." The guide
replied in the affirmative. One of them answered, "O! qué peccado! (what a
pity!) I liked her face, and _yet she is an infidel_." The guide
indignantly pointed to a little crucifix which hung on a rosary by the
lady's side, at which the speaker, springing from her seat, impulsively
kissed both the cross and the lady. This is only a specimen of the faith of
these people, who cannot understand anything Christian that is not
Catholic, and confound all Protestants with Jews or Moors.

Going down the hill, stopping only for a few moments at a curiosity shop
where, however, nothing really old could be obtained--they came to the
Church of La Cruz, built on the site of the martyrdom of St. Leocadia. It
is now turned into a military college; but the magnificent Gothic portal
and facade remain. The streets are as narrow and dirty in this part of the
town as in the filthiest eastern city; but at every turn there is a
beautiful doorway, as at Cairo, through which you peep into a cool "patio,"
with its usual fountain and orange-trees; while a double cloister runs
round the quadrangle, and generally a picturesque side staircase, with a
beautifully carved balustrade, leading up to the cloisters above, with
their delicate tracery and varied arches. The beauty of the towers and
"campanile" is also very striking. They are generally thoroughly Roman in
their character, being built of that narrow brick (or rather tile) so
common for the purpose in Italy, but with the horse-shoe arch: that of S.
Romano is the most perfect. There is also a lovely little mosque, with a
well in the court-yard near the entrance, which has now been converted into
a church under the title of "Sta. Cruz de la Luz," with a wonderful
intersection of horse-shoe arches, like a miniature of the cathedral at
Cordova. Toledo certainly does not lack churches or convents; but those who
served and prayed in them, where are they? The terrible want of instruction
for the people, caused by the closing of all the male religious houses,
which were the centre of all missionary work, is felt throughout Spain; but
nowhere more than in this grand old town, which is absolutely _dead_.
The children are neglected, the poor without a friend, the widow and orphan
are desolate, and all seek in vain for a helper or a guide.

On the opposite side of the Tagus, and not far from the railway station,
are the ruins of a curious old chateau, to which a legend is attached, so
characteristic of the tone of thought of the people that it is given
verbatim here. [Footnote 250]

    [Footnote 250: This legend has been translated by Fernan Caballero, in
    her Fleurs des Champs.]

{746}

  "The owner had been a bad and tyrannical man, hard and unjust to his
  people, selfish in his vices as in his pleasures; the only redeeming
  point about him was his great love for his wife, a pious, gentle, loving
  woman, who spent her days and nights in deploring the orgies of her
  husband, and praying for God's mercy on his crimes. One winter's night,
  in the midst of a terrible tempest, a knocking was heard at the castle
  door, and presently a servant came in and told his mistress that two
  monks, half dead with cold and hunger, and drenched by the pitiless
  storm, had lost their way, and were begging for a night's lodging in the
  castle. The poor lady did not know what to do, for her husband hated the
  monks, and swore that none should ever cross his threshold. 'The count
  will know nothing about it, my lady,' said the old servant, who guessed
  the reason of her hesitation; 'I will conceal them somewhere in the
  stable, and they will depart at break of day.' The lady gave a joyful
  assent to the servant's proposal, and the monks were admitted. Scarcely,
  however, had they entered, when the sound of a huntsman's horn, the
  tramping of horses, and the barking of dogs, announced the return of the
  master. The sport had been good; and when he had changed his soiled and
  dripping clothes, and found himself, with his pretty wife seated opposite
  him, by a blazing fire, and with a well-covered table, his good humor
  made him almost tender toward her. 'What is the matter?' he exclaimed,
  when he saw her sad and downcast face. 'Were you frightened at the storm?
  yet you see I am come home safe and sound.' She did not answer. 'Tell me
  what vexes you; I insist upon it,' he continued; 'and it shall not be my
  fault I do not brighten that little face I love so well!' Thus encouraged
  the lady replied: 'I am sad, because, while we are enjoying every luxury
  and comfort here, others whom I know, even under this very roof, are
  perishing with cold and hunger.' 'But who are they?' exclaimed the count,
  with some impatience. 'Two poor monks,' answered the lady bravely, 'who
  came here for shelter, and have been put in the stable without food or
  firing.' The count frowned. 'Monks! Have I not told you fifty times I
  would never have those idle pestilent fellows in my house?' He rang the
  bell. 'For God's sake do not turn them out [on] such a night as this!'
  exclaimed the countess. 'Don't be afraid, I will keep my word,' replied
  her husband; and so saying, he desired the servant to bring them directly
  into the dining-room. They appeared; and the venerable, saint-like
  appearance of the elder of the two priests checked the raillery on the
  lips of the count. He made them sit down at his table; but the religious,
  faithful to his mission, would not eat till he had spoken some of God's
  words to his host. After supper, to his wife's joy and surprise, the
  count conducted the monks himself to the rooms he had prepared for them,
  which were the best in the house; but they refused to sleep on anything
  but straw. The count then himself went and fetched a truss of hay, and
  laid it on the floor. Then suddenly breaking silence, he exclaimed:
  'Father, I would return as a prodigal son to my Father's house; but I
  feel as if it were impossible that he should forgive sins like mine.'
  'Were your sins as numberless as the grains of sand on the sea-shore,'
  replied the missionary,' faithful repentance, through the blood of
  Christ, would wash them out. Therefore it is that the hardened sinner
  will have no excuse in the last day.' Seized with sudden compunction, the
  count fell on his knees, and made a full confession of his whole life,
  his tears falling on the straw he had brought. A few hours later the
  missionary, in a dream, saw himself, as it were, carried before the
  tribunal of the Great Judge. In the scales of eternal justice a soul was
  to be weighed: it was that of the count. Satan, triumphant, placed in the
  scales the countless sins of his past life: the good angels veiled their
  faces in sorrow, and pity, and shame. Then came up his guardian angel,
  that spirit so patient and so watchful, so beautiful and so good, who
  brings tears to our eyes and repentance to our hearts, alms to our hands
  and prayers to our lips.
{747}
  He brought but a few bits of straw, wet with tears, and placed them in
  the opposite scale. Strange! _they weighed down all the rest_. The
  soul was saved. The next morning, the monk, on waking, found the castle
  in confusion and sorrow. He inquired the reason: its master had died in
  the night."


    Zaragoza And Segovia.

The following morning found our travellers again in Madrid, and one of them
accompanied the sisters of charity to a beautiful fète at San Juan de
Alarçon, a convent of nuns. The rest of the day was spent in the museum;
and at half-past eight in the evening they started again by train for
Zaragoza, which they reached at six in the morning. One of the great
annoyances of Spanish travelling is, that the only good and quick trains go
at night; and it is the same with the diligences. In very hot weather it
may be pleasant; but in winter and in rain it is a very wretched proceeding
to spend half your night in an uncomfortable carriage, and the other half
waiting, perhaps for hours, at some miserable wayside station. After
breakfasting in a hotel where nothing was either eatable or drinkable, our
party started for the two cathedrals. The one called the "Seu" is a fine
gloomy old Gothic building, with a magnificent "retablo," in very fine
carving, over the high altar, and what the people call a "media naranja"
(or half-orange) dome, which is rather like the clerestory lantern of
Burgos. In the sacristy was a beautiful ostensorium, with an emerald and
pearl cross, a magnificent silver tabernacle of cinquecento work, another
ostensorium encrusted with diamonds, a nacre "nef," and some fine heads of
saints, in silver, with enamel collars. But at the sister cathedral, where
is the famous _Virgen del Pilar_, the treasury is quite priceless. The
most exquisite reliquaries in pearls, precious stones, and enamel;
magnificent necklaces; earrings with gigantic pearls; coronets of diamonds;
lockets; pictures set in precious stones; everything which is most valuable
and beautiful, has been lavished on this shrine. In the outside sacristy is
also an exquisite chalice, in gold and enamel, of the fifteenth century;
and a very fine picture, said to be by Correggio, of the Ecce Homo. The
shrine of the Miraculous Virgin is thronged with worshippers, day and
night; but no woman is allowed to penetrate beyond the railing, so that she
is very imperfectly seen. It is a _black_ figure, which is always the
favorite way of representing the Blessed Virgin in Spain: the pillar is of
the purest alabaster. There is some fine "azulejo" work in the sacristy;
but the cathedral itself is ugly, and is being restored in a bad style. Our
party left it rather with relief, and wandered down to the fine old bridge
over the Ebro, which is here a broad and rapid stream, and amused
themselves by watching the boats shooting through the piers--an operation
of some danger, owing to the rapidity of the current. There is a beautiful
leaning tower of old Moorish and Roman brickwork, in a side street, but
which you are not allowed to ascend without a special order from the
prefect. The Lonja, or Exchange, is also well worth seeing, from its
beautiful deep overhanging roof. This is, in fact, the characteristic of
all the old houses in Zaragoza, which is a quaint old town formed of a
succession of narrow tortuous streets, with curious old roofs, "patios,"
columns, and staircases. After having some luncheon, which was more eatable
than the breakfast, our travellers took a drive outside the town, and had a
beautiful view of the lower spur of the Pyrenees on the one hand, and of
the towers, bridges, and minarets of the city on the other. Then they went
to the public gardens, laid out by Pignatelli, the maker of the canal,
which are the resort of all the people on fête-days: they were very gay,
and full of beautiful flowers.
{748}
From thence they drove to the castle, or "Aljaferia," where there is a very
curious moresque chapel still existing, though sadly in ruins. Above are
the rooms occupied by Ferdinand and Isabella, and the apartment where St.
Elizabeth of Portugal was born, with the font where she was baptized. The
hall of the ambassadors is very handsome, with a glorious moresque roof,
and a gallery round. The castle is now turned into a barrack; but the
officers, who, with true Spanish courtesy, had accompanied the priest who
was showing the rooms to our travellers, _had never seen them before
themselves_. How long they had been quartered there none of our party
had the courage to ask! But this is a specimen of the very little interest
which appears to be taken by the Spaniards in the antiquities or art
treasures of their country. Not one of them was ever to be seen in the
matchless gallery of Madrid. Coming home, they visited San Pablo, a curious
and beautiful subterranean church, into which you descend by a flight of
steps. A service was going on, and an eloquent sermon, so that it was
impossible to see the pictures well; but they appeared to be above the
average. This church has a glorious tower in old Roman brickwork. The
palace of the Infanta has been converted into a school. It is the most
perfect specimen of the Renaissance style of Gothic architecture, with
beautiful arches, columns, staircase, and fretted roof. Exhausted with
their sight-seeing, our travellers went back to their inn; agreeably
surprised, however, at the vestiges of ancient beauty still left in
Zaragoza, after the frightful sieges and sacking to which the city has
twice been subjected.

In the evening, the Canon de V----, who had been their kind cicerone at the
cathedral in the absence of the bishop, came to pay them a visit, and gave
them a very interesting account of the people, and a great deal of
information about the convents and religious houses in the place,
especially that of the Ursulines, who have a very large educational
establishment in the town. He has lately written a very interesting account
of the foundress of this order.

The return to Madrid was necessarily accomplished again by night; and jaded
and tired as they were the following day, our party had not the courage for
any fresh expedition. One only visit was paid, which will ever remain in
the memory of the lady who had the privilege. It was to Monsignor Claret,
the confessor of the queen and Archbishop of Cuba, a man as remarkable for
his great personal holiness and ascetic life as for the unjust accusations
of which he is continually the object. On one occasion, these unfavorable
reports having reached his ears, and being only anxious to retire into the
obscurity which his humility makes him love so well, he went to Rome to
implore for a release from his present post; but it was refused him.
Returning through France, he happened to travel with certain gentlemen,
residents in Madrid, but unknown to him, as he was to them, who began to
speak of all the evils, real or imaginary, which reigned in the Spanish
Court, the whole of which they unhesitatingly attributed to Monsignor
Claret, very much in the spirit of the old ballad against Sir Robert Peel:

  "Who filled the butchers' shops with big blue flies?"

He listened without a word, never attempting either excuse or
justification, or betraying his identity. Struck with his saint-like manner
and appearance, and likewise very much charmed with his conversation during
their couple of days' journey together, the strangers begged, at parting,
to know his name, expressing an earnest hope of an increased acquaintance
at Madrid. He gave them his card with a smile! Let us hope they will be
less hasty and more charitable in their judgments for the future. Monsignor
Claret's room in Madrid is a fair type of himself. Simple even to severity
in its fittings, with no furniture but his books, and some photographs of
the queen and her children, it contains one only priceless object, and that
is a wooden crucifix, of the very finest Spanish workmanship, which
attracted at once the attention of his visitor.
{749}
"Yes, it is very beautiful," he replied, in answer to her words of
admiration; "and I like it because it expresses so wonderfully _victory
over suffering_. Crucifixes generally represent only the painful and
human, not the triumphant and Divine view of the Redemption. Here, He is
truly Victor over death and hell."

Contrary to the generally received idea, he never meddles in politics, and
occupies himself entirely in devotional and literary works. One of his
books, Camino recto y seguro para llegar al Cielo, would rank with Thomas à
Kempis's Imitation in suggestive and practical devotion. He keeps a
perpetual fast; and when compelled by his position to dine at the palace,
still keeps to his meagre fare of "garbanzos," or the like. He has a great
gift of preaching; and when he accompanies the queen in any of her royal
progresses, is generally met at each town when they arrive by earnest
petitions to preach, which he does instantly, without rest or apparent
preparation, sometimes delivering four or five sermons in one day. In
truth, he is always "prepared," by a hidden life of perpetual prayer and
realization of the Unseen.

After taking leave of him and the Nunzio, and of the many other kind
friends who had made their stay at Madrid so pleasant, our travellers
started at eight o'clock in the evening for Villa Alba, where they were to
take the diligence for Segovia. The night was clear and beautiful, and the
scenery through which they passed was finer than any they had seen in
Spain. At dawn they came almost suddenly on this most quaint and
picturesque of cities, standing on a rocky knoll more than 3,000 feet above
the sea, encircled by a rapid river, and with the most magnificent
aqueduct, built by Trajan to convoy the pure water of the river Frio from
the neighboring sierra to the town. This aqueduct commences with single
arches, which rise higher as the dip of the ground deepens, until they
become double. The centre ones are 102 feet high, and the whole is built of
massive blocks of granite, without cement or mortar. A succession of
picturesque towers and ancient walls remain to mark the boundaries of the
old Roman city.

The diligence unceremoniously turned our travellers out into the street at
the bottom of the town, and left them to find their way as best they could
to the little "fonda" in the square above. It was very clean and tidy, with
the box-beds opening out of the sitting-rooms, which are universal in the
old-fashioned inns of Spain, and always remind one of a Highland bothie.
The daughter of the house showed off her white linen with great pride, and
was rather affronted because two of the party preferred going to church to
trying her sheets, stoutly declaring that "no one was yet awake, and no
mass could yet be obtained." However, on leaving her, and gently pushing
open one of the low side-doors of the cathedral close by, the ladies found
that the five o'clock services had begun at most of the altars, with a very
fair sprinkling of peasants at each. The circular triple apse at the east
end of this cathedral, from the warm color of the stone, and the beauty of
its flying buttresses and Gothic pinnacles, is deservedly reckoned one of
the finest in Spain. The tower also is beautiful; and the view from the
cupola over the city, the fertile valleys beneath, and the snow-tipped
mountains beyond, is quite unrivalled. The interior has been a good deal
spoiled by modern innovations, but still contains some glorious painted
glass, a very fine "retablo" by Juni of the "Deposition from the Cross,"
and some curious monuments, especially one of the Infanta Don Pedro, son of
Henry II.. who was killed by being let fall from the window of the Alcazar
by his nurse. The Gothic cloisters are also worth seeing. After service, as
it was still very early, the two ladies wandered about this beautiful
quaint old town, in which every house is a study for a painter, and found
themselves at last at the Alameda, a public promenade on the ramparts,
shaded by fine acacias, and the approach to which, on the cathedral side,
is through a beautiful Moorish horse-shoe arched gateway.
{750}
From thence some stone steps led them up to a most curious old Norman
church, with an open cloister running round it, with beautiful circular
arches and dog-toothed mouldings; opposite is a kind of Hôtel de Ville,
with a fine gateway, cloistered "patio," and staircase carved "à jour." In
a narrow street, a little lower down, is the exquisite Gothic façade of the
Casa de Segovia, and turning to the left is another curious and beautiful
church, La Vera Cruz, built by the Templars, and with a little chapel in it
on the exact model of that of the Holy Sepulchre at Jerusalem. The zigzag
and billet dog-tooth mouldings round the windows and doorways are very
fine. A little higher up is the Parral, a deserted convent, with a
beautiful church, richly carved portal and choir, fine monuments,
cloisters, and gardens: the latter had such a reputation that they give
rise to the saying, "Las huertas del Parral, paraiso terrenal." Fairly
tired out with sight-seeing before breakfast, the ladies climbed up again
to the Plaza de la Constitucion, which was like the square of an old German
town, having endlessly varied and colored houses with high roofs; and were
glad to find the rest of the party awake at last, and sitting round a table
with the invariably good chocolate and white bread of the country. The meal
over, one of the ladies started off with a little boy as her guide, to
present her letters of introduction to the bishop, who lived in a
picturesque old palace in the Plaza of San Esteban, the fine church
opposite, with its beautiful tower, Saxon arches, and open cloister, being
dedicated to that saint. He received his visitor with great good nature,
and instantly countersigned the Nunzio's order for her to visit the
Carmelite convent of Sta. Teresa, sending his vicar-general to accompany
her. This house is the original one purchased for the saint, in 1574, by
Dona Ana de Ximenes, who was the first lady to receive the habit in
Segovia. It is dedicated to St. Joseph, and the first mass was said in it
by St. John of the Cross. The nuns maintain the reformed rule in all its
austerity. They showed their visitor the saint's cell, now converted into
an oratory, and also the room of St. John of the Cross, whose convent is in
the valley below, just outside the walls of the town. There his body
rests--that body still uncorrupted, of one of whom it has been truly said
that he was a "cherub in wisdom and a seraph in love." On the door of his
cell is his favorite sentence:

  Pati et contemni pro Te!

This convent is rich both in his letters and in those of St. Theresa. Here
it was that the saint received the news of the death of her favorite
brother, Laurence de Cepeda. She was quietly at work during recreation when
he appeared to her; the saint, without uttering a word, put down her work
and hastened to the choir to commend the departed spirit to our Lord. She
had no sooner knelt before the blessed sacrament than an expression of
intense peace and joy came over her face. Her sisters asked her the reason,
and she told them that our Lord had then revealed to her the assurance that
her brother was in heaven. His sudden death occurred at the very moment
when he had appeared to her in the recreation room. Over the door of her
oratory are the words, "Seek the cross," "Desire the cross;" and a little
farther on, "Let us teach more by works than by words." After spending two
or three hours with the sisters, the English lady was compelled reluctantly
to leave them and return to her party, who were waiting for her to go with
them to the Alcazar.

This palace, originally Moorish, was rebuilt by Henry IV. in the fifteenth
century. It was the favorite residence of Isabella of Castile, and from
thence, on the occasion of a revolution, she rode out alone, and "by her
sweetness of countenance more than by her majesty," as the old chronicle
says, "won over the people to return to their allegiance."
{751}
Our King Charles I. lodged here also, and is recorded to have supped on
certain "troutes of extraordinary greatness," doubtless from the beautiful
stream below. At the time of the French invasion the Alcazar was turned
into a military college, and these wretched students, in a freak of boyish
folly, set fire to a portion of one of the rooms two years ago. The fire
spread; and all that is now left of this matchless palace is a ruined
shell, the façade, the beautiful Moorish towers and battlements, one or two
sculptured arabesque ceilings, and the portcullised gateway, each and all
testifying to its former greatness and splendor. Its position, perched on a
steep plateau forming the western extremity of the town, is quite
magnificent, and the views from the windows are glorious. Our travellers
staid a long time sitting under the shade of the orange-trees in the
battlemented court below, enjoying the glorious panorama at their feet, and
watching the setting sun as it lit up the tips of the snowy sierra which
forms the background of this grand landscape; while the beautiful river
Eresma flowed swiftly round the old walls, its banks occupied at that
moment by groups of washerwomen in their bright picturesque dresses,
singing in parts the national songs of their country. In the valley below
were scattered homesteads and convents, and a group of cypresses marking
the spot where, according to the legend, Maria del Salto alighted. This
girl was a Jewess by birth, but secretly a Christian; and having thereby
excited the anger and suspicions of her family, was accused by them of
adultery, and condemned, according to the barbarous practice of those
times, to be thrown from the top of the Alcazar rock. By her faith she was
miraculously preserved from injury, and reached the ground in safety; a
church was built on the spot, of which the "retablo" tells the tale.

Segovia is famous for its flocks, and for the beauty of its wool: the water
of the Eresma is supposed to be admirable for washing and shearing.

Our travellers now began to think of pursuing their journey to Avila; but
that was not so easy. The diligence which had brought them flatly refused
to convey them back till the following night, except at a price so
exorbitant that it was impossible to give it. And here, as everywhere else
in Spain, you have no redress. There are no carriages whatever for hire,
except in the two or three large capitals, like Madrid and Seville; and
even should carriages be found, there are no horses or mules to draw
them--or, at any rate, none that they choose to let out for the purpose.
Such as they are, they are always reserved for the diligence; and if the
latter should happen to be full, the unhappy passengers may wait for days
at a wayside "posada" until their turn comes. Therefore, it is absolutely
necessary in Spain to write and make the contract for places beforehand:
and to be hard-hearted when the time comes, as it almost invariably happens
that you leave behind certain luckless travellers who have not adopted a
similar precaution; and the struggle for seats, and consequent overcrowding
of the carriages, are renewed at every station. Making a virtue of
necessity, our travellers at last made up their minds to another miserable
diligence night out of bed--the fatigue of which must be felt to be
thoroughly sympathized with--and spent the intervening hours of the evening
in dining, and then going to a religious play, which they had seen
advertised in the morning, and which was a very curious exhibition of
popular taste and religious feeling. The little theatre was really very
clean and tidy, and there was nothing approaching to irreverence in the
representations given. A similar scene in a very different place recurred
to the memory of one of the party, as having been witnessed by her in
Paris, some years ago, when on a certain occasion she accompanied a
somewhat stiff puritanical old lady to the opera.
{752}
A ballet was given as an entr'acte, in which the scenery was taken from the
book of Genesis, and Noah and his sons appeared just coming out of the Ark.
This was too much for the good lady: "If Noah either dances or sings," she
exclaimed, "I'll leave the house!" The poor Segovians, trained in a
different school, saw nothing incongruous in the representation of the
shepherds, and the wise men, and the cave of Bethlehem: and only one
comical incident occurred, when, on a child in the pit setting up a squeal,
there was a universal cry of _Where's Herod?_ At ten o'clock they left
their play, with its quiet and respectable little audience, and once more
found themselves tightly stowed in their diligence prison for the night.
The moon, however, was bright and beautiful, and enabled them to see the
royal hunting-box and woods, and the rest of the fine scenery through which
they passed, so that the journey was far less intolerable than usual, as is
often the case when a thing has been much dreaded beforehand. At four
o'clock in the morning they were turned out, shivering with cold, at a
wayside station, where they were to take the train to Avila; but were then
told, to their dismay, by a sleepy porter, that the six o'clock train had
been taken off, and that there would be none till ten the next morning, so
that all hopes of arriving at Avila in time for church (and this was
Sunday) were at an end. The station had no waiting-room, only a kind of
corridor with two hard benches. Establishing the children on these for the
moment with plaids and shawls, one of the party went off to some cottages
at a little distance off, and asked in one of them if there were no means
of getting a bedroom and some chocolate? A very civil woman got up and
volunteered both; so the tired ones of the party were able to lie down for
a few hours' rest in two wonderfully clean little rooms, while their
breakfast was preparing. The question now arose for the others: "Was there
no church anywhere near?" It was answered by the people of the place in the
negative. "The station was new; the cottages had been run up for the
accommodation of the porters and people engaged on the line; there was no
village within a league or two." Determined, however, not to be baffled,
one of the party inquired of another man, who was sleepily driving his
bullocks into a neighboring field, and he replied "that over the mountains
to the left there was a village and a curé; but that it was a long way off,
and that he only went on great "festas." It was now quite light; the lady
was strong and well; and so she determined to make the attempt to find the
church. Following the track pointed out to her by her informant, she came
to a wild and beautiful mountain path, intersected by bright rushing
streams, crossed by stepping stones, the ground perfectly carpeted with
wild narcissus and other spring flowers. Here and there she met a peasant
tending his flocks of goats, and always the courteous greeting of "Vaya
Usted con Dios!" or "Dios guarde á Usted!" as heartily given as returned.
At last, on rounding a corner of the mountain, she came on a beautiful
view, with the Escurial in the distance to the left; and to the right,
embosomed, as it were, in a little nest among the hills, a picturesque
village, with its church-tower and rushing stream and flowering
fruit-trees, toward which the path evidently led. This sight gave her fresh
courage; for the night journey and long walk, undertaken fasting, had
nearly spent her strength. Descending the hill rapidly, she reached the
village green just as the clock was striking six, and found a group of
peasants, both men and women, sitting on the steps of the picturesque stone
cross in the centre, opposite the church, waiting for the curé to come out
of his neat little house close by to say the first mass. The arrival of the
lady caused some astonishment; but, with the inborn courtesy of the people,
one after the other rose and came forward, not only to greet her, but to
offer her chocolate and bread.
{753}
She explained that she had come for communion, and would go into the
church. The old white-haired clerk ran into the house to hasten the curé,
and soon a kind and venerable old man made his appearance, and asked her if
she wished to see him first in the confessional. He could scarcely believe
she had been in Segovia only the night before! Finding that she was hurried
to return and catch the train, he instantly gave her both mass and
communion, and then sent his housekeeper to invite her to breakfast, as did
one after the other of the villagers. Escaping from their hospitality with
some difficulty, on the plea of the shortness of the time and the length of
the way back, the English lady accepted a little loaf, for which no sort of
payment would be heard of, and walked with a light heart back to the
station, feeling how close is the religious tie which binds Catholics
together as one family, and how beautiful is the hearty, simple hospitality
of the Spanish people when untainted by contact with modern innovations and
so-called progress. There was no occasion when this natural, high-bred
courtesy was not shown during the four months that our travellers spent in
this country; and those who, like the author of Over the Pyrenees into
Spain, find fault on every occasion with the manners of the people, must
either have been ignorant of their language and customs, or, having no
sympathy with their faith, have wounded their susceptibilities, and to a
certain degree justified the rudeness of which they pretend to have been
the victims.

------

      Original.

      Beams.

  "Why seest thou the mote in thy brother's eye,
  but the beam that is in thine own eye
  thou considerest not?"


    Disciple.

  "How's this! And hath my brother ne'er a beam
   That may be plucked from out his eye?
   And are my brother's beams all motes,
     And none have beams but I?"


    Master.

  "E'en so, For beams enough there be, I trow;
   And who will claim them, if not thou?"


    Disciple.

  "'Tis well! I'll claim mine own.
  (Methinks it has of late much larger grown.)"


    Master.

  "Suffices it, if thou wilt claim but one.
   Then shall thy brother, in thy sight, have none.
   For beams do so prevent pride's selfish view
   That, if thy brother's beam did weigh a ton,
   It would appear the smallest mote to you."

------

{754}

  Early Rising. [Footnote 251]

    [Footnote 251: This article is translated from the Conferences
    Destinées aux Femmes du Monde, par Mgr. Landriot.]


  "De Nocte Surrexit."

Sleep was given man to sustain life, to invigorate his strength, and to
serve him as the best and most useful of medicines; one single prescription
perfectly accomplished sometimes sufficing for the cure of serious disease,
or, at least, the amelioration of violent pain. Sleep is the salutary bath
that renovates life, the entire being growing younger under its influence;
it is a station in the desert of this world; and often, after dull and
wearying journeys, one comes to repose in this oasis prepared by divine
Providence, enabled the next day to pursue the route with renewed courage
and activity. The time of sleep is not only useful to the body, but the
soul: it calms all agitation, spreads a balm over piercing grief, and
hinders the precipitation of words and actions. Thus the ancients
designated night the good counsellor; those even whom passion or bodily
infirmity keep awake are subservient to her designs, and, in the calm
which, through shade, she diffuses everywhere, she recalls man to better
sentiments. If he is Christian, she quickens within him the fibres of
prayer; a single aspiration toward heaven sufficing sometimes to crush the
bad or dangerous germs of thought, and prepare for the morrow a pure and
uncloudy sky. In other times, there was so much calmness and placidity in
the sleep of the just, said St. Ambrose, that it was like an ecstasy in
which, while the body reposed, the soul, to speak thus, was separated from
its organs, and united itself to Christ: Somnus tranquillitatem menti
invehens, placiditatem animae ut tanquam soluto nexu corporis se ablevit,
et Christo adhaereat. [Footnote 252]

    [Footnote 252: Ep. xvi. No. 4, p. 960.]

Again, sleep is an excellent preacher, because it recalls to us the image
of death: the ancients named it the brother of death, and both are sons of
night. The daily arrival of sleep should make us say: "The other brother
will come soon, and this time I will extend myself on my bed, never more to
rise. Each visit of the night should be an invitation to prepare me for the
last and solemn departure."

Sleep is, then, excellent in itself; but how greatly it may be abused; and,
if we do abuse it, it will produce effects exactly contrary to those I have
just enumerated; that is to say, it will weaken the body, stupefy the
ideas, and that, far from refreshing and repairing life, it will prepare
for it a kind of living sepulchre in which to bury it.

It is not sufficient to determine the quantity of sleep, which should be
wisely regulated, without according or refusing too much to nature. We must
also calculate the quality of sleep.

Now, according to general observation, the sleep from the real night to the
real morning, that is to say, which is taken in the interval of nine and
five or six o'clock, is the best, the most salutary, and the most favorable
to health. I do not say that it is absolutely necessary to sleep all the
time, I have indicated: this is merely the space designed to choose one's
hours of sleep. Let us willingly admit all the exceptions necessitated by
transitory relations; but, as a general thesis, it is better to retire
early and rise early in the morning. It is the best, the most favorable
time for the nocturnal bath we call sleep; the body better refreshes
itself, the repose is more conformable to the laws of nature; therefore is
it sweeter, at once lighter and more profound, and has not the heaviness
which indicates an abnormal condition.
{755}
Sleep, prolonged too much in the morning because it has been retarded at
night, has serious inconveniences. It communicates to the general system a
sickly languor which becomes the habitual condition of certain
temperaments. Life with them is a sort of perpetual convalescence, and
never do they enjoy the most precious gift of nature, a state of health,
truly and solidly established. See, on the contrary, these robust village
girls; at night at an early hour they demand of their beds the repose for
their tired members; in the morning they rise with the crow of the cock. In
winter, the fire is lighted at dawn of day on the domestic hearth; the
house-keeping is arranged, the order of the day disposed in advance, the
breakfast of the laborers is ready to be served, and the sun has not yet
appeared above the horizon. During the summer, these same children of the
village accompany the star of day in its matutinal march; their chests
dilate, and they strengthen themselves in breathing the fresh and perfumed
air shed with the rays of sun, and they seem to breathe life and health.
Later these same girls marry, and, if they are not imprudent, they may for
many years continue an existence made up of fruitful labor, and ornamented
sometimes with all the charms and freshness of a vigorous old age; for
their regimen is an excellent medicine which gives them a commission of
long life.

But whence, on the contrary, comes that weakness of temperament so
observable in women of the world? It may be deduced from various causes,
but one of the principal is the mode of life too generally adopted,
especially in large cities. A part of the night is spent in _soirées_,
to finish only with longer _matinées_; a portion of the day is given
to sleep, and from this results a general debility of constitution, fatigue
of the nervous system, a numbness of the organs, and in all an habitual and
continual prostration. There may be exceptional temperaments that resist
these effects; but it is incontestable, in the eyes of an impartial
observer, that the loss of health, especially among women, is due in great
part to the life of excess I here mention. "Prolonged night watches," said
a learned man, "necessarily bring on a fatigue which bears on the brain and
on the digestive and respiratory organs. And fatigue of this nature, far
from favoring sleep, renders it incomplete and painful. From thence, in
great measure, comes this valetudinary state which we meet with so
habitually among the women of our cities; balls and _soirées_ ruin
their health in advance, and it is often on youth even, but still oftener
in ripe and old age, that the foolish and miserable dissipations of the
world leave their sad and fatal impress." [Footnote 253]

    [Footnote 253: Leçons de la Nature, nouvelle édition, par M. Desdouits,
    1. 3. 188e considér, t. iii. p. 125.]

You would, then, condemn _soirées_? I pray you to remark that, if
there is something to condemn, it is not I who condemns them; these are
facts according to nature and the temperament of the human body. Is it not
true that the health of many women of the world is weakened? No one can
deny this. Is it not also true that one of the principal causes is the
world's manner of organizing social relations? It is a fact of which
science every day gives undeniable proof. I am far from condemning
_soirées_; and perhaps you have not forgotten that, in our reunions, I
applied myself some years ago to show you how religion was the friend of
honest pleasures and the demands of society; on condition that they should
be regulated by wisdom, and that the interests of both body and soul were
faithfully managed; for so greatly does Christianity respect our bodies
that we can sin in compromising one's health by serious imprudences. Merry
conversations in the evening have all sorts of advantages. They divert the
mind, refresh the body, bring hearts together, dissipate clouds, and bind
more closely the ties of family and friendships. In a certain degree,
pleasures are necessary to man.
{756}
I speak of innocent pleasures that virtue can admit, and those who
entertain some doubt in this respect can consult the writings of the
greatest theologians of the church, and especially St. Thomas. This great
doctor has on this point a clearness and precision, and at the same time a
reason and wisdom, at once full of reserve and condescension. The rule he
establishes is to use all pleasure with moderation, according to time,
place, and the circumstance of those with whom we live: _moderatè pro
loco, et tempore, et congruentiâ eorum quibus convivit, (temperatus.)_
[Footnote 254]

    [Footnote 254: See in particular L'Ethique et La Somme.]

"There are many people," said Fenélon, "who like to groan over everything,
and weary themselves continually by encouraging a disgust for all rational
amusement. For me, I avow I could not accommodate myself to such rigidity.
I like something more simple; and I believe that God himself likes it much
better. When diversion is innocent in itself, and is entered into according
to the rules of the state wherein Providence has placed us, then I believe
all required of us is to take part in it, as in God's sight and with
moderation. Manners more rigid and more reserved, less complaisant and less
open, only serve to give a false idea of piety to worldly people, who are
already sufficiently prejudiced against it, and who believe God is only
served through a sombre and mortified life." [Footnote 255]

    [Footnote 255: _Avis a une Personne de la Cour_. Manuel de Piété.
    Ed. Dupanloup. ]

We would wish, then, that Christian societies would adopt for their maxim
these beautiful words of St. Chrysostom: "Christians have the sense for
delicate pleasures, but decency should preside over all." It is impossible
to make more reasonable concessions to human nature, but is not religion
authorized, therefore, to show herself severe to all who exceed the bounds
of wisdom, conformity, and virtue, and even for all who compromise the
interests of health or fortune? Would it not be possible, to return to our
subject, to combine in our reunions of family and society everything for
the general good and the vigorous health of actual generations? Allowing
for exceptional circumstances, where one may be obliged to be up later,
would it not be possible to make _soirées_ shorter, rendering them, at
the same time, more agreeable and more frequent, more salutary and less
compromising to health? This is the problem I propose to solve; and is it
not a singular thing that here religion interposes to say to you, Think of
the interests of your bodies; you sin the same by seriously neglecting
them? "Hoc esset peccatum" said St. Thomas. This excess in the length of
_soirées_ comes to us from paganism. In the time of Seneca they
existed, and these are the terms which this philosopher used toward them:
"There are people who reverse the uses of day and night. Thus, nothing
looks more sad and broken-down than the appearance of such persons, who
are, so to say, dedicated to the night; their color is that of sick people,
they are pale and languishing, carrying a dead flesh in a living body. And
this is not the only evil: their minds are surrounded by shadows
apparently, benumbed, and inhabiting the clouds. Is it possible not to
deplore an irregularity which banishes the light of day, and passes life in
darkness and shade?" [Footnote 256]

    [Footnote 256: Epist. 122.]

Sometimes I am asked, if religion were to command half the sacrifice that
the world demands if it ordered a part of every night spent in fatiguing
both body and soul, what would not be said against it? What anathemas, what
bitter reproaches! But the world speaks, and no one says anything; we are
enchanted, or, at least, appear so. St. Francis de Sales has given us, on
this subject, some reflections wherein the delicate point of a pleasant
malice is touched with superior reason, and I should reproach myself did I
not present them to you: "We have seen gentlemen and ladies pass not only
one night, but several in succession at play--worldly people said nothing,
friends gave themselves no trouble concerning them; but let us give one
hour to meditation, or rise a little earlier than usual to prepare for
communion, these same friends would run for the doctor to cure us of
jaundice or hypochondria.
{757}
We may occupy thirty nights in dancing, no one complains; but for the
single watch of Christmas night every one coughs, and cries next day with
the stomach-ache."

The salutary regimen of retiring and rising early is very precious for the
soul, and the duties of life much better fulfilled. The soul is calmer at
night, calm as everything that is regular and not troubled and turned
topsy-turvy by the thousand preoccupations of a too worldly life. In the
evening, before going to sleep, we can fix our attention on ourselves,
analyze the day, its thoughts, desires, and actions, praise, blame, or
correct, and, as a skilful merchant, make an account of our losses and
gains. Do not imagine such a practice is confined to narrow minds; it is
the usage of reason and sound philosophy, as are all other practices of an
enlightened devotion. Pagans as well as Christians have given us a lesson
on this subject. Listen to Pythagoras: "Never allow sleep to close thine
eyes before having examined every action of the day. In what have I failed?
What have I done? What duty have I forgotten? Commence by the first of thy
actions, run over the others; in fine, reproach thyself with what thou hast
done ill, and rejoice in what thou hast done well." "What can be more
beautiful," said Seneca, "than this habit of inquiring into a whole day?
What sleep succeeds to such a review of one's actions! How calm, deep, and
free it is when the soul has received its share of praise or blame, and,
submitting to its own control, its own censure, it secretly tries its own
conduct! For me, I have taken this authority on myself, and every day I
cite myself to appear before the tribunal of my conscience. So soon as the
light has gone, I scan my day entirely, weigh anew my acts and my words,
dissemble nothing, and omit nothing." [Footnote 257] Adopt this habit,
everything in you will gain by it--reason and piety; a sweet serenity will
be diffused around your soul, and you will sleep in angelic peace _somnus
sanitatis in homine_. [Footnote 258] You have sometimes seen children
sleep. What calm! What sweetness of expression! What kindness of feature!
What living and silent rest! This will be the image of your sleep.

    [Footnote 257: Da la Colere, 1. 3. c. 36.]

    [Footnote 258: Ecclus. xxxi.]

But--and now we touch a delicate point--it is the result of life's
organization that you ought to get up in the morning. I hear already a deep
sigh of fear from your trembling couch. First, then, let us understand the
value of the words, Get up in the morning. I do not exhort you to imitate a
very delicate lady, who said, during her sojourn at Vichy, "I commence my
day at four o'clock in the morning, in order that my body may not take off
too much from my soul." [Footnote 259]

    [Footnote 259: Lettres de Madame Swetchine. t. ii. p. 111.]

I do not propose you this model, for I am very sure, if I opened a
register, I should find very few members for the confraternity of Madame
Swetchine. Let us leave, then, the value of the expression slightly
undecided. Get up in the morning; let it only be the earliest hour
possible, and this, perhaps may be too late. Once, however, the hour of
your rising determined, hold to it, with a firmness proportioned to the
difficulty of the step, and let the unfortunate bed shut up again the
magnetic fluid whereby one is drawn to it, I do not say in spite of one's
self, but with a sweetness of violence which nails one to the post. I avow
we are here in face of one of the most terrible of enemies, and this enemy
the pillow. When we want to leave it in the morning, it assumes the
artificial language of the siren, and caresses us with tender precaution.
It seems to say: Why do you leave me? are you not better here? what a sweet
temperature! what inappreciable well-being! don't you see it is too soon?
do you not feel your limbs too tired, and as yet enjoying a very incomplete
repose?
{758}
Touch your forehead and you will see you begin to have headache; a few
quarters of an hour more will dissipate it; to-morrow you will rise
earlier! Then it's so cold out of bed: why brave the inclemency of the
seasons? The day is long enough; you will have time enough for everything;
in truth, do not be so severe with yourself. After such eloquent language
the dear pillow extends its two arms to entangle you, and soon the victory
is consummated; true, it was easy, none are so happy as the vanquished; and
behold you fallen again and buried for several hours more.

I speak very seriously in telling you that one of the most difficult
enemies to vanquish is this pillow of the morning; and there is but one way
to conquer it: it is a prompt and decisive blow, a military charge, a jump
out of bed: charge the enemy by a vigorous sally, and the victory is yours.
An old Capuchin said that, after long years of a religious life, what cost
him most was to rise at four o'clock in the morning. It is true there is a
sacrifice to make, a real sacrifice, incontestable; but here life is full
of sacrifices, and each one is followed by a sentiment of true happiness,
and each victory gives to man an astonishing power. When I see a person who
has the courage to get up in the morning, I have immediately a high opinion
of his firmness of character, and I say to myself: This person, when
occasion demands it, will know how to develop extraordinary energy; each
morning his nature is tempered again in the struggle against his pillow,
and this combat is often more difficult, especially on account of its
continuity, than that of the soldier on the field of battle. Besides, wait
as long as you will, even if you sleep until mid-day, you will have to make
a sacrifice on leaving your bed. Sometimes the more you think of it, the
sacrifice will be greater, and increased by the sad perspective of the
approaching effort; so with one minute of decision, prompt and generous,
all is over, and the enjoyment of the active day has commenced. Long
waiting in bed when one is awake makes serious detriment to the soul; the
whole being is softened, and plunged into a sort of reverie, more or less
sensual, which may lead to the brink of certain abysses. Take care, the
butterfly flutters on its golden wings, then goes to burn itself in the
light which shines for it so treacherously; image of those aerial
promenades where, by dint of approaching certain deceitful lights, one ends
by damaging the wings of the soul, or, at least, rubbing off the velvet nap
of a pure conscience. "It is dangerous," said St. Ambrose, "for the sun to
come and trouble with its indiscreet rays the dreams of a lazy mind in its
bed." [Footnote 260]

    [Footnote 260: In Ps. 118, s. 19, No. 22, t. ii. p. 1476.]

The Italian poet, speaking of morning, says: "At the hour when one's mind
is greatest stranger to the flesh, and less near terrestrial thoughts, then
is it almost divine in its visions." [Footnote 261]

    [Footnote 261: Dante, Purgat. c. 9, v. 16-19.]

Each day, after a good night, we can renew our souls with the wonders of a
beautiful spring morning; all is fresh in mind and body, all interior
faculties are warmed; life experiences a sort of need of expansion; all
thoughts, all desires seem to tremble with cheerfulness, as plants in a
celestial garden. If the sun of prayer arises on the horizon, all the germs
of good awake, develop, and mount up in proportion as the divine heat
becomes more intense. "The manna," said the prophet, "disappearing at the
dawn of day; was to show us, my God, that we must anticipate the rising of
the sun to receive thy most precious benedictions." [Footnote 262]

    [Footnote 262: Sap. xvi. 28.]

There is something remarkable in our Lives of the Saints; morning prayer is
always specially mentioned: "My God," said the prophet "thou wilt favorably
hear my prayer in the morning." [Footnote 263]

    [Footnote 263: Ps. v. 4.]

"I will present myself before thee in the morning, and will see thy glory."
[Footnote 264]

    [Footnote 264: Ps. v. 5.]

"It is in the morning that my prayer will surprise thee." [Footnote 265]

    [Footnote 265: Ps. xxxvii. 14.]

"In the morning thy mercy is shed on us abundantly." [Footnote 266]

    [Footnote 266: Ps. lxxxix. 14.]

"Those who watch from the morning," said Wisdom, "will find me."
[Footnote 267]

    [Footnote 267: Prov. viii. 17.]

{759}

Our Lord himself is called "splendid star, star of the morning:" "_Ego
Stella splendida et matutina_." [Footnote 268]

    [Footnote 268: Apoc. xxii. 16.]

In these continual repetitions I can only see a perfectly fixed and
stationary thought: the natural relation established by divine Providence,
and which she loves to preserve in a supernatural world. The morning is the
hour when life recommences on earth; the hour when everything is reborn,
solitude favoring the first leap of life, which retakes its course where
the dew is deposited, and gives fresh nourishment to the plant. It is also
the most delightful hour for the collection of thought, for the effusion of
the dew of souls. The sky is charged with rain that night has condensed;
the manna is everywhere, but it soon disappears; and, whilst indolence
loses its power of body and mind in the swaddling-clothes of sleep, the
active soul has laid in its provision of celestial nourishment, has
disposed its interior heaven for the entire day, has dissipated in advance
the shadows of the day, and established time's serenity until the next
sleep. One of the most precious and the sweetest hours of life is the hour
of morning prayer. I do not merely speak of vocal prayer; I wish to say the
prayer of union with God, the silence and the repose of the soul in God; I
wish to say this opening of the mouth of the soul which aspires to divine
milk, drinking in silence, light, and love, and hiding itself in the bosom
of that mother _par excellence_ we call God, and that so few
Christians understand. _Os meum aperui et attraxi spiritum_. [Footnote
269] If you only realized the gift of God we call the love of morning:
_Si scires donum Dei!_ [Footnote 270]

    [Footnote 269: Ps. cxviii. 181.]

    [Footnote 270: Joan. iv. 10.]

.....

There is a freshness in it, a suavity and an energy, which come directly
from God. Have you never been on the mountains in summer, at three o'clock
in the morning, when the first rays of the sun appear? How limpidly they
seem to come! They have not passed through other breasts; the purest
essence of the planet of day is ours, and thus we seem to realize our union
with God while most men are asleep. On these divine mountains the soul has
the first-fruits of celestial favors; she is penetrated with light, love,
and strength; a gentle intoxication for the day, which, far from weakening
the soul, gives firmness to our thoughts and actions, and sheds a perfume
of joy on all our works. Were there no other reasons for rising in the
morning, I would say to you, Disengage yourself from your pillow, the Lord
comes to visit you with choice favors; but the least delay will be proof of
your indifference, and you will force him to go further to seek souls more
worthy his benefits. There is no one who would refuse to rise early if each
morning a messenger were to tell him, A prince is come among you and waits
for you. Place your God in the place of your prince, and you will do well.
If you wish to accomplish some great work in your life, get up in the
morning. The morning hours are not so deranged, the calm of a sweet
solitude surrounds you, and you more readily expedite your affairs. You can
occupy yourself with business or the regulation of your household, with
your reading, your intellectual work if you love study, and the result in
some years of these extra hours will be incalculable. By rising two hours
earlier each day, you will have gained at the end of forty years,
twenty-nine thousand hours, that is more than seven years, and solely
counting the twelve working hours of the day. To increase one's life seven
years in forty is enormous, and what can be done during this continuous
time is almost incredible. Clement of Alexandria said, "Wrest from sleep
all of our lives we can."

Sleep is truly a thief who ravishes our greatest treasures; a thief, too,
we cannot entirely chase away, but we can run him off the ground and hinder
his encroachments on our actual life. "We live but the half of our lives,"
said Pliny the elder; "the other half is consumed in a state similar to
death,.... and still we do not count the infancy which knows nothing, or
the old age of imbecility."
{760}
Then have the courage to take something each day from this brother of
death, who thus divides our life in two, and for himself would reserve the
better part; let us give to nature what is necessary, but make no
concession to indolence.

The most favorable time to commit this robbery is during the first hours of
the morning. "The quality of time is different at this hour," said Madame
Swetchine.

One hour of the morning is worth two at night, because the mind in its
freshness is naturally more collected, its strength is not yet dispersed,
and it is not exhausted by the fatigue of the day. The morning hours
resemble, in the agility of the mind and the rejuvenated forces of the
soul, the first hour of the courser just placed in the carriage. So the
same author we love to cite advised early rising, cost what it might, "in
order to reserve some hours of the morning for entire solitude." "It is not
only," said one of her friends, "to consecrate to God the first hours of
the day that she commenced it so early, but to have also considerable time
to give to study." She said to me on that day, that the pleasure it gave
her only increased with years. "I am come to this," she said, "when I
approach my table to resume my labors, my heart beats with joy." [Footnote
271]

   [Footnote 271: Lettres, t. ii. p. 443.]

She avowed, besides, that, deprived of these her accustomed hours, all the
rest of the day seemed pillaged. If you would not be pillaged, rise in the
morning; then you can do as you please, no one will come to disturb you,
you will consecrate the closest and best of your strength to the most
serious and truest duties of your existence; and, when the hour of pillage
comes, that is, the hour when you must cut your life in little pieces, to
dispense it in a thousand nothings more or less necessary, you will, at
least, have secured its better and most precious part. If you rise late,
your life will be a perpetual pillage, and whoever pleases will tear it in
shreds from you.

Plato--if you will not consider pagan morality severe--Plato said
somewhere: "It is a shame for the mistress of a household to be awakened by
her servants; she should awaken them." [Footnote 272]

    [Footnote 272: Les Lois, 1-7, p. 808.]

Such words may seem an exaggeration; but, if such were here the case, would
not everything go better in the interior of the family? Woman, as we have
said with the holy Scripture, is the sun of her household; but it should be
the sun which everywhere announces the awakening of nature. It mounts first
on the horizon, and soon everything rises in the universe, plants, animals,
and men. The sun is never awakened by his satellites; he himself gives the
signal. Let the strong woman do the same. _Sicut sol oriens in altissimis
Dei, sic mulieris bonae species in ornamentum domus ejus._[Footnote 273]

    [Footnote 273: Eccl. xxvi. 21.]

------

{761}


    The Wandering Jew. [Footnote 274]

    [Footnote 274:
    Curious Myths of the Middle Ages.
    By S. Baring Gould, M.A., London,
    Oxford, and Cambridge, Rivingtons. 1866.]


There are certain popular fables which, in one shape or another, seem to
have wandered all over the world, and to have planted themselves, and
grown, and developed progeny in the folk-lore of nearly every nation. Of
all these none has been more generally a favorite than the fiction of Time
sparing in his flight some solitary human being, before whose eyes the
centuries unroll their mighty panorama; cities and nations rise, flourish,
and decay; changes pass over the face of nature herself; seas dry up and
rocks crumble to dust; while for one man only age brings no decay and life
seems to have no termination. The early Christian legends are full of such
stories. There are rumors of mysterious witnesses, hidden for ages from the
world's eyes, not dead but sleeping, who are to come forth in the last days
of time, and bear testimony against Antichrist; and one of these was
conjectured to be the apostle St. John, of whom our Lord said to St. Peter,
"If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" So there was a
belief that the beloved disciple still slept at Ephesus, awaiting the
summons, and the earth above his breast heaved as he breathed. Joseph of
Arimathea, according to another beautiful legend, was rewarded for the last
tender offices which he performed for the dead Christ by perpetual life in
the blessed city of Sarras, where he drew divine nourishment from the holy
grail, that precious chalice which the Saviour used at the Last Supper, and
which caught the blood that trickled from his side upon the cross. The
poetical legend of the seven sleepers of Ephesus, who fled from the
persecution of Decius to a cavern on Mount Celion, and slept there three
hundred and sixty years, until God raised them up to confound a growing
heresy against the immortality of the soul; and the still more beautiful
story of the monk of Hildesheim, who, doubting how with God a thousand
years could be as yesterday, listened to the melody of a bird in the
greenwood during three minutes, and found that in those minutes three
hundred years had flown away, are familiar to all our readers. But pagan
literature also abounds in stories of miraculously long slumbers. The
beautiful shepherd Endymion was condemned by Jupiter to perpetual sleep in
a cavern of Mount Latmus; or, according to another form of the story, to a
slumber of fifty years, at the end of which time he was to arise. The giant
Enceladus was imprisoned under Mount Etna, and as often as he turned his
weary body, the whole island of Sicily was shaken to its foundations. The
epic poet Epimenides, while tending his sheep, retired one hot day into a
cavern, and slept there fifty-seven years. This reminds one of the tale of
Rip Van Winkle. The Emperor Frederic Barbarossa, so an old German fable
relates, is waiting with six of his knights in the heart of a mountain in
Thuringia, for the time to release Germany from bondage and raise it to the
first place among nations. When his great red beard has wound itself thrice
around the stone table at which he sits, he will awake and rush forth to do
his appointed work. So, too, it was believed that Charlemagne survived in
some mountain recess, and would appear again at the fulfilment of the days
of Antichrist to avenge the blood of the saints.
{762}
The British King Arthur, the Portuguese Don Sebastian, Ogier the Dane, and
the three Tells of Switzerland were expected by the superstitious peasantry
to reappear at some distant day and become the deliverers of their country;
and there are even some remote parts of France where a popular belief
survives that Napoleon Bonaparte is still living, and will put himself some
day at the head of another victorious host. Who of us is not familiar with
that pretty fairy tale of the sleeping beauty?

  "Year after year unto her feet,
     She lying on her couch alone,
   Across the purple coverlet
     The maiden's jet-black hair has grown.

   ......

  "She sleeps: her breathings are not heard
     In palace chambers far apart.
   The fragrant tresses are not stirred
     That lie upon her charmed heart.
   She sleeps: on either hand upswells
     The gold-fringed pillow lightly prest;
   She sleeps, nor dreams, but ever dwells
     A perfect form in perfect rest."

And who of us in his childhood has not read with a delight which repeated
perusals could not satiate of the coming of the fairy prince, who was
fated, after a hundred years, to wake that sleeping palace into life, and
bear away the happy princess far across the hills, "in that new world which
is the old"?

  "And o'er the hills, and far away
     Beyond their utmost purple rim,
   Beyond the night, across the day,
     Through all the world she followed him."

These many stories are only the protean forms of one favorite popular
conception; the idea of one individual standing still, while the world
sweeps by, and either blest or curst with a perpetual renewal of youth, or
else awaking out of a sleep of centuries to find creation wearing a new
face and new generations acting out the great drama of history. The
different modifications of the story seem to derive their peculiar
character from the peculiarities of the time and country in which they
originate. The pagan tendency to personify all the phenomena of nature is
exemplified in the myth of Enceladus, under which were represented the
throes of Mount Etna. The wild, warlike, and semi-pagan spirit of Germany,
which peoples dark mountain recesses with mysterious forms, and fastens a
legend to each frowning crag and almost inaccessible fastness, finds apt
expression in the legend of the sleeping Barbarossa and his mailed
companions. And how beautifully the piety of the monkish chroniclers has
embellished the same fiction in the fables of the seven sleepers and the
monk of Hildesheim! In the former of these two stories, however, it is
worthy of remark that an actual fact has been blended with the fiction. The
seven sleepers are real historical personages, and their names are enrolled
in the list of canonized saints. They were martyrs whom the Emperor Decius
caused to be walled up alive in a cave, where many generations afterward
their relics were found; and this discovery of the relics has been
amplified into an actual resuscitation of the living men. The narrative in
this spurious form is given by Jacobus de Voragine in his Golden Legend,
and was made the subject of a poem by Goethe. The German poet adds that
there was a dog with the seven Christians, and that immediately after their
awakening, as soon as they had been seen by the king and people of Ephesus,
they disappeared for ever from the sight of man:

  "The most blessed angel Gabriel,
   By the will of God Almighty,
   Walling up the cave for ever,
   Led them into paradise."

The most remarkable of all the varieties of this fiction is the legend of
the Wandering Jew. Like the story of St. John's sleep at Ephesus, it seems
to be based upon a false interpretation of Scripture. "There are some of
them standing here," said our Lord, "who shall not taste death till they
see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom," (St. Matt. xvi. 28.) And it was
the old belief that this prophecy was being literally fulfilled in the
person of a Jew who was wandering over the face of the earth, and would
continue to wander until the day of judgment.
{763}
The earliest mention of this mythical person occurs in Matthew Paris's
Chronicle of English History, wherein he records that, in 1228, a certain
Archbishop of Greater Armenia visited the abbey of St. Albans, on a
pilgrimage to the shrines of the saints in England; and in the course of
conversation he was asked "whether he had ever seen or heard any thing of
Joseph, a man of whom there was much talk in the world, who, when our Lord
suffered, was present and spoke to him, and who is still alive in evidence
of the Christian faith; in reply to which, a knight in his retinue, who was
his interpreter, replied, speaking in French, 'My lord well knows that man,
and a little before he took his way to the western countries the said
Joseph ate at the table of my lord the Archbishop of Armenia, and he has
often seen and conversed with him.'" The archbishop went on to relate that,
when Jesus had been delivered up to the Jews and they were dragging him out
to be crucified, "Cartaphilus, a porter of the hall, in Pilate's service,
as Jesus was going out of the door, impiously struck him on the back with
his hand, and said in mockery, 'Go quicker, Jesus, go quicker, why do you
loiter?' And Jesus, looking back on him with a severe countenance, said to
him, 'I am going, and you shall wait till I return.' And according as our
Lord said this Cartaphilus is still awaiting his return. At the time of our
Lord's suffering he was thirty years old, and when he attains the age of a
hundred years he always returns to the same age as he was when our Lord
suffered. After Christ's death, when the Catholic faith gained ground, this
Cartaphilus was baptized by Ananias, (who also baptized the apostle Paul,)
and was called Joseph. He dwells in one or other divisions of Armenia, and
in divers eastern countries, passing his time among the bishops and other
prelates of the church; he is a man of holy conversation and religious; a
man of few words, and very circumspect in his behavior; for he does not
speak at all unless when questioned by the bishops and religious; and then
he relates the events of olden times, and speaks of things which occurred
at the suffering and resurrection of our Lord, and of the witnesses of the
resurrection, namely, of those who rose with Christ, and went into the holy
city, and appeared unto men. He also tells of the creed of the apostles,
and of their separation and preaching. And all this," added the archbishop,
(though we should think the statement rather superfluous,) "he relates
_without smiling or levity of conversation_, as one who is well
practised in sorrow and the fear of God, always looking forward with dread
to the coming of Jesus Christ, lest at the last judgment he should find him
in anger, whom, on his way to death, he had provoked to just vengeance."
There is something not easy to explain in this story. Matthew Paris was an
eye-witness of the events which he relates, so there can be little doubt
that the Armenian prelate or his interpreter did really tell some such
wondrous tale as this to the monks of St. Albans. Was it a pure invention?
Or did the interpreter, by a familiar species of embellishment, represent
his master as having seen the wandering Jew when he had only _heard_
of him? Or had the archbishop been deceived by some impostor who had taken
advantage of the popularity of the legend to palm himself off upon the
credulous as its veritable hero? One thing at all events is clear from the
narrative of the monk of St. Albans; and that is, that the fable was by no
means a new one in his time, though he is the earliest known writer who has
handed it down to us. The Jew, according to this narrative, refused all
gifts that were offered him, being content with a little food and scanty
raiment; but with all his humble piety he seems to have cherished an odd
sort of pride; for it is related that "numbers came to him from different
parts of the world, enjoying his society and conversation, and to them,
_if they are men of authority_, he explains all doubts on the matters
on which he is questioned."

{764}

After the Armenian had visited the shrine of "St. Tumas de Kantorbire" in
England and "Monsigour St. Jake," whereby we suppose is meant Santiago de
Compostela in Spain, he went to Cologne to see the heads of the three
kings, and there he is reported, in a rhyming chronicle by Philip Mouskes,
afterward Bishop of Tournay, as repeating the story he had told at St.
Albans, but with very slight differences.

There is no further mention of the Wandering Jew in literature for more
than two hundred and fifty years; but, in 1505, he turns up to some purpose
in Bohemia, where a poor weaver named Kokot was in great perplexity to find
a treasure that had been buried by his great-grandfather sixty years
before. The Jew had been present when the treasure was hid away, and he now
appeared opportunely to show the heir where to find it. He seemed at this
time to be about seventy years of age. About the same time we hear of him
in the East, where there was a tradition that he appeared to the Arabian
conqueror Fadhilah, and predicted the signs which were to precede the last
judgment. But this mysterious visitor, who is called Zerib Bar Elia, seems
to have been confounded in a curious way with the prophet Elijah. The most
circumstantial account of the undying one was given about the middle of the
sixteenth century by Dr. Paul von Eitzen, afterward Bishop of Schleswig,
who seems to have been thoroughly deceived by one of the many impostors who
arose during that century and the next, claiming to have been survivors of
the rabble who followed Jesus to Calvary. Dr. Von Eitzen's story is that,
being in church one Sunday in Hamburg, in the year 1547, "he observed a
tall man with his hair hanging over his shoulders, standing barefoot during
the sermon over against the pulpit, listening with deepest attention to the
discourse, and whenever the name of Jesus was mentioned bowing himself
profoundly and humbly, with sighs and beating of the breast. He had no
other clothing in the bitter cold of the winter, except a pair of hose
which were in tatters about his feet, and a coat with a girdle which
reached to his feet; and his general appearance was that of a man of fifty
years." The learned doctor was so much struck by the man's looks that after
the sermon he made inquiries about him. He found that he was a mystery to
everybody. Many people, some of them of high degree and title, had seen him
in England, Scotland, France, Italy, Spain, Denmark, Sweden, Poland,
Hungary, Russia, Persia, and other countries, and nobody knew what to make
of him. So Dr. Von Eitzen sought him out and questioned him. "Thereupon he
replied modestly that he was a Jew by birth, a native of Jerusalem, by name
Ahasuerus, by trade a shoemaker; he had been present at the crucifixion of
Christ, and had lived ever since, travelling through various lands and
cities, the which he substantiated by accounts he gave; he related also the
circumstances of Christ's transference from Pilate to Herod, and the final
crucifixion, together with other details not recorded in the evangelists
and historians; he gave accounts of the changes of government in many
countries, especially of the East, through several centuries, and moreover
he detailed the labors and deaths of the holy apostles of Christ most
circumstantially." The stranger added that he had done his best with others
to have Christ put to death, and that, when sentence had been pronounced,
he ran home and called his family together that they might look at the
deceiver of the people as he was carried to execution. When the Lord was
led by to Calvary, he was standing at the door of his shop with his little
child on his arm. Spent with the weight of the cross which he was carrying,
Christ tried to rest a little, but Ahasuerus, for the sake of obtaining
credit among the other Jews, and also out of zeal and rage, drove the Lord
forward and bade him hasten. "Jesus, obeying, looked at him and said, 'I
shall stand and rest, but thou shalt go till the last day.'
{765}
At these words the man set down the child, and, unable to remain where he
was, he followed Christ, and saw how cruelly he was crucified, how he
suffered, how he died. As soon as this had taken place, it came upon him
suddenly that he could no more return to Jerusalem, nor see again his wife
and child, but must go forth into foreign lands, one after another, like a
mournful pilgrim. Now, when, years after, he returned to Jerusalem, he
found it ruined and utterly razed, so that not one stone was left standing
on another; and he could not recognize former localities.

.....

Dr. Paul von Eitzen, along with the rector of the school of Hamburg, who
was well read in history and a traveller, questioned him about events which
had taken place in the East since the death of Christ, and he was able to
give them much information on many ancient matters; so that it was
impossible not to be convinced of the truth of his story, and to see that
what seems impossible with men is, after all, possible with God." It does
not seem to have required Dr. Von Eitzen's investigation to prove that what
is impossible with man may be possible with God; but how any amount of
questioning could demonstrate the truth of the stranger's story we are at a
loss to see. It apparently failed to strike the reverend doctor and his
associate that the Jew could have learned the history of the East as easily
as they learned it themselves; and even if he made a good many blunders in
his narrative, it is by no means certain that his questioners were wise
enough to detect them.

This impostor, for so we may safely call him, observed the traditional
silence, modesty, temperance, and poverty which the legend uniformly
ascribes to the Wandering Jew, never accepting a larger alms than two
skillings, (about nine cents,) which he immediately gave to the poor; never
laughing; gladly listening to pious discourse; reverencing with sighs the
utterance of the divine name; and waxing very indignant whenever he heard
any one swear, especially by God's death or pains. He spoke the language of
whatever country he travelled in, and had no foreign accent; so at least
the account runs, but it does not appear how that fact was ascertained, nor
is there mention of any competent linguist having examined his abilities in
that line. He never staid long in one place.

Twenty-eight years afterward, that is, in 1575, two legates sent from
Schleswig to the court of Spain declared on their return home that they had
encountered the same mysterious person in Madrid, and conversed with him.
In appearance, manner of life, habits, and garb, he was just the same as he
had appeared in Hamburg. He spoke good Spanish. It is not said, however,
that these legates had themselves seen the man when Dr. Von Eitzen talked
with him twenty-eight years before, and the probability is, that they only
inferred from the description left of that strange traveller that the
wanderer in Madrid was the same person. In 1599, he is reported at Vienna;
in 1601, at Lubeck; and about the same date at Revel in Livonia, and Cracow
in Poland. He was also seen in Moscow, and in January, 1603, we find record
again of his appearance at Lubeck. The next year he was in Paris. Rudolph
Botoreus, who records his visit to that city in his history, apologizes for
mentioning what may seem a mere old wives' fable, but says the story was so
widely believed that he could not omit it. Bulenger, about the same date,
also mentions the report of the Jew's arrival in Paris, but confesses that
he neither saw him nor could hear anything authentic concerning him.

The frequency of the reappearance of this mythical character in different
parts of Europe during the seventeenth century seems to indicate that the
imposture was a profitable one. He assumes different names and tells his
story with several variations. In one work he is called Buttadaeus.
Elsewhere he is known as Isaac Laquedem.
{766}
In some accounts it is said that he was born of the tribe of Napluali,
seven or eight years before the birth of Christ. He ran away from his
father, who was either a carpenter or a shoemaker, to accompany the three
wise men to Bethlehem; and his description on his return of the wonders he
had seen and the rich presents which the magi laid at the feet of the babe
whom they hailed King of the Jews, led to the massacre of the innocents. He
was, according to this version, a carpenter by trade, and made the cross
upon which the Lord suffered. At the end of every hundred years he falls
into a fit or trance, from which he awakes with renewed youth, returning
always to the age at which he was when the Saviour was crucified. He has
tempted death in every conceivable form; he has courted pestilence, thrown
himself into the thickest of battles, and called upon the sea to swallow
him; but a miraculous interposition of divine power preserves him through
everything, and the curse still drives him on from land to land, and will
allow him no rest until the crucified Son of Man shall come in his glory to
judge the world. Penitent and devout, yet tortured with remorse, he sweeps
on perpetually round and round the world, and the sudden roar of a gale at
night is attributed by the vulgar to the passing of the everlasting Jew.
There is a Swiss story that he was seen one day standing on the Matterberg
contemplating the scene with mingled awe and wonder. Once before he stood
on that desolate spot, and then it was the site of a flourishing city. Once
again he will revisit it, and that will be on the eve of judgment.

So late as the beginning of the last century a man calling himself the
Wandering Jew made considerable noise in England, where many of the common
people were found ignorant enough to believe in him. Following the custom
of some of his early predecessors, he preferred the conversation of persons
of distinction, and spared no pains to thrust himself into aristocratic
company. Some of the nobility, half in jest, half out of curiosity, were
wont to talk with him, and pay him as they might a mountebank. He used to
say that he had been an officer of the sanhedrim, and that he had struck
Christ as he was led away from Pilate's judgment seat. He remembered all
the apostles, in proof of which he used to give what purported to be a
description of their appearance, dress, and peculiarities; he had been
acquainted with the father of Mohammed, and had disputed with the prophet
himself about the crucifixion of Christ; he knew Saladin, Tamerlane, and
Bajazet; he was in Rome when Nero set it on fire, and he remembered
minutely the history of the crusades. He spoke many languages, and even
conversed with an English nobleman in Arabic. Oxford and Cambridge sent
professors to discover whether he was an impostor. It does not appear that
he shrank from their examination, for it is pretty certain that he had been
a great traveller, and it is not at all improbable that he was well enough
read in history to perplex his questioners. On matters of detail it was
easy enough for him to impugn the accuracy of authorities which
contradicted him. Educated persons were not long in learning to laugh at
his assumptions, but the vulgar trusted him, and even believed in his power
of healing the sick. We are not aware that the humbug was ever thoroughly
exposed to the satisfaction of the people at large, and when he afterward
passed over to Denmark and Sweden he left probably a plenty of dupes behind
him. The last recorded appearance of a person claiming to be the Wandering
Jew was in 1774 at Brussels.

It would be a curious and interesting study to trace, if we could, the
origin of this myth, but it is a baffling inquiry. Its kinship with the
stories of long slumbers, marvellous resuscitations, and miraculous
prolongation of life is sufficiently apparent, yet it presents remarkable
differences from all these, and it is noteworthy that, during the five
centuries and more in which we know that it flourished, it underwent no
considerable modifications, such as popular legends in general are subject
to.
{767}
When we first hear of it, it is already wide spread and as completely
developed as it was when it finally dropped out of popular belief. And, as
our readers can see from the narratives we have quoted, there never was
even plausible reason to believe that the story was true. None of the
testimony as to the Jew's appearances will bear the very slightest
examination. Either the stories are manifest fabrications, or the persons
to whom they refer were merely ordinary vagabonds. No vagabond, however,
could have established such pretensions unless there had previously been
some legend in vogue to suggest them and to induce people to accept them.
Some have imagined that Ahasuerus is a type of the whole Jewish race,
which, since it rejected the Redeemer, has been driven forth to wander over
the face of the earth, yet is not to pass away until the end of time. This,
however, can hardly be; for Ahasuerus becomes a devout Christian, and,
moreover, one of his principal characteristics is contempt of money. Others
identify him with the gypsies, who are said to have been cursed in a
similar way because they refused shelter to the Virgin and child during the
flight into Egypt; but this is only a local superstition which never
obtained extensive acceptation. The more probable explanation is, that some
pious monk borrowed one of the old legends which we referred to at the
beginning of this article, and adding to it a conception taken from the
words of the Saviour, "There are some of them standing here who shall not
taste death till they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom,"
constructed an allegory which was afterward accepted for literal truth in a
not very critical age, and was kept alive by a succession of impostors.


------

{768}

    Original.

    "Abide In Me."

  "I am the vine, you the branches."


        "I AM the Vine."
  "'Tis true, dear Lord, and yet the fruit,
   And cool, green leaves that cast the grateful shade,
         Are mine."
  "Fie, silly branch! Without a root
   Deep hidden in the lowly earth,
   Thy fruit or leaves would ne'er had birth.
   How quickly would thy coronal of leaves,
   Which now from men such flattery receives,
   Lose all its glory in their sight, and fade
         And die;
   Thy fruit for tastelessness be spurned;
   Thyself be cast into the fire and burned,
         If I
   Who am, of all thou hast, the source,
   Did not with living sap the force
         Supply."
  "Lord! pardon me my foolish pride;
   Too much in my own strength I do confide.
         Decree
   That henceforth I shall bare and barren be,
   If I give not all glory unto thee;
         And chide
   My wayward spirit when it turns aside,
   And thinks to live and flourish, and yet not abide
         In thee."


------

   Abridged from The Dublin University Magazine.

   The Invasions Of Ireland By The Danes.


A knowledge of history is considered an essential portion of the mental
acquirements of every gentleman and lady, but it is for the most part a
disagreeable, and, in many respects, a slightly immoral study, if we apply
the same criterion to it which we do to its relative, romance. Moral
lecturers on fiction instruct us that any novel or romance which centres
its chief interest in wicked men or women, and devotes the greater portion
of its pages to their proceedings, is an immoral, or, at least, an
unedifying book. We need not waste pages or lines here in pointing out what
sort of designs or deeds enter into the tissue of historical narrative, but
as (the above reasoning notwithstanding) history is, and will continue to
be, a popular and engrossing study, it is of importance that we be
acquainted with the true nature of past events.


  Desiderata for a Good Irish History.

With regard to our own country we have not in this case been well favored.
Those histories which have appeared in print rest for their authority on
hitherto inedited MSS., many portions which are of a legendary and romantic
character. It is evident that it is only when all these MS. chronicles,
that are worth the trouble and expense, are published and compared with
each other and with foreign contemporary history, we can arrive with any
certainty at the truth or probability of past events, the existence or
otherwise of some semi-mythic heroes, or truthful chronological
arrangement.

For the coming history of Ireland we are thankful that preparations have
been making. We have had Keating's history badly translated for three
half-centuries. He compiled it in the seventeenth century from MS.
documents, some of which are unhappily not now in existence. Dr. O'Connor
was enabled, through the munificence of the Duke of Buckingham, to get into
print, accompanied by a Latin translation, the Annals of Tighernach, a monk
of Clonmacnois, in the eleventh century, and a portion of the Annals of
Ulster, but these books are nearly as inaccessible as the original MSS.
{769}
The Annals of the Four Masters, (the O'Clerys of Donegal Abbey, early part
of the seventeenth century,) edited by the late Dr. O'Donovan, have been
issued in a costly style by the firm of Hodges & Smith. For about a quarter
of a century our Archaeological and Celtic Societies have been publishing,
with translations, papers of great value, and at last, though at the
eleventh hour, government has lent a hand in bringing before the public
valuable materials for the future historian of Ireland. These consist of a
portion of the ancient Irish code: the Senchus Mhor, the Chronicum
Scotorum, edited by Mr. Hennessy, and the Wars of the Gael with the
Foreigners, [Footnote 275] (with translation,) edited by Rev. Dr. Todd.
This, we trust, is only an earnest of what government means to do. We hope
to see in succession the Annals of Tighernach, of Lough Cé, of Ulster,
[Footnote 276] and others issued at the moderate price adopted.

    [Footnote 275: The War of the Gaedhill with the Gaill; or The Invasions
    of Ireland by the Danes and other Norsemen. The Original Irish Text,
    edited with Translation and Introduction by James Henthorn Todd, D.D.,
    A.B., M.R.I.A., F.S.A., Senior Fellow T.C.D. Published by the Authority
    of the Lords Commissioners of Her Majesty's Treasury, under the
    Direction of the Master of the Rolls. London: Longmans & Co.]

    [Footnote 276: Tiernach O'Braoin, Abbot of Clonmacnois, died in 1088.
    The Annals that bear his name are continued to the fourteenth century.
    They exhibit great conscientiousness on the part of the writer, who
    never gives way to Bardic enthusiasm. The other chief books are the
    Annals of Inisfallen, probably begun by Maol Suthain O'Carroll,
    secretary to Brian Borumha, the Annals of Boyle, the Annals of Ulster,
    compiled by Charles Maguire, a learned ecclesiastic at the Isle of
    Shanat, in Lough Erne. His death occurred in 1493. The Annals begin at
    A.D. 441 and are continued to 1541. The Annals of Loch Cé, compiled by
    Brian MacDermot, relate events from the battle of Clontarf to 1590. The
    Annals of Connacht include all that passed from 1224 to 1562. The
    Annals of Clonmacnois were translated from the Gaelic into English in
    1627, by Connia Mac Egan; the original is not extant.]

The deeply read and zealous editor of the work just quoted below would
prefer to have been exercised on some of the others. We quote his own
words:

  "The editor cannot but regret that this tract, so full of the feelings of
  clanship,... should have been selected as the first specimen of an Irish
  chronicle, presented to the public under the sanction of the Master of
  the Rolls. His own wish and recommendation to his Honor was, that the
  purely historical chronicles, such as the Annals of Tighernach, the
  Annals of Ulster, or the Annals of Loch Cé, should have been first
  undertaken. The two former compilations, it is true, had been already
  printed [Footnote 277], although with bad translations and wretchedly
  erroneous topography; and a rule which at that time existed prohibited
  the Master of the Rolls from publishing any work which, even in part, had
  been printed before. This rule has since been judiciously rescinded, and
  it is hoped that his lordship will soon be induced to sanction a series
  of the chronicles of Ireland, especially the two just alluded to, which,
  it is not too much to say, are to the history of Ireland and of Scotland
  what the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle is to that of England. The Annals of Loch
  Cé (pr. Kay) belong to a later period. They begin with the battle of
  Clontarf, and continue the history, with some few gaps, to 1590."

    [Footnote 277: The Annals of Ulster are given only to the year 1131.
    The Dublin MS. extends to 1503. The Chronicum Scotorum is not here
    mentioned, because it is already on the list of the Master of the
    Rolls, edited by Mr. W. M. Hennessy.--_Note by Rev. Dr. Todd._]

Nothing can be more to the purpose or better worthy of attention than the
sequel of this passage.

  "Until these and other sources of history are made accessible, it is vain
  to expect any sober or trustworthy history of Ireland. The old romantic
  notions of a golden age, so attractive to some minds, must continue to
  prevail....

  "The authors of our popular histories were avowedly ignorant, with
  scarcely an exception, of the ancient language of Ireland--the language
  in which the real sources of Irish history are written. It was as if the
  authors of the history of Rome had been all ignorant of Latin, and the
  writers of our histories of Greece unable to read Greek. Even this would
  not, however, fully represent the real state of the case as regards
  Ireland. Livy and Tacitus, Herodotus and Thucydides, are printed books,
  and good translations of them exist. But the authorities of Irish history
  are still for the most part in manuscript, and unpublished, untranslated,
  and scattered in the public libraries in Dublin, Oxford, and London, as
  well as on the continent of Europe, Hence our popular histories leave us
  completely in the dark, and often contain erroneous information. Wherever
  the Irish names of places or persons are concerned they are at fault.
  They are entirely silent on the genealogies, relationships, and laws of
  the clans and their chieftains a subject so essential, to the right
  understanding of Irish history."

{770}

The most popular of our histories is that translated from the Irish of the
learned Dr. Geoffry Keating, by Dermod O'Connor, and first published,
Westminster, 1726. It was but indifferently done. Dr. Todd gives a decided
preference to that lately executed by O'Mahony, and published in America.
Dr. Todd gives his readers the pleasant information that two perfect copies
of the original Irish, executed by John Torna O'Mulconry, a contemporary of
Dr. Keating, are preserved in the library of Trinity College, Dublin.


  The Mss. Of Our Danish Chronicle.

The narrative in the work under notice embraces two centuries, ending with
the battle of Clontarf, A.D. 1014. Of the two hundred pages devoted to the
subject, the wars waged by Mahon of Thomond and his younger brother, Brian
Borumha, occupy a hundred and fifty. The fact is accounted for by giving
the authorship to Mac Liag, Brian's chief bard, or some other devoted filea
or seanachie of his house, who survived the great day at Clontarf. The
learned editor furnishes ample accounts of the MSS. used in the work, and
we proceed to make use of them for the information of our readers. A very
small portion of it, to wit, one leaf, folio size, closely written on both
sides in double columns, is preserved in the Book of Leinster. [Footnote
278] The contents of this leaf are given in the appendix.

    [Footnote 278: The Book of Leinster was written by Finn, Bishop of
    Kildare, for Hugh MacGriffin, tutor of that antetype of Henry VIII.,
    namely, Diarmuid MacMurroch It is a collection of narratives, tales,
    genealogies, and poems; some of these last attributed to Fionn
    MacCumball and his son Oisin. The death of its compiler in 1160 is
    noticed in the Annals of the Four Masters, under the date A.D. 1160.]

The second MS., also defective, is preserved in the library of Trinity
College. We copy Dr. Todd's reference to it:

  "This copy was found about the year 1840, by the late eminent scholar,
  Mr. O'Curry, bound up in one of the Seabright MSS., formerly in the
  possession of the celebrated antiquary, Edward Lluyd. There is nothing
  except the appearance of the MS., and its handwriting, to fix its age,
  but, judging from these criteria, we cannot be far wrong in supposing it
  to have been written about the middle of the fourteenth century. It is
  imperfect both at the beginning and at the end.... There are also some
  intervening defects, arising from a loss of leaves."

The MS. in which the valuable fragment is preserved is marked H, 2, 17.

  "The third MS. is a paper copy preserved in the Burgundian library,
  Brussels, which has the advantage of being perfect. It is in the
  handwriting of the eminent Irish scholar, Friar Michael O'Clery, by whom
  it was transcribed in the year 1635. This appears by the following note
  at the end:

    "'Out of the Book of Cueonnacht O'Daly, the poor friar, Michael
    O'Clery, wrote the copy from which this was written, in the convent of
    the friars in Baile Tighe, Farannain, (Multifarnham,) in the month of
    March of this year, 1628, and this (the present) copy was written by
    the same friar in the convent of Dun-na-n Gail, (Donegal,) in the month
    of November of this year, 1635.'"

The learned friar copied or introduced into his history catalogues and
poems not to be found in the Dublin MS., and there are passages in the last
not to be found in the Brussels copy. The chronicle now printed is, of
course, the more copious, as it contains everything to be found in either.

It was not till some time after the discovery of the Dublin MS., by Mr.
O'Curry, as recorded, that the existence of the Brussels copy became known.
Dr. Todd proceeded to that city in August, 1848, and copied all the
portions not to be found in the one at home. Afterward, as he observes:

  "Through the influence of the Earl of Clarendon, then Lord Lieutenant of
  Ireland, he obtained from the Belgian government a loan of this and some
  other MSS., and in 1833 caused a complete copy of it to be made by Mr.
  O'Curry, for the library of Trinity College, Dublin. These transcripts
  have been carefully collated in forming the text of the present edition."


  Who Wrote The Chronicle?

The authorship of the work is attributed to Muriertach Mac Liag, the chief
bard of King Brian, but no sure conclusion can be come to on this point.
{771}
It is certain, however, that it is the production of a zealous Dalcassian,
and that it was composed soon after the battle of Clontarf. We copy the
curious circumstance which proves to certainty that the original compiler
was contemporary with the concluding event of the narrative:

  "It is stated in the account given of the battle of Clontarf, that the
  full tide in Dublin Bay on the day of the battle, 23d April, 1014,
  coincided with sunrise, and that the returning tide at evening aided
  considerably in the defeat of the enemy.

  "It occurred to the editor, on considering this passage, that a criterion
  might be derived from it to test the truth of the narrative, and of the
  date assigned by the Irish to the battle of Clontarf. He, therefore,
  proposed to the Rev. Samuel Haughton, M.D., Fellow of Trinity College,
  and Professor of Geology in the University of Dublin, to solve for him
  this problem: 'What was the hour of high-water at the shore of Clontarf
  in Dublin Bay on the 23d April, 1014?' The editor did not make known to
  Dr. Haughton the object he had in view in this question, and the
  coincidence of the results obtained with the ancient narrative is
  therefore the more valuable and curious."

The result of Dr. Haughton's calculations, communicated to the Royal Irish
Academy in May, 1861, was this:

  "The tide along the Clontarf shore, when not obstructed by embankments
  and walls, could not have differed many minutes, on the 23d April, 1014,
  from 5 hours 30 minutes A.M., the evening tide being full in at 5 hours
  55 minutes P.M.

  "This proves that the author, if not himself an eye-witness, must have
  derived his information from those who were. 'None others,' as Dr.
  Haughton observes, 'could have invented the fact that the battle began at
  sunrise, and that the tide was then full in.' The importance of the time
  of tide became evident at the close of the day, when the returned tide
  prevented the escape of the Danes from the Clontarf shore to the north
  bank of the Liffey."

In the chronicle the author makes a distinction between races of the
invaders, namely, the dark-haired Danes and the fair-haired Norwegians. The
word Lochlann (lake land) is applicable to Norway with its numerous fiords,
to which the ancient Irish writers applied the name of lochs. The epithet
_gormglasa_ (bluish green) was probably applied to the plate armor
worn by some of them.


  Style and Spirit of the Work.

The following passage will furnish a fair specimen of the style of the
chronicle, besides exhibiting the misery of a country divided into small
kingdoms when a ferocious band of foreigners chose to make a lodgment in
it:

  "In a word, although there were an hundred hard-steeled iron heads on one
  neck, and an hundred sharp, ready, cool, never-resting, brazen tongues in
  each head, and an hundred garrulous, loud, unceasing voices from each
  tongue, they could not recount, nor enumerate, nor tell what all the
  Gaedhil suffered in common, both men and women, laity and clergy, old and
  young, noble and ignoble, of hardship, and of injury, and oppression in
  every house from these valiant, foreign, purely pagan people. Even though
  great were this cruelty, and oppression, and tyranny--though numerous
  were the oft-victorious clans of the many-familied Erinn--though numerous
  their kings, and their royal chiefs, and their princes--though numerous
  their heroes, and champions, and their brave soldiers, their chiefs of
  valor and renown, and deeds of arms--yet not one of them was able to give
  relief, or alleviation, or deliverance from that oppression and tyranny,
  from the numbers, and the multitudes, and the cruelty, and the wrath of
  the brutal, ferocious, furious, untamed, implacable hordes by whom that
  oppression was inflicted, because of the excellence of their polished,
  ample, treble, heavy, trusty, glittering corselets, and their hard,
  strong, valiant swords, and their well-riveted long spears, and their
  ready, brilliant arms of valor besides, and because of the greatness of
  their achievements and of their deeds, their bravery and their valor,
  their strength, and their venom, and their ferocity, and because of the
  excess of their thirst and their hunger for the brave, fruitful, nobly
  inhabited, full of cataracts, rivers, bays, pure, smooth-planed, sweet,
  grassy land of Erinn."

Little can the mere English reader, who may look on much of this as mere
bombast, feel the charm which such substantives and epithets as the
following had on the original hearers or readers of the work: "Luireach,
lainndearda, luchtmara, tredualach, trom, trebhraid, taitnemach," (Loricas,
polished, ample, treble, etc.)

{772}

  Causes of the Invaders' Success.

The editor, alluding to the defeats suffered by the Irish forces on many
occasions, finds no great difficulty in accounting for them, and this
without the slightest reflection on their innate courage or skill in the
use of their arms:

  "The whole body of the clan were summoned to decide upon the question of
  war or peace. Every petty chieftain of every minor tribe, if not every
  individual clansman, had a voice not only in this primary question, but
  also, when the war was declared, in the questions arising upon subsequent
  military operations... The kings or chieftains were themselves chosen by
  the clan, although the choice was limited to those who possessed a sort
  of hereditary right, often complicated by a comparison of the personal
  merits of the rival claimants.

  "The army was a rope of sand. It consisted of a number of minor clans,
  each commanded by its own petty chieftain, receiving no pay, and bound by
  no oath of allegiance to the king or chief commander. Each clan, no
  doubt, adhered with unshaken fidelity to its own immediate chieftain, but
  he on the smallest offence could dismiss his followers to their homes
  even at the very eve of a decisive battle.... These facts must be borne
  in mind if we would rightly understand the inherent weakness of warfare
  in ancient Ireland."

Thus many of the faults we choose to impute to our ancestors and their
supposed natural propensities should be rather imputed to the circumstances
in which they were placed than to themselves. A tribe could not reckon upon
a continuance of peace with neighbors or strangers for a single week. A
chief enjoying the strength, and courage, and wisdom of manhood was
essential to their well-being, almost to their existence. The heir-apparent
of the chief for the time might be a child or an incompetent youth. In this
case it was but sound policy to elect during the chief's life his brother
or other near relative to assume the command immediately on his decease.
This was done, the election being restricted to the Duine Uasals
(gentlemen) of the tribe. The scrutiny might be distinguished on occasions
by the usual disagreeables of an election, but it prevented the
inconveniences of an interregnum.


  The Danish Proceedings Before Brian's Time.

The mere Irish were never much benefited by the nominal capital of their
country. The Norwegians, getting it into their possession in 836 or 838,
built a fortress there in 842, and the Danes, after a preliminary visit in
851, returned for reënforcements, and their king, Olaf the White, was
recognized as supreme chief of all the foreigners in Ireland in 856, and
made Dublin his headquarters.

There was a comparative rest from foreign invasions for about forty years,
but Ireland's troubles began to thicken in the early part of the tenth
century. Crowds of foreigners assembled, and the brave King of Ireland,
Nial of the Black Knee, collected all the forces he could from Meath and
the North, and attacked their united strength at Kilmashogue in the
mountains beyond Rathfarnham. But the foreigners much outnumbered the
natives, and the heroic king with twelve petty princes perished in the
battle.

The ferocious invaders did not confine their attentions to Dublin and the
north; they ravaged the pleasant south country, and feelingly does the
chronicler describe the hellish mischief they committed. Overcome by his
subjects, he sometimes even neglects his darling alliteration:

  "They rent her (Erinn's) shrines, and her reliquaries, and her books.
  They demolished her beautiful, ornamented temples; for neither
  veneration, nor honor, nor mercy for Termonn, [Footnote 279] nor
  protection for church or for sanctuary, for God or for man, was felt by
  this furious, ferocious, pagan, ruthless, wrathful people. In short,
  until the sand of the sea, or the grass of the field, or the stars of
  heaven be counted, it will not be easy to recount, or to enumerate, or to
  relate what the Gaedhil, all without distinction, suffered from them. ...
  Alas! many and frequent were the bright and brilliant eyes that were
  suffused with tears, and dimmed with grief and despair at the separation
  of son from father, and daughter from mother, and brother from brother,
  and relatives from their race and from their tribe."

    [Footnote 279: Church lands having the privilege of sanctuary.]


{773}

One of the most terrible of these southern descents was that made by
Imar--son of Imar (Ivar) and his three sons Dubhceann, and Cu-Allaidh, and
Aralt, (Black Head,) and Wild Dog, (Wolf,) and Harold. These worthies took
possession of Limerick, and high and haughty were their proceedings.

  "Such was the oppressiveness of the tribute and rent of the foreigners at
  large and generally, that there was a king from them over every
  territory, and a chief over every chieftainry, and an abbot over every
  church, and a steward over every village, and a soldier in every house,
  so that none of the men of Erinn had power to give the milk of his cow,
  nor so much as the clutch of eggs of one hen, in succor or in kindness to
  an aged man or to a friend, but was forced to preserve them for the
  foreign steward, or bailiff, or soldier. And though there were but one
  milk-giving cow in the house, she durst not be milked for an infant of
  one night, nor for a sick person, but must be kept for the steward, or
  bailiff, or soldier of the foreigners. And however long he might be from
  the house, his share or his supply durst not be lessened. And although
  there was in the house but one cow, it must be killed for the meal of one
  night, if the means of a supply could not be otherwise procured.... And
  an ounce of silver Findrunl was paid for every nose besides the royal
  tribute every year. And he who had not the means of paying it, had
  himself to go into slavery for it."

The alternative was the loss of the organ just mentioned.


  Brian's Early Struggles.

But we have got to the tenth century, and the two youthful brothers
destined to give a disabling blow to Danish tyranny are learning the
profession of arms in their father's fortress in Thomond, (_Tuaith
Muimhain_, North Munster.) These were Mathgamhain [Footnote 280] and
Brian, sons of Cennedigh, (Kennedy,) chief of the tribe of Dal-Cais.

    [Footnote 280: However the people of the tenth century pronounced this
    word, modern scholars are content to sound it Mahoun.

    An old Munster king, Oilliol Oiuim, appointed in his will that the
    descendants of his two sons, Eogan and Cormac Oas, should sway the
    sceptre of the south in alternate succession. A very unwise proceeding,
    as future events proved.]

The first naming of these princes in the chronicle brings out an
alliterative and patriotic glow on the pen of the enthusiastic chronicler.

  "There were then governing and ruling this tribe two stout, able, valiant
  pillars, two fierce, lacerating, magnificent heroes; two gates of battle,
  two poles of combat, two spreading trees of shelter, two spears of
  victory and readiness, of hospitality and munificence, of heart and
  strength, of friendship and liveliness, the most eminent of the west of
  Europe, namely, Mathgamain and Brian, the two sons of Cennedigh, son of
  Lorcan, son of Lachtna, son of Core," etc.

Their cousins, the Eoganacht, having the lion's share in the government of
Leath Mogha, the following were the principal privileges of the
Dalcassians:

  "It is the privilege of the host of Lugaidh's race
   To lead the battalions of the hosts of Mumhain,
   And afterward to be in the rere
   In coming from a hostile land.

  "It is not fealty that is required of them,
   But to preserve the freedom of Caisel. [Footnote 281]
   It is not rent, it is not tribute, as hath been heard;
   It is not fostership nor fostership's fees.

    [Footnote 281: The residence of the kings of the south assumed the
    title of Caisiol, (_Cios_, tribute, _ail_, stone.)]

  ......

  "And even when there is not a king
   Out of you over Erinn of hosts,
   Only that you would not infringe on right,
   No human power could prevail over you."

Early in their lives the princes entered on a skirmishing warfare with the
enemy; and when Mahon, weary of the resultless struggle, entered on a truce
with the enemy, Brian still continued to harass them, and as his zealous
biographer says, when he could not injure them on any day, he did it next
night, and every inactive night was followed by a destructive day. He and
his followers lived in temporary huts, and continued to kill daily and
nightly their enemies "by companies, by troops, by scores, by hundreds, and
(in case of a bad day or night) by quaternions."

  "Great were the hardship and the ruin, the bad food and bad bedding,
  which they inflicted on him in the wild huts of the desert, on the hard,
  knotty, wet roots of his native country, whilst they killed his people,
  and his trusty officers, and his comrades; sorrowful, wretched, unpitied,
  weary, for historians say that the foreigners cut off his people, so that
  he had at last but fifteen followers."

{774}

Mahon, finding his brother in this wretched state, appointed a meeting, and
a conference was held, given in verse in the text, Mahon gently chiding
Brian for exposing the lives of his brave followers to certain death; Brian
delicately hinting that such and such of their ancestors would not be so
patient of the presence of the foe in Thomond as he (Mahon) chose to be:

  "_Mahon_. Alone art them, O Brian of Banba (Erinn)!
   Thy warfare was not without valor;
   Not numerous hast thou come to our house;
   Where hast thou left thy followers?

   .....

  "_Brian_. I have left them on Craig Liath, [Footnote 282]
   In that breach where shields were cleft.
   Birnn (Biörn)--it was difficult to cut off the man--
   Fell there with his people.

     [Footnote 282: Cariglea (Gray Rock) near Killaloe, seat of
     _Aoibhin_, (_Aoine_, Venus?) the Bean Sighe of the
     Dalcassian chiefs.]

   .....

  "Our fight at the Fergus was not soft;
   Weary of it were we on both sides;
   Our fight in the combat was no weak combat,
   Thirty with Elius fell.

   .....

  "These are our adventures, O man!
   O son of Cennedigh, the fair-skinned;
   Often did we deliver ourselves with success,
   From positions in which we despaired of escape.
   Cennedigh for wealth would not have been,
   Nor would Lorcan, the faithful, have been
   So quiescent toward the foreigners,
   As thou art, Mathgamhain!"

The result of the conference was a general gathering of the native fighting
men to Cashel, and soon a general engagement took place between themselves
and the foreigners at Sulcoit, in which these last sustained a terrible
defeat. The chronicler then relates with much zest the march to Limerick,
its destruction, and the treatment of the conquered:

  "They carried off their jewels, and their best property, and their
  saddles beautiful and foreign, their gold and their silver, their
  beautiful woven cloth of all colors and of all kinds, their satins and
  silken cloth, pleasing and variegated, both scarlet and green, and all
  sorts of cloth, in like manner. They carried away their soft, youthful,
  bright, matchless girls, their blooming, silk-clad young women, and their
  active, large, and well-formed boys. The fort and the good town they
  reduced to a cloud of smoke, and to red fire afterward. The whole of the
  captives were collected on the hills of Saingel. Every one of them that
  was fit for war was killed, and every one that was fit for a slave was
  enslaved."


  Family Quarrels.

A remnant of the Danish forces maintained a position in Inis Cealtra,
(Scattery Island,) under Ivar, and six years later this chief induced the
chiefs of the O'Donovans and O'Molloys to aid him to destroy the power of
Mahon, now the acknowledged king of Munster, and even to take his life.
These princes were of the Eoganacht branch of the royal line of Cashel,
and, therefore, not friendly disposed to the present Dalcassian monarch.
There are two differing narratives of the murder, with some poems
interpolated, and a guess only can be made at the truthful succession of
incidents. The editor presents as probable a version of the facts as can be
got at among the confusion of the original accounts.

Mahon unfortunately accepted an invitation to O'Donovan's house at Bruree
on the river Maigue, probably to bring about a more friendly feeling
between the two rival branches of the descendants of their common ancestor,
Oilliol Oluim.

The Bishop of Cork being active in the matter, and the Eoganacht chiefs
having sworn neither to attempt his life nor blind him, he seems to have
been quite unsuspicious. We next find him met by O'Molloy's people in a
pass between Kilmallock and Cork, and about to be put to death. One of the
accounts says that he had the Book of the Gospels of Barri (belonging to
the cathedral of Cork) on his breast, but that, as soon as he saw his death
determined on, he flung it the distance of a bow-shot away in order that it
might not be stained with his blood. A cleric witness of the base deed
denounced this curse on the O'Molloy, (Maelmuadh):

{775}

  "It is Aedh (Hugh) that shall kill thee, a man from the border of Aifi,
   On the north of the sun with the harshness of the wind.
   The deed thou hast done shall be to thee a regret:
   That for which thou hast done it thou shalt not enjoy.
   Perpetual shall be its misfortune; thy posterity shall pass away,
    Thy history shall be forgotten, thy tribe shall be in bondage;
    The calf of a pet cow shall overthrow thee at one meeting;
    Thou shall not conquer it, Aedhan shall slay thee."

"The north of the sun with the harshness of the wind" implied the burial of
the treacherous chief on the north side of a hill, where the sun's rays
would not reach his grave.

The denunciation of the bishop noticed the erics payable for the murder of
the king, but so atrocious was the deed that Brian would not accept any
recompense but the life of the culprit.

We extract a portion of the elegy made by Mahon's blind bard on the
melancholy occasion:

  "Loud to-day the piercing wail of woe
   Throughout the land of Ui Toirdhelbhaigh, (Torloch.)
   It shall be and it is a wail not without cause,
   For the loss of the hero Mathgamhain.

  "Mathgamhain, the gem of Magh Fail,
   Son of Cennedigh, son of Lorcan;
   The western world was full of his fame--
   The fiery King of Boromha.

   .....

  "The Dal Cais of the hundred churches remember
   How we overran Gaeth Glenn,
   When upon the illustrious Fergal's shield
   Mathgamhain's meal was cooked.

   .....

  "Although calves are not suffered to go to the cows
   In lamentation for the noble Mathgamhain,
   There was inflicted much evil in his day
   By those who are in Port Arda."

The custom of the Gael in matters militant was to appoint the time and
place for battles--however enraged one party might be with the other. Brian
sent mortal defiance to Molloy, threatening to besiege him in his own dun
if he did not attend the notice. Murchad, Brian's eldest son, and the Osgur
of his day, defied the caitiff chief to single combat. So the challenge was
accepted and the battle took place, a large body of the Danes fighting
under the banner of Maelmuadh. This chief was slain either by the hand of
Murchad, or put to death in cold blood by Aedhan in a lonely hut after the
fight. In this latter case he lost his eyesight in the field of Bealach
Leachta through the curse pronounced on him, and was subsequently killed in
the hut as mentioned.

A few lines of the poetical invitation to battle sent by Brian are worth
quotation:

  "Go, Cogaran the intelligent!
   Unto Maelmuadh of the piercing blue eye,
   To the sons of Bran of enduring prosperity,
   And to the sons of the Ui Eachdach.

   .....

  "Say unto the son of Bran that he fail not
   After a full fortnight from to-morrow,
   To come to Belach Lechta hither,
   With the full muster of his army and his followers.

   .....

  "Whenever the son of Bran son of Cian shall offer
   The Cumhal (blood fine) of my brother unto myself,
   I will not accept from him hostages or studs,
   But only himself in atonement for his guilt.

   .....

  "But if he do not come from the South
   To Belach Lechta the evergreen,
   Let him answer at his house
   The Dal Cais [Footnote 283] and the son of Cennedigh.

    [Footnote 283: This name imports the "Tribe or Family of Cas."]

  "For him shall not be accepted from them
   Gold, nor silver, nor land,
   Nor hostages, nor cattle, O man:
   Tell them this, and go!"


  The Fight At Dunlavin.

There now remained no obstacle to the placing of the crown of Leath Mogha,
[Footnote 284] the southern portion of the island, on the head of the
brother and avenger of Mahon. He took hostages from the chiefs of Desmond,
(_Deas_, South, _Muimhe_, Munster,) allowed sundry Danish groups
of people to occupy places of trade, and finally, in the year 998, came to
a conference with Malachy II., King of Leath Cuinn or northern portion of
Erinn. We have no objection to Brian's triumphant procession up the
Shannon, but are not clear about the privilege assumed by his Dalcassians,
of making hostile visitations to districts on each side as they went
up-stream. However. Malachy had set them a bad example a short time before.

    [Footnote 284: The boundary line of these portions connected the bays
    of Dublin and Galway.]

{776}

The natives and Danes of Leinster getting up an insurrection soon after
this treaty with Malachy, Brian proceeded toward Dublin to bring them to
their duty. They met him at Glean-Mama (Glen of the Gap) near Dunlavin, but
sustained signal defeats at that pass and other points where they afterward
rallied. The curious in topographical details will find much to interest
them at pages cxliv., etc., of the introduction. The editor has made
himself well acquainted with the natural features of the neighborhood of
Dunlavin, having received some valuable information from Rev. Mr. Sherman,
formerly Roman Catholic curate in the neighborhood. The site of the old
fort is marked by an ancient cemetery, pagan tumuli, and fragments of stone
circles, called by the inhabitants, Pipers' Stones. We must here make use
of one of Dr. Todd's many and valuable archaeological notes:

  "The Danes expected to reach Dunlavin, and perhaps to encamp there to
  meet the forces of Meath (under Malachy) and Munster. But Brian met them
  in the narrow defile of Glen Mama, thus cutting off their retreat. Here
  there was no room for a regular engagement, and the flight must have been
  immediate. The main body of the Danish army flew across the sloping land
  through Kinsellastown, to the ford of Lemmonstown, where a stand seems to
  have been made by them, and where it is said thousands fell in the
  conflict. To this day their bones are turned up in the fields about the
  ford, and some mounds on the banks of the stream are so filled up with
  them that the people leave them untilled, as being sacred repositories of
  the dead. The remnant of the defeated army fled to Holywood, about a mile
  to the east of the ford, and thence to the ford of the Horse-pass on the
  Liffey, about Poul a Phouca, (the Pooka's Hole,) where they were utterly
  routed. At the close of the last century the wild lands of Upper Crihelpe
  were reclaimed, and many relics of this retreat were brought to light,
  chiefly in a line from _Tubber Glen_ (Well of the Glen) to
  Lemmonstown ford. The workmen, coming on the pits where the bodies of the
  slain lay buried, left them intact, closing them up again. In the defile
  of Glen Mama, during the first week of May, 1864, one of these pits was
  accidentally opened, bones were turned up, and also the fragments of a
  Danish sword, (now in the possession of Dean Graves, Pres. R. I. A.) The
  clay was found black and unctuous, as if thoroughly saturated with human
  remains."

In the now nearly unknown cemetery of Crihelpe lie the remains of Harold
the Danish prince, by the side of a granite post, furnished with an
aperture for a wooden shaft, to convert it into a cross. It is called
_Cruisloe_, (_Crois laech_, warrior's cross,) and serves as a
rubbing-post for cattle.

This was considered one of the most important victories gained over the
foreigners, both from the number of the slain and the spoils
recovered--"Gold, silver, bronze, (_finndruine_,) precious stones,
carbuncle gems, buffalo horns, and beautiful goblets. Much also of various
vestures of all colors was found there likewise;" for, in the words of the
text,

  "Never was there a fortress, or a fastness, or a mound, or a church, or a
  sacred place, or a sanctuary, when it was taken by that howling, furious,
  loathsome crew, which was not plundered.... Neither was there in
  concealment under ground in Erinn, nor in the various solitudes belonging
  to Fians [Footnote 285] or to fairies, anything that was not discovered
  by these foreign, wonderful Denmarkians through paganism and idol
  worship."

    [Footnote 285:  Here is evidence of the existence of legends of the
    Fianna in the early part of the eleventh century.]

The tables were now completely turned on the foreigners. Instead of the
state of vassalage in which they had held the natives, we now find the
following state of things:

  "There was not a winnowing sheet from Benn Edair (Howth) to Tech Duinn
  [Footnote 286] in Western Erinn that had not a foreigner in bondage on
  it, nor was there a quern (hand-mill) without a foreign woman, so that no
  son of a soldier or of an officer of the Gaedhil deigned to put his hand
  to a flail or to any labor on earth. Nor did a woman deign to put her
  hands to the grinding of a quern, or to knead a cake, or to wash her
  clothes, but had a foreign man or a foreign woman to work for them."

    [Footnote 286: _House of Donn:_ the locality of the shipwreck of
    Donn, son of Milesius, in the south-west of Kerry. Donn was venerated
    as a fairy chief after his decease, the same as Aenghus of the Brugh,
    Mananan, Mac Lir, etc.]


  Unedifying Doings at Kincora.

After a sojourn from Great to Little Christmas (February 2d) in Dublin,
Brian returned to Kincora, (_Ceann Coraidh_, head of the weir.)
{777}
Meantime Sitric, son of Anlaf, the defeated Danish prince, fled to the
court of Aedh, at Aileach, (north east of Donegal,) and afterward to that
of Achy, king of East Ulster, at Down-patrick, but neither king would
afford him protection, such was the awe of Brian's power. So, like a brave
and wise chief, he proceeded directly to the Court of his conqueror, and
requested peace and friendship. These were immediately granted, both from
the inherent nobility of Brian's disposition and his desire to have a
friendly and devoted governor for the distant city of Ath Cliath.

To strain the bonds that held his new ally to him still tighter, he gave
him his daughter in marriage. This might be prudent or the reverse, but to
take Sitric's mother Gormflaith (blue-_eyed_ noble lady) for his
second wife showed little wisdom. This lady, sister to Maelmordha, King of
Leinster, had for her first husband Olaf Cuaran, to whom she bore the
Prince Sitric. Her next spouse was Malachy, King of Leath Cuinn, already
more than once mentioned. After presenting him with a son, Prince Connor,
she was repudiated, and, very little to Brian's domestic comfort, he was
selected for her third experiment in matrimony. After sharing his royal bed
and board for a season, she was repudiated the second time, and then
probably went to add to the discomfort of the fortress of her son in
Dublin, or her brother at Naas, or Dunlavin, or Dinn Righ, (Ballyknockan,
near Leighlin Bridge.)

  "The Njal Saga calls her Kormlada, and describes her as the fairest of
  all women, and best gifted in everything that was not in her own power,
  that is, in all physical and natural endowments, but she did all things
  ill over which she had any power, that is, in her moral
  conduct."--_Burnt Njal_, ii. 323.

We find at the period in question frequent marriage alliances between Irish
and Danish families. In fact, when a foreign family or tribe had contrived
to secure a footing in the country, and the first bitter dislike had blown
over, the native chiefs began to look on them as they did each other, and
in many cases a stronger feeling of friendship connected the foreign chief
and his people to some neighboring native prince or flaith than prevailed
among themselves. This was also the case afterward between natives and
Anglo-Normans. Nothing could exceed the strength of ties that bound the
individuals of a tribe to each other and to their chief, and in most cases
the chiefs to the provincial kings, but enthusiasm for the cause of the
Ard-Righ or for the general weal of the island was an exceedingly scarce
commodity. The same indifferent spirit still exists.

The great chiefs proceedings for some time after these occurrences seem to
have been prompted as much by ambition at least as by a national spirit.
Still he did not depart from the generally observed rule among Gaelic kings
and chiefs, that is, sending warning to those on whom they intended to make
war, and appointing the time and place of battle. He gave Malachy plainly
to understand that he should cede to him the dignity of Ard-Righ. The
astonished sovereign claimed time to consult the princes of the North and
his own chiefs, but neither from the Kinel Conaill [Footnote 287] nor the
Kinel Eoghain could he get due encouragement, and he was obliged to
acknowledge the humiliating fact to the southern chief.

   [Footnote 287: In the original is given the poetical adjuration of Gilla
   Comghaill O'Sleibhin to Hugh, king of Hy Conaill, to join Malachy in his
   opposition to Brian. This King of Munster is treated in it as the King
   of Saxon-land in aftertimes by a bard of the fifteenth or sixteenth
   century. For a wonder the Ulster king did not yield to the power of
   poesy on that occasion.]

Still the latter was not disposed to take the brave prince at a
disadvantage, and gave him a twelvemonth to mature his plans. The interview
took place in Brian's camp, Malachy being accompanied by twelve score
horsemen, and, when the agreement was made, the southern king proceeded
homeward, first making a present of 240 horses to his future vassal. The
Meath warriors would not deign to conduct each a led horse back to the
royal fort, and Malachy was unwilling to offend Brian by refusing them.
[Footnote 288]

    [Footnote 288: Petty chiefs or princes paying tribute to their
    superiors received in turn gifts from the great men, in fact, were
    obliged to receive them--a genuine Irish procedure. (See the Book of
    Rights.)]

{778}

He therefore begged of Murchad to accept them in token of his good-will,
and the prince graciously assented. Malachy was not in a better condition
at the year's end, and so the sovereignty of the island passed into Brian's
hands without bloodshed. We have not space to treat in detail his after
_visitations_ to the north, and his circuit of the kingdom to receive
hostages and confirm his authority. When at Armagh, he gratified the
ecclesiastical powers there by a donation of twenty ounces of gold, and by
directing his secretary, the Abbot O' Carroll, to make this entry in their
book in the Latin language. The curious may still read the original at page
16, BB, in the Book of Armagh, a collection begun in the eighth century:

  "St. Patrick, going up to heaven, commanded that all the fruit of his
  labor, as well of baptisms as of causes and of alms, should be carried to
  the apostolic city which is called _Scotice_ (in Gaelic) ARDD MACHA.
  So I have found it in the book collections of the Scots, (the Gael.) I
  have written, (this,) that is, (I,) Calvus Perennis (_Mael-Suthain_,
  Bald for Ever) in the sight (under the eyes) of Brian, emperor of the
  Scots; and what I have written he has determined for all the kings of
  Maceriae, (Cashel or Munster.)"


  Compensations.

If there is extant a thorough believer in all the facts related by the
bards, he had better refrain from questioning the editor on the subject of
the beautiful and innocent maiden of the gold ring and snow-white wand. The
chronicler coming to this point in the history thus expressed himself:

  "After the banishment of the foreigners out of all Erinn, and after Erinn
  was reduced to a state of peace, a lone woman came from Torach in the
  North to Cliodhna [Footnote 289] (pr. Cleena) in the south of Erinn,
  carrying a ring of gold on a horse-rod, and she was neither robbed nor
  insulted. Whereupon the poet sang:

    "From Torach to pleasant Cliodhna
     And carrying with her a ring of gold,
     In the time of Brian of the bright side, fearless,
     A lone woman made the circuit of Erinn."

      [Footnote 289: Cleena was in the first rank of Munster fairies. Her
      visits were much disliked by the people. _Tonn Cliodhna_
      (Cleena's Wave) in one of the Kerry bays was the dread of the native
      seamen.]

It cannot be denied that Brian was a usurper with respect to Leath Cuinn;
but how much better was it for the people of the whole land to be under the
undivided sway of one wise, noble-minded, and energetic prince, assured of
peace, and opportunities of carrying on the ordinary business of life
undisturbed, and improving their condition, than to be merely enduring life
from day to day, not knowing the moment they should be called on to go on a
marauding expedition or to defend their corn, their cattle, and their own
lives from a marauding party. We quote a few of the peaceful exploits of
the best and greatest of our ancient princes:

  "By him were erected noble churches in Erinn and their sanctuaries. He
  sent professors and masters to teach wisdom and knowledge, and to buy
  books beyond the sea and the great ocean, because the writings and books
  in every church, etc., had been burned, and thrown into the water by the
  plunderers from the beginning. And Brian himself gave the price of books
  to every one separately who went on this service.... By him were erected
  the church of Cell Dálua, (Killaloe,) and the church of Inis Cealtra,
  (Scattery Island,) and the bell-tower of Tuam Greine, [Footnote 290] etc.
  etc. By him were made bridges and causeways and high roads. By him were
  strengthened the duns and fortresses and islands.... and royal forts of
  Mumhain. He built also the fortification of Caisel of the kings,.... and
  Cean Coradh, and Borumha in like manner. He continued in this way
  prosperously, peaceful, giving banquets, hospitable, just-judging;
  wealthily, venerated, chastely, and with devotion, and with law, and with
  rules among the clergy; with prowess and with valor, with renown among
  the laity, and fruitful, powerful, firm, secure for fifteen years in the
  chief sovereignty of Erinn, as Gilla Maduda (O'Cassidy, Abbot of
  Ardbreccan) said:

    'Brian the flame over Banbha of the variegated flowers,
     Without gloom, without guile, without treachery,
     Fifteen years in full prosperity.'"

      [Footnote 290: Fort of the Sun--Tomgreany in Clare--a copy of one of
      the Danaan round towers. There is at present not a trace of it.]

{779}

  The Gathering of the Eagles.

Toward the festival of St. Patrick in the ensuing spring, all that had
remained loyal to the reigning monarch were directing their course to the
plain before Dublin. Sitric, and his mother Gormflaith, and Maelmordha
busied themselves collecting allies from all quarters. Sigurd, Earl of
Orkney, came to the aid of his countrymen on the condition of getting the
privilege of being Gormflaith's fourth husband, the second and third still
living, and one being near eighty years of age. Brodar, about whose name
and the locality of whose earldom there is some uncertainty, was also a
postulant for her hand, and Sitric made no scruple of promising it,
expecting, as may be supposed, that one of the wooers, after doing good
service in the battle, might be very indifferent on the subject at its
close:

  "Brodar, according to the Njal Saga, had been a Christian man and a
  mass-deacon by consecration, but he had thrown off his faith, and become
  'God's dastard' and worshipped heathen fiends; and he was of all men most
  skilled in sorcery. He had that coat of mail on which no steel would
  bite. He was both tall and strong, and had such long locks that he tucked
  them under his belt. His hair was black."

This fierce-looking renegade commanded the foreign Danes and auxiliaries in
the front of the battle, being supported by Earl Sigurd and other chiefs. A
battalion of the Dublin Danes had their position in the rear of these,
supported by the chieftains of ships. Maelmordha and his chiefs occupied
the rear, commanding the North-Leinster men and the forces of Hy
Ceansalach, [Footnote 291] (Wicklow and Wexford.)

    [Footnote 291:  The first chief who bore this name had killed a druid,
    accompanying the sacrilegious deed with a fiendish grin on his
    features. "That vile expression on your face," said the dying man,
    "shall give a name to your posterity while grass grows." _Ceann
    salach_ is literally _dirty head_. Other great families have
    not escaped nick-names. _Cameron_ is crooked nose;
    _Cromwell_, crooked eye. (_Hy Kinsala_ is Kinsella's
    country.)]

Directly opposed to Brodar's front battalions were the tried men of
North-Munster, the Dalcassians under the command of the invincible
Murchadh. The battalion behind this front array consisted of other Munster
troops commanded by the Prince of the Waterford Decies. The nobles of
Connacht, with their brave tribesmen, occupied the rear of the Irish war
force.

The patriotic chronicler, having brought the combatants face to face on the
field which was to be the crown of his work, felt all his poetic rage arise
against the foreigners, whom he abuses as heartily as Goldsmith's bailiff
did the French:

  "These were the chiefs, and outlaws, and Dannars of all the west of
  Europe, having no reverence, veneration, respect, or mercy, for God or
  for man, for church or for sanctuary, at the head of cruel, villainous,
  ferocious, plundering, hard-hearted, wonderful Danmarkians, selling and
  hiring themselves for gold, and silver, and other treasures as well. And
  there was not one villain or robber of that two thousand, (the troops of
  Brodor and his brother Anlaf,) who had not polished, strong,
  triple-plated, glittering armor of refined iron, or of cool uncorroding
  brass, encasing their sides and bodies from head to foot."

In the description of the arms and armor of the combatants we suspect our
authority of some inaccuracy. Avoiding the forest of epithets bristling all
over the glowing description, we are told that the blue-green, hard-hearted
pagans used crimsoned, murderous, poisoned arrows anointed and browned in
the blood of dragons, and toads, and water-snakes, and otters, (the poor
otter! he did not deserve this,) and scorpions. They had barbarous quivers,
yellow-shining bows, green, sharp, rough, dark spears, polished, pliable,
triple-plated corselets of refined iron and uncorroding brass. Their swords
were heavy, hard-striking, strong, and powerful.

{780}

To the Gaelic warriors he allows glittering, _poisoned_, [Footnote
292] well-riveted spears, with beautiful handles of white hazel; darts
furnished with silken strings, to be cast overhand; long, glossy, white
shirts; comfortable (comfort in battle!) long vests; well-adjusted,
many-colored tunics over these; variegated, brazen-embossed shields, with
bronze chains; crested, golden helms, set with precious stones, on the
heads of chiefs and princes; glaring, broad, well-set Lochlann axes, to hew
plate and mail. Every sword had about thirty glorious qualities attached to
it. [Footnote 293]

    [Footnote 292: Venomous and poisonous in the bardic lays were mere
    epithets applied to weapons from their aptitude to inflict mortal
    wounds.]

    [Footnote 293: It is somewhat strange that the chronicler has not
    afforded even the _luirech_ (the leathern jack with its iron or
    bronze scales) to his heroes. These loricas are frequently mentioned in
    the old lays.]

The inferiority of the Irish warriors in defensive arms gave little concern
to their historian. Armed or unarmed, they were a match for the world.
(This under certain conditions is our own belief.)

  "Woe to those who attacked them if they could have avoided attacking
  them, for it was swimming against a stream, it was pummelling an oak with
  fists, it was a hedge against the swelling of a spring tide, it was a
  string upon sand or a sunbeam, it was the fist against a sunbeam to
  attempt to give them battle or combat."


  Day at Clontarf.

The battle began with a single combat, there being a previous challenge in
the case. Plait, the foreign warrior, came before his lines and shouted,
"Faras (_where is?_ an attempt at Danish) Donall?" "Here, thou
reptile!" said the Irish champion. The battle was sharp and short, the two
warriors falling on the sod at the same moment, their left hands clutching
each other's hair, and their hearts transfixed by their swords.

Heaven and earth are ransacked for sublime images to give an idea of the
dread struggle that took place between the iron-covered and the defenceless
warriors on each side:

  "To nothing small (we quote our text) could be likened the firm, stern,
  sudden, thunder motion, and the stout, valiant, haughty, billow roll of
  these people on both sides. I could compare it only to the boundless,
  variegated wonderful firmament that has cast a heavy, sparkling shower of
  flaming stars over the surface of the earth, or to the startling,
  fire-darting roar of the clouds and the heavenly orbs, confounded and
  crashed by all the winds in their contention against each other."

It was a terrible spectacle without doubt--the din and clang of sword and
axe on shields and helms, the cries of the combatants, and the lurid
flashes from the polished surfaces of the arms, and the effect of all
intensified by dying groans, and the sight of bodies writhing in agony as
life was about to quit them. It is not so easy to understand, taking
distance into account, how the following circumstance could occur:

  "It was attested by the foreigners and foreign women who were watching
  from the battlements of Ath Cliath, that they used to see flashes of fire
  from them in the air on all sides."

Malachy's forces remained inactive during the main part of the fight at
least. Dr. Todd acquits him, however, of treachery to the national cause.
We quote some passages of a description of the fight imputed to him:

  "There was a field and a ditch between us and them, and the sharp wind of
  the spring coming over them toward us. And it was not a longer time than
  a cow could be milked that we continued there, when not one person of the
  two hosts could recognize another.... We were covered, as well our heads
  as our faces, and our clothes, with the drops of the gory blood, carried
  by the force of the sharp, cold wind which passed over them to us.... Our
  spears over our heads had become clogged and bound with long locks of
  hair, which the wind forced upon us when cut away by well-aimed swords
  and gleaming axes, so that it was half occupation to us to endeavor to
  disentangle and cast them off."

Were we a powerful, well-armed warrior standing by the side of Maelseachlin
(Malachy) on that day, we would certainly have endeavored to find a better
occupation for his hands. Hear this bit of Pecksniffism uttered by him:

  "It is one of the problems of Erinn whether the valor of those who
  sustained that crushing assault was greater than ours who bore the sight
  of it without running distracted before the winds, or fainting."

{781}

Conaing, Brian's nephew, and Maelmordha, fell that day by each other's
swords. The Connacht forces and the Danes of Dublin assailed each other so
furiously that only about a hundred of the Irish survived, while the Danes
scarcely left a score. Murchadh's exploits, could we trust the chronicler
and Malachy, could be rivalled only by those of Achilles of old. He went
forward and backward through the enemies' ranks, mowing them down even as a
person might level rows of upright weeds. He got his mortal wound at last
from the knife of a Dane whom he had struck to the earth. He survived,
however, till he had received the consolations of religion.

About sunset the foreigners, notwithstanding their superiority in armor,
were utterly defeated. Striving to escape by their ships, they were
prevented by the presence of the full tide, and those who flew toward the
city were either intercepted by the same tide or by Maelseachluin's
[Footnote 294] men. Dr. Todd inclines to this last theory. The heroic youth
Torloch, son of Murchadh, pursuing the fugitive Danes into the sea, met his
death at a weir.

    [Footnote 294: This name implies the Tonsured, that is, devoted
    disciple of Saint Sechnal, contemporary with St. Patrick, and patron of
    Dunshaughlin.]

The aged monarch, while engaged at his prayers for the blessing of Heaven
on the arms of his people, was murdered just at the moment of victory by
the chief Brodar, who in a few minutes afterward was torn to pieces by the
infuriated soldiers crowding to the spot.

The power of the foreigners was certainly crushed in this great and
memorable combat, but disorder seized on the general weal of the island
again. South-Munster renewed its contentions with North-Munster, and even
its own chiefs with each other. Donnchad, Brian's remaining son, though a
brave prince, had not the abilities of his father or elder brother. Malachy
quietly resumed the sovereignty of the island, but found that the
annoyances from turbulent petty kings and the still remaining foreigners
were not at an end.

We join our regret to that of the editor that one of the unromantic books
of Annals--that of Tiernach, or Loch Cé, or that of Ulster, has not
inaugurated the publication of our ancient chronicles. Dr. Todd has done
all that could be done by the most profound and enlightened scholar to
disentangle the true from the false through the narrative by shrewd
guesses, by sound judgment in weighing the merits and probabilities of
conflicting accounts, by comparing the romantic statements with those set
forth in the genuine annals and the foreign authorities, whether Icelandic
or Anglo-Saxon. Many events in our old archives, pronounced by shallow and
supercilious critics to have had no foundation, are found to possess the
stamp of truth by the care taken by Dr. Todd and his fellow-archaeologists
in comparing our own annals and those of the European nations with whom we
had formerly either friendly or hostile relations.

Besides the anxious care bestowed on the comparison of the different MSS.
and the translation, and the very useful commentary, the editor has
furnished in the appendix the fragment (with translation) in the Book of
Leinster, the Chronology and Genealogy of the Kings of Ireland and of
Munster during the Danish period, Maelseachluin's account of the fight of
Clontarf, in full from the Brussels MS., and the genealogy of the various
Scandinavian chiefs who were mixed with our concerns for two centuries. The
accounts given in detail of the fortunes of Sitric and others of these
chiefs are highly interesting. The present volume will be more generally
read than any of the mere chronicles, into whose composition entered more
conscience and judgment--on account of the many poetic and romantic
passages scattered through it. Let us hope that it is not the last on which
the labors of the eminent scholar, its editor, will be employed, for we
cannot conceive any literary task more ably and satisfactorily executed
than the production of the Wars of the Gaedhil and the Gaill.

{782}

The Fatal Sisters, translated by Gray from the Norse, refer to the day at
Clontarf. We quote three of the verses:

  "Ere the ruddy sun be set
     Pikes must shiver, javelins sing,
   Blade with clattering buckler meet,
     Hauberk crash, and helmet ring.

   ......

  "Low the dauntless earl [Footnote 295] is laid,
     Gored with many a gaping wound;
   Fate demands a nobler head,
     Soon a king [Footnote 296] shall bite the ground.

      [Footnote 295: Earl Sigurd.]

      [Footnote 296: Brian.]

  "Long his loss shall Erinn weep,
     Ne'er again his likeness see;
   Long her strains in sorrow steep,
     Strains of immortality!"

The appendix added by Dr. Todd to the work is exceedingly interesting and
valuable, containing among other matters a carefully arranged genealogical
list of the Irish princes and the foreign chiefs during the Danish wars,
and an abstract of the fortunes of several of these kings. The accounts of
the battle of Clontarf differed so much in form in the two MSS., that is,
the Dublin and Brussels copies, that, instead of pointing out the various
readings in notes to the body of the narrative, the editor has removed the
account in the Brussels MSS., purported to have been given by Malachy, to
the end of the book. Passages are worth preservation as literary
curiosities. If Malachy felt any ill to Brian for wresting his independent
sovereignty from him, there is not a trace of it discoverable in his
narrative. Thus he speaks of the noble heir-apparent, Murchadh, who
disdained to wear even a shield.


    Malachy's Account of the Battle.

  "The royal warrior had with him two swords, that is, a sword in each
  hand, for he was the last man in Erinn who was equally expert in the use
  of the right hand and of the left... He would not retreat one foot before
  the race of all mankind for any reason in the world, except this reason
  alone, that he could not help dying of his wounds. He was the last man in
  Erinn who was a match for a hundred. He was the last man who killed a
  hundred in one day in Erinn. His step was the last step which true valor
  took. Seven like Murchadh were equal to Mac Samhain," etc.

Then the writer indulged in a heroic series in geometrical progression,
each hero being worth seven such as the man who preceded him, and the
greatest of all being Hector of Troy. All native bards, school-masters, and
school boys, who have flourished since first the siege of Troy was heard of
in Ireland, have fixed on Hector as the matchless model of heroism,
chivalric faith, courtesy, and tenderness; most of them have borne a
cordial hatred to the son of Peleus. Has the feeling originated from the
pseudo-work of Dares the Phrygian priest having arrived in the country
before Homer's "Tale of Troy Divine"? The theory in the text would make
Hector many times superior to Hercules, the heroic terms in the sevenfold
progression being Murchadh, Mac Samhain, Lugha Lagha, Conall Cearnach,
Lugha Lamhfada, (_Long Hand_,) Hector! After the list comes this
rather startling assertion: "These were the degrees of championship since
the beginning of the world, and before Hector there was no illustrious
championship."

  "Murchadh was the Hector of Erinn in valor, in championship, in
  generosity, in munificence. He was the pleasant, intelligent, affable,
  accomplished Samson of the Hebrews in his own career and in his time. He
  was the second powerful Hercules, who destroyed and exterminated the
  serpents and monsters of Erinn.... He was the gate of battle and the
  sheltering tree, the crushing sledge-hammer of the enemies of his
  fatherland and of his race during his career.

  "When this very valiant, very great, royal champion, and plundering,
  brave, powerful hero saw the crushing and the repulse that the Danars and
  pirates gave to the Dal Cais, it operated upon him like death or a
  permanent blemish; and he was seized with boiling, terrible anger, and
  his bird of valor and championship arose, and he made a brave, vigorous,
  sudden rush at a battalion of the pirates, like a violent, impetuous,
  furious ox that, is about being caught, or like a fierce, tearing, swift,
  all-powerful lioness deprived of her cubs, or like the roll of a deluging
  torrent, that shatters and smashes everything that resists it; and he
  made a hero's breach and a soldier's field through the battalions of the
  pirates. And the historians of the foreigners testified after him that
  there fell fifty by his right, and fifty by his left hand in that onset.
  Nor did he administer more than one blow to any of them; and neither
  shield, nor corselet, nor helmet, resisted any of these blows, which
  clave bodies and skulls alike. Thus three times he forced his way
  backward through the battalions in that manner."

{783}

Sitric, the Danish prince, married as before mentioned to a daughter of
Brian, is described as looking at the fight from his Dublin watch-tower,
with his wife at his side. Seeing the mass of plumages and hair shorn off
by the gleaming weapons, and flying over the heads in the wind, he
exclaimed, "Well do the foreigners reap the field, for many is the sheaf
whirled aloft over them." But in the evening he was obliged to endure the
sight of his foreign friends and allies fleeing into the sea "like a herd
of cows in heat from sultry weather, or from gnats, or from flies. And they
were pursued quickly and lightly into the sea, where they were with great
violence drowned, so that they lay in heaps and in hundreds and in
battalions." Sitric's wife had not yet learned to feel strong sympathy with
her husband's politics; and, if he had insisted on her presence in order to
be a spectator of the defeat of her countrymen, he was sadly disappointed:

  "Then it was that Brian's daughter, the wife of Amhlaibh's son, said: 'It
  appears to me,' said she, 'that the foreigners have gained their
  inheritance.' [Footnote 297] 'What is that, O girl?' said Amhlaibh's son.
  'The foreigners are only going into the sea as is hereditary to them.' 'I
  know not whether it is on them, but nevertheless they tarry not to be
  milked.'

    [Footnote 297: Sitric had used that expression at an early hour of the
    fight, when he imagined the Danes were gaining on their enemy.]

  "The son of Amhlaibh was angered with her, and he gave her a blow which
  knocked a tooth out of her head."

Murcadh's death after a fatiguing day of fight has been already related.
While the fierce struggle was going on, thus was the brave and devout old
monarch employed:

  "When the combatants met, his cushion was spread under him, and he opened
  his psalter, and he began to recite his psalms and his prayers behind the
  battle, and there was no one with him but Laideen, his own horseboy.
  Brian said to his attendant, 'Watch thou the battle and the combatants
  while I recite my psalms.' Brian then said fifty psalms, fifty prayers,
  and fifty paters, and he asked the attendant how the battalions were
  circumstanced. The attendant answered, 'I see them, and closely
  confounded are they, and each of them has come within grasp of the other.
  And not more loud to me would be the blows in Tomar's wood if seven
  battalions were cutting it down, than are the resounding blows on the
  heads, and bones, and skulls of them.' Brian asked how was the banner of
  Murchadh. 'It stands,' said the attendant, 'and the banners of the Dal
  Cais round it.'... His cushion was readjusted under Brian, and he said
  fifty psalms, fifty prayers, and fifty paters, and he asked the attendant
  how the battalions were. The attendant said, 'There lives not a man who
  could distinguish one of them from the other, for the greater part of the
  hosts on either side are fallen, and those that are alive are so
  covered--their heads, and legs, and garments, and drops of crimson
  blood--that the father could not recognize his own son there.' And again
  he asked how was the banner of Murchadh. The attendant answered, 'It is
  far from Murchadh, and has gone through the hosts westward, and it is
  stooping and inclining. Brian said, 'Erinn declines on that account.
  Nevertheless so long as the men of Erinn shall see that banner, its valor
  and its courage shall be upon every man of them.' Brian's cushion was
  readjusted, and he said fifty psalms, fifty prayers, and fifty paters,
  and the fighting continued during all that time. Brian then cried out to
  the attendant, how was the banner of Murchad, and how were the
  battalions. The attendant answered, 'It appears to me like as if Tomar's
  wood was being cut down, and set on fire, its underwood and its young
  trees, and as if the seven battalions had been unceasingly destroying it
  for a month, and its immense trees and its great oaks left standing.'"



  Later Exploits of Sitric of the Silky Beard.

A year after the battle, Malachy assaulted Dublin, and burned all the
buildings outside the fortress, within which Sitric lay secure. In 1018,
Sitric blinded Bran or Braoin, his own first cousin, son of Maelmordha,
thus incapacitating him to rule. The poor prince subsequently went abroad
and died in a monastery at Cologne. This Bran was ancestor of the _Ua
Brain_ or O'Byrn of Wicklow.
{784}
Next year he went on enlarging his bad ways by plundering Kells, slaying
many people in the very church, and carrying away spoils and prisoners. In
1021, his Danes and himself got a signal defeat at Derne Mogorog,
(Delgany,) by the son of Dunlaing, King of Leinster. In 1022, he was again
defeated by King Malachy in a land battle, and at sea by Niall, son of
Eochaidh, (_pr._ Achy or Uchy,) king of Hy Conaill. In 1027, he made
an unsuccessful raid into Meath, and next year went on a pilgrimage to
Rome. Two years later he attended the funeral of his mother Gormflaith. His
pilgrimage had not quenched his thirst for forays, for in 1031 he plundered
Ardbraccan, and carried off much cattle. Next year he was victorious at the
mouth of the Boyne over the men of Meath, Louth, and Monaghan. In 1035,
twenty-one years after the great fight, he abdicated in favor of his nephew
Eachmarcach, (Rich in Horses,) and went abroad, (where is not said.) His
death as well as that of his daughter Fineen, a nun, is recorded in 1042,
the last seven years of life having probably been spent in religious
retirement.

Irish historians and archaeologists will find valuable assistance in the
appendix, whenever they are occupied with the genealogies of the Irish or
foreign kings and chiefs who flourished during the two centuries preceding
the day at Clontarf.

------

    From The Month.

    Rhoda.

    A Devonshire Eclogue.


     "I am declined
  Into the vale of years; yet that's not much."_--Othello_.

  It was the deep midsummer; the calm lake
  Lay shining in the sun; the glittering ripples,
  That scarce bare record of the wind's light wings,
  Reached not the shore, where, shadowed by huge oaks,
  The clear still water blended with the land
  In undistinguished union. All was still,
  Save where at little distance a bright spring
  Leapt out from a fern-coroneted rock,
  And ran with cheerful prattle its short course
  (Making the silence deeper for its noise)
  To quiet slumber in the quiet lake.

      Down to the margin of the water, slow
  Pacing along the shadow-dappled grass
  Into the trees' green twilight, steadfastly
  The while his eyes bent down upon the ground,
  Sir Richard Conway came. No longer young;
  A statesman of repute; in council wise;
  Of bitter speech, but not unkindly heart;
  Of stately presence still. He in his youth
  Had wooed and wedded a fair girl; so fair,
  So gentle, and so good that when she died
  His heart and love died too, and in her grave
  Lay down, and he came forth a stricken man.

{785}

      But this was long ago: his children grew;
  He watched them, but they never saw his heart;
  They dreamed not of the proud man's tenderness,
  But went into the highway of the world,
  And left him to his utter loneliness.
  Years passed: sometimes his solitary heart
  Sent out a cry of agony for love;
  But no one heard--he sternly stifled it:
  Treading his path with dignity, he lived
  In pride and honor, and he lived alone.

      He prayed for love, and in his autumn days
  Love came upon him; but in such a sort
  As, if a man had told him it would come,
  He would have laughed in scorn. But so it is;
  God gives us our desire, and sends withal
  Sharp chastening as his wisdom sees most fit.

      Rhoda, the fairest of a sisterhood
  Who were all fair, lived hard by the great house,
  Near to the lake; the daughter of a pair
  Not rich, yet blessed with slender competence.
  And sometimes in the park, or in the house,
  Whereto chance errands brought her, she would meet
  Sir Richard, who to such as her showed ever
  A gracious kindness, and would give to her
  A friendly greeting, sometimes with a word
  Of question of her needs or her desires,
  Followed by such slight interchange of talk
  As might befit such meetings--nothing more.
  Indeed he could not fail, as time wore on,
  To note that with each year she lovelier grew:
  A pale and delicate fairy, exquisite
  As some rare picture, with pathetic eyes
  Veiled underneath long lashes; their shy glance
  Seemed to reveal a soul whose tender depths
  Were unprofaned by any earthly thought.
  Nor was it seeming only: she was good;
  And fenced her beauty with simplicity,
  Meek sense, and modest wisdom.

{786}

      This he saw--
  He could not choose but see it; and he felt,
  When she was near, as if some soothing strain
  Breathed round him; and his secret soul was swayed
  With unseen power, as sways the billowy corn
  Swept by the warm caresses of the wind.
  He knew what this portended. All in vain
  The proud man struggled with his heart: he loved,
  And knew that he loved, Rhoda; all in vain
  He strove to turn away from her fair face;
  He only gazed more tenderly: in vain
  Strove to speak coldly when he met her; still
  His deep voice trembled, as his heart beat fast,
  And from his eyes looked out his yearning soul.
  Of all this conflict Rhoda saw but little;
  The less, belike, for conflict of her own:
  Mysterious longings kindled by his voice;
  Shy pleasure in his presence; constant thought
  (Half reverence, half compassion, tender always)
  Of this grave, courteous, noble, lonely man,
  Who looked so great, so sorrowful, but still
  With many a mute yet clearly speaking sign
  Sued for her love with sad humility.
  These things she never uttered to her heart;
  And if her thoughts half spoke, unwaveringly
  She put them by, and simply went her way.
  But he could fight no longer; and to-day
  He waited by the water, for he knew
  Rhoda would pass that way, and he resolved
  To tell her all his secret, and to learn
  His future from her lips, whether they spoke
  Hope or despair.

      He had not waited long,
  When through the park, along the trembling lake,
  Into the oaks' soft shadows, Rhoda came;
  So bright, so fresh, so beautiful, she seemed
  To bring a golden light into the gloom.
  Sir Richard trembled, and his breath came quick,
  His pulse throbbed wildly, and his eyes grew dim;
  Yet, mastered by his iron will, his words
  Came calmly forth to greet her: at the sound,
  Surprised to find him here, she started back,
  Then murmuring something hurriedly, went on.
  He gently staid her, saying in tenderest tones:
  "One moment, Rhoda--one--could you but know--"
  She looked into his face with wondering eyes,
  Then bashfully withdrew them; for she knew
  At once his secret from his pleading voice
  And his dark eyes' ineffable tenderness.
  "I did not mean to startle you," he said;
  "Nay, do not tremble; could you see my soul,
  The tempest there would make your own show calm.
  Oh! stay--forgive me when the heart beats fast.
  The tongue is slow--I love you! Fewest words
  Are best for such confession. Can you love?"

{787}

      But Rhoda could not answer. Naught was heard
  Except the gurgling of the silver spring,
  When thus in saddest accents he resumed:
  "Rhoda, you see in me a man sore smitten,
  Whose youth and spring were buried long ago--
  One who has had no summer in his heart,
  Whose autumn days are lonely, and who prayed
  (Till you relumed the sunshine of his life)
  For the swift-closing winter of the grave.
  Long have I kept my secret to myself--
  From no mean shame, my girl; for well I know,
  Were you my wife, mine were the gain, not yours;
  But silver hairs blend ill with waving gold,
  Nor would I bring a blight upon your life.
  Why have I spoken? 'Twas a selfish thought
  To share with you the burden of my gloom,
  O'ershadowing your young years--an idle dream
  That one so old and desolate as I
  Could stir the heart of blessed youthfulness.
  There--you have heard my secret. Pity me:
  I know you will not mock me. So, farewell!
  Go, Rhoda, with my blessing on your head!
  I to my loveless life return alone,
  Forlorn, but uncomplaining."

      He turned to go,
  But Rhoda, who had heard him to this word,
  Could now endure no more; she caught his arm,
  She gazed at him with fond eyes full of tears.
  "Oh! not alone!" she said "we go together;
  If a poor girl like me--" She said no more,
  But turned and hid her face upon his heart.
  He clasped her, looking thankfully to heaven,
  Then stooped and kissed her: "Rhoda, my own wife,
  Bear with me for my love!" The trees stood still,
  Yielding no faintest whispering. They came forth
  Out of the solemn grove into the sun;
  The soft blue sky had not one film of cloud;
  And as they walked in silence, they could hear
  Far off the happy stockdove's brooding note.

      And so Sir Richard won his lovely wife.
  Once more the old house brightened; stately rooms
  Rang with the unaccustomed sound of mirth:
  And still as years went on, Sir Richard wore
  Always an air of serious cheerfulness;
  While baby voices gladdened all the place,
  And Rhoda's lovely face was never sad.
  Let the grim rock give forth a living stream,
  And still boon nature crowns its ruggedness
  With flowers and fairy grasses.

{788}

      Near the park
  Towers up a tract of granite; the huge hills
  Bear on their broad flanks right into the mists
  Vast sweeps of purple heath and yellow furze.
  It is the home of rivers, and the haunt
  Of great cloud-armies, borne on ocean blasts
  Far-stretching squadrons, with colossal stride
  Marching from peak to peak, or lying down
  Upon the granite beds that crown the heights.
  Yet for the dwellers near them these bleak moors
  Have some strange fascination; and I own
  That, like a strong man's sweetness, to myself
  Pent in the smoky city, worn with toil,
  When the sun rends the veil, or flames unveiled
  Over those wide waste uplands, or when mists
  Fill the great vales like lakes, then break and roll
  Slow lingering up the hills as living things,
  Then do they stir and lift the soul; and then
  Their colors, and their rainbows, and their clouds,
  And their fierce winds, and desolate liberty,
  Seem endless beauty and untold delight.

      So was it with Sir Richard: from the park
  And from the cares of state he often went
  With Rhoda, to enjoy some happy hours
  There face to face with nature--far away
  From all the din and fume of human life,
  From paltry cares and interests, that corrupt
  Or keep the soul in chains. They may be seen
  On a great hill, on cloudless summer days,
  Or when the sun in autumn melts the clouds,
  Gazing on that magnificent region, spread
  In majesty below them: teeming plains
  And wood-clothed gorges of the hills in front;
  Behind them sea-like ridges of bare moor,
  Some in brown shade, some white with blazing light;
  Above, enormous rocks piled up in play
  By giants; all around, authentic relics
  Of those drear ages, when half-naked men
  Roamed these dim regions, waging doubtful war
  With wolves and bears; and on the horizon's verge
  The pale blue waste of ocean. There they sit,
  Sir Richard and his Rhoda, side by side
  Their hearts aglow with love, their souls bowed down
  In thankful adoration, scarce recalled
  From musings deep and tender, by the shouts
  Of two fair children playing at their feet.

October, 1866.

------

{789}


  Original.

  Protestant Attacks Upon The Bible. [Footnote 298]

    [Footnote 298: Liber Librorum: Its Structure, Limitations, and Purpose.
    A Friendly Communication to a Reluctant Sceptic. New-York: C. Scribner
    & Co. 1867.]


The work, the title of which we subjoin, though pretending on the surface
to be an appeal, in favor of the Bible, is, in truth, one of the most
serious attacks made upon it that has come under our notice; and would be,
for a Protestant, one of the most dangerous books he could read. With a
Catholic its arguments would have no force whatever, being based upon the
unphilosophical principle of private judgment on revealed truth. We should
say that, take it as a whole, it is a very clever attempt to found a purely
subjective religion, which might call itself Christianity with equal
consistency as do many so-called Christian denominations of our day, and
which would consequently ignore all dogmatic authority and make use of the
Holy Scriptures only as a means of edification.

We cannot see how a Protestant can escape the conclusions drawn by the
author, unless he abandons his Protestantism for Catholic authority or for
the most irresponsible individuality; and, if the author has really been
sincere in his professed desire to reassure the troubled mind of his
reluctant sceptic, and inspire him with respect for the Bible as the
revealed word of God, we cannot but think he counts upon his sceptic's
possessing very limited reasoning powers. His entire argument throughout is
based upon postulates which we are sure no sceptic and certainly no
Catholic is prepared to grant. For it is assumed both that we are, or ought
to be, Christians as a matter of course, independent of authoritative
teaching, and that the inspiration of the Bible is to be taken for granted
without extrinsic proof. Moreover, that each individual is possessed of a
verifying faculty which enables him to appropriate of its contents just so
much and in so far as God wishes it to be true to him.

To assert that a man can be or has become a Christian without having been
so taught is simply absurd. That Christianity is, of all religious systems,
the most perfectly conformable to the reason and spiritual needs of
mankind, fulfilling, perfecting, and completing human nature, is
indisputable; but a man is not born a Christian any more than he is born a
Mohammedan or a Buddhist. What the author of this work seems contented to
take as Christianity will be found broad enough to suit any one who has a
fancy to dignify the mutilated traditions to which he yet clings by that
title; but we think very few will consent to accept their own convictions
as sufficient proof of the divine truth of what they believe, or bow to the
Holy Scriptures as the inspired word of God upon no other authority than a
sense of its harmony in doctrine and morals with what they individually
hold. The stream is not the cause of the fountain. That the stream of
Christian truth, nay, that the stagnant puddles which are the result of an
erratic overflow of its waters, are the cause of its fountain-head of
credibility is what this unphilosophical writer takes for granted on every
page of his book. Of course it is both foolish and arrogant presumption in
the church to claim infallibility, but the most reasonable thing in the
world for each and every human being to claim this prerogative as a
natural-born characteristic. However, we do not wonder at this; it is but
the logical consequence, ridiculously absurd as is the conclusion, of the
rejection of the principle of divine authority.
{790}
It is the conclusion forced upon its adherents by Protestantism, and shows
its fruits in the present wide-spread scepticism and infidelity in the
countries where it has been the dominant religion. Never did any system
prepare more surely the weapon of its own destruction than that which
promulgated to the world the principle of private judgment. The cry of
revolt is raised in the Protestant camp, and alarming its teachers--Rome or
Reason--by which is too plainly meant, "Either a divinely constituted
authority, or the divine authority of the individual soul." A choice that
leaves all the sects which have sprung from the Reformation out in the
cold.

Upon the unphilosophical basis for Christian faith which we have noted
above our author proceeds to establish the sufficient authenticity and
inspiration of the Bible. We say, _sufficient_, because, as far as we
are able to gather, he rates the entire credibility and value of the
Scriptures as the revealed word of God to man according to the intellectual
and spiritual assent of the individual, assuming, as he does, that every
man possesses a "verifying faculty" and a "spiritual insight," through
which his own belief and the Scriptures confirm one another and make him
wise unto salvation.

He holds that the Bible is inspired only in what concerns doctrine and
morals, but is forced to make his reader the judge of what is doctrine and
the censor of morality, for his highest evidence either of inspiration or
of the canonicity of the sacred books is, as he tells us on p. 136, "the
interior witness of the Spirit to the truths embodied in the accepted
books." And as he says on p. 85, "It is 'the wise' only who 'understand.'
The peasant is, in this respect, often far above the philosopher.
Everything depends on the moral condition of the recipient." We think it
sufficient to add his own damaging conclusion: "That this way of looking at
the matter makes the evidence for the truth of the Bible mainly subjective
cannot be disputed; but nothing else in the present day appears to have
much hold on men. It may, indeed, be seriously doubted whether it is now
possible to bring forward any evidence, in favor of miracles, for instance,
which could reasonably be expected to satisfy an unconcerned spectator, and
still less an opponent." (P. 86.)

For himself, therefore, the author rejects all miracles which he thinks
were needless and unworthy of the apparent end for which they were
performed, and advises his reluctant sceptic to follow his example.
Moreover, as he does not find that his interior witness convicts him of the
truth of the Trinity or the divinity of Jesus Christ, or, as we suppose,
from the tenor of his language, anything else that is a mystery, of course
the Scripture does not teach these doctrines either. No man can be blind to
the inevitable consequence of such a principle. The Bible could not have
the slightest extrinsic authority in either doctrine or morals, and is a
proof that, without the divine authority, which both authenticates and
interprets it, it is practically worthless in teaching the one or enforcing
the other.

The following passage contains a most admirable refutation of the writer's
own principle, which, however, he does not appear to see: "Looked at in
this way"--as discerned by spiritual insight--"it is of no moment that
either the uninstructed or the instructed man should be able to say
regarding each separate passage of Scripture, _this_ is inspired,
_this_ is not. How can he indeed? The revelation is not a thing
_apart_ from daily life, but _through_ its various relations:
how, then, can any man undertake to separate in each particular the
supernatural element from the natural which it irradiates and explains? To
regard anything of the kind as necessary either to confidence or
edification is absurd; as absurd, in fact, as it is to maintain that we
'require an exercise of judgment upon the written document before we can
allow men to believe in their King and Saviour.'
{791}
Every one knows that this is not the fact; that in all time the multitude
never have nor ever can enter upon any such inquiries; that the masses must
either believe in Christ directly as an actual person related to them, and
recognized by them in their inmost souls, or they will not believe at all.
They listen to the announcement that Christ is their Redeemer, and they
believe the good news _just in so far as it finds a response in their own
spiritual necessities and consciousness_. Into evidences about documents
they cannot enter." (Pp. 81, 82.)

This is the most delightful instance of begging the question we have ever
met with. Pray, _who_ announces to the multitude, who cannot enter
into evidence about documents nor even read them, that Christ is their
Redeemer? and who has any _right_ to announce that fact? Truly,
"whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved;" but, "how
shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? Or how shall they
believe him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
preacher? And how shall they preach _unless they be sent?_" That it is
the end of preaching, and that saving faith is the belief of the "good news
just in so far as it finds a response in one's own spiritual necessities
and self-consciousness," is mere twaddle, since our spiritual needs however
keenly appreciated, or self-consciousness, however exalted, can never
supply the objective truths of faith or rise above their own capacity to
the ability of verifying, without the aid of extrinsic authority, the
truths when proposed. Christianity, in so far as it is anything more than
mere natural religion, is not of us, but to us. For if it were of us, what
need is there of a revelation? That the good news that Christ is my
Redeemer can be in any manner affirmed to me by my own self-consciousness
is impossible. It is an historical fact, it is true, that such a person as
Christ lived, but it is not an historical fact, by any means, that he is my
Redeemer. That is a divine fact, which the most minute history of humanity
never could demonstrate, for it is altogether out of the natural order, and
wholly supernatural, and hence requiring a divine teaching authority both
to promulgate it and enforce my belief. What this author, with many other
modern writers of the same class, needs is a good course of philosophy as
taught in our Catholic schools. It would save us a good deal of time and
paper in exposing their illogical reasonings.

We do not deny that the holy writings find a response in the heart and mind
of the Christian which no other book that was ever penned could awaken. We
know that it is full of strength and consolation, of instruction and
righteousness, and of help in the perfecting of his character; but this is
the case precisely because he is a Christian by virtue of the same
authority which declares the inspiration of its contents. That authority
for every one who can rationally call himself a Christian is the authority
of the Catholic Church. From this there is no escape. All Protestants
inasmuch as they are Christian are so in obedience to the voice of whatever
Catholic tradition is yet left to influence them. It announces that
Christianity is true and that the Bible is inspired. This tradition of
theirs finds its sanction in the Catholic Church, and would be utterly
worthless if she had no existence.

Again, it is impossible to controvert the fact that the Bible, as a
Christian revelation, depends for its authenticity and canonicity upon the
sanction of the church. To say that it does not is to claim inspiration for
every individual in order to decide upon what is and what is not inspired.
If I reject the authority of the church, how shall I be content with the
Bible as it is, as she has compiled it? Perhaps I might differ with her as
to her decision about the non-inspiration of the rejected gospels and
epistles; and if to my thinking some of the books which it now contains are
not inspired, nay more, if I reject the whole of them as such, what power
on earth is there to call me to account?
{792}
No wonder Luther had the presumption to call the epistle of St. James an
"epistle of straw," or that Dr. Colenso has no respect for the Pentateuch.
We are constrained to believe that the principles assumed by this writer
are far more pernicious, and would do more to undermine the traditional
authority which the Bible has among Protestants and reluctant sceptics,
than the weak and flippant arguments of the notorious apostle of the Zulus.

We read the chapter on the Interpretation of Scripture with no little
curiosity, knowing that this would present a test question to the author's
system of inspiration. Suppose that two men, two Christians if you will,
not only differed about the inspiration of a certain passage, but also
about the interpretation of it. Can the conclusion of both, contradictory
as they are, be the "witness of the Spirit"? As we expected, this chapter
is the weakest in the book. Let us give the author's argument: "But while
divine revelation can have but one true meaning, nothing can be more
certain than that, being a message from the Heavenly Father to his erring
and sinful creatures, it must have a power of adaptation to each and all of
them in particular which, from the very nature of the case, forbids any
exhaustive or authoritative interpretation of its contents." We confess we
are not able to put this in plain English. Let us analyze it, however, and
see what propositions it contains: 1st. Any given inspired revelation can
have but one true meaning. 2d. This inspired revelation is given as a
message of truth to the human race by the God of truth. 3d. This inspired
revelation is necessarily of such a character that it can be made to mean
anything according to the power of discernment in the individual; and
hence, 4th. No one can even be sure which interpretation is the true one.
If these absurd propositions are not contained in the quotation we have
given, we humbly acknowledge that we have learned the English language in
vain. We knew that the author must break down on this subject, and he has
most thoroughly. How one can escape the necessity of an authoritative power
of interpretation of the Scripture it is impossible for us to divine. How
_can_ two contradictory interpretations be true? How _can_ any
man in his senses believe that the Spirit of God witnesses to two
propositions, one of which gives the lie to the other? But, deny an
authoritative power of interpretation to which all men must bow, how can I
ever know that my interpretation is true and that my brother's is false? To
attempt a compromise, such as the author suggests, that each interpretation
is true for each man, is too absurd to demand a moment's consideration.
Truth is truth not because I see it, but as it is, whether I see it or not,
and the man who rejects it when it is presented to his intelligence is
either a knave or a fool. Two and two are four whether I agree to it or
not, and no possible interpretation of the process of addition can change
its truth; nor is there any loophole except that of insanity which would
ever allow me to be excused for asserting that the product of twice two was
five and not four.

It is certainly amusing to see this author refuting himself, as he
frequently does. To confide the right interpretation of Scripture to an
organized authority is to vest the final decision as to what the book says
in man. So he argues. Yet he tells us in the same breath that each
individual man is his own lawful interpreter. Does the author think that we
are simple enough to believe, with all the jarring, clashing sects which
have sprung out of this individual interpretation of the Bible before our
eyes a principle, too, which furnishes the sceptic with the means of
wresting its words to his own destruction--that, if each man interpret it
for himself, the final decision in each particular case is any less human
than the unanimous decision which a body, such as the Catholic Church is,
gives without variation for nineteen centuries?
{793}
This gratuitous assumption about the "interior witness of the Spirit" is
cant, not argument; for where does the individual find any assurance that
each and every man will be so assisted? Experience proves directly the
contrary. But, says our author, all these quarrels about the truths taught
by the Bible are not due to the Bible itself, but to the sectarian
divisions of Christianity, who each and all impose their own interpretation
on their members. This will not do. As long as the principle of
authoritative interpretation was upheld, as it is alone in the Catholic
Church, there was no quarrelling about the doctrines or morals inculcated
by the Holy Scriptures. The interpretation was but one. It was only when
the author's pet principle came into vogue, which was the apple of discord
borne by the tree of the Reformation, that men began to quarrel and dispute
about what the Bible taught. The wily sceptic with the Bible placed in his
hands, accompanied by a pious assurance that he will be guided in its
interpretation by the interior witness of the Spirit, will only laugh in
his sleeve at your simplicity. He will find in it just what pleases him,
and who has the right to accuse him of not following the witness of the
Spirit? Who finds insuperable difficulties in the sacred record? Who has
discovered, as they imagine, contradictory passages in it? Who come to the
conclusion that there is one God of the patriarchs, another God of the
Jews, and a third of the Christian? Not the Catholic Church or her doctors,
but the Protestant sects with their Colensos, their Essayists and
Reviewers, and flippant commentators. The Catholic Church finds no
difficulties or contradictions in the text of Scripture in any portion that
relates to doctrine or morals. Her interpretation is uniform and harmonious
from the first page of Genesis to the last words of the Apocalypse.
Difficulties there are, but they are only historical and of minor moment,
which affect in no way the unity of the sacred writings as the revealed
word of God. All attempts which have been made of late by Protestants to
discredit the inspiration of the Bible on the ground that these historical
difficulties are of such a nature as to render the record untrustworthy,
have signally failed. The most that has been proved, even by the most
captious critics, is, that in the recital of certain events the text is
obscure, and leaves many things untold and unexplained.

The tone of the writer when speaking of the Catholic Church is, on the
whole, pretty fair, but it seems impossible for a Protestant to write on
religious subjects without either committing some egregious blunder when we
are concerned, or inserting some piece of calumny or of wilful
misrepresentation. We note an instance of this in the letter which forms an
introduction to the body of the work. Referring to the hope expressed by
the reluctant sceptic that "one day we shall have forms of public devotion
sufficiently aesthetic to gratify the religious sentiment, without
involving dogmas that lead only to dispute," he adds: "You will perhaps be
surprised if I tell you that I think this very possible. But, believe me,
it will only be when Christendom, so long apostate, has, in retribution for
her abominations, became absolutely atheistic. That a tendency of this kind
manifests itself, from time to time, in Rome, especially among the Jesuits,
has been noticed by devout Catholics, and is regarded by them with grief
and anxiety." (P. 45.)

This is the style of lying (for what he says of the Jesuits is, we hardly
need say, wholly untrue) that disgraces the religious writings of our
opponents almost without exception. What does it mean? Simply this: "I
fear, my dear, reluctant sceptic, that you are hungering after ritualism,
which the Catholic Church possesses in beautiful harmony with all her
dogmas.
{794}
But don't look that way, or examine her claims upon your mind or religious
sentiment, for the Catholic Church herself is becoming atheistic, as is
shown by the atheistical tendencies of the Jesuits in Rome, and
(_aside_--to make the lie more plausible I will say) this tendency has
been noticed by devout Catholics, and is regarded by them with grief and
anxiety." We can do nothing but cry shame upon such wretched and base
subterfuges to withdraw the attention of sincere minds from an honest
examination of the Catholic faith.

We blush for their unscrupulous and persistent system of misrepresentation,
which quietly ignores alike our indignant denials and appeals to be heard;
but we do not fear for the final result. All blows aimed at the Rock of
Truth will only recoil with deadly force upon the aggressor. Her beauty
will come out untarnished after every attempt at defilement; her purity and
sanctity no defamation can long obscure; her divine truth is proof against
the machinations and deceit of the father of lies and his children. Not in
vain has the inspired prophet said of her: "No weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that resisteth thee in
judgment thou shall condemn." She is the divinely appointed exponent of
God's word to man, whether written or not. "He that heareth you, heareth
me," and her exposition has been uniform, harmonious, and consistent
throughout; while the sects, left to their own fanciful interpretation of
the only word which they have acknowledged as authoritative, present a
lamentable picture of dissension and disbelief--"As children tossed to and
fro, and carried about by every wind of doctrine."

------

  From the French of Augustin Chevalier.

  Decimated.

  I.

It was seven in the evening when we arose from the table, where the
conversation had for an hour or more run on the civil war which had just
desolated Germany. General Bourdelaine, a tall, wiry specimen of the
_ancien officier_, whom no one would imagine to be verging upon his
eighty-fourth year, and who very probably will in the year one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-eight celebrate the eighty-second anniversary of
his leaving the military school in 1806, invited us for coffee into the
study where ordinarily none but his most intimate friends are admitted; for
the general, although on the retired list since 1845, has not yet begun to
seek the repose of inactivity, and I have seen in that study of his an
entire series of strategical plans (afterward published by the minister of
war) of the principal battles of Napoleon in Champagne against the allied
forces.

The study is large, although it seems small, so filled is every piece of
furniture, shelf, and hook with coins, arms, plans, papers, portraits,
busts, statuettes in marble and in bronze, books, globes, and drawing
instruments, and all these not in absolute disorder, but in an apparent
confusion which the general finds very convenient, inasmuch as everything
is within reach.

{795}

It was not the first time I had been there. For the first time, however, on
this particular evening, my eyes fell upon a plain boxwood frame hung on
the wall opposite the chimney-piece, in a recess formed by two large
book-cases. A brilliant point in the centre, which reflected the light of
the lamp, attracted my attention. It was the enamel of a cross of the
Legion of Honor, to which was attached, under the glass, a large band of
crape which stretched to the four corners of the frame. On the left of the
frame, on the outside, hung a huge silver watch, and on the right the
golden acorn of a sword-knot.

The daughter of the general entered at this moment, followed by a servant
bearing coffee and all the accessories upon a tray. There were now five of
us in the room: the general, his daughter and his son-in law, a government
clerk, and myself. Each one began in silence to discuss the smoking coffee;
when the general, whose glance had unconsciously taken the same direction
as mine, suddenly exclaimed:

"What a horrible thing war is! I did not enter the service until the time
had come when men no longer went forth to meet the enemy through
patriotism, but moved merely by the desire of winning rank or fortune, or
by the love of glory and honor. I was present at some frightful butcheries
and routs still more frightful; I have seen nearly all the miracles of the
emperor's genius, and I bore my part in the reverses fickle fortune
inflicted upon him. Well, after all, what did it amount to? The fortune of
war is one of the chances of the trade. You conquer or are conquered, kill
or are killed. The ranks close up, and then--room for the bravest or most
favored, the most skilful or the luckiest! But to be forced to fire upon
your own men; to be compelled to decimate pitilessly your own brave
companions; to kill in cold blood excellent soldiers, whose only crime was
a single day's mutiny, but whose example might risk the discipline and
safety of the entire army; to kill, I say, men whom the very intoxication
of victory led to believe that their fault would go unpunished; men we
sorely needed; this, this is most fearful and saddest of all; this it is
that still makes my old heart bleed more than fifty years after it
happened; and when my thoughts revert to it, even though conscience remain
tranquil, something very like remorse pursues me."

"It seems, then, general," I said, "that yonder cross and crape recall
cruel memories."

He put down his cup without replying, filled a small glass with cognac and
swallowed it at one gulp.

"Have you finished the notes I wished you to make from Jomini and
Vandoncourt?"

"Yes, _mon général_."

"Very good; give them me. And now service for service. I will confide to
you an episode in my military life of which you may make what use you think
proper. I authorize you to do so."

And General Bourdelaine thereupon related what follows.


  II.

My rank in the service dates from October, 1805. Jena and Austerlitz won me
my epaulettes of _sous-lieutenant_. In 1807 I made the Polish
campaign, and in 1808 the Spanish. The following year I was recalled to
Germany, and saw Ratisbon and Wagram. Napoleon after the battle halted in
front of my regiment to learn the names of those who had distinguished
themselves.

"All did," cried the colonel; "but, if your majesty will permit me, I would
especially recommend the Lieutenant Bourdelaine to your favor."

The emperor looked at me.

"You come from Saint-Cyr?"

"Yes, sire."

"How many campaigns?"

"Three."

"And still a lieutenant."

"I have had no chance to rise before this."

"Which do you prefer, the cross or promotion?"

"Promotion, sire."

{796}

My reply was not that of a courtier. But he loved the young men of his
schools, and those, above all, who, like me, had not awaited the end of
their course before becoming officers.

"Ah! you prefer promotion."

"Sire, they say that things are not going well in Spain since your majesty
left there. Send me thither; give me a company, and I will win death or the
cross."

"Very well."

I received the company I sought, not, however, in a French, but in an
Italian regiment. I was ordered to Arragon in November, 1810, and made part
of the army commanded by Suchet. My colonel, San-Polo, received me warmly.

"You will find more than one of your countrymen in my regiment," said he;
"and you had better have them give an account of your men. I warn you that
they are very devils. You must be vigilant and firm; just but inflexible;
if not, you will find yourself exposed to strange surprises, and I be put
to the necessity of punishing you."

The colonel was no false prophet. Those Italians are terrible soldiers.
Rash, useful principally for an assault or _coup-de main_, never
flinching under fire, but, once out of it, quarrelsome, intractable and
given to pillaging, ours, I confess, more than once seemed to sack and
destroy for the mere pleasure of doing so. I can yet see the comical though
moving scene which took place in Burgos, where my battalion, in 1808,
boiled their pots with all the mandolines and guitars they could find in
the city, notwithstanding the despair of the inhabitants, who hastened to
bring them coals and wood. But the soup, seasoned with jokes and bursts of
laughter, seemed to them the better for it.

Before I return to my story, a few words on the situation of the army of
Arragon.

General Suchet had taken one after another the towns of Mequinenza; on the
southern confines of the province of Huesca; Lareda, in Lower Catalonia, to
the north-west of Mequinenza; and Tortosa, south of Lerida, at the
extremity of the province of Tarragona. He thus commanded part of the
rivers Ebro, the Segre, and the Cinca; and, moreover, the capture of those
cities had enabled him to collect a complete park of siege artillery at
Tortosa. Unfortunately, the commandant of Figuera having allowed himself to
be surprised in Upper Catalonia, our forces there were compelled to fall
back toward Girona, and the Spanish General Campoverde, beaten before
Figueras by Baraguay d'Hilliers, had profited by our mishap, not only to
rally his troops, but also to annoy our magazines and communications.
Therefore, although he had received orders from the emperor, on the 10th of
March, to invest Tarragona, whose capture, completing our occupation of the
principality of Catalonia, would have opened the road to Valentia to us,
General Suchet did not yet dare attempt an enterprise of such importance.
The task of keeping the two districts of Mora and Alcuniz in subjection--
the first in Lower Catalonia, to the north of Tortosa, and the second in
Arragon to the north-west of Mequinenza, and in the province of Ternel--
paralyzed his forces. His artillery, too, had been retarded. In short,
instead of an effective force of over forty thousand men, which the
junction of the army of Arragon with that of Catalonia should have formed,
he had not more than thirty battalions at his service.

You are not a soldier, and you do not understand how even the lowest
officer racks his head over the probabilities of some approaching
expedition, and with what feverish impatience the men in the ranks await
the signal of departure. Headquarters were established at Lareda, and
magazines already were placed at Reus, Monblanch, and Alcobar, to the north
and west of Tarragona; but it was reported that an English fleet under
Admiral Adams was preparing to re-provision the last-named city, and to
interrupt our communications by transporting to our rear the troops of
Campoverde and Sarsfield by the mouths of the Ebro. Our park of siege
artillery remained motionless at Tortosa, and as yet Suchet had not begun
to move.

{797}

I was at Mora, where my battalion was to remain, if the jokers about camp
were to be believed; an absurd rumor, for wherever a vigorous blow was to
be struck the Italians never failed to come in for their share. I had
formed a close friendship with Lieutenant Polidoro, a reckless individual,
but one of the best-hearted fellows in the service. He was from Milan, and
had commenced life as a choir-boy. A _reverendissimo_, almost unknown
to him, was in the habit of sending him from time to time fifty
_scudi_ by way of pocket-money. The day he received this little
remittance was a gala-day for the whole battalion. Wine flowed through the
camp. Not a man was forgotten. The next day he was without a _sou_,
but he had had his fun, and drunk many times to the health of Monsignor
Capellini, as he called his friend.

His father was unknown to him, and often would he cry, twirling his shako
on his sword, when asked why he did not assume the paternal cognomen:

"Why should I recognize an old fellow who shows so little pride in having a
grenadier of my height for a son?"

The gayety of Polidoro, the friendship of his comrades for him, the
attachment of his men, whose enthusiasm was excited by his bravery and
liberality, inspired me, at last, with the most unlimited confidence in
him; and, well satisfied with never having to inflict the slightest
punishment, thanks to the excellent reports he always brought me of the
company, I placed matters of mere discipline entirely in his hands.

Suddenly, one fine morning, at roll-call, not one of my men, with the
exception of the Sous-Lieutenant Brocard--a Frenchman like myself--appeared
on the parade-ground. He, sad and crest-fallen, informed me that our
company had filed away during the night toward Batea, to the north of
Casserras, on the Arragon frontier. At the same time he handed me a letter
addressed to me by Polidoro. Judge of my astonishment when I cast my eye
upon its contents:

  "Captain: It is certainly an ill proceeding on my part to leave Mora,
  with your whole company, without first informing you of our intention.
  Life in Mora is not very lively, and our men were growing shockingly
  tired of it. I am responsible for their health, and found myself forced
  to adopt violent measures to preserve it. We are going a league from here
  to Batea, where they say good wine abounds. It is even reported that
  there is a guerilla roving through the mountains, and that he has been
  joined by some disbanded soldiers of Sarsfield and Campoverde. What a
  chance for fun! We will thus be enabled to indulge in a little diversion
  while waiting for the march on Tarragona. I do not ask you to put
  yourself at the head of our expedition. I suppose, even, that, if you
  were ordered to bring us back, your honor would only permit you to speak
  to us through the throats of muskets. Be good enough, however, to advise
  our brave colonel of our departure, and tell him that, whatever may
  happen, we are all devoted to him, for life and for death, and that each
  one of us (I was always remarkable for foresight) has ten rounds of
  cartridge at his service. If we are let alone, be assured that the entire
  company, including your humble servant, will be en route for Lareda at
  the first roll of the drum.
      "Your faithful friend,
          "The Lieutenant Polidoro."

This letter filled me with consternation. I felt that I had been guilty of
weakness and negligence. I was not only puzzled; I suspected perfidy,
treason. I did not yet understand the singular forms which insubordination
often takes among Italian troops. The Russian soldier is little more than a
savage; the German, when he quarrels with his officers in the field,
becomes gross and brutal; the Frenchman pushes familiarity to insolence;
the Spaniard heroically disbands, placing every reverse to the account of
the ignorance or cowardice of his officers, and then sets about making head
individually against the enemy in some defile of his mountains; the
Englishman shows himself, in war as in everything else, a close calculator,
weighing the _pros_ and _cons_ long together, and, above all
others, complains of the insufficiency or bad quality of his provisions, as
witness the mutiny of the fleet in the reign of George III., when it became
necessary to hang an admiral, and which was only suppressed by the coolness
of Pitt.
{798}
But, when the Italian mutinies, he does it with incredible niceness, and,
unless he has some vengeance to execute, (which he will carry out with
uncommon ferocity,) he remains an artist to the last.

"_Corbleu!_" cried I to Brocard. "We are in a pretty box; exposed,
too, to the ridicule of our comrades. And I thought this Polidoro my
friend!"

"And he is your friend, captain; doubt it not," replied Brocard; "only you
have not yet formed a true idea of the audacious recklessness and
impulsiveness of these Italians. All this would be but a pleasantry,
without evil results, if the necessity of maintaining discipline at the
outset of a new campaign did not give the affair importance; and what makes
it worse is, that they say the colonel since his return an hour ago has
been making preparations to repel an attack from Campoverde. He is furious
against you, and wishes to have a private interview with you."

Shame and anger almost choked me. I was beside myself with rage, and, if at
that moment a man had but given me a look of ridicule, I would have run him
through the body.

"I come to receive your orders, colonel," said I, as I entered San-Polo's
quarters. "I confess that I deserve no consideration. You told me what I
had to expect. Punish me. I ask of you but one favor--that you would permit
me to go alone to those mutineers and bring them back."

"What I hear is then true, sir," replied San-Polo, whose appearance of
concentrated anger boded me no good. But, having given me this thrust, he
added, softening a little:

"Listen to me, Bourdelaine, notwithstanding your fault in allowing Polidoro
to gain such a hold upon the company, you are nevertheless an officer whom
I esteem both for head and heart, and I heard a very flattering account of
you before you joined the regiment. I am sincerely sorry for you, and that
rogue of a Polidoro has so bewitched the men that after all you are not so
inexcusable."

"Thanks, my colonel."

"But," continued San-Polo, "we must lay aside such considerations in camp.
You had the want of tact to prefer a grade, when the emperor offered you
with his own hand the Cross of the Legion. That was in his eyes a fault
which, be assured, he will not soon forget, and I am sure that you would
have received both if you had chosen the cross."

I bowed my head, but did not reply.

"Your conduct after that, if you wished to rise, should have been
irreproachable, so that your mistake, which seemed to the emperor a piece
of youthful stupidity, might have changed its guise and shone forth as the
generous impulse of a soul born to command.

"I speak not now, captain, as your superior officer, but as your friend.
Speak privately to Lieutenant Brocard. Present yourself to these mutineers,
and let a bloody example recall them to duty. I have full power from the
commanding general to manage my Italians as I think proper. You will
decimate your company."

I started, horror-stricken.

"You have your orders, sir. Now, no delay or pity. Remember that prompt and
vigorous action is necessary not only to reestablish your reputation, but
to replace upon those men the yoke of discipline, so rashly broken. Under
our present _régime_ little is said and less written about army
affairs, and the news of the insubordination of a handful of Italians in an
obscure corner of the peninsula will scarcely reach the emperor's ears. I
will see that it is kept out of the bulletins. It is too small a matter for
headquarters to be troubled about, and in ten days all will be the same as
if nothing of the kind ever happened. Well! you have heard me; what more do
you desire?" asked San-Polo, astonished at my immobility and silence.

{799}

"Pardon, _mon colonel!_" I replied, with many misgivings. "How can we
decimate men of whom we have such immediate need before the enemy?" And I
showed him Polidoro's letter.

He read it through rapidly, and shrugged his shoulders; but, when he came
to the part where the lieutenant, while protesting his own devotion and
that of his men for their colonel, boasted nevertheless of his foresight in
furnishing each man with ten rounds of ammunition, San-Polo cried out, a
passing smile lighting up his face for a moment:

"Poor fellow! it is a pity, for he has the stuff soldiers are made of in
him. Unshrinking under fire, fascinating and raising the spirits of all
around him by his good humor, always ready, full of resources, yet
ridiculing glory and fortune. God grant that this trick do not cost him too
dear. What is the effective force of the company?"

"Ninety-nine men in all, with the officers and drummer."

"Very well; then it is reduced to ninety-six, since you and Brocard are not
in the affair, and the drummer, who is but a boy, does not count. This
letter will not modify my instructions. You will draw by lot four men and a
corporal for the firing party, and one man to dig the grave; ninety will
remain--nine to be shot; it is enough. As to Polidoro, if his stars should
favor him, you will put him under arrest for two weeks. I will attend to
him hereafter if necessary."

I turned with a heavy heart to leave the tent.

"Ah! one word more," said the colonel: "In case any chance should put you
on the track of the guerilla who has been seen between Casserras and Batea,
drag out the execution to the greatest possible length, without, however,
letting it seem that you do so. I love those good-for-nothings after all,
and would to God that a brush with the enemy may deliver them from their
scrape, for they would fight as they always do, and we would have a good
excuse for indulgence. Be easy, even if you find yourself surrounded by the
Spaniards, and open fire on them boldly, for I have taken my measures, and
help will be at hand. _Au revoir_, captain, and fortune favor you!"

Brocard and I immediately set out for Batea. It was yet early morning, and
the road was almost deserted. We could not perceive in the direction of
Casserras a single trace that might remind us of the recent passage of a
body of armed men. It seemed scarcely probable that the guerillas would
dare return toward Batea, which was at furthest a league to the north-west.

On the road I confided to my comrade the cruel mission with which we were
charged, and as I had never seen a military execution, and had never
expected to see so horrible a one as this, the slaying of every tenth man
in my own company, the conversation ran on the best mode of conducting the
business in which we were engaged so as to gain time, as the colonel had
recommended.

"Oh!" said Brocard, "I was 'decimated' my self once. It was in Portugal,
under Junot, for a trick our battalion played the commandant--a lion under
fire, but an ill-natured dog. We gave him a free bath in the Tagus. I was
then only a corporal. They commenced by surrounding and disarming the
mutineers; then, if any officers were found in the number, their names were
proclaimed aloud, or they were degraded. Then the ranks were broken, and we
were aligned in single file, each man taking his place according to chance.
A sergeant, drawn by lot and blindfolded, then approached the line, and,
starting from the first man he chanced to touch, without including him,
counted off ten, twenty, thirty, until he reached the end of the line, when
he continued in the other direction, commencing again with the man he first
touched, and if that poor fellow happened to be the tenth, or twentieth, or
thirtieth, psit! his doom was clear."

"Great heavens!" thought I, "how terribly cool he takes it!"

{800}

"While the counting went on," continued my imperturbable
_sous-officier_, "a roll of the drum accompanied each tenth man as he
stepped out; he was led to the edge of the trench dug for his grave; a
sufficient amount of lead lodged in his head or breast, and his affair was
ended. You see that much time is not lost, and the business even becomes
amusing sometimes; for every man's pride is up, and he chats, jokes,
laughs, appoints a _rendezvous_ under ground a year, a month, or
perhaps only a day off; and all the while the regimental band regales you
with the merriest symphonies, the most alluring marches!"

"You would not make a mockery of death!" cried I, interrupting him.

"Mockery!" he returned. "Diable! we won't have much chance to do so here.
We haven't yet even disarmed our friends, captain. San-Polo evidently
honors us both with his particular esteem, to send us two alone to decimate
more than eighty jokers, each of whom carries ten rounds of ammunition to
answer our polite proposition with."

"Nevertheless, the enterprise amuses you a little, does it not?"

"Humph! whether a man leaves his skin here or elsewhere, what matters it?
although it is disagreeable to be sent out of the world by your old
comrades, your friends at the bivouac, fellows whose elbows you are
accustomed to feel in the ranks. But, after all, those fellows haven't
treated us right; that is a consolation."

"But the other proceeding the colonel mentioned," said I--"the drawing
--you have not explained that."

"Ah! I can only teach you what I know myself; though I was something more
than a mere amateur scholar. I have heard that they sometimes mix up the
names in a helmet or shako, and shoot the man that owns every tenth name
that comes out. But, _ma foi!_ that way is shorter than the other,
but, if it suits you better, you may use it. H st!" [sic]

He stopped short in the middle of the road and brought the musket he had
brought with him from Mora to his shoulder, as a bullet whistled by our
ears, and a thread of white smoke rose from a ravine some little distance
off; a moment after, a tall, wild-looking man, enveloped in a long cloak,
and wearing a countryman's shoes and a red woollen cap, sprang toward the
mountain side, where in the twinkling of an eye he disappeared.

"Don't fire!" I cried, as Brocard was about to pull trigger; "you will give
those wretches the alarm. Wait until they attack us at Batea. That fellow
will simplify our business, and the colonel will be delighted. Forward--
gallop! Remember the mission we have to fulfil."

Ten minutes later we were in Batea. The company had stacked their arms
about a hundred paces from the mountain, and had spread themselves through
the village. The drummer alone, a boy of fifteen, stood guard over the
arms, under the protection of some old _grognards_, who,
cooler-blooded than their comrades, walked leisurely about, smoking their
pipes.

I rode straight to the drummer, and, without dismounting, said:

"Beat the recall, Zanetto, I am in haste."

The smokers at this order approached us, and stared at us with an abashed
air. The most insolent of them gave the military salute, through force of
habit, apparently. But they seemed thoughtful, twisted their mustaches
without speaking, and continued to smoke.

Zanetto, uneasy as the others, rose, hooked on his drum, and replied by a
prolonged roll, which did not cease until the whole company stood behind
their stacks.

"What is all this noise about? Are you a fool, drummer?" cried Polidoro,
coming up last of all, at a run, from the further end of the village, and
carrying a bottle in one hand and a glass in the other.

{801}

The sight of two horsemen redoubled his speed, and when he reached us, he
could scarcely gasp, in his astonishment and want of breath:

"You, Bourdelaine! You here! Glad to see you, _caro mio_. Welcome! We
scarcely expected so agreeable a surprise. What can we do for you, captain?
Will you try a glass of rum?"

I spurred my horse toward Polidoro, and, with a sudden blow breaking the
glass and bottle he held, said briefly and sternly:

"Your sword, lieutenant!"

Polidoro turned pale, and, recoiling a couple of paces, said in a husky
voice:

"My sword! Was it to demand my sword that you came from Mora, you and your
countryman Brocard?"

"We come to decimate you. The colonel has ordered it."

And I dismounted, placing myself in their power, to prove to the mutineers
the fixedness of my resolve to carry out my orders or die in the attempt.

The idea seemed, however, to excite their mirth.

"Decimate us!" cried one.

"Beautiful!" laughed another.

And cries of "Prodigious!" "What a farce!" "Whom will he do it with?" "He
hasn't even a corporal's guard!" rang on every side. The men left the
stack's of arms and began to gather round us with menacing looks and
gestures. Brocard threw himself among the most furious, but his words
availed nothing to restrain them. The situation was becoming critical.

Suddenly a thought struck me. I signed to Zanetto to beat his drum, so that
its continued roll might drown their voices, and the more desperate be thus
prevented from urging on those who hesitated.

Anything which brings the habits of discipline to the minds of old soldiers
acts with wonderful power. Before the roll of the drum ceased, every man
had regained his place; the tumult was ended and quiet reigned.

"We are come to decimate you," I continued, coldly and sternly as before,
"and we are alone. Do you ask why? Because the colonel wishes the execution
to be secret; he would not have the company dishonored before their
comrades--dishonored for having turned their backs when all was ready to
march upon the enemy."

"But we did not do so!" cried one of the men.

"Silence! The captain is right," replied several.

"Then Polidoro deceived us; he told us the captain would protect us," said
a young soldier.

Their tone had already changed. It was no longer hostile.

"I!" cried Polidoro. "Did I ever say aught to make you doubt the captain's
honor?"

"No! no!" cried voice after voice. "It is our fault. Let us suffer the
penalty! Decimate us, captain!" cried several, "and let us have it over as
soon as may be. We are ready."

"Lieutenant," I continued, advancing to Polidoro, "I demand your sword."

He moved his hand to the buckle of his belt as if to take it off, but the
struggle was too great for his proud heart; his youthful blood was in arms,
and, carried away by passion, he shouted hoarsely:

"Then come and take it!"

And drawing it from its sheath, he threw himself on guard.

"Bravo, lieutenant! Let him come and take it!" cried a voice at his side.

"Who spoke then?" I asked, feigning ignorance of the man.

"I!" cried an old soldier; one of the _grognards_ of the company.

"Very well, Matteo; I will attend to you presently."

There was no time for consideration; I at once fell on guard myself.
Polidoro awaited my attack with his blade low, after the manner of the
Italians, but at my first lunge, breaking down his parade before we had
even crossed swords, whether it was that remorse for his act prevented his
exerting his usual skill or through unlucky mischance on his part, I
disarmed him, catching his guard on the point of my sword and forcing his
weapon from his hand.

{802}

"_Maleditto!_" he exclaimed angrily, blushing with shame and wrath,
and turning to Zanetto, who could not forbear laughing at his mishap, with
a blow of his heavy boot, he crushed the drum to pieces, and, tearing off
his epaulettes, mingled with the ranks.

"Lieutenant, I have not degraded you," I said softly. "It is even possible
that, if chance favors you, I may restore your sword."

This indulgence shown to Polidoro, whose guilt was aggravated by an attack
on his superior officer, made a greater impression than severity could. The
fascination he exercised over the men, their belief in him, his prestige
were considerably lessened. I felt that I was master of the troop.

"As for you," I said to Matteo, "as a punishment for your insolence, you
must dig the trench."

"I, my captain?"

"You."

"Shoot me first, captain, I implore you," sobbed Matteo, pale with shame
and despair.

He was one of the oldest and best soldiers in the company; his mustache
almost white, and his face seamed with scars. He thought himself degraded
before his comrades, and did not see that my aim was to save him.

"Not so," I replied. "Go find a pickaxe and spade in the village and
quickly!"

"You are very hard on me, captain."

"Obey: no more words!"

All this while the _sous-lieutenant_ Brocard, who guessed my purpose,
was writing the names of the company upon slips of paper, which he threw
into a shako.

"But that is not the way it is done." cried Polidoro, in a bantering tone.
"Permit me to instruct you."

"Silence in the ranks!" I cried.

"But we will never get through at this rate, captain."

"I am not responsible to you, sir. It is the order of the colonel. Now,
come hither," said I to the drummer, "and draw four names for the firing
party."

"Am I not included, captain," returned Zanetto, drawing himself up proudly
to his full height.

"Boy, you do not count," said Brocard.

"It seems to me that I counted before the enemy," replied the boy.

"Be still, child!" cried Polidoro. "The drummer's duty is to follow the
company."

"That is true," said an old _grognard_. "Come, Zanetto, stick your
hand into the bag, but don't draw my name."

But it was the old man's name that he drew.

"The grenadier Sampierri!"

"I never had any luck," growled Sampierri, stamping angrily upon the
ground.

He took up his musket.

"The grenadiers Nicolo, Mordini, Ruspone!" continued Brocard.

Matteo, while this was going on, had returned from the village, and was
silently digging a trench to our left, about two hundred paces from the
mountain, where the earth was soft and offered but little resistance.

"Ha! Matteo! there are ninety of us," cried Corporal Campana; "nine men to
mount guard underground today. Make it wide enough, my old friend."

"A corporal is wanted to command the firing party," said Brocard, "and I
have mixed up all the names again in the shako."

"Well, let it be Campana," I replied.

"Me, _mon capitaine?_ What have I done more than my comrades? Why
choose me?"

"What have you done? Have you not three chevrons? Are you not the oldest
corporal? You should have set the example of subordination. Go!"

"So be it, then," said the corporal gloomily. "Come attention, firing
party!"

He marched to the trench at the head of his four grenadiers.

{803}

"Attention!" cried I. "Draw the names; the tenth--"

"Enough!" said Zanetto; "let him beware. The business is becoming less
amusing, captain."

He drew nine slips successively, which Brocard did not read, so that the
suspense continued to the end. The tenth he held up.

"The Sergeant Gasparini!"

"Good! This is the day of the grognards," said Gasparini, making the
military salute. "May I embrace Zanetto, _mon capitaine?_"

"Do as you will," I said; "I would rather be a hundred feet underground
than here."

"Thanks, captain. We all see how this business grieves you. Thanks!"

He bent over the drummer, and the tears, spite of his proud endeavors to
restrain them, dropped on his gray mustache.

"Here; take this for thy trouble, my boy," he said, giving the drummer his
silver watch.

He dashed the tears from his eyes shamefacedly, and with a steady step
marched to the edge of the trench.

"Ready!" cried Corporal Campana.

"Aim! Fire!" cried Gasparini.

A flash and report followed, and the old sergeant fell dead on his face in
the trench, where Matteo pushed him with his foot to the place where he was
to rest.

Zanetto continued, drawing from eleven to nineteen. Brocard, still without
reading them, tore them up one after another. Twenty reached, he took the
slip, lifted it above his head, and sobbed, rather than spoke, in his
endeavors to conceal his emotion:

"The Sergeant-Major Gambetta!"

It was the best instructed under-officer perhaps in the regiment; calm,
well knowing his duties, laborious--so useful, in fact, in the humble post
he held that his superiors through pure selfishness had never proposed him
for promotion. He was forty years of age at least, had received the cross
as far back as 1805, and with the money of his pension relieved many a
little want of his comrades.

"Ah! poor Gasparini!" he cried with a sort of mournful merriment; "if today
is the day of the old growlers, it is also the day of sergeants. What is
the matter, _mon capitaine?_" said he as he passed me. "You seem to be
in trouble."

He was not far wrong. I was in despair. My eyes were fixed upon the
mountain as if they would pierce through it, and at every changing shadow,
every breath of wind which sighed among the trees, my heart bounded
painfully with the hope that the long wished for guerilla was about making
his appearance on the heights.

"Adieu, Zanetto! take my cross, I have no watch. Show yourself some day
worthy to wear it. May it be long ere we meet again, captain. God guard
you!"

He crossed himself devoutly, and walked to the trench, his hands in his
pockets, bent one knee to the earth, and gave the word "Fire!"

We heard a report; Gambetta, his head shattered by the bullets, rolled like
a lump of lead into the trench.

"Will those beggarly Spaniards never appear?" said I to Brocard aside. "I
have had more than enough of this."

"Hush!" replied Brocard. "You do not know them yet as well as I, who have
been in the peninsula since 1807. I have just discovered the whole band in
the declivity yonder before us. They are climbing along above, so as to
attack us in front and on both flanks at once. I have counted three hundred
muskets and carbines. We will have hot enough work in a few minutes."

"God grant it! Continue, but more slowly, so that we need not kill any
more."

Slowly, however, as he proceeded to tear up the names drawn, slowly as the
drawing went on, number thirty at length came forth. He lifted it up to
read the name, but remained for an instant silent.

"Who? who?" resounded on all sides.

{804}

"To the devil with it! Let whom it concerns read it," cried Brocard,
flinging it upon the ground.

"I will wager it is I," said Polidoro, springing forward to pick it up.
"Yes, it is indeed. The Lieutenant Polidoro!"

"Did you not make a mistake, Zanetto?" asked I. "I think it is only
twenty-nine."

"Yes, yes, captain, it is only twenty-nine," cried a soldier. "Don't, for
heaven's sake, decimate an officer."

"_Corpo di Bacco_, do you take me for a fool?" shouted Polidoro. "I
counted them, and it is thirty. Come, come! Every one in his turn. No
joking! Your hand, Bourdelaine. You forgive me?"

He had scarcely spoken when a signal shot was heard on the mountain, and
following upon it two fierce blazes of fire crashed on our right and left
and concealed our assailants in their thick smoke.

It was indeed the guerilla band the colonel had spoken of, which, augmented
by some of Campoverde's men, whom the English had disembarked at the mouth
of the Ebro, had filed toward the mountain, going from Cacia, below
Tortosa, as far as Casserras, intending from that point to surprise us at
Mora. Learning that a company was at Batea, they halted on their way in the
hope of capturing us.

At the crash of the discharge, Polidoro sprang forward like a lion. The
smell of battle seemed to intoxicate him. His eyes flashed fire, and his
face glowed with ardor. His was a true warrior-soul.

"Captain," said he, "it is through my fault that the company is brought
into this danger; let it be mine to extricate it. Give me twenty men. I
know the country round, and this morning I discovered a little by-path
opening on a level space, from which we can turn the enemy's right. You
attack him in front; let Brocard see to his left, and in less than a
quarter of an hour all that rabble will be cut to pieces or dispersed. If I
remain alive, I will return and place myself at your disposal."

"If you return alive," I replied, "the colonel will decide upon your case.
San-Polo foresaw this attack and ordered me not to push the execution
further. Here is your sword, Polidoro, but be not rash; the colonel will
not deprive himself, for any whim, of an officer with such a future as
yours before him."

"I have no future, Bourdelaine," he returned gloomily. "I do not deceive
myself with false hopes. Preferment is closed against me. I will die at
least with honor, and bear with me the regret of my chief."

Corporal Campana had returned with his four grenadiers during this
colloquy, and Matteo walked slowly in the rear.

"Five men for the advance, and fifteen more for the lieutenant," I cried to
Brocard.

"All right, captain! You hold the centre and I the right, deployed as
skirmishers is that it?" asked Brocard.

"Right!"

"And I?" said Matteo, confounded as Polidoro, advancing at a run to the
mountain, gained some distance up its declivity without being perceived by
the enemy. "Am I good for nothing, captain, but to bury my comrades?"

"Thou old graybeard! March at the head of the column," I replied, "since
instead of awaiting us in their stronghold those fools have been silly
enough to come down to surround us. Thou seest I did not do ill to reserve
you for a better chance."

"Much obliged!" he returned. "Then we are going to cool their hot blood,
captain?"

The guerilla chief, not having perceived our movement, and there only being
fifty men at most before him, pressed confidently forward, never doubting
that he could easily compel us to lay down our arms. We waited until part
of his men had reached the foot of the mountain, and then we fell upon them
in a solid column, while Brocard, his men deployed as skirmishers, attacked
and drove back their left, and Polidoro, having gained his position, forced
their right to retreat, shooting down all who had not rejoined the main
body.
{805}
Suddenly I heard the drums beat the charge behind me. It was a company, led
by San-Polo himself, which had taken the Batea road, and so cut off the
advance-guard of the guerillas thrown forward toward Mora.

The Spaniard is brave, obstinate, and sober; inured to privations and
fatigues. He will fight long and well behind a rock or a wall, but in the
open field he generally lacks steadiness, and is easily discouraged if he
meets an unforeseen resistance in an attack. He will disband to meet his
fellows at some other point and plan some new surprise--the only species of
warfare which he conducts well. This, indeed, is the result of that
provincial spirit of independence, of that character of individuality,
which so deeply penetrates the masses and forms the distinguishing
characteristic of the nation.

The panic soon became general, and the village was filled with wounded and
dead.

Those who fled from the fire of one party of our men were received upon the
bayonets of another, finding no outlet through which to make their escape;
about a hundred of the guerillas, however, succeeding in forcing their way
toward Casserras, scattering as they went, and giving us a few parting
shots. All the rest were taken. San-Polo forced his way to us, pitilessly
shooting down all who refused to yield. He soon joined us, and cast his
eyes toward the open trench.

"Aha!" he cried, darting a look of intelligence to me; "you are cautious,
captain. You would not have the enemy know the number of your killed. How
many?" asked he in a low tone.

"Two, _mon colonel_; the lot unfortunately fell upon Sergeants
Gasparini and Gambetta."

San-Polo could not restrain a gesture of vexation.

"And Polidoro?"

"_Ma foi_, my colonel; he escaped well; we were going to shoot him
when the skirmish commenced. He is now upon the mountain, where I can vouch
he gave us some famous help."

"He is here," said Brocard, "and in a sad condition. Here are his men
bringing him upon their muskets."

When he reached us, Polidoro raised his head, not without great pain, and
lifting his still bantering glance to the face of San-Polo, who stood grave
and motionless, he cried with an attempt at his old gayety:

"Hit, colonel, hit! I am sorry, my colonel, that you can no longer break or
even put me under arrest."

"I will have chance enough to do both yet," replied San-Polo, with an
affected roughness which betrayed his anxiety to encourage the wounded
soldier.

"O colonel! my account is closed this time," returned Polidoro. "Six
bullets through the body, and two of them at least through my lungs. 'Tis
enough for one, _mon colonel_."

Then some long-banished remembrances seemed to return, and a sad smile
played over his features.

"_Sancta Maria, mater Dei_." he continued, in a tone still tinged with
a sort of sorrowful gayety, "_ora pro nobis peccatoribus, nunc et in hora
mortis nostrae. Amen_."

San-Polo threw himself from his horse, and pressed a flask of brandy to the
lips of the wounded lieutenant, holding him up in his arms for a moment to
help him to swallow a few drops.

"How kind you are to me!" murmured the dying man, in a scarcely audible
voice; "you seem to think that, in spite of my follies, I was not so bad an
officer after all. Keep, I pray you, my colonel, my sword in remembrance of
me; only unfasten the sword-knot and give it to Bourdelaine. Ah! I wish you
would give Zanetto fifteen francs for--the drum--I broke."

A cough interrupted him, and a bloody froth appeared upon his lips. His
features were pinched with pain; he gasped; his eyes grew glassy, and,
after a few slight convulsions, all that remained of Polidoro fell back in
the colonel's arms.

{806}

San-Polo took the lieutenant's sword, pulled the knot off, and hastily
handed it to me; then springing into the saddle he rode off at full gallop,
without speaking a word or even turning his head.

"Quick, Brocard! Mount and accompany the colonel," I said. "You know how
dangerous those guerillas are even in a rout. I shall not need you until we
return to Mora."


  III.

"And now that I have ended," said the general after a pause, "let us talk,
if you please, about the rain and the weather. It is strange," he
continued, pressing his hand to his brow, "how all these memories return,
at the time when, thank God, our days of joy and trouble are nearly past."

"Yours?" the government clerk hastened to reply. "You are good for twenty
years yet."

There are some honest people who always speak thus to old men.

"Good! very good!" growled the general, bending over the table to pour out
another wine-glass of cognac. "In twenty years I will be no more thought of
than if I had never lived. To the devil with wars and those who make them."

While his daughter and son-in-law were lifting their voices in protest
against such an idea, I discreetly took up the lamp, and approached the
frame to examine it more closely.

"These, very probably," I said, half to myself, "are the watch of the
grenadier Gasparini, the cross of the sergeant-major Gambetta, and
sword-knot of Lieutenant Polidoro."

"Yes, yes," replied the general, without looking toward them; "I bought the
watch and the cross from the drummer Zanetto. Poor child! The first bullet
sent him to his account in the assault on Fort Olivo, the 29th of May,
before Tarragona. For goodness' sake, let it alone."

I saw that my curiosity made him impatient, so I returned the lamp and took
up my hat to retire.

"You are leaving us very soon, my friend," said the general.

"You know, general, that I must be home by half-past nine."

"Right. Duty before all. I hope you don't intend to put all I have said
upon paper."

"You have authorized me to do so, general."

"So be it, then; but upon one condition."

"Name it."

"That you will add nothing of your own to it, as most of you men of letters
do; and that you will not pervert my words."

"I will try not to do so."

------

{807}

  From The Month.

  Scenes From a Missionary Journey in South America.


  I. Lisbon, St. Vincent, Pernambuco, Bahia.


Toward evening of the 12th of March we doubled Cape Finisterre, the
north-western extremity of Spain, and saw in the misty offing a very large
four masted iron screw steamer, homeward bound, and said to be from
Australia. We had but once seen the Spanish coast looming through the fog
several leagues off; but at sunrise on the 14th we forgot all the miseries
of the previous four days, as the sea was quite smooth, the weather
admirable, and a scene of unequalled beauty unrolled itself before our
eager gaze. We were entering the Tagus: on our left, at the river's mouth,
stood the castle of St. Julian, apparently not a very ancient or remarkable
structure. We had passed in the night, also on the left, the far-famed
wood-crowned hills and picturesque glens of Cintra, so beautifully sung by
Lord Byron in Childe Harold. Further on jutted into the stream the
yellow-walled old Moorish fortalice of Belem, so often depicted, and so
worthy of it. Its many lights and shadows, as the sunlight plays on its
richly sculptured front, give it a strangely quaint and old-world
appearance. Its garrison, a mere company or so, appeared to enjoy a
sinecure; for I beheld a single sentinel lazily pacing up and down a narrow
landing-place. Others were fishing with a rod and line, and a few more
washing in the stream their seemingly unique shirts, for they wore no other
clothing that I could see, save a pair of white canvas trowsers. This scene
I saw repeated a few weeks later in the Brazilian island of Sancta
Catharina, where a squad of black soldiers were washing their shirts and
trowsers in the waters of a small mountain stream. From the castle of Belem
the view eastward up the river is one of the most beautiful that can be
imagined, and seems at first fully to justify the pride of the Portuguese
lines:

  "Quem nâo tem visto Lisboa,
   Nâo tem visto cousa boa."

That is, he has not seen a beautiful sight who has not seen Lisbon. The
river, considerably narrowed at its extreme mouth, widens here very much,
and displays on its broad surface a forest of masts. On the left hand the
city rises from the water's edge up an amphitheatre of seven hills, house
upon house, church upon church, filling up an irregular semicircle of
considerable extent, and having for a frame the surrounding green heights,
whose tender spring verdure, here and there enlivened by the blooming
Judas-tree, [Footnote 299] agreeably contrasts with the dazzling whiteness
of most of the edifices. To the westward of the city sits the imposing mass
of the modern and yet unfinished royal palace of Ajuda; and beneath it,
near the waterside, an old convent and church, whose gray weather-beaten
walls seem to bid defiance to the mushroom structure above. This palace of
Ajuda will probably never be finished. The finances of that puny kingdom
are not, I imagine, in the most prosperous condition; and it would appear
that modern royalty is as little at ease in residences fashioned upon the
grandeur and magnificence of ancient days, as a beggar would be if he
suddenly became the owner and tenant of a nobleman's seat.

   [Footnote 299: A tree with pendulous bunches of pink flowers. It is
   probably so called from its blooming about Passion-tide. Some say that
   it was on a tree of this species that Judas hanged himself.]

{808}

On the southern side of the Tagus are to be seen scattered here and there
pleasantly enough among the green hills various white-walled
_quintas_, or country farm-houses and villas. There is also, facing
Lisbon, a small town of three or four thousand inhabitants. A little lower
down toward the sea, on the same side, is the new Lazaretto, or building
for quarantine--a certainly not very inviting abode, all white and yellow,
without a particle of verdure or a square inch of shade about it. The
harbor or bay, four or five miles wide, contains ships of almost every
nation; but chiefly British, for Portugal is now little better than a
colony or dependency of England. The Magdalena had no sooner cast anchor
than two of the respected clergy of the English college--the college _dos
Inglesinhos_, (of the dear English,) as the people call them--came on
board to welcome me. I accompanied them ashore, and visited the college,
situated on one of the highest spots of the city. On my way through the
custom-house I saw a piece of impertinence committed by one of the
underlings in the absence of his principal, which too well indicated the
little respect which is now paid to the holy see in that once so Catholic
kingdom. A secretary of the Brazilian nunciature, on his way to Rio, had
landed with a small bag containing despatches sent by Cardinal Antonelli to
the nuncio at Lisbon. Ambassadors' papers are privileged everywhere;
nevertheless, in spite of the secretary's remonstrances and mine, the said
underling broke open one of the sealed packets, and would doubtless have
proceeded further had not Padre Pedro, of the English college, at that
moment arrived, and threatened the insolent _douanier_ with the loss
of his place. I don't know if the nuncio took any notice of the affair; but
where could such a proceeding have taken place save in Lisbon, or perhaps
in Florence?

Facing the harbor, in the Praça do Commercio, is a handsome bronze statue
of one of the former kings of Portugal, whose proud and commanding attitude
half recalled the times when Portugal was mistress of the seas, and her
adventurous navigators pioneered the way through unknown oceans to
discoveries of stupendous magnitude.

The English fathers, the Revs. ----, showed me more than ordinary
politeness: one of them accompanied me to present sundry letters of
introduction I had brought with me to some notable personages of the
capital. I was very cordially received everywhere, and could have wished
that all the Portuguese resembled these worthy representatives of former
national greatness. The Marqueza de F----, among others, appeared to me the
model of a hidalgo's wife, full of grace and dignity, yet of amenity and
practical good sense. I was particularly struck with her fervid piety,
worthy of better times. At the house of the Marquess de L----, brother to
the Portuguese minister in London, I met the newly consecrated Bishop of
Oporto, who, to an ardent zeal and piety, joined the precious experience of
thirty years' apostolate in China as a Lazarist missionary. He has since
made his voice heard to some purpose in the upper house of the Lisbon
parliament, strenuously resisting and combating the antichristian measures
of the Louié ministry.

Some of the churches, of course, I visited, as far at least as the
shortness of time allowed. They bore for the most part traces of the
magnificence and gorgeous piety of other days; but were generally ill kept,
and but too empty of worshippers. The chapter mass was being chanted when I
entered the Primatial church; there were very few people assisting; near
the door stood some poor women with dead babes laid on benches; they did
not seem to be noticed by any one.

If the exterior aspect of Lisbon is truly magnificent, a nearer view of
that capital takes away all illusion. I afterward found this to be the case
also with many of the Brazilian cities.
{809}
Nature has done wonders for most of these towns, but man seems to have made
it his especial purpose to sully and disfigure everything. If we except
some really very fine buildings and noble historic monuments, all in Lisbon
is squalid, neglected, and ruinous. Most of the streets, rebuilt so lately
as eighty years ago, after the great earthquake, are narrow, tortuous,
ill-paved, and more than ordinarily dirty and fetid. The same may be said
of the houses, even of palaces of great noblemen, in which, in spite of
imposing architectural splendor, and traces of former sumptuousness, the
olfactory sense is frequently annoyed by indescribable odors of stables or
worse things. Sanitary commissions would assuredly be driven mad if at work
in that city for any time. The noisy bustle of a great capital always
gives, more or less, an appearance of energetic life to its indwellers; but
after London, Paris, or even Madrid, Lisbon appears dead. It is the torpid
metropolis of a degenerate people.

On the 21st at sunrise we cast anchor in the fine bay of St. Vincent, one
of the Cape de Verde Islands, and a coaling station for steamers. It is a
volcanic rock of frightful sterility, but possesses a wide, deep, and
secure harbor of considerable resort for ships navigating on the African
coast. Everything is brought thither from the neighboring island of Sant'
Antonio--water, oranges, bananas, yams, sugar-canes, and other
productions--for the place yields absolutely nothing, save a little
brackish water in a couple of wells. Its sole inhabitants are a few score
of starving-looking negroes, a few lean pigs, fowls, and goats. I saw,
soaring high among the mountains, a kind of vulture with a large yellow
beak, but wondered where that bird and its possible fellows would find
anything to eat, unless it came across from the neighboring islands. For
there is no sign whatever of vegetation or of wild animal life on this
spot, where it is said never to rain. The soil is reddish, and perpetually
calcined by the intolerable fierceness of an almost equatorial sun. He
ought not to complain of heat in Europe who has once visited St. Vincent.
One of my voyaging companions, the secretary of nunciature at Rio, the Rev.
Monsignore ----, who had come directly from Rome, was sighing and groaning
under the oppression of that fiery clime. The good man had, by some
mischance, left his baggage behind, and had no other clothing to wear but a
long black coat of a coarse and thick texture that would have done him fair
service amidst the snows of Canada--but here in St. Vincent! He must have
had a vivid anticipation of purgatory, I am sure; his distress was very
comical, and he could not relieve it by lighter clothing until we reached
Bahia. Far more at their ease were the dozen or two of little blacks,
perfectly naked, who played on the smooth sandy shore, jumping and tumbling
in and out of the waves, just like our own children in the new-mown hay at
home in the summer-time.

There may be at St. Vincent four or five score of so-called houses of most
wretched appearance, a set of stone-built barracks tenanted by a company or
so of Portuguese soldiers, and a small fort on a hillock, overlooking and
commanding the bay. Three or four sickly-looking palm-trees, brought from
Portugal, endeavor to grow in front of the government house. A small church
has recently been built, and is served by a black priest, who managed to
raise the funds for its erection by begging on board every ship which came
into the harbor. To the right on entering the harbor is a mountain of
somewhat fantastic form. American imagination has found in its outline some
resemblance to Washington's profile, and it has in consequence been called
"Washington's Head." Right in the middle of the entrance of the bay, and
darkly outlined against the frowning cliffs of Sant' Antonio, is a tall
conical rock of remarkable appearance. It is a capital landmark, being seen
seaward at a very great distance.
{810}
When we entered the harbor, we found at anchor, among other vessels, a
large Federal steam-frigate, which had been there four months watching the
arrival of the famous Alabama. Within the spacious bay disported two
whales, mother and cub, which were pursued for several hours, but in vain,
by the native fishermen.

We most gladly bade farewell to the desolate isle of St. Vincent, and
fairly sailed away for the New World, yet distant from us six or seven
hundred leagues. The heat now began to be terrific, especially at night in
the narrow cabins; but it was moderated most days by a gentle breeze, which
made lolling on deck in the evenings truly luxurious. About a day's sail
from St. Vincent I first noticed shoals of flying-fish, though I believe
they are to be found in a much more northerly latitude, and in another
voyage I saw some off the isle of Palma. They rise from the sea, chiefly in
the early morning and when the surface is freshly rippled, in flocks of ten
to sixty or more, and fly close to the surface, often tipping the crest of
the wavelets, and skim along with great velocity for the space of five or
six hundred yards, when they plunge again into the deep, raising a speck of
foam. These small fish, which are said to be of excellent flavor, are about
the size of herrings, and of silvery-gray color. I once or twice saw some
much larger and almost white on the coast of Brazil, between Bahia and Rio
de Janeiro. They are said to be constantly pursued by the bonita, a large
fish of the dolphin species, whose hungry maw they try to escape by rising
out of the water. But although their flight is exceedingly rapid, their
relentless enemy cuts its way through the subjacent waves with equal
swiftness, and is ready for the tiny victims as they drop exhausted into
the sea. There appear to be prodigious numbers of them all over the ocean;
and nearer the coast of Africa the sea is sometimes covered for miles and
miles with their spawn lying on the smooth surface like the duck-weed of
our ponds. In this latitude, and for many days, I also noticed swimming
along in the smooth transparent waters the gay-looking dorado, a large fish
vividly reflecting the sun's rays from its scaly back, all over green and
gold. Sharks I was anxious to see, but none appeared throughout the voyage;
scared away, I should imagine, by the noise and turmoil of the
paddle-wheels.

We had fallen into the region of the trade-winds, which blew steadily from
the north-east, wafting us rapidly over the middle Atlantic; we were eight
days reaching Pernambuco. I was surprised to meet with so few ships on the
way, yet we must have crossed the high road of a great multitude of vessels
outward or homeward bound. This apparent scarcity of ships gave me a vivid
idea of the immensity of the ocean, on whose pathless surface so many sail
wander, lost like imperceptible specks of dust on the plain. In this great
solitude, life on board ship is monotonous enough, and by its wearisomeness
almost justifies the snarling saying of Dr. Johnson: "Sir, I would rather
be in jail than on board of a ship, where you have the confinement of a
prison together with the chance of being drowned." Want of space, even in
the largest vessels, the impossibility of applying one's self to serious
occupation, to study, or to prayer, for want of quiet solitude, and also on
account of the rolling of the ship, which greatly fatigues the head--all
this makes one sigh for the end of the voyage, and find a lively interest
in the most trifling occurrences--the passing of a distant sail, the
flight of a bird, and so forth. It is especially in the evenings--and they
are long ones in the tropics--that time appears heavy, unless one be
inclined to enter into all the frivolous and noisy amusements set on foot
to beguile weariness. The passengers dance, play games, improvise concerts,
and especially eat and drink enormously, and almost all day long. How
wearisome former sea-voyages must have been, which lasted many months,
sometimes even several years! It is related, for example, in Captain Cook's
voyages that some of his crew once lost their wits for joy on seeing the
land they had not beheld for eighteen months.

{811}

A few degrees before we crossed the line, the sky became overcast with
heavy dark clouds, which French sailors call "_le pot du noir_" and
our English tars "the doldrums;" the barometer ceased to indicate any
atmospheric changes. It was on the 26th, in the evening, we passed the
equator, and for more than forty hours we had violent squalls and
occasional tremendous downpourings, which made us all uncomfortable: for
staying on deck was out of the question, and the heat below was very
oppressive. Flocks of a species of large wild goose, which came flying
round the ship, announced the proximity of the land; and on the 28th toward
dusk we passed off the rocky and picturesque island of Fernando de Noroñha.
It was at too great a distance to distinguish anything, but it is said to
contain features of great natural beauty. This island is now used as a
place of transportation for the convicts of Brazil. These were formerly
detained in the southern island of Sancta Catharina; but that spot afforded
the prisoners too many facilities of escape, being so near the mainland,
and within easy reach of the foreign state of the Banda Oriental. I could
collect but meagre notions concerning the number and the lot of the unhappy
convicts, mostly all blacks, who have only exchanged one kind of slavery
and labor for another. In most cases, when the crime committed has not been
of the most heinous nature, the convict after a year or two's confinement
is drafted into the army or navy. I have heard officers of both services
bitterly complain of this system. The island of Noroñha is mountainous, and
difficult of access.

At last, on Sunday, March the 29th, at sunrise, we touched the New World,
and the Magdalena cast anchor in Pernambuco roads, about three miles from
the land, for the harbor, whose entrance is narrow besides, is inaccessible
to ships of large tonnage. The fishermen of this place boldly navigate in
those roads, and sometimes many leagues into the offing, on strange-looking
and perilous rafts made of a few crossed bamboo-sticks, somewhat resembling
the catamarans used at Madras. It is inconceivable how those daring sailors
are not devoured by the sharks off those flimsy machines, which the least
wave upsets. It does not much concern them when this happens, for they all
swim like fishes, and the tiny craft is soon put to rights again. There is,
however, a tradition in the port that once upon a time a man was snatched
off his dancing catamaran by a monstrous shark, which devoured him before
the eyes of his affrighted companions. Pernambuco is a place of great
trade, the third city in the Brazils for population and the importance of
its productions: it is one of the great sugar-markets of the world. It
possesses some good churches and public buildings, and a school of law, the
first in the empire, where Pombalist and Jansenistic traditions have
obtained much less adhesion than at Sao Paolo or Bahia. A thesis was
maintained there with great applause a short time ago, which astonished all
the lawyers of Brazil, namely, that the pope needed not a general council
to decide infallibly any doctrine of faith; his _ipse dixit_ was
sufficient; and all true Catholics ought at once to bow interiorly and
exteriorly to it as to the word of Christ himself. This was probably the
first time this had been so boldly proclaimed in South America since the
banishment of the Society of Jesus.

The town is cut up by a number of lagoons, crossed over by bridges like at
Venice; and its first aspect from the sea reminds one very much of Hamburg.
There is, of course, the difference of a glowing sky and large tropical
vegetation. The land lies low, and the presumption is that it must be
unhealthy; but it is not so, I believe, owing to the regular sea-breezes,
which greatly cool the air and dissipate the vapors. The heat cannot but be
intense at times on a spot only six or seven degrees south of the line.

{812}

It is not always easy to land at Pernambuco, for the entrance of the harbor
does not give more than fifteen or sixteen feet of water in the best tides;
and there lies across it, and for hundreds of miles up and down and
parallel with the coast, a dangerous low coral-reef, against which the
mighty Atlantic waves dash with fury. This reef, which in many places
barely rises above the surface, would prove an excellent defence against
invasion; but it was not apparently thought sufficient in former times, for
there stands on the beach to the north of the town a square bastioned fort,
built by the Dutch under Maurice of Nassau when they occupied the country
at the beginning of the seventeenth century. To the north of this again, on
a bold rocky hill, is situated the ancient city of Olinda, so called from
the exclamations of the first Portuguese discoverers when this enchanting
land broke upon their sight: "O linda terra! lindos outeiros!" "O beautiful
country, charming hills!" It was formerly a bishop's see and the capital of
the country. It contains several churches and convents, as well as old
residences of governors and magnates, of a rather massive and imposing
architecture. The surrounding country is one vast forest of palm,
cocoa-nut, and other trees of the torrid zone. There are many flourishing
sugar and coffee plantations, surrounded by nopal and banana groves, and a
multitude of superb creepers, amidst whose luxuriant growth and glowing
flowers rise the white-walled houses of the owners. As we rode along, we
purchased some pine-apples and mangoes of immense size and exquisite
flavor. When we returned on board, numbers of Pernambuco boatmen surrounded
the ship with loads of oranges and bananas for sale, as well as tame
parrots and monkeys; but none of them, with the fear of the sharks before
their eyes, would imitate the blacks, whom we had seen at St. Vincent
diving into the sea, nine or ten fathom deep, to pick up small pieces of
money which the passengers would throw in, to witness their astonishing
power of swimming.

From Pernambuco to Bahia we had thirty-six hours' passage. We were not
nearer the land than ten or twelve leagues, the Royal Mail Company
forbidding their commanders of ships to hug the coast any closer. On the
30th of March, about noon, we met the fine steamer La Navarre, of the
French Messageries Company, on its way to Bordeaux. It was crammed full of
passengers, among whom I saw several Sisters of St. Vincent de Paul. These
venerable religious women serve various hospitals in the Brazils--at Bahia,
Rio de Janeiro, and other places. They are everywhere, I need not say,
worthy of their holy founder and of their country. They have not escaped,
however, in this New World the calumnies and persecutions which they have
had to endure in some parts of Europe, and notably in Portugal and
Piedmont. Almost the first Brazilian journal I saw contained an infamous
diatribe against them; but they would very likely themselves prefer
contumely to honor, as assimilating them more perfectly to their Divine
Lord, the Man of Sorrows.

At a very early hour on the 31st we doubled the point which juts out on the
right of the harbor of Bahia, and the ship fired a gun to announce our
arrival. No description can convey a true idea of the beauty of this
celebrated bay--Bahia de todos os Sanctos, that is, "All Saints' Bay."
Covered to the water's edge with a glowing and gigantic vegetation, the
hills which rise above the roadstead are dotted with pretty-looking villas,
the residences of the city merchants. It was the commencement of what is
here called winter; yet I saw everywhere a superabundance of flowers,
especially of roses. Trees with strange forms, fruits yet more strange, a
teeming population, two thirds of which at least was composed of negroes,
the odd cries and barbarous howlings of these blacks as they hawked their
wares or carried, to the number of ten or twelve together, huge burdens
swung on the middle of long poles--everything was of a sort to interest a
stranger.
{813}
Carriages there were none, or very few at least; for the city, being built
on the steep slope of an abrupt cliff, has no level surface anywhere in its
streets, most of which resemble very much the queer uphill lanes leading to
Fourvières in the city of Lyons. The intense heat of the atmosphere made me
give up the design I had entertained of visiting the town entirely on foot.
I hired a kind of bath-chair, of which there are long stands about, and two
stout negroes conveyed me successively to the various churches and the
public garden of the city. These chairs are very ingeniously contrived to
exclude the sun and admit the air, as well as to preserve absolute privacy
within them. They swing on a long pole fore and aft, which the blacks carry
on their shoulder; but this pole is shaped like an elongated S, to secure
the sitter's equilibrium, which would be unpleasantly disturbed by the
see-saw tread of the bearers. Notwithstanding the little exercise I took,
an abundant perspiration ran from every pore. It was therefore with
exquisite pleasure that I came to a house where for a few _vintems_ (
few pence) I could exchange my stewing state for the coolness of a
shower-bath. I had previously been told to use the necessary precaution--
that is, to rub a small quantity of caixaça, or rum, over my body before
coming in contact with the water.

The trade of Bahia appears considerable, and is entirely carried on in the
lower town, which stretches along the water-side on the north for more than
a league, nearly to the western-most point of the outer bay, crowned by a
celebrated sanctuary dedicated to Nossa Señhora do Bom-Fim--Our Lady of the
Happy Death. On the eastern promontory of the harbor, on the summit of a
bold hill looking upon the Atlantic, is the oldest religious building,
perhaps, in all South America. It is the now ruinous church built by an
Indian princess, the first of her race who embraced the faith of Christ.
The beach below was often hallowed by the footsteps of the venerable Father
Anchieta, the apostle of Brazil, who would bare his breast to the
sea-breeze to cool the ardor which consumed him for the salvation of souls,
and write with a stick on the sand of the shore the beautiful Latin verses
he daily composed in honor of the Blessed Mother of God. The blacks still
cross themselves at the mention of Padre Anchieta's name, and the country
still abounds with traces and monuments of his zeal and wonderful sanctity.
The numerous churches of Bahia are generally very richly decorated, but not
cleanly kept. I saw some large black rats running across the altar of one
of them, most profusely adorned with gilt carving. It was a church
dedicated to St. Benedict the Moor, a negro saint from Africa, a monk of
the Franciscan order, who lived and died in Sicily, and it is exclusively
used by the blacks. A negro priest was loitering about its precincts, and
when I told him of the boldness of the aforesaid rats, "We cannot help it,
Señor Padre-mestre." he answered; "their numbers are so great we cannot
destroy them." The churches have no seats; the men stand round by the side
walls, and the women _squat_ down on the middle wooden floor.
Sometimes, and when the floor is of stone, the ladies are accompanied to
church by a female slave carrying a small square carpet, which she lays
down for her mistress to sit upon. I saw again here in the cathedral what I
had already seen in Lisbon: on a wooden bench near the holy-water vessel
close to the door lay several dead babies, shrouded up with the exception
of the face, and covered with fresh flowers. The mothers were waiting hard
by until a priest should come to recite the funeral prayers. I had at first
mistaken these little corpses for waxen _exvotos_. Thus adorned, death
had nothing sad or repulsive about it, especially when I thought that
these, were the remains of little angels--_anjiñhos_ they call them
in Brazil--who had flown to heaven with the purity of their baptismal
innocence.

{814}

The negroes of Bahia are numerous, and the finest in the Brazils. I admire
their robust frames, and the seeming indifference with which they carried
almost Titanic loads beneath such a burning sun. The landing-place is a
perfect Babel; these blacks are so loquacious, and they, moreover, seem to
think it adds to their importance to shout as loud as their rough, powerful
throats will let them. I have never heard a negro speak to another in a
quiet, subdued way. Why should they, indeed? They never attain the sober
sense of manhood; they are a mere set of noisy, overgrown children. We had
had as a fellow-passenger by the Magdalena, as far as Bahia, a Mr. B----, a
little, old Scotchman, long settled in the province of Minasgeraes, who
took no small pride in exhibiting a snow-white beard almost a yard in
length, and a plentiful crop of hair of the same venerable hue. A sprightly
English youth, who was one of the first to land, spread the report among
the blacks that we had on board the famous "Wandering Jew." Our ship was
soon surrounded by a multitude of boats crammed full of woolly heads, and,
when the luckless Scotchman landed, he was, to his dismay, escorted
everywhere by a long procession of shouting and screaming blackies. We
thought he paid rather dear for his eccentricity.

The market, which was near the landing-place, was abundantly supplied with
eatables of every kind; poultry, kids, lambs, sucking-pigs, all alive, and
bleating, squeaking, clucking their best; a great variety of fish and
fruits; oranges of huge size, called there _seleitas_; water-melons,
with the red, cool pulp; mangoes, bananas, jacas, a sort of large pumpkins
which grow on tall trees, goiavas, and many more species whose mostly
Indian names I cannot recollect. With the exception of oranges, limes, and
pine-apples, which are superexcellent, the fruits of Brazil do not at first
please a European palate. Those of Europe--owing, I suppose, to careful and
scientific cultivation--attain a more delicate flavor, if they do not equal
the fruits of America in size and color. The same may be said of the
flowers, which, with greater size and magnificence of color and form, lack,
for the most part, the exquisite perfume which our humblest flowers exhale.

------

  Translated.

  Sayings of the Fathers of the Desert.


Some brothers came to Abbot Antony, and said: "We wish to hear a maxim from
you by which we may save ourselves."

The father said: "You hear the Scriptures, that is enough for you."

"But we wish to hear something from you, father."

"You hear," replied Abbot Antony, "Our Lord saying: 'If any man strike you
on the left cheek, turn even the other to him.'"

Said they, "We are not able to do this."

"If you are not able to turn the other cheek, at least bear the one blow
patiently."

"We cannot do that," said they.

"If you are not strong enough for that, then do not wish to strike more
than you are struck."

"Oh!" said they, "we cannot even do that."

Then the father said to his novice: "Get ready some pap for these brothers,
for they are very weak." Then, turning to them, he said: "If you are not
able to do even this much, what can I do for you? All that you need is
prayer."

------

{815}


  The Two Lovers of Flavia Domitilla.

  By Clonfert.


  Chapter IV.

  The Feast of Blood.


About the year ninety-two of the Christian era, Domitian visited the
theatre of the Dacian war. Not daring to show himself to the rebel army, he
plundered the towns and cities which were left unprotected. Fire and fury
surrounded his march; and desolation left its smoking trail behind him.
Carrying with him the wealth of the pillaged villages, he returned to Rome.
The tact and bravery of Julian, who directed the war against the Dacians,
in a few months brought that warlike race to terms. Officially informed of
their surrender, Domitian, who had never appeared on the battle-field,
decreed himself a triumph such as in by-gone ages were awarded only to the
conquerors of great nations. He pompously ordered the temple of Janus to be
closed for the third time, we believe, in his reign. Its gates were left
open in time of war. Its closing was a sign that universal peace prevailed
over the vast area of the Roman empire.

The temple of Janus was closed. But the peace its silent sanctuary
represented was like the calm of the sea before being lashed into fury by
the flapping wings of the tempest. The surface of the social system,
undisturbed by the rebellion of warring tribes or by the clash of arms, was
outwardly quiet and even. But the quiet and the evenness were those of the
stagnant ocean described by the poet as being overhead covered with smiling
ripples and silver sunshine, but underneath filled with filth and
corruption and the nameless things bred thereof. Taking the point of view
chosen by a great saint, we may well exclaim: "What a spectacle presented
itself to the eye of the all-seeing Creator as he gazed downward over that
vast empire! What corruption of truth and justice, of morality and religion
filled society and corroded its vitals in all its parts! Rotten and rotting
systems of philosophy and the monstrous principles and practices born
thereof swarmed and spread on every side. It was only natural that the
whole corrupted mass would swell and boil with fury as the little yeast of
Christian truth destined to impregnate and cure it was being infused."

The temple of Janus was closed. But the man who directed the destinies of
the empire was ill at ease. The legions in Gaul and Asia were clamoring for
increased pay. He had already, in order to secure their fidelity, raised it
from three to four aurei, (about $5.25.) The gigantic and shapeless temples
and other structures he erected, together with the enormous outlay on
public games and festivals, were a continual drain on the treasury. To
procure money he had appointed officials of his own choosing to
superintend, increase, and collect the taxes in the provinces and in the
city of Rome; creatures like Arthus, who ground the people with iron heel
until they bruised out the last cent from their pockets. Arthus was one of
the principal of these tax-imposers and tax-gatherers in the city:
ambitious of rising higher and higher in the imperial favor, and of
out-distancing his fellow-financiers in the neighboring districts, he spent
all his time and attention which were not engaged in building up and
pulling down parts of the labyrinthine temple, of which we have in the last
chapter spoken, in devising plans for raising money.
{816}
After bath and dinner he was to be seen each day for hours with his hand
upon his head concocting schemes as to the best and most expeditious way of
putting his hand in the pockets of the poor, plundered plebeians. The
client who came to propitiate the great man by a money-offer was received
with courteous words and slippery smiles. But if it were a wretched wife
pleading for a husband and family, whose last obolus was given already, she
was received with insult and turned, if not kicked, from the door, carrying
with her the fear of the unrelenting tyrant hanging like midnight upon her
soul!

The Jews in these as in our own times had more than an ordinary repute for,
and possessed more than an ordinary share of, the money-bags. Arthus had
suggested a tax to be levied on them for the right of residence in Rome.
This proved a mine of supply during many years for the emperor. Another
suggestion of Arthus had been an edict of persecution against the
Christians, which would at once enable the cunning official to seize on and
confiscate all their property. The exhausted condition of the treasury,
together with what we are about relating, combined in bringing forth the
edict.

At an early hour of the day, in the morning of which we have seen Aurelian
at the Christian meeting, he sought the imperial palace. He had not changed
his dress of the day before, and he betrayed by his hurried step and
restless eye the deep excitement of his feelings.

When admitted into the emperor's presence, he described what he had
witnessed in the catacombs. The number and the rank in society of those
present at the Christian assemblage were painted in colors heightened by
his imagination and fears. The words of consecration which he had heard
were instanced as undeniable proof of the truth of the rumors circulated
about the murder of infants and participation of human blood and flesh by
the Christians, The marriage of Flavia and Vitus, as Aurelian believed, was
depicted, as well as the part which Theodore, Priscilla, and Clement took
in solemnizing it. The emperor seemed wholly overwhelmed. By nature and
habit of a very nervous temperament, he was overcome with vague terrors on
discovering himself surrounded in his very palace and family by traitors.
Vitus and Priscilla! the two most trusted inmates of his household, the
most punctual in the discharge of their duties, and the most faithful, as
he thought, to his own person! They to be infected with this Christian
poison, and principal sharers in these bloody orgies! After them it was
easy to belive that many more of his servants and friends were followers
and supporters of Christ. Perhaps at that very moment the plots planned in
those sacred meetings were at work against his life and crown! Might it not
be a clever manoeuvre to have thus entrapped and drugged Flavia in order
that, through her popularity and that of her uncle, the Roman people would
willingly see the sceptre wrested from his hand and placed in that of the
Christian whom she would espouse? Such were the reflections of Domitian in
listening to Aurelian's narrative. His full, red face grew fuller and
redder; his eyebrows lowered and drew the small eyes deeper under; and his
voice, always husky and rough, sounded more huskily and roughly as it fell
in short syllables on the ear:

"By the gods--who guard the Roman capitol and state--Aurelian--we must burn
out this nest of insects--crawling in the earth--and seeking to sting us
in our very palace--" He paused for breath, which came and went in
asthmatic style, between groups of three or four words. Striking a gong, he
ordered one of the courtiers to send for Arthus. But that obsequious
functionary was already in attendance at the palace and soon appeared. With
a peculiar, twitching motion of the hands, and feet, and head, and with
dress swaying in unison with the nervous motion of his body, Arthus
approached and knelt before Domitian.

{817}

"Arthus!" said the latter, "before the vesper hour--let the edict already
drafted against the Christians--be posted in the plain of Mars and let
copies of it be sent to the Asiatic, Gallic, and African cities!" Then
addressing Aurelian, "We shall ourselves--send a guard for the
ladies--Theodora and Flavia--as well as for Clement and the others--you
mentioned, and have them with Vitus and Priscilla--examined and punished
in our own presence."

On the evening of the 25th of December, the tablets on which the edict was
graven were placed in the Campius Martins. Then there arose through the
city sounds of commotion and woe, such as might arise if it were besieged
by a hostile army, or if the Gauls were once again calling for the
surrender of its keys. There was a hurrying to and fro of citizens in fear
or in fury, of soldiers and civic officials, of informers, accusers, and
accused, many of whom were before night dragged from their peaceful hearths
and families to the public tribunals. Many Christians were also put to
death. Through the darkness, as it fell like a pall on that scene of
excitement and suffering, the yelling of the mob was heard for many miles
as they surged through the streets and assailed the houses of the
suspected. The thirst for plunder and for blood, the awful rumors afloat,
and believed, of the Christian assemblies, and the thousand petty motives
of jealousy, envy, and hatred by which wicked men are often influenced
against their honest, virtuous neighbors, gave energy to the infuriate
passions of the populace. Throughout the night and the following days they
did not rest from their unhallowed work. Women and children as well as men
were seized and carried before the prefect or into the chamber of tortures,
where the brute-crowd shouted and cheered as they saw the martyrs writhing
on the rack or on the gridiron! However, in these crowds were many of the
faithful, who watched the death-scene, treasured each word that passed
between the judge and the condemned, and carried away either a sponge
soaked in, or a vial filled with, their blood, or some other relics. These
trustworthy witnesses wrote down the history of the martyrdom on
parchment-rolls, which they gave to the secretaries appointed to revise and
take care of them. Thus the first Christian Acts of Martyrs were compiled
and preserved.

As soon as the edict was posted, troops on horseback and in vehicles were
seen hastening through the streets and gates, and directing their courses
along the Appian, Flaminian, and other roads leading to the north, south,
east, and west. They carried copies of the edict for the magistrates of the
cities on their routes, to be set up in the forums and market-places. Some
travelled without stopping, save only for rest or refreshment at the
military _stationes_, or halting-places along the roads at intervals
of twenty or thirty miles. The _pagi_, or outlying smaller villages
built about central forts or places of defence, were seldom visited by
these couriers; because the _pagani_, or inhabitants of these country
villages, were the last to embrace Christianity, and comparatively few of
them had been at this early period converted. Quickly and steadily did
these messengers of persecution speed on, until the seaports or the
mountains were reached. Counting the places at which they rested for the
night, from ancient itineraries of the great highways north and south and
west, we may compute that in ten days the edict was promulgated at
Marseilles, in fifteen at Corinth, in nineteen in Algiers, and in
twenty-four in Ephesus and the remote cities of Asia Minor. Quickly and
steadily these messengers of woe sped from Rome to the four quarters of the
empire; and, as they passed, confusion, agony, and bloodshed were left
behind them. Like a stone dropped into calm waters, the bloody edict fell
upon the empire in an interval of peace.
{818}
The circle of consternation and persecution, like the commotion caused by
the stone falling into the tranquil waters, became wider and wider as the
imperial couriers travelled on, until it surged to the far boundaries of
the empire. But, although the servants of the temporal sovereign were thus
fleet and active, the messengers of the Lord of hosts were not slow or
idle. Ignotus, the Jewish beggar of the Appian Way, was the first to bring
word to Pope Clement and the missionaries assembled in the catacombs. The
pope had already made his arrangements; the city had been divided into
fourteen districts corresponding with its partition under the first
emperors; and priests, deacons, laymen, and even women were appointed to
watch over the several parts, to find admission, if possible, to the
imprisoned confessors and administer the sacraments and other consolations
of religion, to note down carefully what took place at their trials and at
their execution, and to obtain their bodies, and, if not, whatever relics
they could, in order to their decent preservation in the subterranean
vaults. Others, principally those who were lame or otherwise maimed, or
could easily assume the role of mendicants, were appointed to act as
messengers between the city and the catacombs. The more zealous who sighed
for martyrdom were restrained and ordered to prepare the niches for the
bodies of the martyred. The anxieties of the holy pope and missionaries
were not for the preservation of their own lives, but for the perseverance
of the faithful and the conversion of the unbelievers. Prayers for this
double purpose were appointed to be constantly offered in the collects of
the mass and at other times. Oh! how those unselfish, heroic men yearned
for the time when the cross of Jesus would be emblazoned on the capitol as
a sign that the countless nations and tribes subject to the Roman sway
bowed their stubborn necks to the mild yoke it symbolized. Health, wealth,
life were nothing in their esteem compared with this glorious result.
Clement, in his care of Rome, did not forget the other churches. To the
priest Andronicus, who was setting out for his post at Ephesus, he
entrusted a letter to the people of Corinth with regard to practices and
schisms, which, despite the efforts and letters of St. Paul, still cropped
up amongst them. Ignotus, the beggarman of the Appian and Latin Crossway,
had meantime turned his face toward Ostia, and long before the moon had
crossed the meridian he had warned many Christian communities to prepare
for the combat. The messengers of Domitian rested for the night; but
Ignotus never stopped day or night until he reached the mines outside
Ostia, where many Christians were employed. Before the official
announcement of the persecution reached the sea, the docks and vessels were
watched by anxious believers, clad in many guises of concealment. Many
availed themselves of the earliest craft to cross to Illyricum, Macedonia,
Greece, and Asia Minor. In the same way the Christian dwellers beyond the
Alps and Pyrenees had due warning before the edict arrived. One herald,
like Ignotus, was in every place through which he passed, a centre from
which other messengers, like radii, branched out. Thus zeal and charity
gave wings to the humble followers of Christ, with which the wealth and
power of imperial Rome were not able to arm its servants. Thus, too,
Christendom was prepared, as well as it could be, before the vultures
pounced upon its entrails. That preparation consisted to a great extent in
secreting the rolls of the sacred Scriptures and the consecrated vessels,
so that the persecutors might not seize on or desecrate them.

After leaving the Christian assemblage, Sisinnius with his two companions
returned to Aurelian's villa, and retired to take a few hours' rest. When
he awoke, he was told that Aurelian had driven to Rome.
{819}
Returning alone, he mused, as he passed through the fields between the
Latin and Appian roads, on the events of the previous evening, and
determined to say nothing, until he saw how things went on, to his wife or
Flavia about what he had witnessed. He found both in the family parlor.
There was nothing in their appearance to betray their vigils of the night
before, no sign of weariness or excitement. Flavia wore on her head the
white veil, and on her finger the ring, with which Clement had invested
her. A spirit of peace, joy, and happiness indescribable beamed, like a
light through a lamp, through her face and whole being. Theodora seemed
also happy. As the husband opened the door of the room, he saw her on her
knees, and heard his own name mentioned in earnest tones by her as she
supplicated God for his conversion and salvation. Standing for a moment in
the half-open door-way, he gazed with a feeling of veneration on his young
wife and her companion, as the rays of the sun slanting through a window
fell upon their earnest faces and surrounded their kneeling figures with a
balmy radiance. Silently and instinctively he joined them in spirit, asking
for full light to know and believe the truth.

Neither Sisinnius nor the inmates of his house had heard anything about the
persecution until twilight, when they were visited by a troop of the
imperial guard, led by Arthus. With his usual hurried gait and style, that
functionary explained how he had been commissioned by the emperor to escort
Theodora and Flavia to Domitian's palace. Sisinnius expressed his surprise
that it was deemed fitting or necessary to send a guard for noble ladies,
when an invitation or a message would have sufficed.

"Excuse me, noble Sisinnius, if I arouse your fears or pain your feelings.
You are not aware, perhaps, that an edict against the Christians has been
this afternoon promulgated from the capital and on the plain of Mars. The
two noble dames have been accused of belonging to the Christian conspiracy,
and having been present early this morning at their secret meeting!"

This was said by Arthus in a tone of malicious insolence, which Sisinnius
at another time would have subdued with contempt. But the tidings fell like
a lightning-stroke upon him, paralyzed his self possession, and filled him
with vague fears for his wife and her young friend.

"Please to rest," he said to Arthus, "for a few minutes in the atrium while
the ladies get ready to accompany you." Then re-entering the parlor, he
cautiously broke to them the news. But it had no effect on them as it had
on him. They glanced smilingly at each other, and exclaimed, "Thanks to
God," and announced their readiness to depart. Sisinnius urged Flavia to
change her dress; but she declined.

"But this dress," he urged, "will witness against you and be your
condemnation."

"Then I shall retain it. It is my bridal dress: is it fitting for the bride
to leave it aside when going to meet her spouse?"

Addressing himself to Theodora, he found her of the same mind as Flavia.

"Alas! my poor wife!" he exclaimed, embracing her, "you too are resolved to
die! Our lives have hitherto flowed along purely and musically as two
streams which unite their currents and go laughing through the summer
meadows. But we have reached the edge of a precipice, and may be separated
for ever by death. I know the tiger-nature of Domitian. But I must gird
myself to propitiate him. Oh! tell me that you will renounce this Christian
sect! otherwise I have little hope."

"You know not, dear Sisinnius, what, you ask. Death shall not separate
those who share in the future resurrection to a glorious immortality. Would
you wish your wife to lose her hopes thereof in order to avoid a little
temporal punishment? O my husband! I should die happily if I knew that you,
too, had acknowledged the one true God and the Saviour of mankind who died
to save us from sin and shame. I shall pray with my last breath, with my
blood, that God may reveal himself to you.
{820}
Then we would be again united in the world beyond the grave, never, never
to be separated! For there is One above"--she looked and pointed upward,
and Sisinnius imagined that there was something more than mortal about
her--"there is One above who shall hereafter command the elements and force
them to deliver up the portions of these mortal bodies that will have
passed into their possession. Fire and water, earth and air, shall obey his
order; and the ashes from the urn and the mould in the coffin, and the
gaseous vapors in which our burned or corrupting flesh may evaporate will
be restored; the bones shall stand up joint over joint in the tombs, and
the flesh and nerves and sinews shall reclothe them, and the souls shall
enter the arisen tenements of our bodies, and ascend like Jesus,
triumphant, after having despised the sting of temporal death and achieved
victory over the grave, to enjoy the unending, ineffable bliss prepared for
those especially who by their blood confess him before men. Dear Sisinnius,
if you be true to your own nature, if you do not stubbornly prevent the
light from sinking into your mind and heart, I feel a presentiment that you
shall know him, and shall then appreciate the littleness of earthly
sufferings and death when endured for his love! Gladly do I proceed to
resign the life of my body in order to secure that of my soul, particularly
when it is given for him who for me, and for you, too, my husband,
permitted himself to be nailed on a cross. With my very blood I shall
beseech him to show you how great joy there is in suffering for his name,
his person, and his cause. Dearest Lord Jesus!" she fervently prayed,
sinking on her knees, "grant your unworthy servant this grace, and
strengthen us in the hour of trial and combat to win the martyrs' fadeless
palm!"

Sisinnius was affected to tears as he saw such proof of sincere devotion to
himself, and at the same time to the religion of Christ. He thought that it
could not be the religion it was described to be, when it could thus win
and fill with happiness spirits so pure, so high, so unconscious of
wickedness as those of Theodora and Flavia Domitilla.

Arthus was impatient. Impatient also was the Emperor Domitian. He was
waiting in a large chamber of his palace, where, on an ivory altar, edged
with gold, were placed two statues, one of Jupiter and the other of
himself. A smoking censer swung in front of the altar, sustained on silver
chains attached by a pulley to the ceiling. Soldiers with drawn swords
stood in files along the sides of the room, while nearer to the altar were
stalwart men, naked to the waist, and holding instruments of torture in
their hands. These were Domitian's favorite gladiators, to utter a word
against any of whom was certain death. Round their arms the veins and
muscles swelled like twisted cords. The emperor was seated on a rich
throne, the steps of which he at intervals descended and nervously paced
the room. Terror sat on many faces as they saw his sunken eyes and knit
brows. Terror, too, was in his own heart as he conjured up before his
imagination the wide-spread and the hidden nature of the Christian
conspiracy against his throne. Such he assumed it to be. Hence he had now
surrounded himself with the gladiators, to whose fidelity and prowess he
entrusted his safety against the dagger or the poisoned cup. Aurelian had
been commissioned to lead a body of soldiers to the Appian Way, and to
arrest Pope Clement and those with him. But he had returned without finding
any trace of them, to the great chagrin of himself and the emperor. Those
present heard the latter grinding his teeth like small wheels in machinery,
and muttering broken curses with livid lips.

When Sisinnius and his party arrived, they were confronted by Vitus and
Priscilla.

{821}

"Flavia Domitilla and Vitus," said the emperor, "stand forth! Is it true,
Vitus, that, despite our known will, you have espoused our ward and cousin
in the Christian assembly? Can it be that you, so favored, so honored by
us, have become a traitor to our throne and person?"

"My sovereign lord!" said Vitus, stepping boldly into the centre of the
hall and making obeisance to the emperor, "I am not a traitor. On the
contrary, I am bound by every motive of loyalty and religion to serve you
in all things lawful. I appeal to your own experience of me in the past, if
I have not hitherto acted as became a Roman and an officer of the
household. Neither, most exalted emperor, is it true that the Lady Flavia
and I have plighted troth. My troth and faith are plighted to one higher
and more beautiful than she is; to one who can never know speck, or stain,
or wrinkle, who has been washed to a spotless whiteness in the blood of the
Lamb!" As he said this he turned toward Flavia, as if deprecating a seeming
want of courtesy.

At this moment, Aurelian, excited and travel-stained, entered, accompanied
by the troop of the guard he had led to arrest Pope Clement. The only
prisoners he brought back were Damian, the missionary from Britain, and
Lucius, one of his own slaves. He had met these two wandering among the
tombs, but got no trace of others.

Domitian, motioning Aurelian to a place near Vitus and Flavia, asked the
latter:

"Is this true, Flavia Domitilla, which Vitus says?"

"It is, my lord!" she answered, in a low, tremulous voice.

"What sayest thou, Senator Aurelian? I trust you have not, through
jealousy, led us to offer indignity to gentle ladies of rank! If so, by our
crown, the high favor in which you have stood shall not save you from due
atonement."

Aurelian was confused and confounded by this address, the cause of which he
did not well comprehend. One circumstance, however, worked in his favor:
Flavia's white veil. The emperor, remarking it, asked:

"What mean these flowing robes of white? They seem more a festive costume
than an evening dress."

She answered not. But Aurelian, having recovered his presence of mind,
said:

"Was I not right, O mighty potentate? This is the bridal garment she wore
last night when she was married to Vitus, after being drugged with a cup of
human blood! See! the influence of that drug is upon her yet."

"Answer me, Flavia Domitilla, truly. Have you been in the secret meeting of
the Christians last night?"

"I have," she replied, with firm voice and unflinching eye.

"Have you withdrawn the faith you gave Aurelian by our desire, and bestowed
it on another?"

"I have."

"To whom? to Vitus?"

"No! but to One more beautiful, more lovable, more glorious than Vitus, or
than any earthly being; to One whose wisdom outdistances the accumulated
lore of sages and philosophers; to One whose years are not counted by the
sands on the ocean's shores, by the grass blades clothing the earth, or the
water-drops in the encircling seas; yet whose youth is greener, fresher,
softer, and more lovely than the eye of man has rested on or the fancy of
poet has pictured; to One whose sceptre rules the nations of the earth and
all things therein, the islands of the deep and all things thereon, whose
messengers guide the stars in their courses, whose beauty and majesty are
faintly mirrored in the universe, and whose love for me is so great that he
left all these aside and became a servant in order that he might suffer and
die for me, and thus free me from the clutches of a tyrant! Yes, O emperor!
I have plighted my faith, and hope, and love, my body and my soul, my
present and my future, to my God and my Redeemer, Jesus Christ! He is my
glorious spouse, and I am his accepted bride.
{822}
Behold the garments in which I have been betrothed to him!" As she spoke
her face became animated, her voice grew strong and eloquent, her eye
flashed with courage, her whole bearing gave proof of a soul raised by the
excitement of unusual happiness to heroic daring. She stood before the
cruel tyrant, with hand uplifted to heaven, and the white Ionic veil waving
round her face like a shifting glory; and might, in the eyes of the heathen
soldiers, have passed for the goddess Juno, as described by Virgil, or for
Iris freshly descended from Olympus. But Domitian was not moved by her
youth, her eloquence, or her beauty, but bounded from his throne as if
stung by a serpent when he heard her thus mention the Saviour's name.

"What! In my presence--to my face--declaring yourself the bride of my worst
enemy. By the manes of Vespasian and Titus! If you do not offer sacrifice
to Jupiter and to my divinity, and renounce all connection with this
Crucified Jew, your head, with all its attractions, shall not long remain
upon those rounded shoulders!" He waved his sceptre and directed the
soldiers to bring her toward the altar. But she would not raise her hand
toward the incense.

"Never! never!" she exclaimed, "by word or act, shall I deny the Lord of
lords, the God of gods, and acknowledge by the supreme worship of sacrifice
a demon that has usurped his place, or a creature to be a god because he
sits on an earthly throne. You may force my hand, but you cannot force my
will!"

Domitian was frantic: "Away with her! away with her! Her family have always
crossed my path. Let not her head," he turned to the gladiators, "remain an
instant on her body, that her tongue may no longer insult me!"

A smile rippled over the face of the virgin confessor.

"See! she smiles, she mocks me! Off with it! off with it! Craven cowards!
do you hesitate before a mere woman? Give me that executioner's sword and I
shall make short work of it. By heavens she is smiling still and calling on
Jesus. Where is he now, God of gods, as you name him? Why does he not come
forward at his beloved's bidding to resist the power and stay the arm of
Domitian?"

Aurelian interposed nervously:

"Most powerful monarch and irresistible deity! she is smiling in joy under
the infatuating belief that, when her head is severed from her body, she
shall be out of your power, freed wholly from my claims upon her, and
received into the kingdom which Jesus promises to all who die for him. Do
not allow him to triumph over you, do not gratify her desire of martyrdom;
but entrust her to me, that I may make her my own; and then both you and I
shall have triumphed over those who have driven her into this madness."

"Be it so! Ha, ha! I believe you have taken the right view. See the tears
glisten in her eyes, and her joy is changed to sadness. But take her hence,
never to enter my presence, lest her words excite me to gratify her insane
longings. Who are those that drugged her?"

"Behold them!" said Aurelian, pointing to Vitus, Priscilla, Theodora, and
Damian. "There were others, too, who took a leading part in the ceremony,
but we have not been yet able to arrest them."

"Vitus! come forward and offer sacrifice to the gods!"

"I cannot, O mighty emperor! Because there is but one God to whom the honor
of sacrifice may be paid, and that is Jesus Christ, true God and true Man."

"Are you, my ladies," the emperor turned to Priscilla and Theodora, "of a
like disposition?"

"Yes," was the low but firm answer.

"Executioners, advance and do your duty by these recusants!"

Sisinnius fell upon his knees before the emperor and pleaded hard for his
wife's life, pleaded his own long services and fidelity to the imperial
family, pleaded her youth and innocence.

{823}

Domitian at length relaxed.

"I shall spare her life as I have spared that of Flavia Domitilla, until
such time as will show whether she will return to a better sense or not;
but both must be under the surveillance of a guard, whom I shall appoint.
As to those others," he said pointing to Priscilla and Damian, "the
traitors of my household, I shall make an example of them." He gave orders
in a voice which was not to be disobeyed for the execution of Priscilla and
Vitus, Damian and Lucius, (strangers in whom no one seemed interested;) and
the command was obeyed.

As Domitian saw the heads severed from the shoulders, he gloated over the
scene with the savage cruelty peculiar to him. Theodora and Flavia covered
their faces and prayed for the victory of the martyrs, managing to saturate
pieces of cloth in the blood.

------

    Original.


    The Wasted Vigil

  Alas! what dire mischance is wrought?
  A Friend was here who gently sought
  An entrance to my humble cot,
  Whilst I--O sorrow!--heeded not.
  In meekest guise he came and went,
  And I, on trifles vain intent,
  The joyful greeting still forbore
  While he was knocking at my door.

  For me he left a regal throne,
  And came in silence, and alone;
  No shining guard his steps attend:
  O earth! hadst ever such a friend?
  And yet I did not rise to meet
  Those wearied, patient, wounded feet,
  Nor did I shield that kingly head
  On which the chill night-dews were shed.

  Oh! did I wake, or did I sleep,
  That midnight vigil not to keep?
  I knew, and yet I heeded not;
  Methought I heard, and then forgot
  That he had warned of swift surprise,
  And only termed the _watchers_ "wise."

  Dear Bridegroom of my soul! return!
  Bereft of every joy, I mourn:
  Return! my house, at last, is swept,
  And where thy feet have stood, I wept.
  Beloved Guest! I call--I wait;
  Hope whispers, "It is not too late."
  Be then that hope no more deferred,
  Speak to my soul the pardoning word,
  Then will I list in rapture sweet,
  And dwell for ever at thy feet!

      Marie.
      Beaver, Pa.

----

{824}

    From Chambers's Journal.

    Old Paris.


As with men, so with cities. Whenever one of the latter becomes famous, and
the eyes of the world are fixed upon it, we desire to know more of it than
what is presented on the surface. A thousand little details, trifling,
perhaps, in themselves, share in the interest attaching to the whole to
which they belong. And as the most interesting biographies of great men are
those which not merely make us acquainted with the prominent features of
their lives--with the great exploits which they achieved--but also follow
them into their solitude or home-life, so the most attractive chronicles of
states and cities are those which enter into the seemingly unimportant
minutiae, neglected by the general historian and the compiler of the
guide-book.

Lutetia (_civitas_) Parisiorum is first mentioned in Caesar's
Commentaries. Lutetia has had various derivations assigned to it, but most
probably it is the Latinized form of _Loutouhezi_, the Celtic for "a
city in the midst of waters," it having been built on an island in the
Seine. In the fourth century it received the name of the people whose chief
city it was. During the middle ages it was supposed that Francus, a son of
Hector, founded Paris, and also Troyes in Champagne, giving to the former
the name of his uncle. In all likelihood, it comes from the Celtic
_par_ or _bar_, a frontier.

Christianity, according to Gregory of Tours, was first preached to the
Parisians by St. Dionysius, or Denis, in the year 250; and the first synod
held in Paris took place in 360, which seems to prove that the Christian
missionaries had already made numerous converts there. Paganism, however,
was not wholly uprooted until the episcopate of St. Marcellus, who died in
436, and who, according to a legend, is said to have hurled into the Seine
a frightful dragon which desolated the city, and which, perhaps, was the
emblem of heathenism.

Julian the Apostate had a great liking for Paris, and spent five winters
there. He praises its inhabitants for their intelligence and good conduct,
and the surrounding vineyards for their excellent produce. An edifice,
improperly called the Thermes de Julien, still exists in the Rue de la
Harpe, which perpetuates his memory, and possibly served as his residence.
In his time, the Montagne Ste. Geneviève was a sort of Campus Martius; the
gardens of the Luxembourg were occupied by a Roman camp, and Roman villas
lined both sides of the Seine.

The Merovingians made Paris their capital, and Clovis constantly resided
there. His sons, while dividing his states, judged the possession of Paris
of so great importance that they shared it among themselves, and agreed
that none of them should enter it without the consent of the others. Under
this dynasty, several of the Parisian churches were founded. Childebert
built the church of St. Vincent, afterward St. Germain des Prés, the
vaulting of each window in which was supported by costly pillars of marble.
Paintings, decorated with gold, covered the ceiling and the walls. The
roof, composed of plates of gilded bronze, when struck by the rays of the
sun, dazzled the eyes of beholders with its brilliancy.

Under Louis VI. and Louis VII. Paris became celebrated for its schools. The
best known were the Cathedral School, the school of St. Germain des Prés,
and that of Ste. Geneviève. At the first mentioned, Guillaume de Champeaux
taught theology, and counted among his pupils the well-known Abélard, at
the end of the eleventh and beginning of the twelfth century.
{825}
In 1118 Abélard opened on the Montague Ste. Geneviève his famous school,
which soon eclipsed all the others, and at which no less than ten thousand
scholars attended.

Philip Augustus, judging that Paris was not sufficiently protected by its
walls, caused a tower to be built outside them, on the site of a
_Louveterie_, or wolf-hunting establishment, from which it received
the name of the Louvre. It served at once for a royal residence, a
fortress, and a state-prison, and was completed, according to the original
plan, in 1204. It was under this monarch that the streets of Paris were
first paved. One day, while standing at a window of his palace in the city,
the mud or filth in the street, shaken by some vehicles which were passing,
exhaled an unbearable stench, which invaded the royal nostrils. It was then
that Philip conceived the project of paving the streets. The work was done
at the expense of the town, the pavement consisting of rough flagstones,
about three feet and a half square, and six inches in thickness.

It was in this reign, in 1182, that the legate of the holy see consecrated
the cathedral of Notre Dame, begun in 1163 by Maurice de Sully, Bishop of
Paris. This immense edifice, however, was not finished till the reign of
Charles VII. in the fifteenth century. The original flooring of Philip
Augustus was lately found at eight or nine feet below the surface; and the
thirteen steps which in his time, it is said, led to the entrance have
disappeared. It was under Philip that the municipality of Paris received
its first developments, and assumed a regular form. Besides the provost,
who, as officer of the king, presided over the courts of justice, there was
the syndic, nominated by the community of merchants, whose duty it was to
protect the commercial interests of the town. He was afterward called the
provost of the merchants, and was assisted by _echevins_, who formed
his council. Under Philip, this officer acquired many new rights. The
police, the streets, the care of public edifices, the administration of the
lands belonging to the town, passed from the provost of Paris to this
functionary.

Philip was also the patron of learning. He instituted schools in the Rue du
Fouarre. _Fouarre_, or _foare_, from which is derived the
existing _fourrage_, (forage,) is an old French word signifying straw.
The scholars in those simple ages sat upon bundles of straw during the
lectures, and as this custom naturally resulted in the frequent appearance
of that material in the neighborhood of the schools, the street received
its title from it. During the middle ages, no traffic was permitted in this
street, in order to obviate any disturbance to the students.

Philip the Fair founded the parliament of Paris. It held its sessions in
the king's palace, (Palais de Justice,) which, in the middle of the
fifteenth century, was entirely abandoned to it. In this palace was the
vast hall which served for receiving the homage of vassals, giving audience
to ambassadors, public festivities, and other occasions of national
interest, at one of the extremities of which was an enormous marble table,
round which sovereigns alone were permitted to sit; and upon which, at
certain times of the year, the society of _clercs de la basoche_
(lawyers' clerks) gave dramatic entertainments of a farcical character.

In the fourteenth century, as now, Paris was celebrated as the seat of
fashion in dress, though those dazzling _magasins de nouveautés_ which
we now admire there did not then exist. Wearing apparel, as well as other
merchandise, was generally sold by criers in the streets. "They do not
cease to bray from morning till night," writes Guillaume de Villeneuve.
Venders of all classes swelled the discordant concert. To cry goods for
sale was the daily special occupation; among others, of the three hundred
blind men supported by the king, St. Louis. These unfortunates, it seems,
were in the habit of performing their duties without guidance, and the
consequence was that they frequently came in collision, and gave each other
severe contusions.

{826}

The first stone of the famous Bastille was laid by the provost of Paris, in
the reign of Charles V., 1369. That formidable edifice was built for the
purpose of protecting the king, who had seen his authority braved by the
Parisians while residing in his palace in the city, which on that account
he quitted. He frequently dwelt in the Louvre, of which the Bastille was a
pendant, and of which M. Vitet gives the following picturesque description
as it was in the fourteenth century:

  "The king caused to be raised outside the moats a number of buildings,
  useful and ornamental, of a middling height, forming what were then
  called _basses-cours_, and united to the chateau by gardens of
  considerable extent. One cannot imagine all the various objects that were
  heaped together in these dependencies and gardens. Besides lodgings for
  the officers of the crown, there were a menagerie of lions and panthers,
  bird-rooms, aviaries for the king's parrots, fish-ponds, basins,
  labyrinths, tunnels, trellises, leafy pavilions--the favorite decoration!
  of gardens in the middle ages. These parterres, cut in symmetrical
  compartments, and thrown in the midst of buildings varying in form and
  elevation; that chaos of towers and turrets--the former rising heavily
  from the moats, the latter as if suspended from the walls; that pell-mell
  of pointed roofs, here covered with lead, there with varnished tiles,
  some crested with heavy vanes, some with tufts of various colors--all
  this has no resemblance to a modern palace; but that disorder, these
  contrasts, which seem to us only barbarously picturesque, appealed quite
  differently to the imagination in those days, and were not without their
  grandeur and majesty. These were the bright days of the feudal Louvre,
  when it was living, peopled, and well cared for."

The space of ground which, until lately, formed the Marché des Innocents,
was, in the middle ages, the principal cemetery of Paris. It was surrounded
by a sort of vaulted gallery, which was reserved for the corpses of
distinguished persons and for dress-makers' shops. Here, in the year 1424,
the English, who were then masters of Paris, gave a grand fete of rejoicing
for the battle of Verneuil, and indulged in a frightful "dance of the dead"
over the level tombstones. In the middle of the cemetery rose an obelisk,
surmounted by a lamp, which alone feebly illumined at night the field of
the dead, and animated its solitude. But at sunrise all was
changed--daylight brought back with it noise, luxury, and pleasure.

Victor Hugo, in the chapter of his romance, Notre Dame de Paris, entitled
_Paris à vol d'oiseau_, (book iii. chapter ii.,) gives a vivid
description of the town as it was in the fifteenth century. Paris,
according to him, was at that time divided into three distinct parts--the
city, the university, and the town. The city, occupying the island, was the
oldest and smallest, and was the mother of the other two. "It stood between
these," he says, "like a little, old woman between two tall, handsome
daughters." The university was on the left bank of the Seine, stretching
between points which at present correspond with the Halles aux Vins and La
Monnaie. The town, the largest of the three divisions, was on the right
side of the river. Each of the divisions formed a town, depending for its
completeness upon the others. The city had churches; the town, palaces; the
university, colleges.

In 1539, Francis I., having given permission to the Emperor Charles V. to
traverse France, entertained the idea of receiving him at the Louvre, which
underwent, on that account, a general restoration, according to the style
of the renaissance; but as soon as the emperor departed, Francis,
perceiving that the new works were merely of a temporary character,
resolved to build a new palace on the same site as the former one, and
confided its erection to Pierre Lescot.
{827}
The building, begun in 1541, was continued till the death of Henry II. It
is the finest portion of the Louvre; the south-west angle. When Catherine
de Médicis came into power, she dismissed Lescot, engaged an Italian
architect, and caused that wing to be built which advances toward the
river.

In 1564, tired of the Louvre, Catherine bought a piece of ground called the
_Salbonière_, covered with pottery-works, the _Tuileries Saint
Honoré_, and commenced the palace which received its name from the
fabrics which had occupied its site. For six years, the new edifice
steadily progressed; but Catherine, having learned from her astrologer,
Ruggieri, that it was her fate to die under the ruins of a house near St.
Germain, suddenly gave up the works of the Tuileries, because it was in the
parish of St. Germain l'Auxerrois, and built the Hôtel de Soissons, on the
site of the present corn-market.

The famous Pont-Neuf was begun in 1578, Henry III. laying the first stone.

The Place Royale was completed in 1612. Here Cardinal Richelieu soon
afterward built a palace, which he called the Palais Cardinal, but which,
in a spirit of regal munificence, he presented to his king, Louis XIII.
Thenceforth it became the Palais Royal. Numerous hotels of the
_noblesse_ sprang up in the same quarter, and with them first appeared
there the warehouses for _bijouterie_ and other fancy goods, for which
the Palais Royal is at present so celebrated. A writer of that time
severely blames the merchants of these shops for permitting their wives to
flirt with customers--"all to induce them to buy a fashionable collar, a
child's purse, a drachm or two of perfume for the perruques or a boy's
wooden sword." Speaking of perruques, we must not omit to mention that they
reached their full development at the time of Louis Quatorze. Their most
celebrated maker was a M. Binet, from whom they sometimes were called
_binettes_. They weighed several pounds, sometimes cost a thousand
crowns, and rose five or six inches above the brow. The word _binette_
still exists in the language of the Paris _gamin_, designating a
person with a droll countenance.

The last insurrection at Paris before the revolution was that called the
_Fronde_, (sling.) This revolt received its name in a singular manner.
In the moat of the town, near Saint Roch, the little boys of the quarter
used to fight with slings. When the constable appeared, they all took to
their heels. In the disputes of the parliament, a young counsellor,
Bauchaumont, observed the modesty and docility of the members in the
presence of the king, and their turbulence in his absence. "They are quiet
just now," said he, "but, when he is gone, they will sling (_on
frondera_) with a will." The word remained. The Fronde soon gained the
whole town, which eagerly took the side of the insurgents, as the first
cause of the troubles was a new tax on houses built outside the walls.
Afterward, when the rebellion was quelled, the Parisians paid dearly for
their share in it. Their privileges were abolished, a royal garrison took
the place of their civic guards, and magistrates dependent on the crown,
that of the municipal authorities.

Deprived of its independence, it became the sole glory of Paris to be the
stage on which the splendors of the court of Louis XIV. were revealed. In
1662, that king gave an idea of what his reign would cost by the famous
_fète du carrousel_, which has left its name to the vast _place_
between the Louvre and the Tuileries. It cost 1,200,000 francs. Gold and
silver were employed in so great profusion on the trappings of the horses,
that the material of which they were made could not be distinguished from
the embroidery with which it was covered. The king and the princes shone
with the prodigious quantity of diamonds with which their arms and the
harness of their horses were covered.
{828}
About the same time the Tuileries and the Louvre were completed, and a
garden was designed for the former by Le Nôtre. The former garden of the
Tuileries, like other ancient French gardens, comprised a strange medley;
among other objects, it contained a pretty little abode, beside the quay,
and mysteriously concealed by a thick grove, which Louis XIII. had given to
his valet-de-chambre, Renard, who had furnished it with rare and costly
articles, and had made it a secret rendezvous for young seigneurs, and the
scene of luxurious _petits soupers_.

It was in 1669 that Soliman Aga, the Turkish ambassador at the French
court, introduced the use of coffee into Paris. The first café was opened
at the _foire_ St. Germain, which was then one of the most frequented
and fashionable places of resort in the town, and the suppression of which,
toward the end of the eighteenth century, went far to destroy the industry
and commerce of the left bank of the river, to the profit of the right. An
Armenian named Pascal afterward established a _café_, which was much
in vogue, called the Manouri, upon the Quai de l'Ecole; and, in 1689, a
Sicilian, Procopio, opened the Café Procope in the present Rue de
l'Ancienne Comédie, which was for long the favorite place of reunion for
the _savans_ and _beaux-esprits_ of the period.

But the café reminds us that we are leaving Paris in old times for the
Paris of the present, and that we are close upon that blood-written page,
the revolution, which divides the chronicles of the former from those of
the latter. These notes must not be brought to a conclusion without the
acknowledgment that from M. Malte-Brun's laborious compilation, La France
Illustrée, they derive whatever archaeological interest they possess.

------

  Original.

  The Churches of Ireland--Ancient and Modern.


Students of Irish topography are sometimes at a loss to account for so many
names of places in that island bearing the prefix "Kil." The explanation of
this seeming want of inventive nomenclature is that the word Kil is an
abbreviation or corruption of the vernacular _Cill_, a church; thus,
Kilkenny means the church of St. Canice, or Kenny; Kilmore, the great
church, _more_ meaning, in the Irish, great or large; Kildare, church
of the oak, from _daire_, oak. In the early ages of Christianity the
church or abbey was to the people of Ireland what the feudal castle or
walled town was to the inhabitants of the continent of Europe, at once a
rallying point in case of danger, and a common centre where learning,
trade, and the mechanical arts found teachers and patrons.

The Irish, before and long after their conversion, were essentially an
agricultural people, caring little for large towns; and, though insular,
seem to have neglected foreign commerce, except such as flowed from their
periodical incursions in Britain and Gaul, or which necessarily arose out
of their emigration from the north of Ireland to Scotland. Hence we find
that, while most of the inland cities and towns bear the name of some
favorite saint or church, the seaports generally owe their origin and name
to the Danes and Anglo-Normans.

{829}

The first Catholic churches erected in Ireland, of which we have any
authentic account, were three in number, built in the present counties of
Wicklow and Wexford, by Palladius, A.D. 430. It seems that this missionary
landed on the Wexford coast in that year, accompanied by four priests, but,
having met with opposition from the Druids and persecution from the local
chiefs, he returned the following year to Britain, leaving, however, behind
him some converts under the care of two of his assistants. We are told by
the annalists that, before his departure, he deposited in the church of
Cellfine, some relics of Sts. Peter and Paul and other saints, the sacred
books, and his own writing-tablets, all of which were preserved with great
veneration for many years afterward.

But the great church planter in Ireland was Patrick, the son of Potitus,
who commenced his task of a nation's conversion, with all the advantages of
a personal knowledge of the people and their language, a matured judgment,
profound learning, piety chastened by exile and long-suffering, and an
unconquerable faith. His first convert after landing, in 432, was a chief
named Dicho, who in proof of his sincerity built, at his own expense, a
church near Lecale, in Down, which was called _Sabhall Padruic_,
(Patrick's Barn.) Thence the saint proceeded to Tara, in Meath, where, as
it is well known, he appeared before the monarch Leogaire, and, though his
preaching made no impression on the heart of that stern pagan, he baptized
many of the Druids, poets, and courtiers. By St. Patrick's direction two
churches were built in the neighborhood, one at Drumcondrah, and the other
at Drumshallon, near the present town of Drogheda. Having thus stormed the
enemy's citadel, he advanced confidently to capture the outworks. He passed
westward through Connaught to the sea; thence returning to Ulster, he spent
some time in Down, Antrim, Ardmagh, and other northern counties; he next
visited the different parts of Leinster, and finally entered the populous
province of Munster, then a separate kingdom, and planted the standard of
the cross in the royal city of Cashel. He remained about seven years in
Munster, when, his mission having been successfully completed, he retraced
his steps to his favorite place in Down, in 452. Three years afterward he
founded the metropolitan see of Armagh, erected a cathedral on land given
him for that purpose by Daire, and thus laid the foundation of the primacy
of Ireland, and the city of that name. "Suitable edifices were annexed to
the cathedral for the accommodation of the clergy, and adjacent to it were
several religious retreats, in which members of both sexes, forsaking the
world, made a sacrifice of all to the Great Author of their existence."
[Footnote 300]

    [Footnote 300: Ecclesiastical History of Ireland, Brenan.]

The extraordinary success of this great missionary is without a parallel in
the history of the church. In the course of twenty years a whole people,
rulers and princes, men and women, were won over to Christianity, without
the shedding of a drop of human blood, or even any serious opposition. Sees
were founded in all parts of the island, churches and monasteries built,
bishops consecrated and priests ordained, and, in fact, the moral and
social condition of the entire population revolutionized. Nor was this a
triumph over weak-minded or stolid barbarians, for we find that from his
neophytes St. Patrick chose his bishops and priests almost exclusively--men
whose genius and ability became in the service of the church second only to
his own. It might also be supposed that impressions so suddenly produced
would be transitory, did we not know how irradicably fixed in the Irish
heart is the faith he taught and the doctrine he expounded.

The sees of Ardagh, Clogher, Emly, and Elphin were founded during the
life-time of St. Patrick, and fifteen others of lesser note before the
close of the century.
{830}
The cathedral of Kildare, second only in extent and magnificence to that of
Armagh, was built about the year 490, and belonged jointly to the diocesan
and the nunnery of St. Brigid. It is described as having been divided by a
partition beyond the sanctuary; the bishop and clergy entering the church
by a door on the north, and the abbess and her community by a door on the
south side. In all the sees thus founded, cathedrals, churches,
monasteries, schools, and nunneries were erected. History records the
building of twenty-one monasteries and schools of great celebrity in the
fifth century, besides many others of minor reputation. The schools of Emly
at one time contained six hundred scholars; those of Louth are said to have
educated one hundred bishops and three hundred priests, while the great
institution of Mungret contained within its walls six churches, and,
besides its scholars, fifteen hundred religious, equally divided into
learned preachers, psalmists, and persons devoted to contemplation and
works of charity. At this time, also, St. Brigid founded several nunneries,
the most celebrated of which was that of Kildare.

The following century saw seventeen more sees founded and cathedrals built,
including those of Dromore, Ossory, Tuam, Clonfert, and Down; while, to
meet the growing demand for Christian education, four principal colleges
were erected in different parts of the kingdom--Clonard in Meath, Clonfert
in Galway, Clonmacnois in Kings county, and Bangor in Down. The number of
students educated in the last mentioned was at one time not less than three
thousand. Forty-four new monasteries and abbeys are named in the annals of
the sixth century, besides many others forgotten in history. Even the place
whereon stood the famous monastery of Inniscathy, established at the mouth
of the Shannon at this period, is now only marked by a small portion of the
ruins of its round tower, while that of Glendaloch, perhaps from its
romantic surroundings, is somewhat better preserved. Speaking of the ruins
of the latter as seen some years since, the learned author of the
Ecclesiastical History of Ireland says:

  "The venerable ruins of Glendaloch, even at this day, present an awful
  and an interesting picture to the mind of the curious and contemplative
  stranger. Among these must be noticed the church of the Trinity, standing
  on a rising ground north of the abbey. The seven churches, which in
  former days were the pride and glory of Glendaloch, and for which it will
  be celebrated even when the vestiges now remaining are no more. The
  Cathedral church, with its curious doors, jambs and lintels, and its
  round tower, one hundred and ten feet high, rising up in its ancient
  grandeur amidst the prostrate ruins which surround it. Our Lady's church,
  the most westward of the seven, and nearly opposite the cathedral, is in
  ruins; but these very ruins speak volumes, and the scattered monuments,
  crosses, and inscriptions refresh the memory, and fill the mind with new
  and painful thoughts. St. Kevin's kitchen, so called, and undoubtedly one
  of the seven churches, is entire; together with its architraves, fretted
  arches, and round belfry, forty-five feet high. The finger of time alone
  and of human neglect seem to have wrought the work of desolation in this
  part of the building. The Rhefeart, or the Sepulchre of Kings, is
  rendered famous for having seven kings interred within its walls. The Ivy
  church stands to the westward, with its unroofed walls overgrown with
  ivy. The Priory of St. Saviour is a complete ruin. Tampull-na-Skellig, in
  the recess of the mountain, was formerly called the Temple of the Desert,
  and whither the austere fathers of the abbey were wont to retire on
  vigils and days of particular mortification. The celebrated bed of St.
  Kevin, on the south side of the lough, and hanging perpendicularly at a
  frightful height over the surface of the waters, is another object in
  which the mind of the antiquary would be much gratified; and on the same
  side of the mountain are to be seen the remains of a small stone
  building, called St. Kevin's cell."

The next two centuries added Ferns, Cork, Killaloe, and eleven other sees,
with their cathedrals and churches, and fifty-five principal schools,
monasteries, and abbeys. During the ninth and tenth centuries we find only
two sees created, and no mention of additional monasteries or schools. This
may be accounted for by the continual incursions of the Northmen, a swarm
of barbarians whose native element seems to have been the ocean and whose
only end and object were bloodshed and rapine.
{831}
From 807 until the decisive battle of Clontarf in 1012, they perpetrated an
uninterrupted series of raids on Ireland, and even sometimes held the
larger portion of the country in subjection. Landing from their ships at
remote and undefended points on the coast, they marched stealthily into the
interior, marking their paths with the blood of the defenceless
inhabitants, sparing neither age, sex, nor condition in their fury, and
bearing off or destroying every species of property. Churches were given to
the flames, the relics of the saints stolen or scattered to the winds,
monks, nuns, and students put to the sword without mercy or remorse. In one
of those incursions Bangor was plundered and nine hundred monks
slaughtered. Armagh was sacked and its cathedral destroyed. Cork, Ferns,
and Taghmon shared the same fate, while the city of Kildare, its cathedral
and nunnery were razed, and their inhabitants massacred or carried into
slavery. Clonmacnois was thirteen times plundered, and scarcely a religious
house on the island but received at least one visit from the sacrilegious
invaders.

After a long and brilliant career an eclipse seemed to have fallen on the
church in Ireland, her monasteries were in ruins, her priesthood
slaughtered, and her schools deserted. But the genius of one great man was
put forth to save the people. Brian, surnamed Boroimhe, King of Munster,
and monarch of Ireland, after repeated victories drove the Danes out of his
kingdom, and, finally, by his last great battle, destroyed their power for
ever in Ireland. The remnant of the once dreaded enemy, embracing the faith
of their conquerors, were permitted, upon paying tribute, to settle along
the coast for the purpose of foreign traffic. This great king during his
long reign did much to reinstate the church in possession of her property,
and to repair the damages of two centuries of organized plunder, and his
successors continued to follow his example. Even the converted Danes
imbibed the prevailing spirit of restitution. The see of Dublin was
established in 1040, and its cathedral, consecrated to the Holy Trinity,
(now Christ's church,) was built by Bishop Donatus. The see of Waterford
was founded in 1096, and its splendid cathedral, also under the invocation
of the Holy Trinity, erected by Malchus, its first bishop; and the
celebrated priory of Selsker, in Wexford, was established by the new
converts some few years afterward. The see of Ardfert was founded in the
middle of the eleventh century, and that of Derry about one hundred years
subsequently.

It is reasonable to infer that most of the early Irish ecclesiastical
structures of any magnitude were of wood, with perhaps a stone tower or
stronghold to serve as a depository for sacred vessels, libraries, etc.,
and for defence in case of actual attack. Dr. Petrie, in his great book on
Round Towers, produces convincing proofs that these curious specimens of
architecture, some seventy of which still remain more or less well
preserved, were intended for these purposes. Ireland at the time of Saint
Patrick was densely wooded, oak being predominant, and where so many
extensive buildings had to be erected in so limited a time no more
convenient and suitable, though certainly very destructible, material could
be used. This, as well as the ravages of time and foreign invasion, will
explain the fact that so many of the sites of our primitive edifices are
recognized only by local tradition. The art of building in stone was indeed
known in the country before the introduction of Christianity, but it was
not generally applied to church purposes till about the beginning of the
twelfth century.

When Cormac McCulinan was appointed to the see of Cashel, it is recorded
that he built a cathedral in that city in the latter part of the ninth
century, which, according to the annals of the priory of the Island of all
Saints, was not long after rebuilt and consecrated with great ceremony.
{832}
Whether the beautiful ruin now called Cormac's chapel owes its origin to
the warrior bishop or to a successor of the same name is a mooted question
among antiquarians, as the records of the succession in this diocese are
very imperfect. However, it must have been erected at an early age, for we
find that in 1170 Donald O'Brian, King of North Munster, built the
cathedral of St. Patrick in his royal city of Cashel, and the former church
of Cormac was converted into a chapter-house, on the south side of the
choir. Bishop O'Heden in 1420 repaired and beautified St. Patrick's and
erected a hall for the vicars choral. In the same year that Donal O'Brian
built St. Patrick's he also caused to be constructed the beautiful
cathedral of St. Mary's in Limerick, endowing it liberally, and it existed
in great splendor until the Reformation, when it shared the general fate of
all such noble institutions.

The cathedral of St. Patrick, in Down, was rebuilt on the site of the old
one by St. Malachy in 1138, and forty years afterward was enlarged by one
of his successors and a namesake. About this time it was dedicated to St.
Patrick, having been formerly consecrated to the Most Holy Trinity, a
favorite name, it would appear, for cathedrals in the early centuries of
Christianity.

St. Mary's, at Tuam, was built in 1152, by O'Connor, King of Ireland, and
Bishop O'Hoisin, the first archbishop of that see; in 1260 it was enlarged
and a new choir added. Finally, it was given over by Henry VIII. to an
apostate named Bodkin.

St. Columba's, in Derry, was built in 1164, by King Maurice MacLaughlin. It
also had to succumb to the reformers who settled in Ulster, and the present
Protestant cathedral of that town was built on its ruins, by the "London
Company," in 1633.

The majestic cathedral of Kilkenny, dedicated to St. Canice, was commenced
in 1178, by Bishop Felix O'Dullany, and was finished by Bishop St. Leger in
1286. Some years later it was altered and beautified by Bishop Ledred, and
at the time of the Reformation was considered one of the most beautifully
situated buildings in Europe.

The cathedral of the Holy Trinity, in Waterford, was built about the
beginning of the eleventh century. Its subsequent fate is thus related by a
recent Protestant writer:  [Footnote 301]

    [Footnote 301: Ireland and her Churches, by James Godkin.]

  "The old cathedral, or rather the oldest part of the first cathedral of
  Waterford, was built in 1096, by the Ostmen, on their' conversion from
  paganism; and about two centuries later it was endowed by King John, a
  dean and chapter having been appointed under the sanction of Innocent
  III. Endowments of various kinds had accumulated from age to age, till
  the Reformation, when the old altars were thrown down and the ornaments
  defaced. During the rebellions and wars that followed, its most costly
  treasures were carried away, with the brass ornaments of the tombs, the
  great standing pelican which supported the Bible, the immense
  candlesticks, six or seven feet high, the great brazen font, which was
  ascended by three stairs made of solid brass, and various gold and
  silver-gilt vessels. In 1773 the dean and chapter pronounced the old
  building so much decayed as to be unsafe for public worship, and
  unfortunately resolved that the whole pile should be taken down and
  replaced by a new edifice."

It will be seen that some of those lasting monuments of Irish skill and
piety were raised subsequent to the English invasion, but the advent of the
Norman soldiers was destined soon to dry up the springs of public
munificence, if not to exterminate the old race, and obliterate the faith
of St. Patrick. The Anglo-Norman of the twelfth century, though professing
Christianity, was at heart as much a pagan as the race from which he
sprung. He was brave, cunning, cruel, and rapacious. His greediness could
not withstand any inducement to plunder, even though sacrilege had to be
added to robbery; and he generally had courage and skill enough to carry
out his intentions. He was neither an Englishman nor a Frenchman, but a
compound of elements common to the worst classes of both races,
super-induced on the genuine, old northern barbarism. He was, in fact, the
prototype of the modern filibuster, and, though given to fighting,
preferred the spoils to the glory of warfare.
{833}
Like most of his class in every age and country, he substituted
superstition for religion, and became only generous of his goods when death
threatened to snatch them from his grasp. When reduced to Protestantism by
act of parliament, it is unnecessary to say that even the check of remorse,
weak as it was, was removed, and the spoliation of gifts given to God and
his poor sat as lightly on his conscience as his coronet or crown sat on
his head. Consequently, from the landing of Strongbow and his friends until
the Reformation, the wars which ensued against the natives were
occasionally diversified by the plunder of a rich abbey, or the burning of
a church, while now and then we read of an institution being founded by
some repentant lord of the Pale, from which all "mere Irish" were excluded.

There were, indeed, a few men who came into Ireland in the track of its
invaders, who were men of true piety. Among these may be classed John
Cornin, archbishop of Dublin. It was he who, in 1190, built St. Patrick's
collegiate church in that city, and repaired and beautified Holy Trinity;
St. Lawrence O'Toole having, eighteen years before, added to its original
dimensions by building a choir, belfry, and three chapels. Those two noble
buildings are still in use by the Protestants of Dublin, and but little
changed since their Catholic days. St. Patrick's has been renovated and
improved through the liberality of a public-spirited merchant. Though ever
dear to the Catholic hearts of Dublin for its old memories; its fame, since
it has fallen into the possession of its present occupants, rests only in
its association with the name of the gifted and eccentric Swift, whose
flashes of wit and sly sarcasms were wont to arouse his drowsy
congregation.

Notwithstanding the impoverished condition of the people, and the
insecurity of life and property, during the wars of the twelfth,
thirteenth, fourteenth, and early part of the fifteenth centuries, we find
the following religious houses established throughout the country: Priories
of the Canons Regular of St. Augustin, 20; abbeys of the Cistercian order,
29; convents of the Dominican order, 23; of the Franciscan order, 56; of
the Augustan order, 21; of the Carmelite order, 24; commanderies of Knights
Templar, 11. This latter order was suppressed about the middle of the
fourteenth century, and its property given to the Hospitallers.

But a new era now commenced in the history of the church. To the bitterness
of national hate were to be added bloody persecution and wholesale
confiscation. Henry VIII. had commenced his quarrel with the pope, and,
with the vain intention of revenging himself on his holiness, he turned
reformer, initiated a state religion, and unanimously elected himself head
of the same. But Henry Tudor had method in his madness, and knew well that
the best way to convert his Anglo-Irish subjects was by appealing to their
old passion for plunder. Accordingly, his lord deputy, St. Ledger, in 1536,
summoned, what was in that age called a parliament, and this assembly,
representing nobody but the hirelings about the deputy, with one fell swoop
confiscated three hundred and seventy monasteries and abbeys, whose yearly
value amounted to £32,000, while their movables amounted to more than three
times that amount. A year or two later all religious houses were suppressed
and their property turned over to the king.

That this atrocious spoliation of the patrimony of the church and the
property of the poor had not even the pretext of being perpetrated to
replenish the treasury of an impoverished, state may be inferred from the
words of Ware, who, in his life of this new Defender of the Faith, says:
"Henry soon after disposed of the possessions of the religious orders to
his nobles, courtiers, and others, reserving to himself certain revenue or
annual rents."
{834}
This exhibition of royal magnificence at once convinced the aforesaid
"nobles and courtiers" that Henry was the veritable Head of the Church, not
only in England, but in Ireland also, and they hastened to accept his gifts
and his new religion with equal alacrity. The cathedrals and churches had
now to be disposed of. That portion of the laity described as nobles and
courtiers was well provided for, and the clergy had to be satisfied; a new
religion, Henry wisely thought, would not look well without churches and a
hierarchy. Pliant tools of the school of Cranmer and Cromwell were sent
over from England, who shielded by the military power of the deputy, and
aided by a few apostates of native growth, were fraudulently inducted into
Irish sees. While Brown, who had become archbishop of Dublin, was burning
in the public streets the sacred image of our crucified Redeemer, taken
from the abbey of Ballibogan, and the crosier of St. Patrick, rifled from
Holy Trinity; the lord deputy was "gutting" the old cathedral of Down,
violating the graves of Ireland's three greatest saints, and destroying
their sacred relics. As these acts did not bring enlightenment to the minds
of the benighted Catholics, a more general system of devastation was
adopted. All the churches were seized and their sacred vessels and
ornaments appropriated as legitimate spoils, by the "reformed clergy,"
while such of the buildings as were not required for the preachers of the
new evangel were converted into barracks or stables. The people, though
decimated and dispirited by long and disastrous wars, were too much
attached to the ancient faith not to resist those iniquitous proceedings;
but fire, sword, famine, and pestilence pursued them everywhere, martyred
their priests, and laid their homes and their fields desolate.

What Henry commenced, his son, and worthy daughter Elizabeth, followed up;
Cromwell's troopers nearly left the country a desert; and the vacillating
and treacherous Stuarts added, if possible, to its already degraded
condition. So abject was the state of the population in the time of William
of Orange, that his penal laws, and those of the house of Hanover
subsequently enacted, though in themselves most atrocious, were
comparatively harmless, so well had the scythe of persecution been wielded
by their predecessors. Even as late as the middle of the last century, the
Catholics, still the bulk of the population, were sunk in the most pitiful
misery and prostration; their priests churchless and outcasts before the
laws, their monks and nuns banished or fled the country; or, if any
remained of the once splendid institutions of piety and charity, they were
to be found secreted in the purlieus of the larger towns, stealthily
attending the sick and consoling, if unable to relieve, the wants of the
poor. "No places of public worship were permitted," says the author of the
History of Dublin, "and the clergyman moved his altar-books and everything
necessary for the celebration of his religious rites from house to house
among such of his flock as were enabled in this way to support an itinerant
domestic chaplain; while for the poorer part some waste house or stable in
a remote or retired situation was selected, and here the service was
silently and secretly performed, unobserved by the public eye." Indeed, in
many counties the people suffered worse; children were unbaptized, men and
women unmarried, the dying deprived of the last consolations of religion,
and the poor and infirm left to the cold charity of an unfeeling and
hostile minority. The force of persecution could go no further. The
experiment of conversion by force had been tried with a vengeance, and had
signally failed. It was evident that utter extermination or reaction must
follow.

Fortunately for the honor of humanity it was the latter. God was with his
people in their afflictions and hearkened to their prayers. Slowly the
light of toleration broke upon the darkened minds of the dominant
Protestant party, and, though but the merest glimmer at first, gradually
and steadily gained in intensity.
{835}
One hundred and twenty years ago the first chapel tolerated by law was
publicly opened in Dublin; the more atrocious of the penal laws fell into
disuse; chapels, poor indeed, and monasteries, feeble in their very sense
of insecurity, commenced to raise their humble heads. Protestant gentlemen
of liberal views found a voice in the Irish and English parliaments.
Maynooth and Carlow colleges were established; a great and fearless
Catholic, O'Connell, arrayed his coreligionists in solid phalanx in defence
of their rights; and, finally, the British government, abashed at the scorn
of Christendom, and yielding to fears of internal revolution, consented to
emancipation. Of the many causes which led to this tardy act of justice the
moral effect of religious freedom in the United States and the conduct of
our Catholic immigrants during the revolution were not among the least
effective.

Turning from the past with all its varied trials and defeats, it is
pleasant to dwell on the condition of Catholic Ireland of to-day, with its
churches, monasteries, colleges, and schools innumerable. Of the city of
Dublin, where the Reformation made its first attacks, and where, at the
beginning of the century, there were but a few poor chapels and "friaries,"
we find the following picture drawn by one who, though not a Catholic nor
of Catholic sympathies, is too clear-minded to shut his eyes to the actual
condition of affairs around him. He says: [Footnote 302]

    [Footnote 302: Ireland and Her Churches. By James Godkin. This very
    able book has just been published in England, and, though written by a
    Protestant and a devoted believer in the opinions of that sect, is full
    of very valuable information regarding the present condition of the
    Catholics of Ireland.]

  "There are now thirty-two churches and
  chapels in Dublin and its vicinity. In the diocese the total number of
  secular clergy is 287, and of regulars, 125; total, priests, 412. The
  number of nuns is 1150. Besides the Catholic university, with its ample
  staff of professors, there are in the diocese six colleges, seven
  superior schools for boys, fourteen superior schools for ladies, twelve
  monastic primary schools, forty convent schools, and 200 lay schools,
  without including those which are under the National Board of Education.
  The Christian Brothers have 7000 pupils under their instruction, while
  the schools connected with the convents in the diocese contain 15,000.
  Besides Maynooth, which is amply endowed by the state, and contains 500
  or 600 students, all designed for the priesthood, there is the college of
  All Hallows, at Drumcondra, in which 250 young men are being trained for
  the foreign mission. The Roman Catholic charities of the city are varied
  and numerous. There are magnificent hospitals, one of which especially--
  the Mater Misericordiae--has been not inappropriately called 'The Palace
  of the Sick Poor'--numerous orphanages, several widows' houses, and other
  refuges for virtuous women; ragged and industrial schools, night asylums,
  penitentiaries, reformatories, institutions for the blind and deaf and
  dumb; institutions for relieving the poor at their own houses, and
  Christian doctrine fraternities almost innumerable. All these wonderful
  organizations of religion and charity are supported wholly on the
  voluntary principle, and they have nearly all sprung into existence
  within half a century."

Miss Fannie Taylor, an English lady, in a recent work entitled Irish Homes
and Irish Hearts, admirably describes, from personal and minute
examination, the efficiency, success, and untiring devotion of the numerous
orders of holy women, whose houses everywhere are to be found in and around
the capital. Every conceivable want, every ill that flesh is heir to, finds
at their busy and gentle hands an alleviation and a soothing remedy. The
daughters of the rich are taught their duties to themselves and to society;
the children of the poor are gratuitously trained in all the necessary arts
of life; the orphan has a refuge; the sick are visited and comforted; even
the outcast woman, the loathing of the worldly of her own sex, is taken by
the hand and gently led back to the path of virtue. Hospitals; asylums for
the blind, the deaf and dumb, have been built by them, generally out of
their own slender means; and even the raving maniac and drivelling idiot
find a shelter and a home. Wherever death, sickness, poverty, ignorance,
crime, or affliction is, there also is to be found the "sister," consoling,
helping, teaching, admonishing, always gentle, patient, and cheerful.
{836}
"I would speak," said the writer, in her introductory chapter, "of that
marvellous net of religious institutions spread over the land, and of those
deeds of charity which in reality form a powerful element in Irish life."
Words as truthful as they are applicable.

Following Mr. Godkin in what he calls his "Inspection of Bishoprics,"
(Protestant of course,) we come to the diocese of Ferns, embracing the
county of Wexford. "Here, then," says the inspector, "is a population that
seems naturally fitted in a preeminent degree for the reception of
Protestantism;" but he found himself mistaken. In the very cradle of
Catholicity in Ireland he could not find even one out of every ten who even
professed to be Protestants. He is equally surprised at the respect and
veneration in which our blessed mother was held in this diocese of
"industrious, self-reliant, and independent" men, and acknowledges his
astonishment gracefully enough:

  "I had plenty of proofs of this in the town of Wexford, where there are
  two splendid new churches, with grand towers, built almost exactly alike,
  in cathedral style; erected also at the same time, and chiefly through
  the exertions of the same priest. One of them is called the church of the
  Immaculate Conception, and the other the church of the Assumption; both,
  therefore, specially dedicated to the Virgin Mary. There could be no
  mistake about this in the mind of any one visiting these splendid places
  of worship, which are fitted up admirably with seats to the very doors,
  finished in the most approved style, and with a degree of taste that
  would do honor to the best cathedrals in England. Behind the high altar
  there is a very large window of stained glass, and a similar one of
  smaller dimensions at each side. To the right is Mary's chapel, with an
  altar brilliant and gorgeous in the extreme. There is a beautiful statue
  of the Virgin and Child, before which three lamps were burning during the
  day, and in the evening eight or nine dozen of candles are lighted, while
  ten or twelve vases are filled with a variety of flowers, kept constantly
  fresh, and producing the most brilliant and dazzling effects for the
  worshippers, who are nearly all attracted to this favorite altar, the
  beauty and splendor of which throw the altar of Christ completely in the
  shade. Generally, indeed, the Saviour appears only agonized on the cross,
  his hands fastened with nails, and the blood flowing from his pierced
  side, or else lying dead and ghastly in the sepulchre. It is only the
  Virgin that appears arrayed in beauty, crowned with majesty, and
  encircled with glory. Her altar in the Wexford church of the Assumption
  is decorated in the same style as the Immaculate Conception, but not with
  so much elaboration. Great local sacrifices must have been made for the
  erection and furnishing of these two churches, with their magnificent
  towers and spires, but much of the money came from Great Britain and the
  colonies; and to a question which I put on the subject to my guide, I
  received for answer that it came 'from all parts of the habitable world.'

  "But, beautiful as those two new churches are, they are surpassed in
  internal decorations by the Franciscan church of this town. This is a
  perfect gem in its way so elegantly painted and ornamented, and so nicely
  kept, so bright and cheering in its aspect, and evincing such regard to
  comfort in all its arrangements, that we can easily conceive it to be a
  very popular and fashionable place of worship. It is not cruciform, but
  built in the shape of an L. To the left of the principal altar, at the
  junction of the two portions, stands in impressive prominence the altar
  of the Virgin Mary, which is covered by an elevated canopy, resting upon
  white and blue pillars with golden capitals. Upon the altar stands a
  beautiful marble statue of the Virgin. Three lamps burn constantly before
  it. One hundred candles are lighted round it in the evening with half a
  dozen gas-burners. Floral ornaments are in the greatest profusion and
  variety. There are four large stands on the altar floor, two others
  higher up on the pedestal, and a number of small vases with bouquets
  ranged on the altar. The friary attached to the church presents a picture
  of order, neatness, and cleanliness which seemed to be a reflection of
  the characteristics of the 'English baronies,' showing how national
  idiosyncrasies and social circumstances affect religion. In fact, a
  community of Quakers could not keep their establishment in better order
  than these Franciscans keep their friary. I observed a great contrast in
  this respect in the Roman Catholic establishments of Waterford and
  Thurles. Wexford, indeed, is quite a model town in the Roman Catholic
  Church. There are three other places of worship besides those already
  mentioned--the college chapel and the nunnery chapels, and certainly
  there are no people in the world, perhaps, not excepting the Romans
  themselves, more abundantly supplied with masses. There is a mass for
  workingmen at five o'clock in the morning, there are masses daily during
  the week at later hours, and no less than six or seven on Sundays in each
  of the principal chapels, or churches as they are now generally called.
  The college is a large building, and in connection with it is the
  residence of the bishop, Dr. Furlong."

{837}

What has here been remarked of Dublin and Ferns may be said with equal
justice of other parts of Ireland. Kildare and Leighlin has its splendid
cathedral, the corner-stone of which was laid in Carlow in 1828, by the
celebrated Dr. Doyle. Cork has its fine churches, schools, and monasteries.
Of the cathedral of the diocese of Kerry, Miss Taylor says:

  "The great ornament of Killarney is the cathedral, the only one I have
  seen in Ireland worthy of the name. It is one of Pugin's happiest
  conceptions. The tower is not yet built, and this of course greatly
  detracts from the beauty of the exterior; but within, the great height of
  the roof, the noble pillars, the sense of space and grandeur, made one
  think of some of the beautiful cathedrals of old of our own and foreign
  lands."

In the archdiocese of Tuam, where some years since the Most Rev. Dr. Kelly,
the predecessor of the present patriotic prelate, said that out of one
hundred and twenty-one places of worship one hundred and six "were thatched
cabins," there are now three hundred and eighty-seven churches, three
hundred and eighty-two clergymen, and fifty-four religious houses.

Armagh has again risen from the ashes of the past, and again a beautiful
metropolitan cathedral appears on the spot hallowed by St. Patrick. The
corner-stone of this beautiful building was laid by the Most Rev. Dr.
Crolly, primate, on the 17th of March, 1840. The increase of churches in
this diocese from 1800 to 1864 has been ninety-three; convents and schools,
twenty-four.

Such is the outward visible sign of the progress of the church in Ireland
for the last hundred years. What though the wind sighs mournfully through
the broken arches of many a church and cloister, made sacred by the saintly
men who prayed and taught fourteen centuries ago; though the fern and the
ivy grow up and cement a thousand crumbling ruins, which in their
desolation attest at the same time man's passion and his impotence; let
them be as silent teachers of the past and of its glorious memories and
bitter persecution. But the people of Ireland have the present, they are
working not only for themselves, but for the future; and they, too, will be
known to after generations by the monuments they are now building as their
forefathers built; by their churches, convents, and colleges, which shall
exist, even though in ruins, in the grateful memories of coming ages.

------

{838}

  From The Dublin Review.

  John Tetzel. [Footnote 303]

    [Footnote 303: Tetzel und Luther, oder Lebensgeschichte und
    Rechtfertigung des Ablasspredigers und Inquisitors, Dr. Johann Tetzel,
    aus dem Predigerorden. Von Valentin Gröne, Doctor der Theologie. Soest
    und Olpe. Verlag der Nasse'schen Buchhandlung. 1853. (pp. 237.)]

Of all Luther's contemporary opponents none experienced so much of his
foul-mouthed vituperation as the Dominican preacher of indulgences, John
Tetzel--a vituperation which Protestant writers, down to the present day,
have not ceased, with unmitigated virulence, to heap upon his memory.

Nor have Catholic writers done much to defend Tetzel's calumniated
reputation. On the contrary, they have in general allowed themselves to be
deluded by Protestant prejudice, and so to have abstained from referring,
in his behalf, to original sources of information. This unworthy course
they have pursued as though they viewed Tetzel in the light of a personage
not worth quarrelling about, whom, without detriment to the church, they
might safely abandon to the enemy, nay, whom it might perhaps be as well
thus to abandon. They were fully aware that it was not for preaching Pope
Leo's indulgence that Luther really attacked Tetzel. The indulgence was but
the pretext seized by Luther for openly broaching the heretical opinions
which, ever since the year 1515, he had secretly formed. Neither did Luther
owe his success to the alleged abuses of the papal indulgence. He owed his
success to the wide-spread moral corruption of his times. Had Leo X.
proclaimed no indulgence at all, Luther's calamitous Reformation could
hardly have been prevented.

Three Protestant biographies of John Tetzel have been written in Germany.
The earliest, written by Godfried Hecht in Latin, appeared in 1707. About
the same time a Life of Tetzel, in German, was published by Jacob Vogel.
The third, a compilation of both, is by Friedrich Hoffmann, and appeared at
Leipsic in 1844. They are all three, more or less, just such _ex
parte_ productions as might be expected, full of obloquy founded on
garbled quotations and falsified facts. The most virulent is Hoffmann's
book, the least so Hecht's. In copiousness of original research, Vogel far
surpasses Hecht and Hoffmann. As a counterpoise to these biographies the
Catholic party produced nothing till the year 1817. An anonymous work then
appeared at Frankfort-on-the-Main, entitled Vertraute Briefe zweier
Katholiken über den Ablass Streit Dr. Martin Luthers wider Dr. Johann
Tetzel. This work is supposed to have been written by a Jesuit, and,
although it contains many strong points in vindication of Tetzel's injured
character, it would not seem to have had this object so much in view as the
defence of the doctrine of indulgences against the attacks made on it by
reason of the year 1817 being the tercentenary year of the Reformation, and
celebrated as such throughout Protestant Germany. What Audin in his Life of
Luther says in favor of Tetzel proceeds more from feeling than historical
research, and is consequently of inferior importance. Under these
circumstances it is gratifying to meet with such a book in defence of
Tetzel as Dr. Valentine Gröne has produced, in which, while he exhibits the
vilified Dominican as an able, pious, and devoted champion of the holy see,
in a manner that establishes, his title in future to that character on a
solid basis, he also contributes to the history of Luther and the
Reformation a most interesting fund of knowledge and reflection.

{839}

The true date of Tetzel's birth appears to be unknown. It is conjectured to
have fallen a little later than the middle of the fifteenth century. He was
a native of Leipsic, where his father was a citizen and goldsmith. Dr.
Gröne has much to say about the etymology of his family name. But this we
may pass over as superfluous. Of Tetzel's boyhood and youth nothing is
recorded until the year 1482. It was the year of his matriculation as a
student of the Leipsic university. He is now said to have shown superior
abilities and great application. For the art of rhetoric he soon evinced a
strong predilection. Not content with attending the lectures of Conrad
Kimpina on the theory of declamation, he sought to gain a practical
knowledge of it by assiduously frequenting the sermons of the Dominicans.
This led to his forming an attachment to the order of which, in 1490, he
became a member. Two years before, he had received his bachelor's degree,
being the sixth on a list of fifty candidates.

In the seclusion of the Dominican convent of St. Paul's, at Leipsic, Tetzel
renounced the study of humanities in order to devote himself all the more
zealously to the writings of the fathers and doctors of the church.

This course he adopted as the surest means of qualifying himself to become
a preaching friar in the true spirit of St. Dominic. "The goldsmith's son,"
says Jacob Vogel, "possessed every requisite to form a public speaker, a
clear understanding, a good memory, an eloquent tongue, an animated
delivery, a manly and sonorous voice, the charm of which was enhanced by a
tall and slender figure."

His first essays as a preacher were confined to the church of his convent.
Their effect was such that his prior, Martin Adam, soon gave him permission
to preach beyond the convent walls, at the different places belonging to
its jurisdiction. In Tetzel's day it was still customary not to confer holy
orders until, according to ancient canonical rule, the candidate had
reached the age of thirty years. This age Tetzel attained before the close
of the century. He was then ordained priest by Philo von Trotha, Bishop of
Merseburg. About the same time Pope Alexander VI. proclaimed the great
jubilee. It was the eighth proclamation since the first by Boniface VIII.
Tetzel received from his superiors the appointment to preach the jubilee
indulgence. He preached it at Leipsic, Zwickau, Nüremberg, Magdeburg,
Görlitz, Halle, and other towns. So well did he perform his duty, that he
established his fame as one of the most powerful popular preachers that had
ever appeared in Germany. "By reason of his extraordinary eloquence," says
Godfried Hecht, "he acquired great authority over the people, and rose
higher and higher in renown." Dr. Gröne adverts to various contemporary
attestations of Tetzel's surprising success with the masses. It was
ascribed to his resounding voice, his richly metaphorical language, and
logical clearness.

In 1504, Pope Julius II. proclaimed an indulgence in favor of the Teutonic
Knights in Prussia, whom the Russians and Tartars had reduced to great
straits. On this occasion Tetzel was again chosen to preach, along with
Christian Baumhauer, of Nüremberg. He preached the indulgence in Prussia,
Brandenburg, and Silesia. At the same time the Dominican priory of Glogau,
becoming vacant, was offered to him. He was little more than thirty years
old. "What stronger proof," says Dr. Gröne, "could be given him of the high
veneration in which he was held by his order?" But he did not accept the
dignity. In the early part of 1507 he returned to Leipsic. On his way he
preached for the Teutonic Knights at Dresden. So great was the desire to
hear him that the largest church in the city was found too small for the
congregation.
{840}
Duke George of Saxony caused him, in consequence, to preach from a window
of his palace. The same zealous duke, on Tetzel's arrival at Leipsic,
received him outside the gates at the head of the clergy, the civic
authorities, and dignitaries of the university, and conducted him in solemn
procession to St. Paul's convent. Here Tetzel again retired, a simple
friar, to the seclusion of his cell. In 1510, he was employed to preach an
indulgence of a peculiar sort, granted in aid of building a bridge, with a
chapel on it, over the Elbe at Torgau. The Saxon princes, being themselves
short of funds, and finding the people unwilling to contribute the money
for nothing, had obtained in 1491 from Innocent VIII. the indulgence in
question, by which all the faithful in Saxony who should give the twentieth
part of a gold florin toward the bridge and chapel at Torgau were permitted
to eat butter and drink milk in lent, on the rogation days, and the vigils
of feasts, for a term of twenty years. In 1510, Pope Julius II. renewed
this indulgence for another twenty years. Such indulgences were not
unfrequent in the middle ages. In 1310. Pope John XXII., as Dr. Gröne tells
us, granted an indulgence of forty days toward the erection of the bridge
at Dresden. When Julius II. died in 1513, the great aspiration of his
successor, Leo X., was to complete the magnificent temple of Christendom,
St. Peter's basilica, begun by Julius in 1506. But Leo found that the wars
waged by his high-minded predecessor in defence of St. Peter's patrimony,
and the independence of Italy, had exhausted the papal treasury. Julius
having raised the funds for laying the foundations of St. Peter's by means
of an indulgence, Leo resolved to do the like toward the expenses of
finishing the work. The bull which he accordingly issued, granting a
plenary indulgence to all Christendom, reached Germany in 1515. The
commission to preach it was given to the Franciscans. For Saxony and the
north of Germany this commission was divided between the guardian of the
Franciscans of Mentz and Albert of Brandenburg, the newly installed
archbishop of the city. But the guardian of the Franciscans declining to
act, the entire commission passed into the hands of the archbishop. It was
merely as a special favor that he had been included in the commission at
all. His grace, in fact, had been obliged to contract a heavy debt with the
Fuggers of Augsburg, the Rothschilds of the day, in order to pay the fees
on his pallium, which, for an archbishop of Mentz, amounted to no less a
sum than thirty thousand gold florins. As it was not customary for the
archbishops to pay this sum out of their privy purse, it had to be levied
on the faithful of the diocese. But this had been done twice within the
last ten years for the immediate predecessors of Albert of Brandenburg,
namely, Archbishops Berthold and James Uriel. To raise the sum a third time
under such circumstances seemed impossible without assistance. Wherefore,
in order to afford relief to his flock, Archbishop Albert had obtained
leave from Rome to appropriate a portion of the proceeds of the papal
indulgence in his province toward the payment of his debt. This fact
suffices, in Dr. Gröne's opinion, to clear the archbishop from the reproach
of avarice cast at him by Protestant writers, who have also not failed to
impute all sorts of unworthy motives to him for making choice of the
Dominican, John Tetzel, as his chief sub-commissioner, or quaestor, in
preaching the indulgence. But, says Dr. Gröne, is not the archbishop's
choice of Tetzel tantamount to a refutation of the calumnies heaped upon
him as one of the vilest, not only of friars, but of men? Archbishop Albert
proceeded with the greatest caution, and issued very clear and exact
instructions, both on the nature of the indulgence, and the manner in which
it should be preached. Had Tetzel really been the notoriously bad monk
Protestant writers say he was, how could the archbishop, with the knowledge
of such a fact, have ventured to choose him at all?
{841}
How could Tetzel be expected to preach with any effect, if, as is asserted,
he was a disgrace to his order, a man who did not scruple openly to
perpetrate the worst excesses? But Archbishop Albert of Mentz had, as we
have seen, very particular reasons of his own for promoting as much as
possible the success of Pope Leo's indulgence, and, accordingly, he made
choice of Tetzel as his chief quaestor, not because he thought a coarse,
sordid monk of infamous reputation the likeliest person he knew of to stir
up the religious fervor of the people, but because he judged this might
best be done by one who, while eminent alike for piety and for zeal in the
cause of the church and the holy see, enjoyed the renown of being one of
the most eloquent preachers then living in Germany. What motive could be
more natural, more just, more obvious than this?

Tetzel entered on his duties as preacher of the papal indulgence for the
Archbishop of Mentz with his accustomed zeal and ability. What he had to
announce in virtue of the Instructio Summaria of the archbishop was
substantially this: That all persons who repented of, and confessed,
fasting, their sins, who received holy communion, said certain prayers in
seven different churches, or before as many altars, and contributed
according to their means a donation toward St. Peter's basilica, should
obtain full remission of the temporal punishment due to their sins, once
for their lives, and then as often as they should be in danger of death;
that this indulgence might be applied by way of intercession to the souls
in purgatory, while bedridden people were to be able to obtain it by
devoutly confessing and communicating in their chambers before a sacred
image or picture.

In the entire document, says Dr. Gröne, there does not occur a thought
which the church at the present day would hesitate to subscribe. The
Instructio Summaria further declares, that those who cannot afford a
pecuniary donation are not, therefore, to be denied the grace of the
indulgence, which seeks not less the salvation of the faithful than the
advantage of the basilica. "Let such as have no money," it says, "replace
their donations by prayer and fasting, for the kingdom of heaven must not
stand more open to the rich than the poor." What a refutation have we here
of the slanderous clamor against Pope Leo's indulgence as an alleged
traffic in sin! With respect to the conduct of Tetzel himself and his
subordinates, they are admonished to lead an exemplary life, to avoid
taverns, and to abstain from unnecessary expense. That cases of levity
nevertheless took place, Dr. Gröne admits, but he strenuously denies that
Tetzel gave cause for animadversion. Finally, the Instructio Summaria
directed that all indulgences of a particular or local kind should be
declared, in virtue of the pope's bull, as suspended for eight years in
favor of the one now granted by his holiness; a declaration which did not
fail to excite a bitter spirit of opposition and jealousy, especially among
the religious orders and confraternities, of which Tetzel had to bear the
brunt.

In the church of All Saints, at Wittenberg, there was a costly shrine of
relics resented by the reigning elector Frederic, afterward surnamed the
Wise. At his request Pope Leo X., so recently as 1516, had attached to this
shrine an indulgence for the yearly festival of All Saints. The offerings
which this indulgence would produce Frederic designed to apply for the
benefit of the university which he had founded. Hence, he regarded the
papal indulgence for St. Peter's at Rome as a grievance, and, but for an
imperial mandate requiring all the German princes to throw no impediment in
its way, he would have forbidden its being preached in his territories.

{842}

Frederic, moreover, had a grudge against Rome on the following grounds: The
holy see had, in compliance with his request, consented to confer on his
natural son the coadjutorship to a benefice _in commendam_. But the
commendator himself dying when the diploma conferring the coadjutorship had
just been completed, a new diploma conferring the vacant commendatory had
to be prepared instead, entailing on Frederic, who was of a very
parsimonious disposition, the vexatious necessity of having to pay the fees
twice over. This he ruminated upon in his sullen way, and set it down in
his mind as a conclusive proof of that grasping, overreaching spirit which
the enemies of the church in that age accused her of in such exaggerated
terms. Frederic the Wise was also involved in a dispute with the archbishop
of Mentz respecting certain territorial rights at Erfurth.

The Augustinian hermits of Wittenberg sympathized with their munificent
patron the elector. He permitted them to make use of the funds accruing
from the local indulgence of All Saints toward the expenses of a new
convent and church which they had in course of erection. But the temporary
suspension of the latter indulgence in favor of the one preached by John
Tetzel for Pope Leo X. and Archbishop Albert inconvenienced and annoyed
them all the more, as their buildings were on the point of completion.
Neither was their ill-will toward Tetzel the less that, in his character as
a Dominican, he was their ardent opponent in the scholastic and theological
disputes of the day; and, besides being a preacher of such talent and
influence, was a dignitary of the court of Inquisition at Cologne, where,
of course, the Dominicans presided.

In spite of all obstacles, Tetzel preached the indulgence with signal
success at Leipsic, Magdeburg, Halberstadt, Berlin, and other places. At
length, about the end of October. 1517, he arrived at Yüterbock, near
Wittenberg, just at the time for gaining the special indulgence of All
Saints. In vain the Augustinians secretly did what they could to prevent
the people from flocking to hear him. The very students of the new
Wittenberg university, expressly founded as it was as a rival to that of
Leipsic, deserted the lecture-halls in such numbers that the professors
were filled with alarm and indignation. In particular, Dr. Martin Luther
was exasperated to find himself so completely eclipsed by the proximity of
Tetzel, against whom he fruitlessly inveighed in the temporary church of
the Augustinian hermits. Even his own penitents, regardless of his
admonitions and refusals of absolution, forsook his confessional to obtain
the indulgence proclaimed at Yüterbock. All at once they seemed to forget
the maxims he had taken so much pains to instil into their minds respecting
divine grace and good works! Long had he waited for an opportunity to
broach his new doctrine openly, and he and his disciples resolved that now
or never was the time to do so.

Accordingly, on the 31st of October Luther posted up his famous ninety-five
theses at the door of All Saints' church in Wittenberg, and challenged all
the world to dispute with him on the doctrine they maintained. Ostensibly
they were levelled against the alleged abuses of the papal indulgence. But
attacks on the doctrine itself, as well as on the authority of the pope,
were insidiously intermingled with them.

  "Not the affair of the indulgence, not Tetzel, not the corruption and
  ignorance of the clergy, not the decay of discipline," says Dr. Gröne,
  "but the circumstance that Luther, previous to the posting up of his
  theses, was a heretic, and found support in the Elector Frederic--this it
  was that gave rise to the great schism in the church."

Dr. Gröne substantiates his assertion by authenticated facts, and a
critical examination of Luther's ninety-five theses, which, says he,

  "Were the point of transition from secret to open from timid to
  obstinate, heresy. They were the seed which, sown in the soil, contains,
  not only virtually, but really, all that, as germ and plant, it has a
  right to contain. They were the result, the production of Luther's mental
  life, corroded, as it was, by error and learned self-conceit; they were
  as intimately united with it as the stem is with the root, therefore they
  could only be abandoned in case the author himself transformed his entire
  interior life. Hence, too, is to be derived the obstinacy with which
  Luther clung to them, with which he would still have clung to them, even
  if they had not earned him general applause; hence the circumstance that,
  in defending them, he involved himself deeper and deeper in heresy."

{843}

By means of the press Luther's theses were soon spread all over Germany.
Tetzel, seeing the riotous applause they met with from the enemies of the
church generally, and from his own enemies in particular, suspended his
preaching; and, with the concurrence of the archbishop of Mentz, repaired
for advice to his former preceptor, Dr. Conrad Wimpina, at that time rector
of the university of Frankfort-on-the-Oder. Wimpina advised him to answer
Luther's challenge with a series of antitheses. Tetzel did so, and
published against Luther's ninety-five theses a hundred and six antitheses.
They obtained for him the degree of doctor of divinity. In the clearest
manner they set forth the true Catholic doctrine of the absolute necessity
of repentance, confession, and satisfaction for the pardon of sin,
affirming that, though an indulgence exempts the sinner from the
vindicatory penalties of the church, it leaves him just as much bound as
ever to submit to her medicinal and preservative ones; that it does not
derogate from the merits of Christ, since its whole efficacy is due to the
atoning passion of Christ; as also that the pope has power only by means of
suffrage to apply the benefits of an indulgence to the souls in purgatory.
Moreover, to say the pope cannot absolve the least venial sin is erroneous;
and equally so to deny that all vicars of Christ have the same power as
Peter had: rather to assert that Peter, in the matter of indulgences, had
more power than they, is both heretical and blasphemous. One of the many
slanders on Tetzel is, that he was not the author of the antitheses that he
published, but that Dr. Wimpina wrote them for him. Luther himself flung
this taunt in his face, and so gave it the prestige among his party of an
undoubted fact. Dr. Gröne enters fully into the case, and terminates his
inquiry with "venturing to believe that, by his vindication, he has
annihilated every substantial ground for doubting that Tetzel was the real
author of the antitheses in question." They did not, of course, silence
Luther, who replied to them with a popular compendium in German of his
ninety-five theses in twenty articles. Tetzel rejoined with twenty others,
also in German. In the nineteenth he declares of Luther's doctrine, in the
tone of a prophet, that, in consequence of it, "many people will contemn
the authority and power of his holiness the pope and the Roman see, will
intermit the works of sacramental satisfaction, will no longer believe
their pastors and teachers, but will explain, every one for himself, the
sacred Scriptures according to private fancy and whim, and believe just
what every one chooses, to the great detriment of souls throughout
Christendom."

At a time when all the most learned men in Germany regarded the matter as
nothing but a scholastic dispute, when many even in Rome deemed it a mere
monkish quarrel, Tetzel, by thus pointing out in such clear and concise
terms what Luther's principles really involved, what fatal results they
would produce, evinced, in Dr. Gröne's opinion, a more than ordinary
penetration of mind.

Luther's fundamental thought in attacking indulgences was this: That
indulgences are not of faith, because not taught in the Bible, not taught
by Christ and his apostles; they emanate, he said, only from the pope. Now,
if this thought was an erroneous one, if the pope in questions of faith and
morals is infallible, if he alone possesses the right to decide the true
sense and meaning of Scripture, every Catholic is bound on all such
questions to submit to him; and Luther, if he persisted in maintaining his
doctrine, passed sentence on himself as an apostate and a heretic, cut
himself off from all__ escape, and had no other choice left than that
of either being punished as a heretic, or making a recantation.
{844}
Hence, in order to drive him from the field, it was requisite to prove
that, besides the truths explicitly declared in holy writ, there are other
truths in the church which we are equally bound to believe; and that they
comprise all those doctrines relating to faith which are defined as such by
the holy see. By setting up those propositions the dispute would be raised
to one of principle, and Luther would be compelled to speak out on the
pope's authority in matters of faith and practice.

These considerations spurred Tetzel on to issue against Luther's fifty
theses on the power of the pope; for, indeed, it had not eluded his
observation that much the greater part of the applause received by Luther
was owing far more to his insidious attacks on the authority of the holy
see than to his reprobation of the indulgence. Tetzel's fifty theses,
published about the end of April, 1518, maintained, therefore, that the
highest power having been received by the pope exclusively from God, cannot
be extended or limited, either by any man or by the whole world, but only
by God alone. That in his power of jurisdiction the pope stands above all
other bishops separate or united. That, although, as a private man, the
pope may hold, on a point of faith, a wrong opinion, yet, when he
pronounces judgment on it _ex cathedrâ_, he is infallible. That
indulgences cannot be granted by the rest of the prelates, whether
collectively or singly, but only by the "Bridegroom of the whole church,"
namely, the pope. That what is true and of faith about indulgences, only
the pope can decide. That the church has many Catholic truths, which are
neither expressly declared in the canon of Scripture, nor explicitly stated
by the holy fathers. That all doctrines relating to faith, and defined as
such by the apostolic see, are to be reckoned among Catholic truths,
whether or not they are contained in the Bible. As a warning for the
elector of Saxony, Tetzel declares that all those who patronize heretics,
and use their power to prevent them from being put upon their trial before
the lawful judge, incur excommunication.

These fifty theses of Tetzel's were strictly in the spirit of the
scholastic theology in vogue, a spirit which the experience of such
councils as those of Basle, Constance, and Florence had contributed not a
little to evoke.

Luther at once perceived what a stumbling-block Tetzel had thrown in his
way. He did not attempt to dispute the fifty theses. Had he done so he must
have plainly acknowledged himself a heretic. As matters stood this would
have been premature, would have spoiled all, would have ruined him and his
cause. Tetzel had not designated Luther personally as a heretic. But Luther
chose to assume that he had done so, and forthwith let loose a storm
against him of such brutal and malignant invective as Luther alone was
capable of. Adopting the tone of an injured man, a man shamefully
misunderstood, he filled Germany with hypocritical asseverations of his
orthodoxy and his devotion to the see of Peter. All his party, all Tetzel's
opponents, followed in his wake. The heathen-minded humanists, in
particular, singled out Tetzel as the butt of their ribald satire, holding
him up to scorn and execration as the very impersonation of every
imaginable monastic abuse and scandal. The persecuted man found little or
no shelter from the tempest. The friends of religion and the church were
intimidated, confounded, paralyzed; apathy, indecision, cowardice,
delusion, prevailed among the guardians of the faith, prevailed among the
German bishops. Rome herself was slow and lenient in her measures. Although
she cited Luther to come and answer for himself to her, she consented, in
the persons of Cajetan and Miltiz, to go to him. Cajetan, all patience and
condescension, allowed himself to be trifled with and duped. Miltiz
truckled to Luther, reviled Tetzel, betrayed his trust.
{845}
In vain did Hermann Rab, provincial of the Saxon Dominicans, address a
touching letter in Tetzel's defence to Miltiz. It is dated at Leipsic,
January 3d, 1519, and is quoted in full by Dr. Gröne:

  "Truly I should not know where to find a man (observes Hermann Rab in
  this letter) who has done and suffered, who still suffers so much for the
  honor of the apostolic see, as our venerable father, Magister John
  Tetzel. If his holiness only knew it, I doubt not but that he would
  distinguish him in a worthy manner. With what lies and slanders beyond
  number he is overwhelmed, all the street-corners, where they resound in
  your ears, attest. I only wish your excellence had heard the sermon he
  preached on the feast of our Lord's circumcision, for then you would not
  have failed to convince yourself what his sentiments are, and always have
  been, toward the holy see."

Miltiz commanded Tetzel to retire to his cell at Leipsic. He obeyed. His
career was now terminated. He never ascended the pulpit again. The fatigues
and excitement he had undergone; the persecution he had suffered; his
deserted and forlorn condition; above all, the course of events, so ominous
for the church and the papacy, to which he clung with all his soul; these
things preyed upon his mind and body to such a degree that his health gave
way, and he died in a state of profound melancholy in the month of August
of the above-mentioned year. He is supposed to have been about sixty years
old:

  "Tetzel could not have set up a better monument to his own character
  (writes Dr. Gröne) than he did in the grief and affliction which hastened
  his end. The ruin of the church, the wild infidelity, and unspeakable
  disorders which the triumph of Luther must needs entail on Germany--this
  was the worm that gnawed his vital thread. It broke his heart to be
  forced to see how the sincere champions of the old church truths were
  left alone, were slandered, despised, and misunderstood by their own
  party, while the mockers and revilers of the immutable doctrine won
  applause on all sides."

In a chapter devoted to a refutation of the infamous calumnies and profane
anecdotes recorded of Tetzel, it is shown by Dr. Gröne that they were
mostly borrowed from the Decameron of Boccaccio and a congenial German
production, styled Der Pfaffe Amis. For example: Tetzel, being anxious to
impart extraordinary interest to the indulgence he had to preach, once told
the people he would show them a feather which the devil, in combating with
the archangel Michael, had plucked from the archangel's wing. But a couple
of godless wags, entering his chamber during his absence, stole the feather
out of the box in which it was kept, and put some coals from the fireplace
in its stead. Tetzel, ignorant of the theft, mounts the pulpit, box in
hand, and declaims with great fervor on the wonderful qualities of his
heavenly feather. Then opening the box, finds it full of coals. Nothing
abashed, he cries out, "What wonder if, among so many relic-boxes as I
possess, I have taken the wrong one?" And forthwith he extols the
miraculous power of the very coals on which St. Lawrence was broiled.

Another merry tale of the sort is the following: "Tetzel," they, say, "once
desired to lodge with the sacristan at Zwickau. But the sacristan excused
himself as being too poor to entertain so renowned a guest. 'We'll see that
you have money enough,' said Tetzel, 'only look what saint it is in the
calendar to-morrow.' The sacristan found the name of Juvenalis. 'A very
unlucky name, he regretted to say, because it was so little known.' 'But
we'll make it known,' replied Tetzel. 'Ring the bells to-morrow as if for a
festival, and let high mass be sung.' The sacristan obeyed, and the people
throng the church. After the gospel Tetzel ascends the pulpit, and speaks:
'Good people, to-day I have something to tell you which, if I were to
withhold it, would be the very ruin of your salvation. Hitherto, you know,
we have always invoked such and such saints, but now they have grown old,
and are tired of hearing and helping us. To-day you commemorate Juvenalis,
and although until now he has been unknown, let us none the less honor him
with all our hearts.
{846}
For as he is a new saint, he will be all the more indefatigable in praying
for us. Juvenalis, my friends, was a holy martyr, whose blood was
innocently shed. Now, if you would also participate in his innocence before
God, let each of you put an offering on the altar during mass. And do you,
ye great and rich ones, precede the rest with your good example.'"

Again, in 1512, Tetzel, after having preached at Zwickau, had got all his
money packed up, and was about to depart. But the parish priest, with his
chaplain and clerk, came running to him, bitterly complaining that, while
he had provided so splendidly for himself, they had not got as much by the
indulgence as would pay for one jolly day. "Truly I am very sorry," answers
Tetzel, "but why did you not tell me sooner? However, ring the bells again
to-morrow; there may still, perhaps, be something left for you." No sooner
said than done. The people all came flocking to church, and Tetzel,
ascending the pulpit, begins: "Dearly beloved, true I had intended to
depart this very day, but last night I heard in your church-yard a poor
soul moaning and weeping miserably, and imploring some one to come to her
relief, and deliver her out of purgatory. This caused me to remain here to
day, to have mass said and offerings made for this poor soul. Now, whoever
among us should neglect to make an offering would thereby prove that he has
no compassion on the poor soul, or else that he must either be a fornicator
or an adulterer, whose conscience tells him he is not worthy to take part
in this good work. And that you may know what an urgent case it is, I
myself will be the first to present my offering."

Of course all the people hasten to follow so edifying an example, they even
borrow money from one another, for no one wishes to be thought a fornicator
or an adulterer.

In citing such absurd stories as the above, along with many others of a
still more profane description, Dr. Gröne shows that, in several instances,
they were the same as were employed to slander the character of Bernardin
Samson, the Franciscan preacher of Pope Leo's indulgence in Switzerland. He
also cites two contemporary documents, one of them signed by the
authorities of the town of Halle, the other by John Pels, prior of the
Dominican convent of Nevenwerk, denying in emphatic terms that Tetzel, in
his sermons, ever blasphemed the Blessed Virgin in the shocking way he was
accused of doing. In fine, had he really been the monster of depravity, the
shameless drunkard, swindler, liar, blasphemer, and adulterer his enemies
make of him, it is but too obvious that, instead of opposing, he would have
joined Luther, whose earliest and most ardent disciples were principally
degenerate monks, in love with the Lutheran doctrine of the futility of
good works--monks, in a word, corresponding in every respect to the
Protestant descriptions, but opposite in character as day and night to the
true nature of John Tetzel.

------

{847}

  From Once a Week.

  The Bride of Eberstein.

  A Legend of Baden.


Four hours distant from the city of Baden, near the market village of
Malsch, on a bold, projecting wood-crowned eminence in the Black Forest,
stood the Castle of Waldenfels. It is now a heap of ruins, and scarcely can
the traveller discover the spot which was formerly the residence of an
opulent and powerful family.

In the thirteenth century, Sir Beringer, last of his race, inhabited the
castle of Waldenfels. His lately departed consort had bequeathed him an
only daughter, Rosowina by name. In bygone years Sir Beringer had ofttimes
felt distressed that he would leave no male heir to propagate the name and
celebrity of his ancient stock; and, in this feeling, he had adopted
Heinrich von Gertingen, an orphan boy, the son of an early friend and
companion in arms, and the representative of an ancient but impoverished
house, to whom he purposed to bequeath his inheritance and his name. Not
long, however, after this event, his daughter was born. And as Rosowina,
after her mothers early death, advanced in the blossom of youth, she became
the pride and happiness of her father's age, and never caused him sorrow,
save in the reflection that some day she would leave the paternal for the
conjugal hearth. All now that troubled him was his adopted son. The growing
boy, while manifesting a becoming taste for knightly accomplishments, and
obtaining success in their display, nourished in his breast the germ of
fiery passions, which, while they caused distress and anxiety to the Lord
of Waldenfels, impressed his daughter with terror and revolted feeling. At
length, when Rosowina had attained her sixteenth year, she became to
Heinrich the object of a wild and desperate devotion. He repressed the
sentiment awhile, but at length yielded himself its slave. He persecuted
Rosowina with his ill-timed and terrible addresses; and one day, having
found her alone in the castle garden, he cast himself at her feet, and
swore by all that was holy and dear that his life was in her hand, and that
without her he must become the victim of an agonizing despair. Rosowina's
terror and confusion were boundless; she had never experienced the smallest
feeling of affection for the youth, but rather regarded him with aversion
and alarm. She knew not at the moment how to act or what to say. At that
instant her father appeared. The confusion of both sufficiently discovered
what had occurred: in a burning rage Sir Beringer commanded the unhappy
youth instantly to quit the castle for ever. With one wild glance at
Rosowina, Heinrich obeyed; and muttering, "The misery thou hast brought
upon my life come upon thine own!" rushed despairingly away. Next morning
his body was found in the Murg, his countenance hideously distorted, and
too well expressing the despair with which he had left the world. Efforts
were made, so far as possible, to conceal the horrid truth from Rosowina,
but in vain; time, however, softened the features of the ghastly memory.
She had now completed her seventeenth year, and was already celebrated as
the beauty of the surrounding country. And not only was her beauty the
subject of universal praise; her maidenly modesty, her goodness of heart,
her prudent, thoughtful, intelligent cast of mind, were the theme of
commendation with all who had enjoyed the privilege of her society.

{848}

A few hours' distance from the Castle of Waldenfels, in the pleasant valley
through which rush the clear waters of the Alb, stood the monastery of
Herrenalb. The Holy Virgin was patroness of the foundation, and the day on
which the church celebrates the festival of her nativity was annually
observed as the grand holiday of the convent, when the monks, to do honor
to this occasion, exhibited all the splendor and magnificence which
Christian bounty had placed at their disposal, and spared no expense to
entertain their guests in the most hospitable and sumptuous manner. And now
Sir Beringer of Waldenfels had promised his Rosowina to ride over to
Herrenalb with her the next St. Mary's day. He was ever a man of his word;
how should he now be otherwise, when that word assured a pleasure to the
darling of his heart?

Bright and genial rose the autumnal morning when Sir Beringer and Rosowina,
with a small retinue, rode over the hills to Herrenalb. The knight and his
daughter were courteously and hospitably received by the abbot and his
monks. The presence of the noble heiress of Waldenfels excited much
interest and observation in the minster church; but the maiden herself
appeared unconscious of the fact. Seldom, however, as she found herself
disturbed by worldly thoughts in her devotions in the castle chapel at
Waldenfels, the splendor of the monastic church and services, and the
innumerable hosts of worshippers, were to her so new, that she felt
tempted, from time to time, to give a momentary glance around her. On one
occasion her gaze encountered a pair of eyes which seemed to rest on the
attraction of her countenance with an earnest yet respectful expression,
and, inexperienced as she was, she was at no loss to comprehend its
meaning. The gazer was a stately youth, who was leaning against a pillar.
His strong-built and well-proportioned frame, his noble and expressive
countenance, and even his rich and tasteful apparel, were well adapted to
fix the attention of a youthful maiden of seventeen, while his whole
demeanor convinced her how deeply he was smitten with the power of her
charms.

The service over, the worshippers dispersed, and the sumptuous abbey opened
its hospitable gates to all who could advance any claim to entertainment. A
sister of Rosowina's mother was a nun in the cloister of Frauenalb, and
Rosowina was permitted occasionally to visit her, and had here enjoyed the
opportunity of making the acquaintance of several noble young ladies of the
neighborhood. She met some of them on this occasion, whom she accompanied
into the spacious garden of the convent. Among these was the young Countess
Agnes of Eberstein, with whom as she was sauntering through an avenue of
umbrageous beeches, suddenly there stood before her the abbot of the
convent and the young man who had attracted her attention in the church,
who, side by side, had emerged from a side-way path into the main walk.
Rosowina trembled in joyful alarm as she recognized her admirer: her first
thought was to return or retreat, but, without a manifest discourtesy, this
was now impossible. Neither was the Countess Agnes at all willing to
escape, but rather forced forward the reluctant Rosowina, welcoming at the
same time the youthful stranger as her beloved brother, the Count Otto of
Eberstein. After mutual salutations, Agnes introduced Rosowina to her
brother, who was delighted to recognize in the object of his admiration the
friend of his sister. He made advances toward a conversation, but the
abbot, whose heart was less sensible to beauty, would not, even for a few
short minutes, postpone the subject of their discussion. At the banquet,
however, which followed, it was easy for the Count of Eberstein, from his
high connection with the monastery, to choose his place, and he placed
himself opposite Sir Beringer and his daughter.
{849}
The knights had met occasionally before, and a nearer acquaintance was soon
made. To an engaging person Sir Otto united the attractions of polished
manners, of knowledge extensive for that period, acquired by residence in
most of the courts of Europe, and of a lively conversational talent, which
rendered him everywhere a welcome addition to society. With so many claims
on her regard, it was little wonderful that Rosowina should accept with
pleasure the homage of the count, and encourage in his breast the most
delightful of hopes.

About that time the Counts of Eberstein had built a new castle above the
beautiful valley of the Murg, not far from the family residence of their
ancestors. The splendor of Neueberstein was the subject of universal
conversation, and all who had the opportunity of seeing the new palace were
eager to embrace the privilege. An invitation from Count Otto to the Knight
of Waldenfels and his daughter was only natural, and was no less naturally
accepted with especial welcome.

Warm and mild shone the bright autumn sun on the lovely valley of the Murg,
as Sir Beringer and his daughter rode on beside the crystal stream; nor
could Rosowina suppress the thought how she might ere long ascend the steep
winding pathway to the castle no longer its visitor, but its mistress. Sir
Otto met his guests at the castle-gate, and, with eyes beaming with joy,
more especially as he saw the joy was mutual, lifted Rosowina from her
palfrey. After brief rest and refreshment, the inspection of the castle
began. Halls and chambers were duly examined, and at last the party
ascended the rampart of the loftiest tower, whence an enchanting prospect
met the eye. Far below them the Murg rolled its restless waters, now
flowing peaceful between banks of lively green, now toilsomely forcing its
passage between wild masses of rock. On either side the dusky hills towered
above the scene; and here and there now glimmered out of the shadow of the
forest a solitary mountain village, now a mass of mighty cliffs; and as the
eye descended the rapid mountain stream, it rested on the blooming plain of
the Rhine, where, in the violet tints of distance, arose the awful barrier
of the Vosges. Lost in the magnificent spectacle stood Rosowina, unable to
satiate her eye on the glorious picture, and unaware that Otto was close
beside her, contemplating with secret pleasure the beautiful spectatress.
At length the involuntary exclamation escaped her, "A paradise indeed!"

Then found she herself softly clasped in a gentle arm, and her hand
affectionately pressed, while a well-known voice uttered softly, "And would
not Rosowina make this place 'a paradise indeed,' were she to share it with
me!"

Unable now to suppress her feelings, Rosowina replied by a glance more
expressive than any words. She returned that evening with her father to
Waldenfels the happy affianced bride of Count Otto of Eberstein.

On a bright spring morning, symbolizing well the feelings of the lovers,
the marriage solemnity was held at the Castle of Neueberstein, with all the
pomp and state of the period, which few understood better than Otto to
display. From towers and battlements innumerable banners, with the
Eberstein colors and blazonry, floated gallantly in the morning breeze, and
the portal, adorned with wreaths and arras, cast wide its hospitable gates.
Toward noon appeared, in the midst of a glittering pageant, the bride,
magnificently arrayed, but brighter in her incomparable beauty; and all
praised the choice of Otto, and agreed that he could have selected no
worthier object to grace his halls. Rosowina, however, felt unaccountably
distressed. It was not the confusion of maiden modesty it was not the
embarrassment of the bride that troubled the serenity of her heart. She
knew not herself what it was; but it weighed upon her mind like the
foreboding of a threatening misfortune.
{850}
An image, moreover, arose to her thought which long had seemed to have
vanished from her memory, even that of the unhappy Heinrich von Gertingen.
She endeavored to repress her anxiety, and succeeded so well that the happy
bride-groom saw not the cloud of sorrow that shaded the fair brow of his
bride. But when the priest had spoken the words of blessing, the last spark
of gloomy foreboding was extinct, and with untroubled tenderness she
returned her bridegroom's nuptial kiss, reproaching him smilingly, and yet
seriously, for exclaiming, as he did, with solemn appeals, that all the
joys of paradise and all the bliss of heaven were poor and insipid
pleasures in comparison of the happiness which he enjoyed in calling her
his own.

The nuptial banquet followed. It was served with profuse splendor; but when
the joy was at its height, and the castle resounded with jubilant voices,
and the dance was about to begin, a page announced a stranger knight, who
wished to speak to the bridegroom; and forthwith a figure walked into the
hall. The stranger's armor and mantle were black, and he wore his visor
down. He proceeded with stately advance to the place where the newly wedded
pair were seated at the table, made a low reverence, and spoke with a
hollow and solemn tone:

"I come, honored Count of Eberstein, on the part of my master, the powerful
monarch of Rachenland,  [Footnote 304] to whose court the celebrity of this
occasion and of your bride has come, to assure you of the interest which he
takes in your person, and his gratification in the event of this day."

    [Footnote 304: _Anglicè_, "The Land of Vengeance."]

His speech was interrupted by a page, who, kneeling, presented him with a
goblet of wine. But the stranger waved aside the honor, and requested, as
the highest favor that could be shown him, that he might lead the first
dance with the bride. None of the company had heard of Rachenland; but the
knowledge of distant countries was not then extensive, and the
representative of a mighty prince could not be refused the usual courtesy.
Rosowina, however, at the first appearance of the stranger knight, had
experienced an unaccountable shuddering, which amounted almost to terror,
as, leading her forth to the dance, he chilled her whole frame with the
freezing touch which, even through his gauntlet, seemed to pierce her very
heart. She was forced to summon all her strength to support herself during
the dance, and was painfully impatient for its conclusion. At length the
desired moment arrived, and her partner conducted her back to her seat,
bowing courteously, and thanking her. But at that instant she felt even
more acutely the icy coldness of his hand, while his glowing, penetrating
eye, through his visor, seemed to burn for a moment into her very soul. As
he turned to leave, a convulsive pang rent her heart, and, with a shriek,
she sank lifeless on the floor. Instant and universal was the alarm; all
rushed to the scene of the calamity; and in the confusion of the moment the
stranger knight vanished.

Inexpressible was the grief of all. In the bloom of beauty and rich fulness
of youth lay the bride, cold and inanimate, a stark and senseless corpse.
Every conceivable appliance was tried to recall departed life; but departed
it had for ever, and all attempts were vain; and when it was ascertained
beyond a doubt that not the smallest hope remained, the guests in silence
left the house of mourning, and the inhabitants of the castle were left
alone with their sorrow.

Three days had now passed away. The corpse of Rosowina rested in the vault
of the castle chapel, and the mourners, after paying the last honors to the
dead, had again departed. Otto, left alone at Eberstein, refused all human
consolation. The first stupefaction of sorrow had now given place to a
clamorous and boundless despair.
{851}
He cursed the day of his nativity, and in his wild desperation cried aloud
that he would readily sacrifice the salvation of his soul, and renounce his
claim on eternal happiness, were it only granted him to spend the rest of
life at Rosowina's side.

Before the door of the vault in which the young countess slept the wakeless
sleep, Gisbrecht kept watch and ward. Gisbrecht was an old man-at-arms of
the house of Eberstein, which he had served faithfully for more than forty
years. He was a warrior from his youth, and had stood loyally at the side
of his master, and of his master's father and grandfather, in many a bloody
conflict; fear, except the fear of God, which he diligently cultivated, was
a stranger to his soul. With slow and measured tread he paced up and down
at his station, meditating the sudden death of the young and beautiful
countess, and thence passing in thought to the instability and nothingness
of all human things. Often had his glance fallen on the entrance to the
vault; but now--what was that? Scarcely did he trust his eyes; yet it was
so. The gate opened, and a white-robed figure came forth from the depths of
the sepulchre. For a while, Gisbrecht stood motionless, with bated breath,
but fearless, while the apparition approached him. But when he gazed nearer
on the pale, ashy countenance, and recognized beyond a doubt the features
of Rosowina, the horrors of the spirit-world came upon him; and, impelled
by an unutterable terror, he rushed up the steps, and along the corridor
which led to his lord's chamber, unheeding the call of the white figure,
which followed close upon his track.

Count Otto, in his despair, was turning himself from side to side upon his
bed, when he heard a heavy knock upon the door; and, as he rose and opened
it, there stood old Gisbrecht, pale, trembling, with distorted features,
and scarcely able to stammer out from his trembling lips:

"O my lord count! the Lady of Waldenfels--"

"Art mad, Gisbrecht!" cried the count, astonished at the manner and words
of the old man.

"Pardon me, lord count," continued Gisbrecht, stammering; "I meant to say
the young departed countess--"'

"O Rosowina!" exclaimed the count, with an involuntary sigh.

"Here she is--thy Rosowina!" cried a pallid female form, which, with these
words, precipitated herself into the count's embrace.

The count knew not what to think. He was overpowered with astonishment. Was
it a dream? was it an apparition? or was it Rosowina indeed? Yes, it was
indeed she. It was her silver voice. Her heart beat, her lips breathed, the
mild and angelic features were there. It was Rosowina indeed, whom, wrapt
in the cerements of the grave, he held in his embrace.

On the morrow, the wondrous tale was everywhere told in the castle and the
neighborhood. The Countess Rosowina had not died; she had only been in a
trance. The sacristan, fortunately, had not fastened the door of the vault,
and the countess, on awakening, had been enabled by the light of the
sepulchral lamp to extricate herself from the coffin, and to follow the
affrightened sentinel to his master's chamber.

And now at Castle Eberstein once more all was liveliness and joy. But
boundless as had been the despair of the count at his loss, he did not feel
happy in his new good fortune. It seemed as though a secret unknown
something intervened between him and his youthful bride. He found no more
in her eye that deep expression of soul that so oft had awakened his heart
to transports of joy; the gaze was dead and cold. The warm kiss imprinted
on her chilly lips met never a return. Even her character was opposite to
all he had expected. As a bride, loving and gentle, trustful and devoted,
open and sincere, now was she sullen, testy, and silent. Every hour seemed
these peculiarities to unfold themselves more; every day they become mere
unendurable.
{852}
Often was his kiss rejected, sometimes with bitter mockery; if he left her
awhile through annoyance, she reproached him, and filled the castle with
complaints of his neglect and aversion; when business called him abroad,
she tortured him with the most frightful jealousy. Even in her manners and
inclinations the Countess of Eberstein was an actual contrast to the
heiress of Waldenfels; all in her was low, ignoble, and mean; one habit was
chiefly remarkable in her, always to cross her husband, to distress and
annoy him, to embitter all his joys, to darken all his pleasures. And soon
it became the common saying of the neighborhood: "The Count of Eberstein
thought he had been courting an angel, but he had brought home a dragon
from an opposite world."

With inexhaustible patience, with imperturbable equanimity, Count Otto
endured these annoyances. No complaint, no reproach, ever passed his lips.
He had loved Rosowina too faithfully, too entirely, to let the conduct of
her whom he now called his wife so soon extinguish the passion of his
heart. But these disappointed hopes, this perpetual struggle between love
and despised self-esteem, and this concealment of the sharpest pangs of his
soul, gnawed at the very germ of life, and destroyed it at its core. A slow
fever seized him, and he was now visibly decaying, and approaching the
grave. One morning he was found unexpectedly in the death-struggle. He
asked for the chaplain of the castle, in order to make his dying
confession; but the holy man only arrived in time to witness his last most
agonizing groans. At the same moment a frightful crash shook the
foundations of the castle, the doors of the burial-vault sprang open, and
some of the domestics saw the spectral form of Rosowina sweep into it, and
vanish in the darkness.

The deserted castle of Neueberstein sank in ruins, uninhabited for many
centuries; the popular belief being that Otto and Rosowina continued to
appear in its haunted apartments, and to set forth thereby the solemn
lesson, that _he makes the most foolish and wicked of bargains, who gains
even the whole world, if he lose his own soul._

------

  From The Lamp.

  The Miner.

  From The German of Novalis.


In a room of a clean inn sat a group of men, partly travellers, partly
persons that had entered to drink a glass of beer, who conversed with each
other on various subjects. The attention of the company was particularly
directed to an old man in strange attire who was seated at a table, and
answered in a friendly manner all the questions which were put to him.

"He came from foreign parts," he said; and was a native of Bohemia. From
early youth he had had a vehement longing to know what was hidden within
the mountains whence the water gushed up into the springs, and where we
found the gold, silver, and precious stones, which have attractions so
irresistible for man. In the church of the neighboring monastery he had
often gazed upon the solid brilliancy of the images and reliquaries, and
wished that they could speak and tell him of their mysterious origin.
{853}
He had heard sometimes that they came from far distant lands; but he had
asked himself why these treasures and gems should not be found in his own
district. Not without a purpose were the mountainous regions so vast, and
preserved so securely; so it seemed to him, as sometimes on the hills he
found bright and glittering stones. He had often clambered into clefts and
caverns, and beheld with unspeakable pleasure those primeval halls and
vaults. At length he once met a traveller who advised him to become a
miner, by which means he might gratify his curiosity. He had told him that
there were miners in Bohemia; and that, if he followed the downward course
of the river, he would after ten or twelve days' journey arrive at Eula;
there he had only to speak, and he might at once become a miner. He had not
sought for further information; but the next day had set out on his
journey.

"After a fatiguing walk of several days," he continued, "I arrived at Eula.
I cannot express the joy I felt when from the summit of a hill I saw large
piles of stones, overgrown with shrubs, and upon which stood little wooden
huts; and when in the valley below I saw clouds of smoke rolling over the
wood, a distant noise increased the eagerness of my expectation. With
wonderful curiosity, and full of silent devotion, I stood upon one of the
stone mounds before the black abyss, which, from the interior of the hut,
led down straight into the mountain. Then I hastened down the valley, where
I met some darkly-clad men with lamps, who, as I rightly supposed, were
miners. With bashful anxiety I mentioned my design to them; they listened
to me with kindness, and bade me go to the melting house and inquire for
the surveyor, who would at once inform me whether or not my offer would be
accepted. They thought that my wish would be fulfilled, and told me the
usual words of salutation, '_Glück auf!_' with which I should accost
the surveyor. Full of joyful expectation, I left them, and could never
cease repeating to myself the novel salutation, so full of significance.

"I found a venerable old man, who, when I told him my history, and had
informed him of my eager desire to learn his curious and mysterious art,
promised in a very friendly manner to grant my request. I seemed to please
him; and he kept me in his house. With impatience I waited for the hour
when I should descend into the mine, and see myself clothed in the costume
which had so great a charm in my eyes. That evening he brought me a suit of
miner's clothes, and taught me the use of several instruments, which he
kept locked up in a room.

"In the evening several miners came to him; and although for the most part
their language and the subjects of their conversation were unintelligible
and novel to me, I endeavored not to miss a single word of what was said.
The little, however, which I fancied I understood increased my curiosity,
and suggested strange dreams to me during the night.

"I awoke betimes, and was soon with my new host, around whom the miners
gradually assembled to receive his orders. A room in his house was fitted
up as a chapel. A monk appeared, who said mass, and afterward recited a
solemn prayer, in which he besought the Almighty to take the miners into
his holy keeping, to support them in their perilous toil, to shield them
from the assaults and malice of evil spirits, and richly to bless their
labors.

"Never before had I prayed with so much fervor, or felt in so lively a
manner the high significance of the divine office. My future companions
seemed to me, as it were, subterranean heroes who had to surmount a
thousand dangers, but whose lot was enviable from the wonderful knowledge
they possessed, and who, through their solemn and silent acquaintance with
the primeval caverns of nature, were in her dark and marvellous chambers
endued with heavenly gifts and blissfully raised above all the annoyances
of the world.

{854}

"At the close of the service the surveyor gave me a lamp and a small wooden
crucifix, and went with me to the shaft, as we call the steep entrance to
the subterranean abode. He showed me the manner of descent, and instructed
me in the names of the numerous objects and their divisions. Holding a
rope, which was attached by a knot to a side-post, with one hand, and a
lighted lamp with the other, he began to descend. I followed his example;
and, proceeding at a somewhat rapid pace, we soon arrived at a considerable
depth.

"A feeling of deep solemnity pervaded my mind, and the light which moved
before me seemed, as it were, a fortunate star which guided me to the
secret treasuries of nature. We reached below a labyrinth of paths; and my
friendly master was never wearied answering all my questions, and
instructing me in his art.

"The murmur of the water, the distance from earth's inhabited surface, the
darkness and intricacy of our route, and the sound from afar of the miners
at work, filled me with extraordinary pleasure, and I felt with joy that I
was now in full possession of that which it had ever been my earnest desire
to possess. It is impossible to explain and describe the full satisfaction
of an inborn desire--that wonderful pleasure one finds in things which have
some secret connection with one's inmost being, and in occupations to which
one is called, and for which from his cradle his nature is adapted. Perhaps
to most people these might appear obscure, vulgar, or repulsive, but to me
they seemed as necessary as air or food.

"My aged master was much pleased with my genuine satisfaction, and
predicted that my zeal and attention would insure success. With what
rapture did I see for the first time in my life, now more than
five-and-forty years ago, the king of metals lying in delicate leaves in
the clefts of the rock! It seemed to me as though he were here kept in
close imprisonment, and shone with pleasure upon the miner who with so much
danger and labor had cloven his way to him through strong walls to bring
him to the light of day, so that he might be honored in royal crowns and
vessels and holy reliquaries, and might lead and govern the world in valued
and well earned coin.

"Thenceforth I remained at Eula, and rose by degrees to the grade of
_hewer_--who alone among the miners carries on the work on the rock
itself from carrying out the loose metal in baskets, to which work I had
been at first appointed.

"On the day when I became a hewer my aged master laid his hand on his
daughter's head and on mine, and blessed us as bride and bridegroom. On the
same day before sunrise I had cut open a rich vein. The duke gave me a gold
chain with his likeness on a large medal, and promised me my step-father's
situation. What happiness was mine when on our wedding-day I hung it round
the neck of my bride, and all eyes were fixed upon her! Our old father
lived to see several grandchildren, and at length passed in peace from the
dark mine of this world to await the great day of general retribution."

Here the old miner paused awhile and wiped away some tears from his eyes.

"Oh!" he at last exclaimed, God's blessing must needs rest upon the miner's
labors; for there is no craft which makes its workers more fortunate and
more noble-minded, which tends more to excite faith in God's wisdom and
providence, and which preserves purer innocence and youthfulness of heart
than that of the miner. Poor is he born into the world, and poor he leaves
it. It is his high joy to discover where the potent minerals are to be
found, and to bring them to light; but their dazzling brilliancy has no
influence over his heart.
{855}
Free from all perilous covetousness, his pleasure is rather derived from
their wonderful formation, the singularity of their origin and their
_habitats_, than from their possession, though it promises all things.
They have no greater charm for him than if they were common wares; and he
would rather seek for them through toil and danger in the deep fastnesses
of the earth, than strive for them on its surface by illusive and
fraudulent arts. That toil keeps his heart fresh and his mind courageous;
he enjoys his scanty pay with genuine thankfulness, and ascends every day
from the dark scenes of his calling with renewed pleasure in life. He alone
knows the real charm of light and repose, the beneficent influence of the
fresh air and the prospects which meet his eye. With what zest and
thankfulness does he eat his daily bread, and with what friendly feelings
does he associate with his fellows and taste the pleasures of familiar
conversation! In his solitude he thinks with hearty good-will of his
companions and his family, and feels ever renewed in his mind the mutual
needfulness and relationship of men. His calling teaches him unwearied
patience, and never permits him to waste his attention on unprofitable
thoughts. He has to deal with wonderfully hard and inflexible power, which
can only be overcome by obstinate labor and constant vigilance.

"But what a splendid plant he finds growing and blooming in these dreadful
depths! It is real trust in his heavenly Father, whose hand and providence
are daily made visible to him by unmistakable signs. How often have I sat
down in my place of work and contemplated by the light of my lamp my rude
crucifix with the truest devotion! There for the first time did I rightly
comprehend the holy significance of that mysterious symbol; there has my
heart felt its noblest impulses, which have been of continual use to me.

"Truly he must have been a godlike man who first taught the miner's craft,
and hid in the bosom of the rocks that solemn emblem of human life. Here
the vein discloses itself wide and unworked but valueless. There the rocks
confine it within a narrow obscure cleft; but there it is found of the
noblest proportions. Other veins running into it debase it, until it is
joined by one of a similar nature, which finally enhances its value. Often
it breaks before the miner in a thousand fragments; but he is not
discouraged. He pursues his work quietly, and presently sees his
perseverance rewarded as it stretches itself before him in increased
dimensions. Sometimes an illusive fragment leads him astray, but, soon
perceiving his mistake, he vigorously breaks through it till he finds the
vein leading to the true ore. How well acquainted is the miner with all the
humors of chance! but how thoroughly does he understand that zeal and
perseverance are the only real means to manage them and to take from them
their obstinately defended treasures!"

------

{856}

    Miscellany.

_Photographs of Churches in France._--This year's issue of
transcripts from ancient Gothic buildings and portions of buildings by the
Architectural Photographic Association is unusually interesting, not only
on account of the beauty and clearness of the sun-pictures of which it
consists, but of the subjects that have been chosen for the camera. These
contain no renaissance examples or specimens of sixteenth century craft in
imposing semi-barbarous fronts on noble Gothic churches of earlier date, as
in the works at Belloy, Luzarches, and Verteuil. These changes had
remarkable interest of their own, and were acceptable to the student who
cared to see how great was the debt of the remodelling architect to his
middle age forerunner. The studies now before us range from St. Georges de
Boscherville, founded in 1050 by Ralph de Tancarville, chamberlain to
William the Conqueror, to the very beautiful and interesting west front of
the church at Civray, which, like its greater neighbor, Notre Dame de
Grande, at Poitiers, also represented here, dates from the first half of
the twelfth century, through the curious rather than important early church
of St. Ours, at Loches, at the door of which stands a Roman altar that
appears to have been used as a font; the superb portals of Notre Dame, at
Chartres, of which we have five admirable photographs; St. Julien, at Le
Mans; the interior of the church of St. Pierre, at Lisieux, the west front
of the same, with its unequal but beautiful towers; and the church of St.
Riquier, near Abbeville, which may be said to have been discovered by Dr.
Whewell, and is a splendid Flamboyant work, with certain elements of
decoration that assimilate it with those of perpendicular. Of this church
we should very much enjoy a good interior view, on account of its value in
illustrating the happy union of early French Gothic with much later
Flamboyant. To these must be added a view of the very fine Flamboyant west
front of St. Wulfram, at Abbeville, an admirable example of its kind, and
the west front of the cathedral of St. Gatien, at Tours, a work which was
begun in 1440, and brought to perfection in 1500, under Robert de
Lenoncour, then archbishop. We can only find one fault in this series, that
is, the excessive number of doorways it contains. A doorway, or series of
portals, is one of the happiest fields for architectural art; but there is
a disproportion in this respect here, where, out of twenty-two examples, we
have but one interior view, that of St. Pierre, at Lisieux, and three
general views, two of which comprise portals.

St. Georges de Boscherville is one of the best known examples of the early
Norman churches, and remarkable for the extreme simplicity of its exterior,
its fine proportions, beautiful central tower, and high octagonal spire.
Interiorly, the building is much richer than without, and comparatively
light in style; the west front is among the most highly ornamented examples
of its kind and date in Normandy, and comprises a round-headed arch with
five concentric roll-mouldings, with as many shafts in the side of the
entrance, and is decorated with beaked heads, frets, cables, and chevrons
to an unusual degree, and capital in design. The apse of this church, which
is shown in the view before us, is very curious. The western turrets are
works of the thirteenth century.

Notre Dame, at Poitiers, is too well known to the artist and antiquary to
need commendation or description here; the design is a noble one, and
happily illustrates the Romanesque of Poitou. It has been remarked that the
window, which resembles that at Civray in position, has been converted from
the original round form to a tall shape, and that this was done to admit
the introduction of painted glass. We believe this is a mistake, and the
window retains its pristine form. The window at Civray was certainly never
circular. The canopied niches of fifteenth century work, at the sides of
this window, which once disfigured the façade, have been removed by late
restorers of the edifice, obviously to the improvement of the design. We do
not see in the two views of the church of St. Ours, at Loches, enough to
demand a double illustration: one better selected view than either of those
which appear here would be enough.
{857}
A general prospect of the church would have been valuable as an
illustration of its four tourelles, with their roofs of stone, after the
manner of those in the west front of Notre Dame, at Poitiers. Doubtless the
low porch of the church at Loches, which is not shown in the photograph,
prevented the selection of a more powerful effect of light and shade, and
interfered with the choice of points of view. Mr. Petit has carefully
analyzed this church in his Architectural Studies of France. We have also a
view of the details of the doorway exterior representing the carvings of
what may be called the imperfect capitals of the jambs. The glorious
porches of Chartres, especially that magnificent one on the south side, are
admirably represented in five photographs. These give the south doorway,
north doorway, details of the north doorway, doorways of the west front;
the last represents the long-robed statues of the royal saints and other
features of the Porte Royale, (so called, probably because Henry the Fourth
entered by it to his coronation,) after they left the restorer's hands, and
is a fine, clear photograph.--_Athenaeum_.


_Newspaper Zoölogy_.--The Pall Mall Gazette has published the
following interesting note: "The Courier de Saigon reports some
extraordinary items of natural history from the land of the Anamites. There
is a certain fish, called Ca-ong in the language of the country, which has
distinguished itself to that degree that the king has bestowed upon it the
proud title of 'Nam hai dui bnong gnan,' which, as everybody knows, means
'Great General of the South Sea.' It appears that this laudable fish is in
the habit of quietly paddling round the ships near the coast until somebody
tumbles overboard. He then seizes him instantly, and, instead of eating
him, gently carries him in his mouth to the shore. At Wung-tau, near St.
James's Cape, they keep a skeleton of this extraordinary philanthropist. It
is about thirty-five feet long, possesses front teeth like an elephant,
very large eyes, a black skin very smooth, a tail like a lobster, and two
wings on the back."


_Mechanics of Flight_.--An extremely interesting paper on this subject
was read by Mr. Wenham to the Aeronautical Society. The subject is too
difficult and complex to be explained briefly, and therefore we will only
say that Mr. Wenham has brought into the explanation of flight the effect
of the forward motion in retarding descent. Imagine a parallelogram 10 ft.
long by 2 ft. broad, weighing 20 lbs. Such a body would descend in still
air at the limiting rate of 1320 ft. per minute, the resistance of the air
put in motion by the plane balancing at that velocity the effect of
gravity. If now a force be applied horizontally so as to carry the plane
with its long side forward at a speed of thirty miles per hour, then the
motion of the plane being both downward and forward, a great volume of air
will pass under the front margin of the plane, and will be carried downward
before leaving the hinder margin. The weight of air thus put in motion will
be enormous, and the descending velocity of the plane proportionately
reduced. Mr. Wenham calculates that the velocity of descent would in these
circumstances be reduced to one fifteenth of the passive rate of descent,
or would not exceed 83 ft. per minute. Each particle of air would then be
moved downward eight tenths of an inch by the passage of the plane, and
conversely, if this inclination were given to the plane, it would move
forward without descending. Mr. Wenham finds that few birds can raise
themselves vertically in the air, the exertion in that case being
excessive. The eagle can only lift itself from the ground by running with
outstretched wings till its velocity having become sufficient, it glides
into the air as if sliding on a frictionless plane.--_Popular Science
Review_.


_A New Volcano in the South Seas_.--From a letter forwarded by the
English consul at Navigators' Islands, we learn that a volcano has just
broken out at Manua, about two miles from the islands of Oloscqa. It was
preceded by a violent shock of earthquake, which commenced on the 5th of
September, and on the 12th dense thick smoke rose out of the sea. Lava was
thrown up, discoloring the water for many miles round, and destroying large
quantities of fish. Wherever the ashes fell on the adjacent island, they
destroyed all vegetation. Up to the middle of November dense smoke was
still being thrown up. It is said that the smoke rose higher than the
neighboring island, which is over 2000 feet high. The consul has been
unable to ascertain whether there is any bank thrown up in the water.

{858}

_A Chemical Method for effectually Cleaning Glass_ is given in a
recently published work on one of the processes of photography. It is
simple, reliable, and completely efficient, and will, we doubt not, be
found very useful by our readers. It is as follows: Dilute the ordinary
hydrofluoric acid sold in gutta-percha bottles, with four or five parts of
water, drop it on a cotton rubber, (not on the glass,) and rub well over,
afterward washing till the acid is removed. The action is the same as that
of sulphuric acid when used for cleaning copper; a little of the glass is
dissolved off, and a fresh surface exposed. The solution of the acid in
water does not leave a dead surface on the glass, as the vapor would; if a
strong solution is left on long enough to produce a visible depression, the
part affected will be quite bright. This method is recommended in some
cases for cleaning photographic plates.



_Nature of the Earth eaten by the People of Borneo_.--The Chemical
News gives us the composition of the clay which is eaten so extensively by
the natives of Borneo. It states that some years ago the manager of the
Orange-Nassau colliery, near Zandjermasin, in the island of Borneo, found
that many of his work-people (natives) consumed large quantities of a kind
of clay; a sample of this material was forwarded to Batavia for analysis,
and the following is the result in 100 parts:

  Pitcoal resin, (organic matter volatile
  at red heat,)----15.4

  Pure carbon,----14.9

  Silica,----38.3

  Alumina,----27.7

  Iron pyrites,----3.7

  Total,----100.0


_Photography at the Paris Exhibition_.--On the whole, the art-science
of photography plays its part well at the great French International
Exhibition, and in the collective displays of various nations we find its
numerous and diverse applications, improvements, and modifications fairly
represented. The Austrian collection is a very attractive one, and contains
some of the very best specimens of photo-lithography yet produced; its
specimens of portraiture from life-size downward are of a very excellent
character, and, like those of France, Prussia, and Russia, are decidedly
superior to the English. In the Darmstadt contributions are some
interesting specimens by Dr. Reissiz, exhibited to illustrate his theory of
photogenic action. In the Prussian department a large portrait lens
attracts attention; it is fourteen inches in diameter, and covers a square
of thirty inches. The French department contains some interesting specimens
of photographic-engraving process, of enamelled photographs, and of
enlargements from microscopical photographs, amongst which is one of a flea
enlarged to the size of a small pig. Amongst the novelties and applications
of photography to decorative art are photographs of a singular character,
illustrative of a new process called "Chrysoplasty." They represent
goldsmiths' work, ancient armor, draperies embroidered with gold and
silver, bronze statuary, philosophic instruments, etc., and are apparently
in the same metals as the originals. This process is a secret one, but the
inventor, Mr. Boeringer, is prepared to produce such photographs from any
negatives which may be sent him for that purpose. He is at present making a
large collection of specimens from antique curiosities and works of art in
metal dispersed in the public and private museums of various nations, and
with this end in view appeals to the owners and guardians of such
collections, and those who have negatives of the required description, to
render him assistance. In photographic portraiture, by universal consent,
the French stand prominently foremost, so much so that, as The Times says,
"amongst those articles which are specially called _articles de
Paris_, a good photographic portrait is now to be placed." In the
English department we miss most of our foremost photographers, amongst them
Mr. O. G. Reglandes, Mr. T. R. Williams, and but too many others. Mr.
Mayall, M. Claudet, Lock and Whitfield, Ross, and other of our chief
portraitists exhibit largely, but all show but weak and mean when
contrasted with their rival portraitists as represented in the French
collection. As landscapists English photographers, like English painters,
carry off the palm. Why landscapes by English operators so far surpass
others we cannot explain, but no one with any artistic taste or judgment
would hesitate to attribute the superiority of the French portraits purely
and simply to a more refined taste and greater knowledge of pictorial
science in their producers.
{859}
The English photographs display little merit beyond such as belongs
exclusively to the skilful management of good tools, while the French
photographers are evidently, as a rule, artists studying such things as
lighting, posing and arranging, exposing and developing with considerable
artistic knowledge and preconceived design, the former with a view to
putting a picture before the lens, and the latter with a view to its
faithful reproduction in the operating room. Two of the great secrets of
their greater success will, we believe, be found to reside in the much
longer exposures they give their plates in the camera, and in the use of a
developer not so rapid in its action as to escape control during
development. The great cry in England has been for short exposures and
powerful developers, things which war against the subtle delicacies of
gradations from light to dark, and from darks into reflected lights, which
constitute one of the most special and striking peculiarities of the best
French portraits. Refer back to past volumes of the English photographic
journals, and this craving for extraordinary rapidity coupled with frequent
mention of the extraordinary long exposures given on the continent, where
the light is more powerful and the atmosphere more pure, will be found. You
will also perceive that, while articles tending directly and indirectly to
give mechanical manipulation and good tools all the credit of increased
success crowd their pages to a wearying degree of sameness and repetition,
papers of a truly art-educational character are extremely rare, in
consequence, we have been informed, of the little real appreciation they
meet with from English photographic students. Hence probably the inartistic
and tasteless character displayed by their photographs when contrasted with
those of our more artistic and tasteful neighbors.--_Popular Science
Review._

------

  Original.

  New Publications.


  Melpomene Divina; or, Poems' on Christian Themes.
  By Christopher Laoinedon Pindar.
  Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott & Co. 1867.

This is an elegant little volume, but not a volume of elegant poetry. We
feel unwilling to speak adversely of the effusions of a youthful author,
(we suppose his youth from several poems given as "youthful efforts" as
late as the year 1861,) but the truth must be honestly told, if told at
all, both for young and old; and the truth is, that this book contains many
easy rhymes, but very little poetic thought. The verses, too often faulty
in rhythm, abound with sentences that can hardly be called good English,
as, for instance, (p. 90:)

  "He gazed and gazed, and deeper still
     The soft attachment grew,
   And nearer to the charmful maid
     His loving soul him drew."

And again, (p. 172;)

  "Only pray I thee, whom first saint
     In America God chose,
   Grant that countless maids may rival
     In my land thee, heavenly Rose!"

In a little translation entitled The Fisher's Wife we find a verse which
will illustrate the desire we now express that the writer had husbanded his
poetical ability, and allowed it to find expression in a lesser number of
poems more carefully worded. He might then have given us a volume of some
merit. We quote:

  "'O horror and woe! now breaks my poor heart!
     Out must I to gain relief!'
   She cries, and rushes from out the house,
     The mother in fear and grief.

  "And silently drifts a corse to the shore
     Strewn with trees and sedge and tan;
   There lies he all naked on the black sand:
     'O merciful God! my man!'"

{860}

With so many evidences of the author's acquaintance with the classic poets
upon these pages, we are surprised to meet with such words as "bluey,"
"bleaky," "browny," and the like; together with elisions, as "'T" for "it,"
to begin a line; "need'd" for "needed;" and such unwarrantable extensions
as giving three syllables to words like "Christian," "solely," etc. We feel
so much pleased, however, with his modest introduction to the volume that
we will allow him to speak here for himself: "That the book is very
imperfect, I am fully convinced of; that it be but taken by another as a
spur to elicit a more perfect one in illustration of a similar theme, is my
earnest desire. The many and almost unceasing demands of a higher order
have allowed me to bestow only a few 'tempora subseciva' on a work to which
I would have gladly devoted day and night. As such it can hardly be
anything else than deficient in many respects. Yet if I be the cause of
giving to but one person the pleasure of a moment in perusing these pages,
and still more, if one be thence inspired to send a whisper of love to the
saintly beings carolled in them, I shall consider myself happy, and my
labors more than sufficiently repaid."

----

  The Two Roads,
  Gabriel,
  Martha,
  Bread Of Forgiveness,
  Flowers From Heaven,
  Fragments Of Correspondence.
  P. O. Shea, Publisher, New York.

This is a series of beautiful stories, from the French, on the beatitudes.
They are well translated, and published in good style.

----

  Science Of Happiness; or, The Beatitudes in Practice.
  By Mader Bourdon.
  P. O. Shea, New York.

This volume contains the stories mentioned above bound together, so as to
make another book.

----

  Studies In The Gospels.
  By Richard Chenevix Trench, D.D.
  New-York: Charles Scribner & Co.

The author of this volume is well known from his valuable philological
works. This volume of Studies is composed of sixteen chapters of expository
notes on different parables and events recorded in the gospels. He has made
free use of the standard commentaries, both Catholic and Protestant. We
cannot attach any critical value to the work, as we observe that, where
Maldonatus and the fathers go against the system to which he is committed,
he passes over what they have said, and gives us instead the opinion of
Calvin or his own. The volume contains, however, many suggestive thoughts,
clothed in pure, good English. The typographical appearance of the volume
is remarkably good.


----

  Mr. P. F. Cunningham, Philadelphia, has in press, and will soon publish,
  The new Life of St. Aloysius Gonzaga, edited by Edward Healy Thompson,
  and which has just appeared in London. It will make a volume of about
  four hundred pages.


  Messrs. Benziger Bros., New York and Cincinnati, are about to publish
  Rome and the Popes: translated from the German of Dr. Karl Brandes, by
  Rev. W. T. Wiseman, Professor of Church History in Seton Hall Seminary.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Catholic World, Volume 5, by Various

