Part III


LANDSCAPE AND PORTRAIT PAINTING


    "He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for
    the service of man: that he may bring forth fruit out of the
    earth."--Psalms civ. 14.





1. The Value "Ugly" in the Mouth of the Creator.


In the last section of this lecture, I told you of three kinds of
ugliness. I said there was the ugliness of chaos and disorder, which
provokes the hate of the layman, and which the artist overcomes. I
spoke of the ugliness of form in Art, which appeared when the artist
had failed in his endeavour to master disorder, or when he had selected
a subject already ordered, in which he has left himself no scope
for manifesting his power; and I also pointed to that ugliness of
subject in Art, in which the ordinary beholder, as well as the artist,
recognizes the degeneration of his type or a low example of it.

There is, however, a fourth aspect of ugliness, and that is the
esoteric postulation of the value "ugly" by the creator. I have shown
how creating also involves giving, and therefore loss--just as
procreation does; but what is the precise meaning of the word "ugly" in
the mouth of the Dionysian artist?

We must remember that his eyes are not our eyes, and that his mind is
not our mind. He cannot look at Life without enriching her. But what is
his attitude to the transfigurations of former artists?

Before these the Dionysian artist can feel only loathing, and, in
a paroxysm of hatred, he raises his axe and shatters the past into
fragments. All around him, a moment before, people said: "The world
is beautiful!" But he, thoroughly alone, groans at its unspeakable
ugliness.

He rejoices as he sees the fragments fly beneath his mighty weapon,
and the greater the beauty of the thing he destroys, the higher is his
exultation. For, to him, "the joy in the destruction of the most noble
thing and at the sight of its gradual undoing," is "the joy over what
is coming and what lies in the future," and this "triumphs over actual
things, however good they may be."[1]

What he calls "ugly," then, has nothing whatsoever in common with any
other concept of ugliness; it is simply the outcome of his creative
spirit "which compels him to regard what has existed hitherto as no
longer acceptable, but as botched, worthy of being suppressed--ugly!"[2]
And thus it is peculiar to him alone.

I have shown you that Nietzsche explains pleasure, æsthetically, as
the appropriation of the world by man's Will to Power. Pain, or evil,
now obtains its æsthetic justification. It is the outcome of the
destruction that the creator spreads in a world of Becoming; it is the
periodical smashing of Being by the Dionysian creator who can endure
Becoming. No creator can tolerate the past save as a thing which once
served as his schooling. But a people are usually one with their past.
To them it is at once a grandfather, a father, and an elder brother.
In a trice the creator deprives them of these relatives. Through him
they are made orphans, brotherless and alone. Hence the pain that is
inevitably associated with the joy of destruction and of creation.

Not only a creative genius, however, but also a creative age, may use
the word ugly in this Dionysian sense. For a robust and rich people
scorn to treasure and to hoard that which has gone before. And thus our
museums, alone, are perhaps the greatest betrayal of our times.

When the Athenians returned to their ruined Acropolis in the first
half of the fifth century before Christ, they did not even scratch
the ground to recover the masterpieces that lay broken, though not
completely destroyed, all around them. And, as Professor Gardner
observes, it is fortunate for us that no mortar was required for the
buildings which were being erected to take the place of those that
had been destroyed; otherwise these fragments of marble sculpture
and architecture, instead of being buried to help in filling up the
terraced area of the Acropolis, would certainly have gone to the
lime-kiln.[3]

The men of the Renaissance, in the same way, regarded the buildings of
ancient Rome merely as so many quarries whence they might bear away
the materials for their own constructions. And whether Paul II wished
to build the Palazzo di Venezia, or Cardinal Riario the Cancellaria,
the same principle obtained. At the same period we also find Raphael
destroying the work of earlier painters by covering it with his own
compositions,[4] and Michelangelo not hesitating to obliterate
even Perugino's altar frescoes in the Sixtine Chapel in order to paint
his "Judgment." While in comparatively recent times, at a moment
when a great future seemed to be promised to modern Egypt, Mehemet
Ali sent his architect to the sacred Pyramids of Gizeh, to rob them
of the alabaster which he required for his magnificent mosque on the
citadel of Cairo.[5]

From a purely archæological and scholastic point of view, therefore,
it is possible to justify our museums--the British Museum, for
instance. But from the creative or artistic standpoint, they are simply
a confession of impotence, of poverty, and of fear; and, as such, are
utterly contemptible. In any case, however, I think that, for the
sake of public taste and sanity, some of the ugly fragments--such as
two-thirds of the maimed and mutilated parts of bodies from the Eastern
and Western pediments of the Parthenon--ought never to have been
allowed to stand outside a students' room in a school of archæology or
of art, and even in such institutions as these, I very much question
the value of the pieces to which I have referred.


[1] _W. P._, Vol I, p. 333. See also _B. T._, pp. 27, 28.

[2] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 333.

[3] _A Handbook of Greek Sculpture_, by E. A. Gardner, M.A., p. 212.

[4] Piero della Francesca's decorations in the Vatican, painted under
the direction of Pope Nicholas V, were ultimately destroyed by Raphael.
See W. S. Waters, M.A., _Piero della Francesca_, pp. 23, 24, 108.

[5] See also Fergusson, _A History of Architecture_, Vol. I, p. 48:
"... If we had made the same progress in the higher that we have in the
lower branches of the building art, we should see a Gothic Cathedral
pulled down with the same indifference, content to know that we could
easily replace it by one far nobler and more worthy of our age and
intelligence. No architect during the Middle Ages ever hesitated to
pull down any part of a cathedral that was old and going to decay;
and to replace it with something in the style of the day, however
incongruous that might be; and if we were progressing as they were, we
should have as little compunction in following the same course."




2. Landscape Painting.


Up to the present, I have spoken only of Man as the proper subject
of Ruler-Art. I have done this because Man is the highest subject of
Art in general, and because the moment humanity ceases from holding
the first place in our interest, something must be amiss, either with
humanity, or with ourselves.

Still, there are degrees and grades among ruler-artists. All of them
cannot aspire to the exposition of the highest human values. And just
as some turn to design and to ornament, and thus, in a small way,
arrange and introduce order into a small area of the world, so others
--standing halfway between these designers and the valuers of humanity
--apply their powers quite instinctively to Nature away from Man. They
have a thought to express--let us say it is: "Order is the highest
good," or "Power is the source of all pleasure and beauty," or "Anarchy
contends in vain against the governing power of light which is genius,"
and in the case of this last thought they paint a rugged scene which
they reveal as arranged, simplified and transfigured by the power of
the sun. In each of these cases they use Nature merely as a symbol, or
a vehicle, by means of which their thought or valuation is borne in
upon their fellows; and they do not start out as actual admirers of
mere scenery, wishing only to repeat it as carefully as possible.

Even when it uses Nature merely as a symbol or a vehicle, however,
there can be little doubt that this kind of Ruler-Art is a degree lower
in rank than the art which concerns itself with man; and when this
kind of art becomes realistic, as it did with Constable and all his
followers, it is literally superfluous. Only when the landscape is a
minor element, serving but to receive and convey the mood or aspiration
of the artist, is it a subject for Ruler-Art, and then the hand of
man should be visible in it everywhere. With the artist's arranging,
simplifying and transfiguring power observable in Nature, landscape
painting, as Kant very wisely observed in his _Kritik der Urteilskraft_,
becomes a process of pictorial gardening, and as such can teach very
great lessons.

Still, all landscapes ought to be approached with caution by the lover
of Ruler-Art; for unless they are treated with an extreme ruler-spirit,
they point too imperatively away from man, to promise a development
that can be wholesomely human.

When it is remembered that landscape painting only became a really
important and serious branch of art when all the turmoil and
contradiction which three successive changes of values had brought
about were at their height--I refer to the blow levelled at Mediæval
values by the Renaissance, to 'the blow levelled at the Renaissance
by the Counter-Renaissance and Protestantism (in its German form of
Evangelism and in its English form as Puritanism), and to the blow
levelled at the artistic spirit of Europe in general by the rise of
modern science in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries--and when,
therefore, doubt and confusion had already entered men's minds as to
what was to be believed about Man and Life; when it is remembered also
that it was precisely in the north, where, as we shall see, culture was
less a matter of tradition than in the south, that landscape found its
most energetic and most realistic exponents--from Joachim Patenier[6]
to Ruysdael; and that it was in the north, even after the
Renaissance, that the negative character of Christianity, in regard to
humanity and to Life, found its strongest adherents; the importance of
establishing a very severe canon in regard to all landscape painting,
and of insisting upon very high ruler qualities in this branch of the
art, ought to be clear to all who take this subject to heart.

For, difficult as it may seem to realize it, there is nothing
whatsoever artistically beautiful in landscape.[7] Only sentimental[8]
townspeople, compelled by their particular mode of existence
to gaze daily on their own hideous homes and streets, ever manifest
a senselessly ardent and determined affection for green fields and
hills, for their own sake; and with English psychologists, it would be
quite admissible here to say that all beauty that particular people
believe to exist in country scenery, is the outcome of association. The
ancients liked the sunlit and fruitful valley because of its promise of
sustenance and wealth; but they showed no love of nature as such.[9]

Mr. S. H. Butcher,[10] for instance, points out how landscape painting
only became a serious and independent branch of art among the Greeks
after the fourth century B.C.--that is to say, long over a century
after the date when, according to Freeman, the decline of Hellas
began; and, in speaking of the Greeks in their best period, he says:
"They do not attach themselves to nature with that depth of feeling,
with that gentle melancholy, that characterizes the moderns....
Their impatient imagination only traverses nature to pass beyond it to
the drama of human life." J. A. Symonds tells us that "Conciseness,
simplicity and an almost prosaic accuracy are the never-failing
attributes of classical descriptive art--moreover, humanity was always
more present to their minds than to ours. Nothing evoked sympathy
from the Greek unless it appeared before him in human shape, or in
connection with some human sentiment. The ancient poets do not describe
inanimate nature as such, or attribute a vague spirituality to fields
and clouds. That feeling for the beauty of the world which is embodied
in such poems as Shelley's _Ode to the West Wind_ gave birth in their
imagination to definite legends, involving some dramatic interest and
conflict of passions."[11] And Mahaffy and Mr. W. R. Hardie tell the same
story.[12]

But even among sensible moderns, uninfected by sentimental fever, the
love of nature is mostly of a purely utilitarian kind, as witness the
love of cornfields, hayfields and orchards. The farmer at certain times
gazes kindly at the purple hills behind his acres of cultivated land,
because their colour indicates the coming rain. The cattle-breeder
smiles as he surveys the Romney marshes, and thinks of the splendid
pastureland they would make.

In fact, the attitude of sensible mankind in general towards landscape,
as landscape, seems to have been pretty well summarized by the writer
of the 104th Psalm, from whom, according to W. H. Rhiel, the Christian
world, and especially the Teutonic part of it, seems to have derived
much of their love of the beauties of Nature.[13]

What constitutes the artistic beauty in a painted landscape, then, is
the mood, the particular human quality, that the artist throws into
it. As the French painters say, a landscape is a state of the soul;
and unless the particular mood or idea with which the artist invests
a natural scene have some value and interest, and be painted in a
commanding or ruler manner, it is a mere piece of superfluous foolery,
which may, however, find its proper place on a great railway poster or
in an estate agent's illustrated catalogue.

There is, on the other hand, another kind of love of nature, which
dates only from the eighteenth century, and which is thoroughly and
unquestionably contemptible. This also, like the above, is the result
of association, and has nothing artistic in its constitution; but this
time it is an association which is misanthropic and negative. I refer
to what is generally known as the love of the Romantic in Nature, the
love of mountains, torrents, unhandseled copses, virgin woods, and
rough and uncultivated country.

In this love a new element enters the appreciation of Nature, and
that is a dislike and mistrust of everything that bears the stamp of
man's power or his labour, and therefore an exaltation of everything
untutored, uncultured, free, unconstrained and wild.

This attitude of mind seems to have been unknown not only to the Greeks
and to the Romans,[14] but, practically, to all European nations up
to the time of Rousseau. As Friedländer says, it would be difficult
to find evidence of travellers going to mountain country in quest of
beauty, before the eighteenth century,[15] and the majority of those who
were forced to visit such country, before that time, in their Journeys
to foreign cities, describe it as horrible, ugly and depressing. Oliver
Goldsmith is a case in point. Riehl declares that in guidebooks, even
as late as 1750, Berlin, Leipzig, Augsburg, Darmstadt, Mannheim, etc.,
are spoken of as lying in nice and cheerful surroundings, whilst the
most picturesque parts (according to modern notions) of the Black
Forest, of the Harz, and the Thuringian woods are described as "very
gloomy," "barren," and "monstrous," or at least as not particularly
pleasant. And then he adds: "This is not the private opinion of the
individual topographists: it is the standpoint of the age."[16]

Even in the Bible illustrations of the eighteenth century, we also find
the same spirit prevailing. Paradise--that is to say, the original
picture of virgin glory in natural beauty--is made to look like what
moderns would call a monotonously flat garden, devoid of any indication
of a hill, in which the Almighty, or Adam, or somebody, has already
clipped all the trees and hedges, and carefully trimmed the grass.

You may argue with Riehl[17] that mediæval painters must have thought
rough, wild and barren country beautiful; otherwise, why did they put
it in their pictures? One low-German painter of the Middle Ages, for
instance, painted a picture of Cologne, and, contrary to the genuine
nature of the surrounding country, introduced a background of jagged
and rocky mountains. Why did he do this, if he did not think jagged and
rocky mountains beautiful?

In reply to this I cannot do better than quote Friedländer again, who
on this very question writes as follows--

"At least the lack of a sense for the beauty of mountain scenery, which
is noticeable in the poetry and travels of the Middle Ages, viewed as
a whole, ought to lead us to suspect that this same sense could have
been only very slightly apparent in the realm of pictorial art. But
ought we not to ascribe the fantastic and romantic art ideal of the old
masters, in landscape, rather to their endeavour to transfer the scene
and figures of their pictures from reality to an imaginary world?...
Even if historical painters like John van Eyck and Memling eagerly
introduced jagged rocks and sharp mountain (which apparently they had
never seen) into their backgrounds ... it is difficult to recognize
any real understanding or even knowledge of the nature of mountains in
all this; but simply an old and therefore very conventional form of
heroic landscape which was considered as the only suitable one for a
large number of subjects."[18]

But there is other evidence, besides that to be found in mediæval
poetry and travels, which shows to what extent the particular sense
for natural beauty, which I am now discussing, was lacking in the
Middle Ages. Its absence is also illustrated by the arrangement of
castles and other buildings. Mr. d'Auvergne, in his work _The English
Castles_, more than once calls attention to this, and instances a tower
at Dunstanburgh Castle,[19] which, though commanding a wildly romantic
prospect, was selected for the vilest domestic uses.

Suddenly, all this is contradicted and reversed. Precisely where man's
hand has been, everything is supposed to be polluted, unclean, and
ugly; and rough, uncultivated nature, however rugged, however unkempt,
is exalted above all that which the human spirit has shaped and trained.

How did this change come about?

To begin with, let it be said, that it was not quite so sudden as
Friedländer would have us suppose. Long before the dawn of the
eighteenth century, the very principles that were at the base of
European life and aspirations--the principle of the depravity of man,
the principle of liberty for liberty's sake, the principle of the
pursuit of general truth; and finally, the principle that experience
--that is to say, a direct appeal to nature--was the best method of
furnishing the mind--all these principles had been leading steadily to
one conclusion, and this conclusion Rousseau was the first to embody in
his energetic and fulminating protest against culture, tradition, human
power and society. And the fact that his doctrine spread so rapidly,
that within fifty years of its exposition, with the help of men like
Coxe, Ramond de Carbonnières, Étienne de Sénancour, Töppefer, Saussure
and Bourit, it had practically become the credo and the passion of
Europe, shows how ready the age must have been for the lessons Rousseau
taught it.

All of you who have read the fulsome and bombastic praise of Nature,
together with the bitter disparagement of the work of man, in such
works as _La Nouvelle Héloise_, the _Confessions_, his letters to _Monsieur
de Malesherbes_, and his _Reveries of a lonely Rambler_, will not require
to be told the gospel Rousseau preaches.[20]

Suffice it to say, that he successfully created a love of the rough, of
the rugged, the unhandseled and the uncultivated in the minds of almost
all Europeans--especially Northerners, and that this love was rapidly
reflected in landscape painting.

This new feeling for the romantic, for the unconstrained and for
the savage in Nature, although it soon dominated art, was, in its
essentials, quite foreign to art and to the artist. It had nothing
in common with the motives that prompt and impel the artist to his
creations. Its real essence was moral and not artistic; its fundamental
feature was its worship of the abstract principles of liberty, anarchy
and the absence of culture, which rude nature exemplifies on all sides;
and it was a moral or scientific spirit that animated it, whether in
Rousseau or in his followers.

Friedrich Schiller, who entirely supports Rousseau's particular kind
of love for Nature, frankly admits this[21] in his able and profound
analysis of the sentiment in question; whatever self-contempt, and
contempt of adult manhood, may have lain behind Rousseau's valuations,
Schiller brings all of it openly into the light of day, and in his
efforts to support the Frenchman's school of thought, literally exposes
it to ridicule.

One or two voices, such as Hegel's[22] and Chateaubriand's, were raised in
protest against this thoroughly vulgar and sentimental attitude towards
savage and wild phenomena; but they were unable to resist a movement,
the strength of which had been accumulating for so many centuries in
the hearts of almost all Europeans; and, ultimately, numbers triumphed.

Even the hand of man--of the artist--in a painted landscape, got
to be a thing of the past. Realism--because it most conscientiously
repeated that unconstrained and anarchical spirit which the romantic
age loved to detect in matted weeds, in tangled and impenetrable
coppices, in thick festoons of parasitic plants, in unhandseled
brambles and in babbling brooks--became the ruling principle.
Classical influence alone was able for a while to resist too rapid a
decline; but soon we find Constable declaring in the early part of
the nineteenth century, that "there is nothing ugly," and addressing
aspiring artists in these words: "Observe that thy best director, thy
perfect guide is Nature. Copy from her. In her paths is thy triumphal
arch. She is above all other teachers; and ever confide in her with
a bold heart:"[23] and a whole host of people following in his wake and
applauding his principles.

Just as England by her influence had created Rousseau and his peculiar
mode of thinking,[24] so, again, British influence was to show its
power in the world of Art. The parallel is striking, but nevertheless
true. In the years 1824, 1826 and 1829, Constable, whom Muther calls
the father of landscape painting,[25] and whom Meier Graefe calls the
father of modern painting,[26] exhibited in Paris, and his style soon
became a dominant force.[27]

Stendhal, though very much too moderate, was one of the first to
raise, his voice against the lack of idealism (transfiguration,
simplification) in these English pictures; but his efforts were of
no avail, and he might just as well have shouted in the face of a
hurricane.


[6] According to Dr. Wilhelm Lübke, _Outlines of the History of Art_
(Vol. II, p. 452), Patenier might almost be called the founder of the
modern northern school of landscape painting. See also p. 575 in the
same volume. On this subject see also Muther, _Geschichte der Malerei_,
Vol. II, p. 72: "Although in a way it is possible to establish in what
respect the painting of the Netherlands in the sixteenth century ran
parallel with that of Italy, it is also necessary to emphasize the
fact, on the other hand, that painting." Muther mentions Hendrik Met de
Bles, Joachim de Patenier and Bosch as the leaders of this tendency.

[7] See W. H. Riehl, _Culturstudien aus drei Jahrhunderten_, p. 67.

[8] This use of the word sentimental in regard to the love of nature
for its own sake, is not by any means unprecedented. Schiller, in his
essay _Ueber naive und sentimentale Dichtung_, as an advocate in favour
of the love in question, constantly refers to it as sentimental. (See
1838 Edition of _Works_, Vol. XII, pp. 167-281.)

[9] See W. R. Hardie, _Lectures in Classical Subjects_, pp. 16-17:
"What are the scenes in Nature which had the greatest attraction
for the ancients? The landscape which a Greek would choose for his
environment was a tranquil one, a cultivated spot or a spot capable
of cultivation;" and p. 21: "... apart from the work of one or two
exceptional poets like Æschylus or Pindar, it must be allowed that the
ancient view of Nature was somewhat prosaic and practical, showing a
decided preference for fertile, habitable and accessible country."

[10] _Some Aspects of Greek Genius_, p. 252. See also his remarks,
pp. 246-248, concluding thus: "The great period, indeed, of the Attic
drama, when the dialectic movement of thought was in full operation,
can hardly be called 'simple' in Schiller's sense" [he is quoting
Schiller on "Simple and Sentimental Poetry," where in the opening
paragraph Schiller applies the word _naiv_, simple, to a natural
object, as meaning that state in which nature and art stand contrasted
and the former shames the latter]; "yet even then, as in Homer, nature
is but the background of the picture, the scene in which man's activity
displays itself. The change of sentiment sets in only from the time
of Alexander onwards. Nature is then sought for her own sake; artists
and poets turn to her with disinterested love; her moods are lovingly
noted, and she is brought into close relationship with man."

[11] _Studies of the Greek Poets_, Vol. II, p. 258.

[12] See _Social Life in Greece_ (Mahaffy), p. 426, and _What have the
Greeks done for Modern Civilization?_ (Mahaffy, 1909), p. 11: "External
nature was the very thing that the Greeks, all through their great
history, felt less keenly than we should have expected. Their want of a
sense of the picturesque has ever been cited as a notable defect." See
also W. R. Hardie, _Lectures on Classical Subjects_ (1903), p. 8: "To
what extent do the modern feelings and fancies about Nature appear in
the ancient poets?... The usual and substantially true answer is that
they appear to a very slight extent. Like Whitehead, the Greek is slow
to recognize 'a bliss that leans not to mankind.'"

[13] _Culturstudien aus drei Jahrhunderten_ (2nd Edition, 1859), p. 63.

[14] See S. H. Butcher, _Some Aspects of the Greek Genius_, pp. 265,
266: "Mountains and lonely woods and angry seas, in all periods of
Greek literature, so far from calling out a sublime sense of mystery
and awe, raise images of terror and repulsion, of power divorced from
beauty and alien to art. Homer, when for the moment he pauses to
describe a place, chooses one in which the hand of man is visible;
which he has reclaimed from the wild, made orderly, subdued to his own
use. Up to the last days of Greek antiquity man has not yet learnt
so to lose himself in the boundless life of Nature, as to find a
contemplative pleasure in her wilder and more majestic scenes."

See also J. A. Symonds, _Studies of the Greek Poets_, Vol. II, p. 257:
"The Greeks and Romans paid less attention to inanimate nature than
we do, and were beyond all question repelled by the savage grandeur
of marine and mountain scenery, preferring landscapes of smiling
and cultivated beauty to rugged sublimity or the picturesqueness of
decay...."

See also W. R. Hardie, _Lectures on Classical Subjects_, pp. 3, 9, 17,
and Friedlander, _Roman Life and Manners_, Vol. I. pp. 391, 392, 393,
395.

[15] _Ueber die Entstehung und Entwicklung des Gefühls für das
Romantische in der Natur_, pp. 4, 10.

[16] _Culturstudien aus drei Jahrhunderten_, p. 57.

[17] _Ibid._, pp. 59, 60.

[18] _Ueber die Entstehung und Entwicklung des Gefühls für das
Romantische in der Natur_, pp. 2, 3.

[19] E. B. d'Auvergne, _The English Castles_, pp. 216, 217.

[20] See _Lettres Nouvelles addressées à Monsieur de Malesherbes_
(Geneva, 1780), 3rd letter, p. 43. Speaking of a lonely walk in the
neighbourhood of his country house, he says: "J'allois alors d'un pas
plus tranquille chercher quelque lieu sauvage dans la forêt, quelque
lieu désert, où rien ne me montrant la main de l'homme ne m'annonçât
la servitude et la domination, enfin quelqu' asyle où je pusse croire
avoir pénétré le premier, et où nul tiers importun ne vint s'entreposer
entre la nature et moi. C'était là qu'elle sembloit déployer à mes
yeux une magnificence toujours nouvelle. L'or des genêts et la pourpre
des bruyères frappoient mes yeux d'un luxe qui touchoit mon cœur; la
majesté des arbres"--and so on in the same romantic strain for twenty
lines. It is impossible to reproduce every passage I should like
to quote, in order to reveal the full range of Rousseau's passion
for nature and his bitter contempt of man and man's work; but the
above is typical, and other equally gushing passages may be found in
_Les Rêveries du Promeneur Solitaire_ (Paris, 1882), pp. 119, 138,
etc., etc.; _La Nouvelle Héloise_, especially the 11th letter; _Les
Confessions_ (Ed. 1889, Vol. I), Bk. VI, pp. 229, 234, 238, 245, and
Bk. IV, p. 169: "... on sait déjà ce que j'entends par un beau pays.
Jamais pays de plaine, quelque beau qu'il fût, ne parut tel à mes yeux.
Il me faut des torrents, des rochers, des sapins, des bois noirs, des
montagnes, des chemins raboteux à monter et à descendre, des précipices
à mes cotés, qui me fassent peur.... J'eus ce plaisir ... en approchant
de Chambéri ... car ce qu'il y a de plaisir dans mon goût pour des
lieux escarpés, est qu'ils me font tourner la tête: et j'aime beaucoup
ce tournoiement pourvu que je sois en sureté."

[21] _Sämmtliche Werke_ (Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1838), Vol. XII,
"Ueber naive und sentimentale Dichtung," p. 168, 169: "This kind of
pleasure at the sight of Nature is not an æsthetic pleasure, but a
moral one: for it is arrived at by means of an idea, and it is not
felt immediately the act of contemplation has taken place, neither
does it depend for its existence upon beauty of form." And, p. 189,
after pointing out that the Greeks completely lacked this feeling for
Nature, he says: "Whence comes this different sense? How is it that we
who, in everything related to Nature, are inferior to the ancients,
should pay such homage to her, should cling so heartily to her, and
be able to embrace the inanimate world with such warmth of feeling?
It is not our greater conformity to Nature, but, on the contrary, the
opposition to her, which is inherent in our conditions and our customs,
that impels us to find some satisfaction in the physical world for our
awakening instinct for truth and primitive rudeness, which, like the
moral tendency from which that instinct arises, lies incorruptible and
indestructible in all human hearts and can find no satisfaction in the
moral world."

[22] See _Hegels Leben_, by Karl Rosenkranz, especially pp. 475, 476
and 482, 483.

[23] See _The Life and Letters of John Constable_, by C. R. Leslie,
R.A., pp. 343, 349.

[24] See J. Morley's _Rousseau_, Vol. I, pp. 85, 86: "According to
his own account, it was Voltaire's Letters on the English which first
drew him seriously to study, and nothing which that illustrious man
wrote at this time escaped him." And p. 146: "Locke was Rousseau's most
immediate inspirer, and the latter affirmed himself to have treated
the same matters exactly on Locke's principles. Rousseau, however,
exaggerated Locke's politics as greatly as Condillac exaggerated his
metaphysics." And p. 147: "We need not quote passages from Locke to
demonstrate the substantial correspondence of assumption between him
and the author of the Social Contract. They are to be found in every
chapter."

[25] _Geschichte der Malerei_, Vol. III, p. 175.

[26] _Modern Art_, Vol. I, p. 140.

[27] _Ibid._, p. 138: "What his fatherland neglected was taken over
by the Continent. Strange as this neglect may seem, the rapidity
with which Europe assimilated Constable is even more remarkable.
The movement began in Paris.... France needed what Constable had to
give.... The young Frenchmen saw the traditional English freedom with
eyes sharpened by enthusiasm."




3. Portrait Painting.


When one now adds to these influences, the steady rise of the power of
the bourgeoisie in Europe, from the seventeenth century onward, and,
as a result of this increasing power, an uninterrupted growth in the
art of portrait painting--a growth that attained such vast proportions
that it cast all attainments of a like nature in any other age or
continent into the shade--one can easily understand what factors have
been the most formidable opponents of Ruler-Art in the Occident, since
the event of the Renaissance.

After all that I have said concerning the principles of Ruler-Art, it
will scarcely be necessary for me to expatiate upon those elements in
portrait painting which are antagonistic to these principles; for when
you think of portrait painting as it has been developed by the claims
of the bourgeoisie in Europe, you must not have Leonardo da Vinci's
"Mona Lisa" in mind. Neither must you consider that portrait work
in which, by chance, the artist has had before him a model who, in
every feature of face or of figure, corresponded to his ideal; nor
that in which the artist has been able to allow himself to exercise
his simplifying and transfiguring power. Otherwise some of the best
of Rubens' and Rembrandt's work would of necessity come under the ban
which we must set upon by far the greater number of portraits.

[Illustration: Saskia By Rembrandt.]

When Rembrandt painted his bride Saskia,[28] for instance, the extent to
which he exercised his simplifying and transfiguring power is amazing,
and precludes all possibility of our classing this work among the
portraits which should be condemned. He knew perfectly well that poor
Saskia was not beautiful--what beautiful girl would have condescended
to look at Rembrandt?--so what did he do? He cast all the upper and
right side of her face in shadow, and deliberately concentrated all
his attention, and consequently the attention of the beholder as well,
upon three or four square inches of nice round muscle in the lower part
of Saskia's young cheek and neck. But how many plain daughters of rich
bourgeois would allow three or four square inches of their cheek and
neck to be exalted in this way, at the cost of their eyes and their
nose and their brow? The same remarks also apply to Rembrandt's "Jewish
Rabbi" in the National Gallery. There he had to deal with an emaciated,
careworn old Jew. How did he overcome the difficulty? All of you who
know this picture will be able to answer this question for yourselves,
and I need not, therefore, go into the matter.

This, then, is not the class of portrait work which need necessarily
deteriorate the power of art. What does deteriorate this power, is
that other and more common class of portrait painting which began in
Holland in the seventeenth century, and in which each sitter insisted
upon discovering all his little characteristics and individual
peculiarities; in which, as Muther says, each sitter wished to find "a
counterfeit of his personality," and in which "no artistic effect, but
resemblance alone was the object desired."[29]

It was the insistence upon this kind of portrait work by the wealthy
bourgeoisie of England, which well-nigh drove Whistler, with his
ruler spirit, out of his mind, and it is precisely this portrait work
which is dominant to-day. In order to be pleasing and satisfactory
to the people who demand it, this class of painting presupposes the
suppression of all those first principles upon which Ruler-Art relies
in order to flourish and to soar; and where it is seriously and
earnestly pursued, art is bound to suffer.

This was recognized three hundred years ago by the Spanish theoretician
Vincenti Carducho, and his judgment still remains the wisest that has
ever been written on the subject. In formulating the credo of the
sixteenth century, he wrote as follows--

"No great and extraordinary painter was ever a portraitist, for such
an artist is enabled by judgment and acquired habit to improve upon
nature. In portraiture, however, he must confine himself to the model,
whether it be good or bad, with sacrifice of his observation and
selection; which no one would like to do who has accustomed his mind
and his eye to good forms and proportions."[30]

Our art at the present day is, unfortunately, very largely the
development and natural outcome of the two influences I have just
described, and that accounts for a good deal for which I have failed to
account hitherto.

Art no longer gives: it takes. It no longer reflects beauty on reality:
it seeks its beauty in reality. And that is why it falls to pieces
judged by the standard of Ruler-Art. It cannot bear the fierce light
of an art that is intimate with Life and inseparable from Life. In
its death-throes it has decked itself with all kinds of metaphysical
plumes, in order that it may thus, perhaps, live after death. But these
plumes have been used before by dying gods and have proved of no avail.
"Virtue for virtue's sake," was the cry of a dying religion. "Art for
art's sake," is now the cry of an expiring godlike human function.

But unless this cry be altered very quickly into a cry of art for the
sake of Life, there will be no chance of saving it. Before this art for
Life's sake can be discovered, however; before the purpose after which
it will strive can be determined and established, the first thing to
which we shall have to lend our attention is not art, but mankind.

The purpose of man is a thousand times more important than the purpose
of art. The one determines the other. And as a proof of how intimately
the two are connected, see how much doubt there is as to the purpose of
art, precisely at a moment when men also, owing to the terrible civil
war which is raging among their values, are beginning to doubt the real
purpose of human existence.

It would be useless to indulge in a detailed criticism of individual
artists. To all those who have followed my arguments closely, no such
clumsy holding up of particular modern artists to ridicule will seem
necessary. In some of your minds these men are idols still, and it
pleases only the envious and the unsuccessful to see niche-statues
stoned.

The great artist, as I have shown you, is the synthetic and superhuman
spirit that apotheosizes the type of a people and thereby stimulates
them to a higher mode of life. But where should we go to-day, if we
wished to look for a type or for a desirable code of values which that
type would exemplify?

We know that we can go nowhere; for such things do not exist. They are
utterly and hopelessly extinct.

Our first duty, then, is not to mend the arts--you cannot mend a
cripple. But it is rather to mend the parents who bring forth this
cripple--to mend Life itself, and above all Man.

"Away from God and Gods did my will allure me," says Zarathustra; "what
would there be to create if there were Gods!

"But to man doth it ever drive me anew, my burning will; thus doth it
drive the hammer unto the stone.

"Alas, ye fellow-men, within the stone slumbereth an image for me,
the image of all my visions! Alas that it should perforce slumber in
ugliest stone!

"Now rageth my hammer, ruthlessly against its prison. From the stone
fly the fragments: what's that to me?

"I shall end the work: for a shadow came unto me--the stillest and
lightest of all things once came unto me.

"The beauty of the Superman came unto me as a shadow. Alas my brethren,
what are the gods to me now!"[31]


[28] Dresden Royal Picture Gallery.

[29] _History of Painting_ (Eng. Trans.), Vol. II, pp. 572, 576.

[30] Muther, _History of Painting_ (English Translation), Vol. II, p.
481.

[31] _Z._, II, XXIV.




Lecture III[1]



Nietzsche's Art Principles in the History of Art




