
NIETZSCHE AND ART

by

ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI

Author of 'Who is to be Master of the World?'


"Rien n'est beau que le vrai, dit un vers respecté; et moi, je lui
réponds, sans crainte d'un blasphème: Rien n'est vrai sans beauté."
--Alfred de Musset.


CONSTABLE & CO. LTD.

LONDON

1911



[Illustration: Sekhet (Louvre)]


Preface


"We philosophers are never more delighted than when we are taken for
artists."[1]


In this book, which embodies a course of lectures delivered in a
somewhat condensed and summarized form at University College, London,
during November and December, 1910, I have done two things. I have
propounded Nietzsche's general Art doctrine, and, with the view of
illustrating it and of defining it further, I have also applied its
leading principles to one of the main branches of Art.

As this has not been done before, either in English or in any
Continental language, my book is certainly not free from the crudeness
and inadvertences which are inseparable from pioneer efforts of this
nature. Nevertheless it is with complete confidence, and a deep
conviction of its necessity, that I now see it go to print; for,
even if here and there its adventurous spirit may ultimately require
modification, I feel certain that, in the main, time itself, together
with the help of other writers, will fully confirm its general thesis,
if I should be unable to do so.

Sooner or later it will be brought home to us in Europe that we
cannot with impunity foster and cultivate vulgarity and mob qualities
in our architecture, our sculpture, our painting, our music and
literature, without paying very dearly for these luxuries in our
respective national politics, in our family institutions, and even
in our physique. To connect all these things together, and to show
their inevitable interdependence, would be a perfectly possible though
arduous undertaking. In any case, this is not quite the task I have
set myself in this work. I have indeed shown that to bestow admiration
on a work of extreme democratic painting and at the same time to be
convinced of the value of an aristocratic order of society, is to
be guilty of a confusion of ideas which ultimately can lead only to
disastrous results in practical life; but further than this I have not
gone, simply because the compass of these lectures did not permit of my
so doing.

Confining myself strictly to Nietzsche's æsthetic, I have been content
merely to show that the highest Art, or Ruler Art, and therefore the
highest beauty,--in which culture is opposed to natural rudeness,
selection to natural chaos, and simplicity to natural complexity,--can
be the flower and product only of an aristocratic society which, in its
traditions and its active life, has observed, and continues to observe,
the three aristocratic principles,--culture, selection and simplicity.

Following Nietzsche closely, I have sought to demonstrate the
difference between the art which comes of inner poverty (realism, or
democratic art), and that which is the result of inner riches (Ruler
Art).

Identifying the first with the reflex actions which respond to external
stimuli, I have shown it to be slavishly dependent upon environment
for its existence, and, on that account, either beneath reality
(Incompetence), on a level with reality (Realism), or fantastically
different from reality (Romanticism). I have, moreover, associated
these three forms of inferior art with democracy, because in democracy
I find three conditions which are conducive to their cultivation,
viz.--(1) The right of self-assertion granted to everybody, and the
consequent necessary deterioration of world-interpretations owing to
the fact that the function of interpretation is claimed by mediocrity;
(2) the belief in a general truth that can be made common to all, which
seems to become prevalent in democratic times, and which perforce
reduces us to the only truth that can be made common to all, namely
Reality; and (3) a democratic dislike of recognizing the mark or stamp
of any _particular_ human power in the things interpreted, and man's
consequent "return to Nature" untouched by man, which, once again, is
Reality.

Identifying Ruler Art, or the Art of inner riches, with the function of
giving, I have shown it to be dependent upon four conditions which are
quite inseparable from an aristocratic society, and which I therefore
associate, without any hesitation, as Nietzsche does, with Higher Man,
with Nature's rare and _lucky strokes_ among men. These conditions are
--(1) Long tradition under the sway of noble and inviolable values,
resulting in an accumulation of will power and a superabundance of good
spirits; (2) leisure which allows of meditation, and therefore of that
process of lowering pitchers into the wells of inner riches; (3) the
disbelief in freedom for freedom's sake without a purpose or without an
aim; and (4) an order of rank according to which each is given a place
in keeping with his value, and authority and reverence are upheld.

In the course of this exposition, it will be seen that I have to lay
realism also at the door of Ruler Art; but I am careful to point out
that, although such realism (I call it _militant realism_ in respect
to the art both of the Middle Ages and of the later Renaissance, as
well as of Greece) is a fault, of Ruler Art which very much reduces
the latter's rank among the arts; it is nevertheless above that other
realism of mediocrity which, for the want of a better term, I call
_poverty realism_. (See Lecture II, Part II, end.)

In order firmly to establish the difference between the Ruler and
Democratic styles I ought, perhaps, to have entered with more
thoroughness than I have done into the meditative nature of the one,
and the empirical nature of the other. This, apart from a few very
unmistakable hints, I have unfortunately been unable to do. I found
it quite impossible to include all the detail bearing upon the main
thesis, in this first treatise; and, though I have resolved to discuss
these important matters very soon, in the form of supplementary essays,
I can but acknowledge here that I recognize their omission as a blemish.

The wide field covered by this book, and the small form in which I
was compelled to cast it, have thus led to many questions remaining
inadequately answered and to many statements being left insufficiently
substantiated. In the end I found it quite impossible to avail myself
even of a third of the material I had collected for its production,
and I should therefore be grateful if it could be regarded more in the
light of a preliminary survey of the ground to be built upon, rather
than as a finished building taking its foundation in Nietzsche's
philosophy of Art.

With regard to all my utterances on Egypt, I should like the reader
kindly to bear only this in mind: that my choice of Egyptian art, as
the best example of Ruler Art we possess, is neither arbitrary nor
capricious; but, because it is neither arbitrary nor capricious, it
does not follow that I regard a return to the types of Egypt as the
only possible salvation of the graphic arts. This would be sheer
Romanticism and sentimentality. "A thousand paths are there which have
never yet been trodden; a thousand salubrities and hidden islands of
life. Unexhausted and undiscovered is still man and man's world" (_Z._,
I, XXII.).

It is rather the spirit which led to this Egyptian Art, which I regard
as so necessary to all great achievements, either in legislation, art,
or religion; and whether this spirit happens to be found on the banks
of the Nile, in the Vatican, or in Mexico. I point to it merely as
something which we ought to prize and cherish, and which we now possess
only in an extremely diluted and decadent form. It is the spirit which
will establish order at all costs, whose manner of exploiting higher
men is to look upon the world through their transfiguring vision, and
which believes that it is better for mankind to attain to a high level,
even in ones, twos, or threes, than that the bulk of humanity should
begin to doubt that man can attain to a high level at all.

This spirit might produce any number of types; it is not necessary,
therefore, that the Egyptian type should be regarded as precisely the
one to be desired. I do but call your attention to these granite and
diorite sculptures, because behind them I feel the presence and the
power of that attitude towards life which the ancient Pharaohs held and
reverenced, and which I find reflected in Nietzsche's Art values.


       *       *       *       *       *

In quoting from German authorities, where I have not been able to
give reference to standard English translations, I have translated
the extracts from the original myself, for the convenience of English
readers; while, in the case of French works, I have deliberately given
the original text, only when I felt that the sense might suffer by
translation.

I should now like to express my deep gratitude to Dr. Oscar Levy, who
has always been ready to place his valuable time and wide knowledge at
my disposal whenever I have expressed the smallest desire of consulting
him on any difficult point that may have arisen during the preparation
of these lectures. And I should also like to acknowledge the help
afforded me by both Mr. J. M. Kennedy and Dr. Mügge,--the one through
his extensive acquaintance with Eastern literature, and the other
through his valuable bibliography of works relating to Nietzsche's life
and philosophy.

It only remains for me to thank the Committee and the Provost of
University College, Gower Street, for their kindness, and for the
generous hospitality which they have now extended to me on two separate
occasions; and, finally, to avail myself of this opportunity in order
to express my grateful recognition of the trouble taken on my behalf by
Professor Robert Priebsch and Mr. Walter W. Seton of London University,
on both occasions when I had the honour of delivering a course of
lectures at their College.

                                                   ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.
February 1911.


[1] Friedrich Nietzsche's Gesämmelte Briefe, vol. 111, p. 305.





    CONTENTS


    LECTURE I

    PART I

    Anarchy in Modern Art

    The State of Modern Art

    The Fine Arts:
    1. The Artists
    2. The Public
    3. The Critics
    4. Some Art-Criticisms

    PART II

    Suggested Causes of the Anarchy in Modern Art

    1. Morbid Irritability
    2. Misleading Systems of Æsthetic
    3. Our Heritage:--
    (a) Christianity
    (b) Protestantism
    (c) Philosophical Influences
    (d) The Evolutionary Hypothesis

    LECTURE II

    Government in Art--Nietzsche's Definition of Art

    PART I

    Divine Art and the Man--God

    1. The World "Without Form" and "Void"
    2. The First Artists
    3. The People and their Man-God
    4. The Danger
    5. The Two Kinds of Artists

    PART II

    Deductions from Part I--Nietzsche's Art Principles

    1. The Spirit of the Age incompatible with Ruler Art
    2. A Thrust parried. Police or Detective Art defined
    3. The Purpose of Art Still the Same as Ever
    4. The Artist's and the Layman's View of Life
    5. The Confusion of the Two Points of View
    6. The Meaning of Beauty of Form and of Beauty of Content in Art
    7. The Meaning of Ugliness of Form and of Ugliness of Content in Art
    8. The Ruler-Artist's Style and Subject

    PART III

    Landscape and Portrait Painting

    1. The Value "Ugly" in the Mouth of the Dionysian Artist
    2. Landscape Painting
    3. Portrait Painting

    LECTURE III

    Nietzsche's art principles in the history of art

    PART I

    Christianity and the Renaissance

    1. Rome and the Christian Ideal
    2. The Pagan Type appropriated and transformed by Christian Art
    3. The Gothic Building and Sentiment
    4. The Renaissance

    PART II

    Greece and Egypt

    1. Greek Art
    (a) The Parthenon
    (b) The Apollo of Tenea
    (c) The Two Art-Wills of Ancient Greece
    (d) Greek Painting

    2. Egyptian Art
    (a) King Khephrën
    (b) The Lady Nophret
    (c) The Pyramid

    LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

    Sekhet (_Louvre_) Frontispiece
    The Marriage of Mary, by Raphael (_Brera, Milan_)
    Saskia, by Rembrandt (_Dresden Royal Picture Gallery_)
    The Canon of Polycleitus (_Rome_)
    The Apollo of Tenea (_Glyptothek, Munich_)
    The Medusa Metope of Selinus (_Palermo_)
    King Khephrën (_Cairo Museum_)
    The Lady Nophret (_Cairo Museum_)




    Abbreviations Used in Referring to Nietzsche's Works


    E. I.      =     The Future of our Educational Institutions.
    B. T.      =     The Birth of Tragedy.
    H. A. H.   =     Human All-too-Human.
    D. D.      =     Dawn of Day.
    J. W.      =     Joyful Wisdom.
    Z.         =     Thus spake Zarathustra.
    G. E.      =     Beyond Good and Evil.
    G. M.      =     The Genealogy of Morals.
    C. W.      =     The Case of Wagner and Nietzsche contra Wagner.
    T. I.      =     The Twilight of the Idols.
    A.         =     Antichrist.
    W. P.      =     The Will to Power.



    The English renderings given in this book are taken from the
    Complete and Authorized Translation of Nietzsche's Works
    edited by Oscar Levy.

    (This edition in 18 volumes is entirely being made available
    at Project Gutenberg too, also with a linked index to all works
    as last volume, and will be completed soon.--Transcriber's Note.)



Nietzsche and Art




Lecture I[1]




Part I


Anarchy in Modern Art


    "Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord
    did there confound the language of all the earth: and from
    thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all
    the earth."--_Genesis_ xi. 9.



"Concerning great things," said Nietzsche, "one should either be
silent, or one should speak loftily:--loftily, that is to say,
cynically and innocently."[2]

Art is a great thing. Maybe it is the greatest thing on earth.
Wherever and whenever Nietzsche speaks about it he always does so
loftily, and with reverence; while his position as an anchorite, and
as an artist who kept aloof from the traffic for fame, allowed him to
retain that innocence in his point of view, which he maintains is so
necessary in the treatment of such a subject.

As the children of an age in which Art is rapidly losing its prestige,
we modern Europeans may perhaps feel a little inclined to purse our
lips at the religious solemnity with which Nietzsche approaches this
matter. So large a number of vital forces have been applied to the
object of giving us entertainment in our large cities, that it is now
no longer a simple matter to divorce Art altogether in our minds from
the category of things whose sole purpose is to amuse or please us.

Some there are, of course, who would repudiate this suggestion
indignantly, and who would claim for Art a very high moral purpose.
These moralists apart, however, it seems safe to say, that in the
minds of most people to-day, Art is a thing which either leaves them
utterly unmoved, or to which they turn only when they are in need of
distraction, of decoration for their homes, or of stimulation in their
thought.

Leaving the discussion of Nietzsche's personal view of Art to the next
lecture, I shall now first attempt, from his standpoint, a general
examination of the condition of Art at the present day, which, though
it will be necessarily rapid and sketchy, will, I hope, not prove
inadequate for my purpose.

Before I proceed, however, I should like to be allowed to call your
attention to the difficulties of my task. As far as I am aware, mine is
the first attempt that has been made, either here or abroad, to place
an exhaustive account of Nietzsche's Art doctrine before any audience.
But for one or two German writers, who have discussed Nietzsche
--the artist--tentatively and hesitatingly, I know of no one who has
endeavoured to do so after having had recourse to all his utterances
on the subject, nor do I know of anybody who has applied his æsthetic
principles to any particular branch or branches of Art. It is therefore
with some reason that I now crave your indulgence for my undertaking
and beg you to remember that it is entirely of a pioneer nature.

Many of you here, perhaps, are already acquainted with Nietzsche's
philosophy, and are also intimately associated with one of the branches
of Art. Nevertheless, let me warn you before I begin, that you may have
to listen to heresies that will try your patience to the utmost.

I also am intimately associated with one of the branches of Art, and my
traditions are Art traditions. I can well imagine, therefore, how some
of you will receive many of the statements I am about to make; and I
can only entreat you to bear with me patiently until the end, if only
with the hope that, after all, there may be something worth thinking
about, if not worth embracing, in what you are going to hear.

Two years ago, in this same hall, I had the honour of addressing an
audience on the subject of Nietzsche's moral and evolutionary views,
and, since then, I have wondered whether I really selected the more
important side of his philosophy for my first lectures. If it were
not for the fact that the whole of his thought is, as it were, of one
single piece, harmoniously and consistently woven, I should doubt that
I had selected the more vital portion of it; for it is impossible to
overrate the value of his Art doctrine--especially to us, the children
of an age so full of perplexity, doubt and confusion as this one is. In
taking Nietzsche's Art principles and Art criticism as a basis for a
new valuation of Art, I am doing nothing that is likely to astonish the
careful student of Nietzsche's works.

Friends and foes alike have found themselves compelled to agree upon
this point, that Nietzsche, whatever he may have been besides, was at
least a great artist and a great thinker on Art.

On the ground that he was solely and purely an artist some have even
denied his claim to the title Philosopher. Among the more celebrated
of modern writers who have done this, is the Italian critic Benedetto
Croce;[3] while Julius Zeitler declares that "Nietzsche's artistic
standpoint should be regarded as the very basis of all his thought,"
and that "no better access could be discovered to his spirit than by
way of his æsthetic."[4]

Certainly, from the dawn of his literary career, Art seems to have
been one of Nietzsche's most constant preoccupations. Even the general
argument of his last work, _The Will to Power_, is an entirely artistic
one; while his hatred of Christianity was the hatred of an artist
long before it became the hatred of an aristocratic moralist, or of a
prophet of Superman.

In _The Birth of Tragedy_, a book in which, by the bye, he declares that
there can be but one justification of the world, and that is as an
æsthetic phenomenon,[4] we find the following words--

"To the purely æsthetic world interpretation ... taught in this book,
there is no greater antithesis than the Christian dogma, which is
_only_ and will be only moral, and which, with its absolute standards,
for instance, its truthfulness of God, relegates--that is, disowns,
convicts, condemns--Art, all Art, to the realm of falsehood. Behind
such a mode of thought and valuation, which, if at all genuine, must
be hostile to Art, I always experienced what was _hostile to life_, the
wrathful vindictive counter will to life itself: for all life rests on
appearance, Art, illusion, optics, and necessity of perspective and
error."[5]

Nietzsche's works are, however, full of the evidences of an artistic
temperament.

Who but an artist, knowing the joy of creating, for instance, could
have laid such stress upon the creative act as the great salvation from
suffering and an alleviation of life?[6] Who but an artist could have been
an atheist out of his lust to create?

"For what could be created, if there were Gods!" cries Zarathustra.[7]

But, above all, who save an artist could have elevated taste to such
a high place as a criterion of value, and have made his own personal
taste the standard for so many grave valuations?

"And ye tell me, my friends," says Zarathustra, "that there is to be no
dispute about taste and tasting? But all life is a dispute about taste
and tasting!

"Taste: that is weight at the same time, and scales and weigher; and
alas for every living thing that would live without dispute about
weight and scales and weighing!"[8]

But it is more particularly in Nietzsche's understanding of the
instinct which drove him to expression, and in his attitude towards
those whom he would teach, that we recognize the typical artist, in
the highest acceptation of the word--that is to say, as a creature of
abundance, who must give thereof or perish. Out of plenitude and riches
only, do his words come to us. With him there can be no question of
eloquence as the result of poverty, vindictiveness, spite, resentment,
or envy; for such eloquence is of the swamp.[9] Where he is wrath, he
speaks from above, where he despises his contempt is prompted by love
alone, and where he annihilates he does so as a creator.[10]

"Mine impatient love," he says, "floweth over in streams, down towards
the sunrise and the sunset. From out silent mountains and tempests of
affliction, rusheth my soul into the valleys.

"Too long have I yearned and scanned the far horizon. Too long hath the
shroud of solitude been upon me: thus have I lost the habit of silence.

"A tongue have I become and little else besides, and the brawling of a
brook, falling from lofty rocks: downward into the dale will I pour my
words.

"And let the torrent of my love dash into all blocked highways. How
could a torrent help but find its way to the sea!

"Verily, a lake lies within me, complacent and alone; but the torrent
of my love draws this along with it, down--into the ocean!

"New highways I tread, new worlds come unto me; like all creators I
have grown weary of old tongues. No longer will my spirit walk on
worn-out soles.

"Too slow footed is all speech for me:--Into thy chariot, O storm, do I
leap! And even thee will I scourge with my devilry.

"Thus spake Zarathustra."[11]


[1] Delivered at University College on Dec. 1st, 1910.

[2] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 1.

[2] Æsthetic (translation by Douglas Ainslie), p. 350.

[3] Nietzsches Æsthetik, p. 5.

[4] _B. T._, p. 183.

[5] _B. T._, pp. 9, 10.

[6] _Z._, II, XXIV.

[7] _Z._, II, XXIV.

[8] _Z._, II, XXXV. See also La Bruyère's reply to his countrymen's
popular belief, "des goûts et des couleurs on ne peut discuter," in Les
Caractères: Des ouvrages de l'esprit, Aph. 10.

[9] _Z._, III, LVI.

[10] _Z._, II, XXXIV.

[11] _Z._, II, XXIII.




The State of Modern Art.


The Art of to-day, unholy and undivine as the Tower of Babel, seems to
have incurred the wrath of a mighty godhead, and those who were at work
upon it have abandoned it to its fate, and have scattered apart--all
speaking different tongues, and all filled with confusion.

Precisely on account of the disorder which now prevails in this
department of life, sincere and honest people find it difficult to show
the interest in it, which would be only compatible with its importance.

Probably but few men, to-day, could fall on their knees and sob at
the deathbed of a great artist, as Pope Leo X once did. Maybe there
are but one or two who, like the Taiko's generals, when Teaism was in
the ascendancy in Japan, would prefer the present of a rare work of
art to a large grant of territory as a reward of victory;[12] and there
is certainly not one individual in our midst but would curl his lips
at the thought of a mere servant sacrificing his life for a precious
picture.

And yet, says the Japanese writer, Okakura-Kakuzo, "many of our
favourite dramas in Japan are based on the loss and subsequent recovery
of a noted masterpiece."[13]

In this part of the world to-day, not only the author, but also the
audience for such dramas is entirely lacking.

The layman, as well as the artist, knows perfectly well that this
is so. Appalled by the disorder, contradictoriness, and difference
of opinion among artists, the layman has ceased to think seriously
about Art; while artists themselves are so perplexed by the want of
solidarity in their ranks, that they too are beginning to question the
wherefore of their existence.

Not only does every one arrogate to himself the right to utter his word
upon Art; but Art's throne itself is now claimed by thousands upon
thousands of usurpers--each of whom has a "free personality" which
he insists upon expressing,[14] and to whom severe law and order would be
an insuperable barrier. Exaggerated individualism and anarchy are the
result. But such results are everywhere inevitable, when all æsthetic
canons have been abolished, and when there is no longer anybody strong
enough to command or to lead.

"Knowest thou not who is most needed of all?" says Zarathustra. "He who
commandeth great things.

"To execute great things is difficult; but the more difficult task is
to command great things."[15]

Direct commanding of any sort, however, as Nietzsche declares, has
ceased long since. "In cases," he observes, "where it is believed that
the leader and bell-wether cannot be dispensed with, attempt after
attempt is made nowadays to replace commanders by the summing together
of clever gregarious men: all representative constitutions, for
example, are of this origin."[16]

Although, in this inquiry, the Fine Arts will be the subject of
my particular attention, it should not be supposed that this is
necessarily the department in modern life in which Nietzsche believed
most disorder, most incompetence, and most scepticism prevails. I
selected the Fine Arts, in the first place, merely because they are the
arts concerning which I am best informed, and to which the Nietzschean
doctrine can be admirably applied; and secondly, because sculpture and
painting offer a wealth of examples known to all, which facilitates
anything in the way of an exposition. For even outsiders and plain men
in the street must be beginning to have more than an inkling of the
chaos and confusion which now reigns in other spheres besides the Fine
Arts. It must be apparent to most people that, in every department
of modern life where culture and not calculation, where taste and
not figures, where ability and not qualifications, are alone able to
achieve anything great--that is to say, in religion, in morality, in
law, in politics, in music, in architecture, and finally in the plastic
arts, precision and government are now practically at an end.

"Disintegration," says Nietzsche,"--that is to say, uncertainty--is
peculiar to this age: nothing stands on solid ground or on a sound
faith.... All our road is slippery and dangerous, while the ice
which still bears us has grown unconscionably thin: we all feel the
mild and gruesome breath of the thaw-wind--soon, where we are walking,
no one will any longer be able to stand!"[17]

We do not require to be told that in religion and moral matters,
scarcely any two specialists are agreed--the extraordinarily large
number of religious sects in England alone needs but to be mentioned
here; in law we divine that things are in a bad state; in politics even
our eyes are beginning to give us evidence of the serious uncertainty
prevailing; while in architecture and music the case is pitiable.

"If we really wished, if we actually dared to devise a style of
architecture which corresponded to the state of our souls," says
Nietzsche, "a labyrinth would be the building we should erect. But," he
adds, "we are too cowardly to construct anything which would be such a
complete revelation of our hearts."[18]

However elementary our technical knowledge of the matter may be, we, as
simple inquirers, have but to look about our streets to-day, in order
to convince ourselves of the ignominious muddle of modern architecture.
Here we find structural expedients used as ornaments,[19] the most rigid
parts of buildings, in form (the rectangular parts, etc.), placed
near the roof instead of in the basement,[20] and pillars standing
supporting, and supported by, nothing.[21] Elsewhere we see solids
over voids,[22] mullions supporting arches,[23] key-stones introduced into
lintels,[24] real windows appearing as mere holes in the wall, while the
ornamental windows are shams,[25] and pilasters resting on key-stones.[26]

And, everywhere, we see recent requirements masked and concealed behind
Greek, Roman, Gothic, Renaissance, Rococo, and Baroque embellishments,
thrown together helter-skelter, and with a disregard of structural
demands which must startle even the uninitiated.[27]

Our streets are ugly in the extreme.[28] Only at night, as Camille
Mauclair says, does the artificial light convert their hideousness
into a sort of lugubrious grandeur,[29] and that is perhaps why, to the
sensitive artistic Londoner, the darkness of night or the pale glow of
the moon is such a solace and relief.

As to the state of modern music, this is best described perhaps, though
with perfectly unconscious irony, by Mr. Henry Davey, in the opening
words of his _Student's Musical History_.

"Music has indeed been defined," he says, "as 'sound with regular
vibrations,' other sounds being called noise. This definition," the
author adds, "is only suited to undeveloped music; modern music may
include noise and even silence."[30]

People are mistaken if they suppose that Nietzsche, in attacking
Wagner as he did, was prompted by any personal animosity or other
considerations foreign to the question of music. In Wagner, Nietzsche
saw a Romanticist of the strongest possible type, and he was opposed
to the Romantic School of Music, because of its indifference to form.
Always an opponent of anarchy, despite all that his critics may say
to the contrary, Nietzsche saw with great misgiving the decline and
decay of melody and rhythm in modern music, and in attacking Wagner
as the embodiment of the Romantic School, he merely personified the
movement to which he felt himself so fundamentally opposed. And in
this opposition he was not alone. The Romantic movement, assailed by
many, will continue to be assailed, until all its evil influences are
exposed.

"Since the days of Beethoven," says Emil Naumann, "instrumental
music, generally speaking, has retrograded as regards spontaneity of
invention, thematic working, and mastery of art form,"[31] and the same
author declares that he regards all modern masters as the natural
outcome of the Romantic era.[32]

Nietzsche has told us in his Wagner pamphlets what he demands from
music,[33] and this he certainly could not get from the kind of music
which is all the rage just now.

What it lacks in invention it tries to make up in idiosyncrasy,
intricacy, and complexity, and that which it cannot assume in the
matter of form, it attempts to convert into a virtue and a principle.[34]

"Bombast and complexity in music," says P. von Lind, "as in any other
art, are always a sign of inferiority; for they betray an artist's
incapacity to express himself simply, clearly, and exhaustively--three
leading qualities in our great heroes of music (_Tonheroen_). In this
respect the whole of modern music, including Wagner's, is inferior to
the music of the past."[35]

But of all modern musical critics, perhaps Richard Hamann is
the most desperate concerning the work of recent composers. His book on
Impressionism and Art entirely supports Nietzsche's condemnation of the
drift of modern music, and in his references to Wagner, even the words
lie uses seem to have been drawn from the Nietzschean vocabulary.[36]

Briefly what he complains of in the music of the day is its want of
form,[37] its abuse of discord,[38] its hundred and one different artifices
for producing nerve-exciting and nerve-stimulating effects,[39] its
predilection in favour of cacophonous instruments,[40] its unwarrantable
sudden changes in rhythm or tempo within the same movement,[41] its habit
of delaying the solving chord, as in the love-death passage of Tristan
and Isolde,[42] and, finally, its realism, of which a typical example is
Strauss's "By a Lonely Brook"--all purely Nietzschean objections!

Well might Mr. Allen cry out: "Oh for the classic simplicity of a
bygone age, the golden age of music that hath passed away!"[43] But
the trouble does not end here; for, if we are to believe a certain
organ-builder, bell-founder and pianoforte-maker of ripe experience, it
has actually descended into the sphere of instrument-making as well.[44]


[12] Okakura-Kakuzo, _The Book of Tea_, pp. 112, 113.

[13] _The Book of Tea_, p. 112.

[14] See in this regard _B. T._, pp. 54, 55.

[15] _Z._, II. XLVI.

[16] _G. E._, p.121.

[17] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 55.

[18] _D. D._, Aph. 169.

[19] This is such a common fault that it is superfluous to give
particular examples of it, but the New War Office in Whitehall is a
good case in point.

[20] Local Government Board building; Piccadilly Hotel (Regent St.
side).

[21] Piccadilly Hotel (Piccadilly side), and the Sicilian Avenue,
Bloomsbury.

[22] New Scotland Yard.

[23] Gaiety Theatre; the new Y.M.C.A. building, Tottenham Court Road.

[24] Local Government Board.

[25] Gaiety Theatre.

[26] Marylebone Workhouse.

[27] See Fergusson's Introduction to his _History of Modern
Architecture_.

[28] See W. Morris's _Address on the Decorative Arts_, pp. 18, 19.

[29] _Trois crises de l'art actuel_, p. 243.

[30] _The Student's Musical History_, p. 1.

[31] _History of Music_, Vol. II, p. 927. See also _The Student's
Musical History_, by Henry Davey, p. 97. "Weakness of rhythm is the
main reason of the inferiority of the romantic composers to their
predecessors."

[32] _History of Music_, p. 1195. See also P. v. Lind, _Moderner
Geschmack und moderne Musik_, in which the author complains of the
excessive virtuosity, want of faith and science of modern music, while
on p. 34 he, too, calls all modern musicians romanticists.

[33] See especially _C. W._, pp. 59, 60.

[34] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 276.

[35] _Moderner Geschmack und moderne Musik_, p. 54.

[36] Der Impressionismus in Leben und Kunst.

[37] _Ibid_., pp. 53, 57.

[38] _Ibid_., p. 64.

[39] _Ibid_., p. 67.

[40] _Ibid_., p. 69.

[41] _Ibid_., p. 74.

[42] _Ibid_., p. 61.

[43] _The Fallacy of Modern Music_, p. 10.

[44] _A Protest against the Modern Development of Unmusical Tone_, by
Thomas C. Lewis.




The Fine Arts.--1. The Artists.


Turning, now, to Painting and Sculpture, what is it precisely that we
see?

In this branch of Art, chaos and anarchy are scarcely the words to use.
The condition is rather one of complete and hopeless dissolution. There
is neither a direction, a goal, nor a purpose. Slavish realism side
by side with crude conventions, incompetence side by side with wasted
talent, coloured photography side by side with deliberate eccentricity,
and scientific principles applied to things that do not matter in
the least: these are a few of the features which are noticeable at a
first glance. Going a little deeper, we find that the whole concept of
what Art really is seems to be totally lacking in the work of modern
painters and sculptors, and, if we were forced to formulate a Broad
definition for the painting and sculpture of our time, we should find
ourselves compelled to say that they are no more than a _field in which
more or less interesting people manifest their more or less interesting
personalities_.

There is nothing in this definition which is likely to offend the
modern artist. On the contrary, he would probably approve of it all
too hastily. But, in approving of it, he would confess himself utterly
ignorant of what Art actually is, and means, and purposes in our midst.

Or to state the case differently: it is not that the modern artist
has no notion at all of what Art is; but, that his notion is one
which belittles, humiliates and debases Art, root and branch.

To have gazed with understanding at the divine Art of Egypt, to have
studied Egyptian realism and Egyptian conventionalism; to have stood
doubtfully before Greek sculpture, even of the best period, and to have
known how to place it in the order of rank among the art-products of
the world; finally, to have learnt to value the Art of the Middle Ages,
not so much because of its form, but because of its content: these are
experiences which ultimately make one stand aghast before the work of
our modern men, and even before the work of some of their predecessors,
and to ask oneself into whose hands could Art have passed that she
should have fallen so low?

Whether one look on a Sargent or on a Poynter, on a Rodin or on a
Brock, on a Vuillard or on a Maurice Denis, on an Alfred East or on a
Monet, the question in one's heart will be; not, why are these men so
poor? but, why are they so modest?--why are they so humble?--why, in
fact, are their voices so obsequiously servile and faint? One will ask:
not, why do these men paint or mould as they do? but, why do they paint
or mould at all?

Ugliness, in the sense of amorphousness, one will be able to explain.
Ugliness, in this sense, although its position in Art has not yet been
properly accounted for, one will be able to classify perfectly well.
But this tremulousness, this plebeian embarrassment, this democratic
desire to please, above all, this democratic disinclination to assume
a position of authority,--these are things which contradict the
very essence of Art, and these are the things which are found in the
productions of almost every European school to-day.

But, as a matter of fact, to do artists justice, beneath all the
tremendous activity of modern times in both branches of the art we are
discussing, there is, among the thinking members of the profession,
a feeling of purposelessness, of doubt and pessimism, which is ill
concealed, even in their work. The best of these artists know, and
will even tell you, that there are no canons, that individuality is
absolute, and that the aim of all their work is extremely doubtful, if
not impossible to determine. There is not much quarrelling done, or
hand-to-hand scuffling engaged in; because no one feels sufficiently
firm on his own legs to stand up and oppose the doctrine that "there is
no accounting for tastes." A clammy, deathlike stillness reigns over
the whole of this seething disagreement and antagonism in principles.
Not since Whistler fired his bright missiles into the press has the
report of a decent-sized gun been heard; and this peace in chaos, this
silence in confusion, is full of the suggestion of decomposition and
decay.

"Art appears to be surrounded by the magic influence of death," says
Nietzsche, "and in a short time mankind will be celebrating festivals
of memory in honour of it."[45]

With but one or two brilliant exceptions, that which characterizes
modern painting and modern sculpture is, generally speaking, its
complete lack of Art in the sense in which I shall use this word in my
next lecture. This indeed, as you will see, covers everything. For the
present purpose, however, let it be said that, from the Nietzschean
standpoint, the painters and sculptors of the present age are deficient
in dignity, in pride, in faith, and, above all, in love.

They are too dependent upon environment, upon Nature, to give a
direction and a meaning to their exalted calling; they are too
disunited and too lawless to be leaders; they are in an age too chaotic
and too sceptical to be able to find a "wherefore" and a "whither" for
themselves; and, above all, there are too many pretenders in their
ranks--too many who ought never to have painted or moulded at all--to
make it possible for the greatest among them to elevate the Cause of
Art to its proper level.

No æsthetic canon is to be seen or traced anywhere; nobody knows one,
nobody dares to assert one. The rule that tastes cannot be disputed is
now the only rule that prevails, and, behind this rule, the basest,
meanest and most preposterous individual claims are able to make their
influence felt.

Certainly, it is true, there is no accounting for tastes; but, once
a particular taste has revealed itself it ought to be possible to
classify it and to point out where it belongs and whither it is going
to lead. Undoubtedly a man's taste cannot be taken from him, because
its roots are in his constitution; but, once he has identified himself
with a particular form of taste, it ought to be possible to identify
him too,--that is to say, to realize his rank and his value.

If it is impossible to do this nowadays, it is because there is no
criterion to guide us. It will therefore be my endeavour to establish a
criterion, based upon Nietzsche's æsthetic, and, in the course of these
lectures, to classify a few forms of taste in accordance with it.

Meanwhile, however, the inquiry into the present condition of the Fine
Arts must be continued; and this shall now be done by taking up the
public's standpoint.


[45] _H. A. H._, Vol. I, pp. 205, 206.




2. _The Public._


The man who goes to a modern exhibition of pictures and sculptures,
experiences visually what they experience aurally who stand on a
Sunday evening within sight of the Marble Arch, just inside Hyde Park.
Not only different voices and different subjects are in the air; but
fundamentally different conceptions of life, profoundly and utterly
antagonistic outlooks.

The Academy, The International Society of Sculptors, Painters and
Gravers, The Royal Society of British Artists, The New English Art
Club, The Salon des Artistes Français, and the Salon des Beaux Arts,
are all alike in this; and the International's scorn of the Academy,[46]
xvi or the Academy's scorn of it, is as ridiculous as the Beaux Arts'
scorn of the Salon, or vice versâ.

It is quite foolish, therefore, to inveigh against the public for their
bad taste, Philistinism and apathy. How can they be expected to know,
where there are no teachers? How can they be otherwise than apathetic
where keen interest must perforce culminate in confusion? How can they
have good taste or any taste at all, where there is no order of rank in
tastes?

We know the torments of the modern lay student of Art, when he asks
himself uprightly and earnestly whether he should say "yes" or "no"
before a picture or a piece of sculpture. We know the moments of
impotent hesitancy during which he racks his brains for some canon
or rule on which to base his judgment, and we sympathize with his
blushes when finally he inquires after the name of the artist, before
volunteering to express an opinion.

At least a name is some sort of a standard nowadays. In the absence of
other standards it is something to cling to; and the modern visitor to
an Art exhibition has precious little to cling to, poor soul!

Still, even names become perplexing in the end; for it soon occurs to
the lay student in question that, not only Millais, but also Leighton,
Whistler, Rodin, Frith, Watts, Gauguin, John, and Vuillard have names
in the Art world.

Now, it is generally at this stage that such a student of Art either
retires disconcerted from his first attempts at grappling with the
problem, and takes refuge in indifference; or else, from the depth of
his despair, draws a certain courage which makes him say that, after
all, _he knows what he likes_. Even if he does utter a heresy at times
against fashion or against culture, he knows what pleases him.

And thus is formed that large concourse of people who set up what they
like and dislike as the standard of taste.

It is in vain that painters and sculptors deplore the existence of this
part of their audience. It is they themselves who are responsible for
its existence. It is the anarchy in their own ranks that has infected
the bravest of their followers.

The taste of the masses, endowed with self-confidence in this way, is
now a potent force in European Art, and among those so-called artists
who do not suffer under the existing state of affairs, there are many
who actually conform and submit to this mob-rule. In my next lecture I
shall show how even the art-canons of the lay masses have been adopted
by some painters and sculptors in perfect good faith.

"Too long have we acknowledged them to be right, these petty people,"
says Zarathustra. "Thus we have at last given them power as well;--and
now they teach that 'good' is only what petty people call 'good.'"

It is on this account that many sincere and refined natures turn
reluctantly away from Art altogether nowadays, and begin to doubt
whether it serves any good purpose in the world at all. They grow weary
of the humbug of the studios, the affectation of gushing amateurs, and
the snobbery of the lionizing disciple of one particular school, and
doubt the honesty even of his leader. They grow timid and renounce
all judgment in Art, wondering whether any of it really matters. In
a gingerly fashion they still hold on to generally accepted views,--
views that time seems to have endorsed,--and thus they very often give
all their attention to the Old Masters.[48]

And yet, it is in thus turning away with contempt from modern Art, that
sincere people tacitly acknowledge how profoundly serious the question
is on which they have turned their backs. For, it is the horror of its
disorder that makes them disconsolate: they could continue facing this
disorder only if the matter were less important.

Passing over that unfortunately large percentage of up-to-date people,
in whose minds Art in general is associated with jewellery, French
pastry and goldfish, as a more or less superfluous, though pleasing,
luxury, the rest of the civilized world certainly feels with varying
degrees of conviction that Art has some essential bearing upon life;
and, though few will grant it the importance that Nietzsche claims for
it, a goodly number will realize that it is quite impossible to reckon
without it.

Now, if by chance, one of the last-mentioned people, having grown
disgusted at the prevailing degeneration of Art, should start out in
quest of a canon, or a standard whereby he might take his bearings in
the sea of confusion around him, what are we to suppose would await him?

Unfortunately, we know only too well what awaits him!

He may turn to the art-critics--the class of men which society
sustains for his special benefit in art matters,--or he may turn to
the philosophers. He may spend years and years of labour in studying
the Art and thought of Antiquity, of the Middle Ages, and of the
Renaissance; but, unless he have sufficient independence of spirit to
distrust not only the Art, but every single manifestation of modern
life, and to try to find what the general corrosive is which seems to
be active everywhere, it is extremely doubtful whether he will ever
succeed in reaching a bourne or a destination of any sort whatsoever.

He will still be asking: "What is a good poem?" "What is good music?"
--and, above all, "What is a good picture or a good statue?"

We know the difficulties of the layman, and even of the artist in
this matter; for most of us who have thought about Art at all have
experienced these same difficulties.

The general need, then, I repeat, is a definite canon,[49] a definite
statement as to the aim and purpose of Art, and the establishment of an
order of rank among tastes. Once more, I declare that I have attempted
to arrive at these things by the principles of Nietzsche's Æsthetic;
but, in order to forestall the amusement which an announcement of this
sort is bound to provoke nowadays, let me remind you of two things:
_First_, that any artistic canon must necessarily be relative to a
certain type of man; and _secondly_, that the most that an establishment
of an order of rank among tastes can do for you, is to allow you the
opportunity of exercising some choice--a choice of type in manhood,
therefore a choice as to a mode of life, and therefore a choice of
values, and the customs and conditions that spring from them.

At present you have no such choice. You certainly have the option of
following either Rodin and Renoir, or Whistler and Manet, or Sargent
and Boldini, or John and Gauguin, or Herkomer and Lavery; but not one
of you can say, "If I follow the first couple I shall be going in such
and such a direction," or, "If I follow the second couple I shall be
travelling towards this or that goal,"--this you would scarcely be
able to say; neither could your leaders help you.


[46] For some amusing, and, at the same time, shrewd, remarks
concerning the International Society, I would refer the reader to Mr.
Wake _Cook's Anarchism in Art_ (Cassell & Co.). I agree on the whole
with what Mr. Wake Cook says, but cannot appreciate his remarks on
Whistler.

[47] _Z._, IV, LXVII.

[48] In a _Times_ leader of the 20th December, 1909, the writer puts
the case very well. After referring to the heated controversy which
was then raging round the Berlin wax bust that Dr. Bode declared to be
a Leonardo, the writer goes on to say: "... it is amusing to see how
the merit of the work is forgotten in the dispute about its origin. It
seems to be assumed that if it is by Leonardo it must be a great work
of art, and if by Lucas nothing of the kind.... This fact proves what
needs no proving, that there are many wealthy connoisseurs who buy
works of art not for their intrinsic merit, but for what is supposed to
be their authenticity.... This state of things reveals an extraordinary
timidity in buyers of works of art. If they all trusted their own
taste" [that is to say, if they had a taste of their own based upon
some reliable canon] "names would have no value. The intrinsic merit
of a work of art is not affected by the name it bears.... Yet in the
market the name of a great painter is worth more than the inspiration
of a lesser one.... Hence many people believe that it is far more
difficult to understand pictures than literature.... But there is no
more mystery about pictures than about literature. It is only the
market that makes a mystery of them, and the market does this because
it is timid." In other words: because it does not know.

[49] On this point see _Questionings on Criticism and Beauty_, by the
Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour. (Oxford University Press.) Mr. Balfour entirely
agrees that to-day we are driven to a kind of anarchy of individual
preferences, and he acknowledges that he is not satisfied to remain in
this position. He does not seem to recognize, however, how curiously
and almost perfectly this anarchy in Art coincides with a certain
anarchy in other departments of life, and thus, although it displeases
him, he sees in it no imminent danger, or no hint that Art and life
react in any way upon each other.




3. The Critics.


Now, to return to our lay-student of Art, let us suppose that he first
approaches the art-critics of the day for guidance. Will there be one
among these men who will satisfy him? Is there a single art-critic
either of the nineteenth or twentieth century who knew, or who knows,
his business?

It is possible to point to one or two, and even so, in doing this, one
is prompted more by a sense of kindness than by a sense of accuracy.
Some Continental critics, Camille Mauclair and Muther among them, and
here and there an English critic like R. A. M. Stevenson, occasionally
seem to hit a nail on the head; but as a rule, one can say with
Coventry Patmore: "There is little that is conclusive or fruitful in
any of the criticism of the present day."[50]

For the most part it is written by men who know absurdly little of
their subject, and who, if they do know it, are acquainted much more
with its chronological and encyclopædic than with its philosophical
side. There is not much conscience either, or much acumen, in these
men; and they are as a rule concerned with questions that are
irrelevant to the point at issue. Like a certain kind of insect, as
Nietzsche very justly remarks, they live by stinging; but their stings
serve no purpose save that of providing them with their food.[51]

They are, perhaps, less to blame than the artists themselves for the
state of affairs that exists to-day; but, while the artists have
betrayed only themselves, the critics have betrayed the reading
public. They have neither resisted nor condemned the flood of anarchy
that has swept over the art-world; they have rather promoted it in
every way in their power, abetting and applauding artists in their
lawlessness. In fairness to some of them, however, it should be said,
that in encouraging the confusion and disorder around them they very
often acted with almost religious sincerity. This reservation applies
to Ruskin, for instance, and to many other critics writing for the
better-class papers.

Lest this be considered as an overstatement of the case, hear what one
of these men himself actually says concerning his own profession! Mr.
Frank Rutter, writing in 1907, expressed himself as follows:--

"In olden days the press used to lead public opinion; now it meekly
follows because its courage has been sapped by servile cringing to
the advertiser, because its antics and sensational inaccuracy have
brought it into contempt. No longer commanding the authority of a
parent or guardian, it seeks to attract attention by the methods of the
cheap-jack. The few exceptions surviving only prove the rule."[52]

Finding themselves forced to speak of other things than "The Purpose of
Art," "The Standard of Beauty," and "The Canons of Art"--simply because
nobody now knows anything about these matters, or dares to assert
anything concerning them,--the better-class art-critics, feeling that
they must do something more than state merely their opinions concerning
the work under notice--in fact, that they must give their reasons for
their praise or blame--have lately been compelled to have recourse to
the only field that is open to them, and that is _technique_.

Now, while Mr. Clutton Brock seems perfectly justified in deprecating
these tactics on the part of some of his brother critics, and while
Mr. Rutter seems quite wrong in upholding them, the question which
naturally arises out of the controversy is: what is there left to the
critic to talk about?

If he is no longer able to judge of the general tendency and teaching
of a play, and if he is no longer able to regard it æsthetically,
what can he do but analyse the playwright's grammar, and seek out the
latter's split infinitives, his insufficient use of the subjunctive
mood, his Cockney idioms and Cockney solecisms?

We agree with Mr. Clutton Brock that ... "the public has no concern
with the process of production but only with the product"; and
that "if Art _were in a healthy state_[53] the public would know this
and would not ask for technical criticism." We also agree that "the
critic's proper business is with the product, not with the process of
production; to explain their own understanding and enjoyment of the
meaning and beauty of works of art, and not the technical means by
which they have been made."[54]

But, while we agree with all this, we cannot help sympathizing with the
late R. A. M. Stevenson and his admirer Mr. Frank Rutter; for their
dilemma is unique.

When Monsieur Domergue of the French Academy assured his friend
Beauzée confidentially that he had discovered that Voltaire didn't
know grammar, Beauzée very rightly replied with some irony: "I am much
obliged to you for telling me; now I know that it is possible to do
without it."[55]

And this is the only reply that ought to be made to any criticism which
analyses the technique of a real work of Art; since it is obvious,
that if technical questions are uppermost, the work is by implication
unworthy of consideration in all other respects.[56]


[50] _Principles in Art_, p. 4.

[51] _H. A. H_., Vol. II, Aph. 164.

[52] _The Academy_, August 24th, 1907. Article, "The Pursuit of Taste."

[53] The italics are mine.

[54] _The Academy_, Oct. 26th, 1907. Article, "The Hypochondria of Art."

[55] Monsieur de Saint Ange's Reception Speech, 1810.

[56] There is, however, a further excuse for Mr. Rutter and his school
of critics, and that is, that in an age like this one, in which
Amateurism is rampant, the critic very often performs a salutary office
in condemning a work on purely technical grounds. I, for my part,
am quite convinced that the morbid attention which is now paid to
technique is simply a result of the extraordinary preponderance of the
art-student element in our midst.




4. Some Art Criticisms.


In order further to establish my contention, it might perhaps be an
advantage to refer to some criticisms that have actually been made.
It will not be necessary to give more than one or two of these,
because everybody must know that similar instances could be multiplied
indefinitely; but while I shall limit the selection, I should not like
it to be thought that the cases I present are not absolutely typical.

Quite recently the art-world has been staring with something akin to
amazement, not unmingled here and there with indignation, at the work
of one Augustus John, in whose pictures they have found at once a
problem and an innovation.

Now, without for the present wishing to express any opinion at all upon
Mr. John's work, this at least seemed quite clear to me when I first
saw it; namely, that it challenged profound analysis. Unconsciously or
consciously, Mr. John seemed to re-question a whole number of things
afresh. The direction of Art, the purpose of Art, the essence of
Art, the value of Art--these are some of the subjects into which he
provoked me to inquire.

Here was an opportunity for the more wise among the critics to show
their wisdom. This was essentially a case in which the public required
expert guidance. Augustus John comes forward with a new concept of what
is beautiful. He says pictorially this and that is beautiful. Are we to
follow him or to reject him?

Hear one or two critics:--

Commenting upon one of Mr. Max Beerbohm's caricatures in the Spring
Exhibition of the New English Art Club, 1909, the Times critic writes
as follows--"Here an art-critic meets a number of Mr. John's strange
females with long necks and bent, unlovely heads, like a child's
copy of a Primitive; and the puzzled critic ejaculates, 'How odd
it seems that thirty years hence I may be desperately in love with
these ladies!' Odd, indeed, but perfectly possible," continues the
Timesexpert. "Some of us have learned, in twenty years, to find nature
in Claude Monet, and the time may come when the women in Mr. John's
'Going to the Sea,' or in the 'Family Group' at the Grafton, will seem
as beautiful as the Venus de Milo. The 'return of Night primeval and of
old chaos' may be nearer than we think." Then after paying Mr. John's
drawing a compliment, the writer continues: "But can any one, for
all that, whose mind is not warped by purely technical prepossession
in favour of a technician, say that the picture would not have been
enormously improved if the artist had thought more of nature and less
of his 'types' If Mr. John would throw his types to the winds, look
for a beautiful model, and paint her as she is, we should not have to
wait the thirty years of Mr. Max Beerbohm's critic, but might begin to
fall in love with her at once."[57]

And this, let me assure you, is a comparatively able criticism!

But, what guidance does it give? Why is it so timid and non-committing?
And, where it is committing, why is it so vague? The words "beautiful
model" mean absolutely nothing nowadays. How, then, can the critic
employ them without defining the particular sense in which he wishes
them to be understood?

I examined this picture of Mr. John's, as also the one at the Grafton.
Both of them were full of his personal solution of the deepest problems
associated with the ideas of Art and beauty; but how can we know
whether to accept these solutions unless they are made quite plain by
our critics? It may be suggested that Mr. John's solutions of these
problems is not sufficiently important. Why, then, discuss them at all?

The _Daily Telegraph_ also contained a so-called criticism of Mr. John.
After commenting, as the previous critic did, upon Mr. Max Beerbohm's
caricature and the words accompanying it, the writer proceeds: "How
true--to give the most obvious of all instances--with respect to
Wagner! And yet Mr. Max Beerbohm, the satirist, is as regards the
actual moment, not quite, quite up to date. To-day, for fear of
being accused of a Bœotian denseness, we hasten to acclaim, if not
necessarily to enjoy, Cézanne, Maurice Denis, the neo-Impressionists,
etc., etc."[58]

"For fear of being accused of Bœotian denseness!" Yes, that is the
whole trouble! Apparently, then, if we are to believe the _Daily
Telegraph_ critic, Mr. John has been acclaimed, simply in order that his
critics may escape the gibe of being classically dense!

Possessing neither the necessary knowledge, nor the necessary values,
nor yet the necessary certainty, to take up a definite stand for or
against, these critics "acclaim" novelty, in whatever garb it may come,
lest, perchance, their intelligence be for one instant doubted. Very
good!--at least this is a confession which reveals both their humility
and their honesty, and, since it entirely supports my contention, I am
entirely grateful for it.

But what ought to be said to the implied, ingenuous and perfectly
unwarrantable assumption, that that which posterity endorses must of
necessity have been right all along? Why should Wagner be vindicated
simply because an age subsequent to his own happens to rave about
him? Before such posthumous success can vindicate a man, surely the
age in which it occurs must be duly valued. In the event of its being
more lofty, more noble, and more tasteful than the age which preceded
it, then certainly posthumous fame is a vindication; but if the case
be otherwise, then it is a condemnation. In an ascending culture the
classic of yesterday becomes the primitive of to-morrow, and in a
declining culture the decadent of yesterday becomes the classic of
to-morrow. Thus in valuing, say, Michelangelo, it all depends whence
you come. If you come from Egypt and walk down towards him, your
opinion will be very different from that of the man who comes from
twentieth-century Europe and who walks up towards him.

But we are not ascending so rapidly or so materially--if we are
ascending at all--as to make posthumous success a guarantee of
excellence. In fact, precisely the converse might be true, and men
who are now quickly forgotten, may be all the greater on that account
alone. In any case, however, the matter is not so obvious as to allow
us to make the broad generalizations we do concerning it.

Perhaps, in order to be quite fair, I ought now to refer to other
critics, as well as to other criticisms concerning John written by the
critics already quoted. True, in the Times for October 14th, 1905,
there appears a more elaborate discussion of Mr. John's powers. (I say
more elaborate, but I mean more lengthy!) And the _Daily Telegraph_ has
also given us more careful views, as, for instance, in their issues of
October 17th, 1905, and November 23rd, 1909. I doubt, however, whether
it could be honestly said that one really understands any better how to
place Mr. John after having read the articles in question, though, in
making this objection, I should like it to be understood, that I regard
it as applying not only to the art-criticism of the two particular
papers to which I have referred, but to art-criticism in general.[59]

Most of what we read on this matter in the sphere of journalism is
pure badinage, and little besides--entertainingly and ably written
it is true, but generally very wide of the fundamental principles at
stake, and of that consciousness of dealing with a deeply serious
question, which the subject Art ought to awaken.

No one seems to feel nowadays that a picture, like a sonnet, like a
sonata, and like a statue, if it claim attention at all, should claim
the attention of all those who are most deeply concerned with the
problems of Life, Humanity, and the Future; and that every breath of
Art comes from the lungs of Life herself, and is full of indications as
to her condition.

When one says these things nowadays, people are apt to regard one as a
little peculiar, a little morbid, and perhaps a little too earnest as
well. Only two or three months ago, a certain critic, commenting upon a
sentence of mine in my Introduction to Nietzsche's _Case of Wagner_,[60]
in which I declared that "the principles of Art are inextricably bound
up with the laws of Life," assured the readers of the Nation that "the
plainest facts of everyday life contradict this theory of non-artistic
philosophers in their arm-chairs."[61] And thus the fundamental
questions are shelved, year after year, while Art withers, and real
artists become ever more and more scarce.

"I loathe this great city," cried Zarathustra.

"Woe to this great city!--And I would that I already saw the pillar of
fire in which it will be consumed!

"For such pillars of fire must precede the great noontide. But this
hath its time and its own fate."[62]


[57] _The Times_, May 22nd, 1909.

[58] _The Daily Telegraph_, May 31st, 1909.

[59] A further example of what I mean can be found in the _Morning
Post's_ article (4th April), on the International Society's 1910
Show. Here the writer's only comments on a Simon Bussy (No. 149),
which really required serious treatment, or no treatment at all, are:
"Could any English tourist at Mentone see that resort in the terms
of M. Bussy?" And his comments on an important Monet (No. 133) are:
"What happy Idler at Antibes other than a Frenchman could record
the particular impression of Monet (No. 133), even in enjoying the
hospitalities of Eilenroe?"

[60] Dr. Oscar Levy's Authorized English Edition of Nietzsche's
_Complete Works._

[61] _The Nation_, July 9th, 1910.

[62] _Z._, III, LI.




Part II


Suggested Causes Of The Anarchy In Modern Art


    "... To them gave he power to become the sons of God, even
    to them that do believe in his name."--_John_ i. 12.



And now, what are the causes of this depression and this madness in
Art? For Nietzsche was not alone in recognizing it. Many voices, some
wholly trustworthy, have been raised in support of his view.

It could only have been the unsatisfactory conditions, even in his
time, that made Hegel regard Art as practically dead; for, as Croce
and Monsieur Bénard rightly observe, Hegel's _Vorlesungen über Æsthetik_
are Art's dirge.[1] Schopenhauer's extraordinary misunderstanding
of Art, also, precisely like Plato's,[2] can be explained only by
supposing that the examples of Art which he saw about him misled his
otherwise penetrating judgment. Even Ruskin's vague and wholly confused
utterances on the subject are evidence of his groping efforts to find
his way in the disorder of his time. And, as to the voices of lesser
men, their name is legion.

Two eminent Englishmen of the last century, however, were both clear
and emphatic in their denunciation of the age in which they lived. I
refer to Matthew Arnold and William Morris. The former made a most
illuminating analysis of some of the influences which have conduced
to bring about the regrettable state of modern life, while William
Morris--less philosophical perhaps, and more direct, though totally
wrong in the remedies he advocates--bewailed Art's unhappy plight as
follows--

"I must in plain words say of the Decorative Arts, of all the arts,
that it is not merely that we are inferior in them to all who have
gone before us, but also that they are in a state of anarchy and
disorganization, that makes a sweeping change necessary and certain."[3]

There can be no doubt, therefore, that what Nietzsche saw was a plain
fact to very many thinking men besides; but, in tracing the conditions
to precise and definite causes, Nietzsche by far excelled any of his
contemporaries.

Before proceeding, however, to examine the more general causes that he
suggests, I should like to pause here a moment, in order to dispose
of one particular cause which, although of tremendous importance for
us moderns, can scarcely be regarded as having been active for a very
long period. I refer to the manner in which Nietzsche accounts for a
good deal that is incompetent and futile, in the Art of the present day
only, by pointing to a psychological misapprehension which is, alas,
but all too common. I should not have broken my general narrative with
the consideration of this particular cause, had it not been that I feel
sure it will help laymen, and artists as well, to account for much that
will still remain obscure, even after the more general causes have been
discussed.


[1] Benedetto Croce, _Æsthetic_ (translated by Douglas Ainslie), p.
308, and Monsieur Bénard's critical survey of Hegel's _Æsthetik_ in
_Cours d'Esthétique_, Vol. V. p. 493.

[2] On this point see Schelling, _Sämmtliche Werke_, Vol. V,
"Vorlesungen über die Methode des akademischen Studiums," pp. 346-47.

[3] _The Decorative Arts_, an address delivered before the Trades Guild
of Learning, p. 11.




1. Morbid Irritability.


Nietzsche recognized that this age is one in which Will is not merely
diseased, but almost paralyzed. Everywhere he saw men and women, youths
and girls, who are unable to resist a stimulus, however slight; who
react with excessive speed in the presence of an irritant, and who
bedeck this weakness and this irritability with all the finest gala
dresses and disguises that they can lay their hands on.[4]

In Determinism he saw the philosophical abstract of this fact; in our
novels and plays he saw its representation under the cloak of passion
and emotion; in the Darwinian theory of the influence of environment,
he saw it logged out in scientific garb, and in the modern artist's
dependence upon an appeal to Nature for inspiration--i. e. for a spur
to react upon, he recognized its unhealthiest manifestation.

"The power of resisting stimuli is on the wane," he says; "the strength
required in order to stop action, and to cease from reacting, is most
seriously diseased."[5]

"Man unlearns the art of _doing_, and _all he does is to react_ to
stimuli coming from his environment."[6]

Speaking of the modern artist, he refers to "the absurd irritability of
his system, which makes a crisis out of every one of his experiences,
and deprives him of all calm reflection,"[7] and, while describing
Europeans in general, he lays stress upon their "spontaneous and
changeable natures."[8]

In calling our attention to these things, Nietzsche certainly laid his
finger on the root of a good deal for which the other more general
causes which I shall adduce fail to account.

There can be no doubt that this irritability does exist, and that it
causes large numbers of unrefined and undesirable men and women to
enter the arts to-day, who are absolutely mistaken in their diagnosis
of their condition. We are all only too ready to conceal our defects
beneath euphemistic interpretations of them, and we most decidedly
prefer, if we have the choice, to regard any morbid symptoms we may
reveal, as the sign of strength rather than of weakness. There is some
temptation, therefore, both for our friends and ourselves, to interpret
our natures kindly and if possible flatteringly; and, if we suffer
from a certain "sickly irritability and sensitiveness" in the presence
of what we think beautiful, we prefer to ascribe this to an artistic
temperament rather than to a debilitated will.

We are acquainted with the irascible nerve patient who pours his curses
on the head of a noisy child; and in his case we are only too ready to
suspect a morbid condition of the body. But when we ourselves, or our
young friends, or our brothers, sister, or cousins, suddenly display,
when still in their teens, a sort of gasping enthusiasm before a
landscape, a peasant child, or a sunset; when they show an inability
to bide their time, to pause, and to remain inactive in the presence
of what they consider beautiful, we immediately conclude from their
conduct, not that they have little command of themselves, but that they
must of necessity have strong artistic natures.

Our novels are full of such people with weak wills, so are our plays;
so, too, unfortunately, are our Art Schools.

We know the Art student who, the moment he sees what he would call "a
glorious view," or a "dramatic sunset or sunrise," hurls his materials
together helter-skelter and dashes off, ventre à terre, to the most
convenient spot whence he can paint it.

We have seen him seize the thing he calls an impression, his teeth
clenched the while, and his nostrils dilated. But how often does it
occur to us that such a creature has got a bad temper? How often do we
realize that he is irritable, self-indulgent, sick in fact?

Only in an age like our own could this ridiculous travesty of an artist
pass for an artist. It is only in our age that his neurotic touchiness
could possibly be mistaken for strength and vigour; and yet there are
hundreds of his kind among the painters and sculptors of the day.

Many a student's call to Art, at present, is merely a reminder, on the
part of Nature, that he should cultivate restraint and forbearance,
and should go in for commerce; for there is a whole universe between
such a man and the artist of value. Not that sensitiveness is absent
in the real artist; but it is of a kind which has strength to wait, to
reflect, to weigh, and, if necessary, to refrain from action altogether.

"Slow is the experience of all deep wells," says Zarathustra. "Long
must they wait ere they know what hath sunk into their depths."[9]

But the people I have just described have only a skin, and any itch
upon it they call Art.

No lasting good, no permanent value can come of these irascible people
who will be avenged on all that they call beauty, "right away";
who will, so to speak, "pay beauty out," and who cannot contain
themselves in its presence. They can but help to swell the ranks of the
incompetent, and even if they are successful, as they sometimes are
nowadays, all they do is to wreck the sacred calling in which they are
but pathological usurpers.

Now, in turning to the more general causes, we find that in accounting
for the prevailing anarchy in Europe and in countries like Europe,
and particularly in England and in countries like England, Nietzsche
pointed to the whole heritage of traditional thought which prevailed
and still does prevail in the civilized parts of the Western world,
and declared that it was in our most fundamental beliefs, in our most
unquestioned dogmas, and in our most vaunted birthrights that this
anarchy takes its source.

If Art had lost its prestige in our midst, and even its justification;
and if individualism, incompetence, eccentricity, mediocrity and doubt
were rife, we must seek the causes of all this neither in Diderot's
somewhat disappointing essay on painting, nor in the slur that Rousseau
had once cast upon the culture of man, nor in John Stuart Mill's
arguments in favour of individualism, nor yet in Spencer's declaration
that "the activities we call play are united with the æsthetic
activities by the trait that neither subserves in any direct way the
processes conducive to life."[10]

All these things are merely symptomatic. Diderot, Rousseau, John Stuart
Mill, and Spencer were only symptoms of still deeper influences which
have been at work for centuries, and those influences are to be sought
in the most vital values upon which our civilization is based.


[4] _G. E._, p. 145.

[5] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 36.

[6] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 63.

[7] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 258.

[8] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 339.

[9] _Z._, I, XII.

[10] _The Principles of Psychology_, Vol. II, p. 627.




2. Misleading Systems of Æsthetic.


It is perfectly true that from classic times onward the guidance
of European thought, on matters of Art, has been almost entirely
inadequate if not misleading. But for the subconscious motives of
artists and their spectators there seems to have been very little
comprehension of what Art actually means and aspires to, and even these
subconscious motives have been well-nigh stifled, thanks to the false
doctrines with which they have been persistently and systematically
smothered. Perhaps, however, the very nature of the subject condemns
it to false theoretical treatment; for it has almost always been at
the mercy of men who were not themselves performers in the arts. Of
the few artists who have written on Art, how many have given us an
adequate expression of what they themselves must have felt and aspired
to? Not one. Ghiberti, Vasari, Leonardo, Michelangelo, Mengs, Hogarth
and Reynolds--to mention the most famous, teach us scarcely anything
at all concerning the essence of their life passion, and this is, as
Nietzsche observes, perhaps "a necessary fault; for," he continues,
"the artist who would begin to understand himself would therewith begin
to mistake himself--he must not look backwards, he must not look at
all; he must give.--It is an honour for an artist to have no critical
faculty; if he can criticize he is mediocre, he is modern."[11]

Still, the greater part of this faulty guidance may, in itself, be but
another outcome of the erroneous and rooted beliefs which lie even
deeper in the heart of life than Art itself, and for these beliefs we
must seek deep down in the foundations of European thought for the last
two or three hundred years. In fact, we must ask ourselves what our
heritage from by-gone ages has been.

Since Art is the subject of our inquiry, and "Art is the only task
of life,"[12] it seems moderately clear that everything that has tended
to reduce the dignity of Art must, in the first place, have reduced
the dignity of man. Is our heritage of thought of a kind that exalts
man, or is it of a kind that debases him? What are, in fact, its chief
characteristics?


[11] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 256.

[12] Ibid., p. 292.




3. Our Heritage.--A. Christianity.


We shall find that the one definite and unswerving tendency of the
traditional thought of Europe has been, first, to establish on earth
that equality between men which from the outset Christianity had
promised them in Heaven; secondly, to assail the prestige of man by
proving that other tenet of the Faith which maintains the general
depravity of human nature; and thirdly, to insist upon truth in the
Christian sense; that is, as an absolute thing which can be, and must
be, made common to all.

At the root of all our science, all our philosophy, and all our
literature, the three fundamental doctrines of Christianity: the
equality of all souls, the insuperable depravity of human nature, and
the insistence upon Truth, are the ruling influences.

By means of the first and third doctrines equality was established in
the spirit, and by means of the second it was established in the flesh.[13]


By means of the first, each individual, great or small, was granted an
importance[14] undreamt of theretofore,[15] while the lowest were raised
to the highest power; by means of the second, in which the pride of
mankind received a snub at once severe and merciless, the highest were
reduced to the level of the low, while the low were by implication
materially raised; and by means of the third, no truth or point of
view which could not be made general could be considered as a truth or
a point of view at all. Practically it amounted to this, that in one
breath mankind was told, first,

    "Thy Lord for thee the Cross endured
    To save thy soul from Death and Hell;"[16]

secondly, "Thou shalt have no other God before Me;" and thirdly,

    "From Greenland's icy mountains
    To India's coral strand,
    ... every prospect pleases,
    And only man is vile."[17]

But in each case, as I have pointed out, it was the higher men who
suffered. Because they alone had something to lose. The first notion
--that of equality, threatened at once to make them doubt their own
privileges and powers, to throw suspicion into the hearts of their
followers, and to make all special, exceptional and isolated claims
utterly void. The third--the insistence upon a truth which could be
general and absolute, denied their right to establish their own truths
in the hearts of men, and to rise above the most general truth which
was reality; while in the second--the Semitic doctrine of general sin,
which held that man was not only an imperfect, but also a fallen being,
and that all his kind shared in this shame--there was not alone the
ring of an absence of rank, but also of a universal depreciation of
human nature which was ultimately to lead, by gradual stages, from a
disbelief in man himself to a disbelief in nobles, in kings and finally
in gods.[18]

At one stroke, not one or two human actions, but all human
performances, inspirations and happy thoughts, had been stripped of
their glory and condemned. Man could raise himself only by God's grace
--that is to say, by a miracle, otherwise he was but a fallen angel,
aimlessly beating the air with his broken wings.

These three blows levelled at the head of higher men were fatal to the
artist; for it is precisely in the value of human inspirations, in
the efficiency of human creativeness, and in the irresistible power
of human will, that he, above all, must and does believe. It is his
mission to demand obedience and to procure reverence; for, as we shall
see, every artist worthy the name is at heart a despot.[19]

Fortunately, the Holy Catholic Church intervened, and by its rigorous
discipline and its firm establishment upon a hierarchical principle,
suppressed for a while the overweening temper of the Christian soul,
and all claims of individual thought and judgment, while it also
recognized an order of rank among men; but the three doctrines above
described remained notwithstanding at the core of the Christian Faith,
and awaited only a favourable opportunity to burst forth and blight all
the good that the Church had done.

This favourable opportunity occurred in the person of Martin Luther.
The Reformation, in addition to reinstating, with all their evil
consequences, the three doctrines mentioned above, also produced a
certain contempt for lofty things and an importunate individualism
which has done nought but increase and spread from that day to this.

Individualism, on a large scale, of course, had been both tolerated and
practised in Gothic architecture, and on this account the buildings of
the Middle Ages might be said to breathe a more truly Christian spirit[20]
than most of the sculpture and the painting of the same period,
which are more hieratic.[21] But it was not until the Reformation
began to spread that the most tiresome form of individualism, which we
shall call Amateurism,[22] received, as it were, a Divine sanction;
and there can be no doubt that it is against this element in modern
life that not only Art, but all forces which aim at order, law and
discipline, will eventually have to wage their most determined and most
implacable warfare.


[13] The Judaic story of the fall of man is at bottom an essentially
democratic one. This absence of rank in sin had no parallel in the
aristocratic Pagan world. Likewise, in the manner of the fall, there
is a total absence of noble qualities. "Curiosity, beguilement,
seductibility and wantonness--in short, a whole series of pre-eminently
feminine passions--were regarded as the origin of evil." See _B. T._,
pp. 78, 79.

[14] Bury, _History of the Later Roman Empire_, Vol. I, p. 33.

[15] _A._, Aph. 43 and 64.

[16] _Hymns Ancient and Modern_, No. 435.

[17] _Ibid_., No. 522.

[18] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 312: "When it occurs to inferior men to doubt
that higher men exist, then the danger is great," etc. See, in fact,
the whole of Aph. 874.

[19] See _A._, Aph. 49: "The concept of guilt and punishment, inclusive
of the doctrine of 'grace,' of 'salvation,' and of 'forgiveness'--lies
through and through, without a shred of psychological truth. Sin,...
this form of human self-violation _par excellence_, was invented solely
for the purpose of making all science, all culture, and every kind of
elevation and nobility utterly impossible."

[20] Ruskin, _On the Nature of Gothic Architecture_ (p. 7), contrasting
the classic and Gothic style, says: "... In the mediæval, or especially
Christian, system of ornament, this slavery [_i.e._ the slavery imposed
by the classic canon] is done away with altogether; Christianity having
recognized, in small things as well as great, the individual value of
every soul."

[21] In a good deal of the painting and sculpture of the
pre-Renaissance period, too, signs were not lacking which showed that
the Christian ideal of truth was beginning to work its effects by
leading to a realism which I have classified in Lecture II as Police
Art. Of course, a good deal of this realism may also be accounted for
by the reasons which I suggest at the end of Part I of Lecture III;
be this as it may, however, as it is difficult to decide the actual
proportion of either of these influences, the weight of the Christian
doctrine of Truth must not be altogether overlooked in such productions
as Donatello's "Crucifixion" (Capella Bardi, S. Croce, Florence);
Masolino's "Raising of Tabitha" (Carmine, Florence); Masaccio's
Fresco (S. Maria del Carmine, Florence); Ucello's "Rout of S. Romano"
(Uffizi); Andrea del Castagno's "Crucifixion" (in the Monastery of the
Angeli, Florence); and the really beautiful statues of the Founders in
the Cathedral of Naumburg.

[22] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 297: "The terrible consequences of
'freedom'--in the end everybody thinks he has the right to every
problem. All order of rank is banished."




B. Protestantism.


For Protestantism was nothing more nor less than a general rebellion
against authority.[23] By means of it the right of private judgment
was installed once more, and to the individual was restored that
importance which Christianity had acknowledged from the first, and
which only the attitude of the Church had been able to modify. The
layman, with his conscience acknowledged to be the supreme tribunal,
was declared a free man, emancipated even from the law,[24] or, as
Luther said, "free Lord of all, subject to none."[25]

Now, not only the immortal soul of every individual became important;
but also every one of his proclivities, desires and aspirations. He was
told that he could be his own priest if he chose,[26] and that Christ had
obtained this prerogative for him. Megalomania, in fact, as Nietzsche
declares, was made his duty.[27]

"Let men so account of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards
of the mysteries of God."[28]

With these words St. Paul had addressed the Corinthians, and Luther did
not fail to base his strongest arguments upon the text.[29]

"Even the Reformation," says Nietzsche, "was a movement for individual
liberty; 'Every one his own priest' is really no more than a formula
for _libertinage_.As a matter of fact, the words, 'Evangelical freedom'
would have sufficed--and all instincts which had reasons for remaining
concealed broke out like wild hounds, the most brutal needs suddenly
acquired the courage to show themselves, everything seemed justified."[30]

Was it at all likely that the formula, "Every one his own priest," was
going to lead to trouble only in ecclesiastical matters? As a matter of
fact we know that Luther himself extended the principle still further
in his own lifetime. By his radical alterations in the church service
Luther gave the laity a much more prominent place in Divine worship
than they had ever had before; for, in addition to the fact that the
liturgy as compiled by him was written almost entirely in the native
tongue, the special attention he gave to the singing of hymns[31]
allowed the people an opportunity of displaying their individual powers
to such an extent that it has even been said that "they sang themselves
into enthusiasm for the new faith."[31]

But these remarkable changes were only symbolic of the changes that
followed elsewhere; for, once this spirit of individual liberty and
judgment had invaded that department of life which theretofore had
been held most sacred, what was there to prevent it from entering and
defiling less sacred sanctuaries?

Bearing in mind the condition of the arts at the present day, and
taking into account a fact which we all very well know; namely, that
thousands upon thousands are now practising these arts who have
absolutely no business to be associated with them in any way, we are
almost inclined to forgive Protestantism and Puritanism their smashing
of our images, and their material iconoclasm; so light does this
damage appear, compared with the other indirect damage they have done
to the spirit of Art, by establishing the fatal precedent of allowing
everybody to touch and speak of everything--however sacred.

We may argue with Buckle that the English spirit is of a kind which
is essentially Protestant in temper; but this only seems to make the
matter worse.

When Cardinal Newman and Matthew Arnold point, the one to the evils of
Liberalism, and the other to the evils of anarchy, we know to what they
are referring. They are referring to the impossibility, nowadays, of
awakening reverence for anything or for anybody.

"May not every man in England say what he likes?" Matthew Arnold
exclaims. "But," he continues, "the aspirations of culture, which
is the study of perfection, are not satisfied, unless what men say,
when they may say what they like, is worth saying.... Culture
indefatigably tries, not to make what each raw person may like, the
rule by which he fashions himself; but to draw ever nearer to a sense
of what is indeed beautiful, graceful, and becoming, and to get the raw
person to like that."[32]

But what is fatal to culture is no less fatal to art, and thus we find
Nietzsche saying--

"Once spirit was God, then it became man, and now it becometh mob."[33]

If in the Europe, and especially in the England of to-day, everybody
has a right to every judgment and to every joy; if a certain slavish
truthfulness to nature and reality, rawness and ruggedness, have
well-nigh wrecked higher aspirations, and if everybody can press his
paltry modicum of voice, of thought, of draughtsmanship, of passion
and impudence to the fore, and thus spread his portion of mediocrity
like dodder over the sacred field of Art; it is because the fundamental
principles of the Christian faith are no longer latent or suppressed in
our midst; but active and potent--if not almighty.

It might almost be said that they have reared a special instinct--the
instinct of liberty and of taking liberties, without any particular aim
or purpose; and, by so doing, have thrown all virtue, all merit, all
ambition, not on the side of culture, but on the side of that "free
personality"[34] and rude naturalness, or truth to man's original savagery,
which it seems the triumph of every one, great or small, to produce.

No one any longer claims the kind of freedom that Pope Paul III claimed
for his protégé Benvenuto Cellini:[35] this would be too dangerous,
because, in a trice, it would be applied to all. Therefore the
insignificant majority get more freedom than is good for them, and the
noble minority are deprived of their birthright.

"Thus do I speak unto you in parable," cries Zarathustra, "ye who make
the soul giddy, ye preachers of _equality_! Tarantulas are ye unto me,
and secretly revengeful ones!

"But I will soon bring your hiding-places to the light, therefore do I
laugh in your faces my laughter of the height.

"And 'Will to Equality'--that itself shall henceforth be the name of
virtue; and against all that hath power will we raise an outcry!

"Ye preachers of equality, the tyrant frenzy of impotence crieth thus
in you for 'equality': your most secret tyrant longings disguise
themselves in words of virtue!"[36]

And now recapitulating a moment, what have we found our heritage to
consist of, in the realm of the religious spirit?

In the first place: a certain universal acknowledgment and claim of
liberty, which has no special purpose or direction, and which is too
fair to some and unfair to many. Secondly, a devotion to a truth that
could be general, which perforce has reduced us to vulgar reality;
thirdly, a prevailing depression in the value and dignity of man,
resulting from the suspicion that has been cast upon all authority
and all loftiness; and fourthly, a wanton desecrating and befingering
of all sanctuaries by anybody and everybody, which is the inevitable
outcome of that amateur priesthood introduced and sanctified by Martin
Luther.


[23] Buckle, _History of Civilization in England_, Vol. II, p. 140:
"Whatever the prejudices of some may suggest, it will be admitted, by
all unbiassed judges, that the Protestant Reformation was neither more
nor less than an open rebellion. Indeed, the mere mention of private
judgment, on which it was avowedly based, is enough to substantiate
this fact. To establish the right of private judgment was to appeal
from the Church to individuals," etc. (See also p. 138 in the same
volume.) _Cambridge Modern History_, Vol. II, p. 166: "In the Edict of
Worms, Luther had been branded as a revolutionary, then as a heretic,
and the burden of the complaints preferred against him by the Catholic
humanists was, that his methods of seeking a reformation would be
fatal to all order, political or ecclesiastical. They painted him as
the apostle of revolution, a second Catiline." And p. 174: "The most
frequent and damaging charge levelled at Luther between 1520 and 1525
reproached him with being the apostle of revolution and anarchy, and
predicted that his attacks on spiritual authority would develop into a
campaign against civil order unless he were promptly suppressed."

[24] _A Treatise Touching the Libertie of a Christian_, by Martyne
Luther (translated from the Latin by James Bell, 1579. Edited by
W. Bengo' Collyer, 1817), p. 17: "So that it is manifest that to a
Christian man faith sufficeth only for all, and that he needeth no
works to be justified by. Now, if he need no works, then also he needs
not the law: if he have no need of the law, surely he is then free from
the law. So this also is true. The law is not made for the righteous
man, and this is the same Christian libertie."

[25] _Ibid_., p. 3.

[26] _Ibid_., p. 31.

[27] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 211.

[28] 1 Cor. iv. 1.

[29] Cambridge Modern History, Vol. II, p. 201.

[30] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 75.

[31] Emil Naumann, _History of Music_, Vol. II, p. 429: "With the
Catholics, hymns in the mother tongue were only used at processions
and on high festivals, and were then sung by the congregation only
at Christmas, Easter, and certain other high feast days. With these
exceptions, the Catholic congregational song consisted of short musical
phrases chanted by the priests, to which the people either responded,
or added their voices to the refrain sung by the choristers from the
altar. The part assigned to the people then was but a very subordinate
one." See also the Introduction to C. von Winterfeld's Sacred Songs of
Luther (Leipzig, 1840).

[32] _The Beginnings of Art_, by Ernst Grosse, pp. 299, 300; and
Cambridge Modern History, Vol. II, p. 201.

[33] Culture and Anarchy (Smith, Elder, 1909), pp. 11, 12.

[34] _Z._, I, VII.

[35] E. I., pp. 54, 55.

[36] _Sandro Botticelli_, by Emile Gebhart (1907), p. 9: "Paul III âme
très haute, répond aux personnes qui lui dénoncent les vices de son
spirituel spadassin: 'Les hommes uniques dans leur art, comme Cellini,
ne doivent pas être soumis aux lois, et lui moins que tout autre.'"




C. Philosophical Influences.


Now, turning to our heritage in philosophy and science, do we find
that it tends to resist, or to thwart in any way the principles of our
religious heritage? Not in the slightest degree! At every point and
at every stage it has confirmed and restated, with all the pomp of
facts and statistics to support it, what the religious spirit had laid
down for our acceptance. It is superficial and ridiculous to suppose,
as Dr. Draper once supposed, that there has been a conflict between
Religion and Science. I take it that he means the Christian Religion
alone. Such a conflict has never taken place; what has taken place,
however, is a conflict between Science and the Catholic Church. The
Christian Religion and Science together, however, have never had any
such antagonism, and least of all in England, where, from the time of
Roger Bacon,[37] the first English Experimentalist, to the present
day, nothing has been left undone, no stone has been left unturned,
which might establish scientifically that which Christianity, as we
have seen, wished to establish emotionally.

Universal liberty, without a purpose or a direction; the free and
plebeian production of thoughts and theories divorced from all aim
or ideal, after the style in which children are born in the slums;
devotion to a truth that can be common to all; the depression of the
value and dignity of man, and a certain lack of reverence for all
things--these four aspirations of Christianity and Protestantism have
been the aspirations of science, and at the present moment they are
practically attained.

Unfortunately, it is in the nature of human beings to imitate success,
and England's success as a colonizing and constitutional nation has
undoubtedly been a potent force in spreading not only her commercial,
but also her philosophical views among all ambitious and aspiring
Western nations, who guilelessly took the evil with the good.

The empiricists, Francis Bacon, Hobbes and Locke, were among the first,
by their teaching, to level a decisive blow at genuine thought, at the
man who knows and who is the measure of all things;[38] and this they
did by arriving at a conception of knowledge and thought that converted
the latter into possessions which might be common to everybody--that is
to say, by reducing all knowledge to that which can be made immediately
the experience of all. This was the greatest blasphemy against the
human spirit that has ever been committed. By means of it, every one,
whatever he might be, could aspire to intellectuality and wisdom;
for experience belongs to everybody, whereas a great spirit is the
possession only of the fewest.

The Frenchmen, Helvetius, Voltaire, Rousseau, Maupertius, Condillac,
Diderot, d'Alembert, La Mettrie and Baron Holbach, were quick to
become infected, and in Germany, despite the essentially aristocratic
influence of Leibnitz,[39] Kant was the first to follow suit.

Begun in this way, English philosophical speculation, as Dr. Max
Schasler says, was forced to grow ever more and more materialistic[40]
in character, and, if "Science has already come very generally to
mean, not that which may be known, but only such knowledge as every
animal with faculties a little above those of an ant or a beaver can be
induced to admit," and if "incommunicable knowledge, or knowledge which
can be communicated at present only to a portion--perhaps a small
portion--of mankind, is already affirmed to be no knowledge at all,"[41]
it is thanks to the efforts of the fathers of English thought.

Hence Nietzsche's cry, that "European ignobleness, the plebeian ism of
modern ideas--is England's work and invention."[42]

But it is not alone in its vulgarization of the concept of knowledge,
or in its materialistic tendency, that English influence has helped
to reduce the dignity of man and to level his kind; the utilitarians
from Bentham to John Stuart Mill and Sidgwick, by taking the greatest
number as the norm, as the standard and measurement of all things, ably
reflected the Christian principle, of the equality of souls, in their
works, and, incidentally, by so doing, treated the greatest number
exceedingly badly. For what is mediocre can neither be exalted nor
charmed by values drawn from mediocrity, and is constantly in need of
values drawn from super-mediocrity, for its joy, for its love of life,
and for its reconciliation with drabby reality.[43]


[37] It is important here to note, first, that Roger Bacon was an
Aristotelian through his intimate study of the Arabian treatises on the
Greek philosopher, and, secondly, that although Greek speculation was
governed more by insight than experience, Aristotle forms a striking
exception to this rule.

[38] _G. E._, p. 210: "What is lacking in England, and has always been
lacking, that half-actor and rhetorician knew well enough, the absurd
muddle-head Carlyle, who sought to conceal under passionate grimaces
what he knew about himself: namely, what was lacking in Carlyle--real
power of intellect, real depth of intellectual perception, in short,
philosophy."

[39] In reply to those who said, "Nothing exists in the intellect but
what has before existed in the senses," Leibnitz replied: "Yes, nothing
but the intellect."

[40] _Kritische Geschichte der Æsthetik_ (1872). Speaking of the
English Æstheticians, he says (p. 285), "The fact that there is no
decrease, but rather an increase of Materialism in their thought, no
purification in their meditation from the coarseness of experience,
but rather a gradual immersion in the same, may also be regarded as
characteristic of the development of the English spirit in general."

[41] Coventry Patmore, _Principles in Art_, p. 209.

[42] _G. E._, p. 213.

[43] Even J. S. Mill saw the flaw in his own teaching in this respect,
and acknowledged it openly. See his _Liberty_, chapter "The Elements of
Well-Being," paragraph 13.




D. The Evolutionary Hypothesis.


Finally, in the latter half of the last century, these two tendencies
at last reached their zenith, and culminated in a discovery which,
by some, is considered as the proudest product of the English mind.
This discovery, which was at once a gospel and a solution of all
world riddles, and which infected the whole atmosphere of Europe from
Edinburgh to Athens, was the Evolutionary Hypothesis as expounded by
Darwin and Spencer.

A more utterly vulgar, mechanistic, and depressing conception of
life and man cannot be conceived than this evolutionary hypothesis
as it was presented to us by its two most famous exponents; and its
immediate popularity and rapid success, alone, should have made it seem
suspicious, even in the eyes of its most ardent adherents.

And yet it was acclaimed and embraced by almost everybody, save those,
only, whose interests it assailed.

How much more noble was the origin of the world as described even in
Genesis, Disraeli was one of the first to see and to declare;[44]
and yet, so strong was the faith in a doctrine which, by means of
its popular proof through so-called facts, could become the common
possession of every tinker, tailor and soldier, that people preferred
to think they had descended from monkeys, rather than doubt such an
overwhelming array of data, and regard themselves still as fallen
angels.

In its description of the prime motor of life as a struggle for
existence; in its insistence upon adaptation to environment and
mechanical adjustment to external influences;[45] in its deification of a
blind and utterly inadequate force which was called Natural Selection;
and above all in its unprincipled optimism, this new doctrine bore the
indelible stamp of shallowness and vulgarity.

According to it, man was not only a superior monkey, but he was also
a creature who sacrificed everything in order to live; he was not
only a slave of habit, but he was a yielding jelly, fashioned by his
surroundings; he was not only a coward, but a cabbage; and, with it
all, he was invoked to do nothing to assist the world process and his
own improvement; for, he was told by his unscrupulous teachers, that
"evil tended perpetually to disappear,"[46] and that "progress was
therefore not an accident, but a necessity."[47]

Thus not only was man debased, but we could now fold our arms
apathetically, and look on while he dashed headlong to his ruin.[48]

"No," said the evolutionists, "we do not believe in a moral order of
things, although our doctrine does indeed seem to be a reflection of
such an order; neither do we believe in God: but we certainly pin our
faith to our little idol Evolution, and feel quite convinced that it
is going to make us muddle through to perfection somehow--look at our
proofs!"

And what are these proofs? On all sides they are falling to bits, and
we are quickly coming to the conclusion that an assembly of facts can
prove nothing--save the inability of a scientist to play the rôle of a
creative poet.

Nietzsche was one of the first to see, that if Becoming were a reliable
hypothesis, it must be supported by different principles from those of
the Darwinian school, and he spared no pains in sketching out these
different principles.[49]

"These English psychologists--what do they really mean?" Nietzsche
demands. "We always find them voluntarily or involuntarily at the same
task of pushing to the front the _partie honteuse_ of our inner world,
and looking for the efficient, governing and decisive principle in that
precise quarter where the intellectual self-respect of the race would
be the most reluctant to find it--that is to say, in slothfulness of
habit, or in forgetfulness, or in blind and fortuitous mechanism and
association of ideas, or in some factor that is purely passive, reflex,
molecular, or fundamentally stupid,--what is the real motive power
which always impels these psychologists in precisely this direction?"[50]

Not one of these advocates of mechanism, however, realized how
profoundly he was degrading man, and how seriously he had therefore
sullied all human achievement. In their scientific _réchauffé_ of the
Christian concept of man's depravity, they all had the most hearty
faith, and, as there was little in their over-populated and industrial
country to contradict their conclusions, they did not refrain from
passing these conclusions into law.

We can detect nothing in this greatest scientific achievement of the
last century which seriously resists or opposes our heritage in the
realm of the religious spirit. In their fundamentals, the two are one;
And when we take them both to task, and try to discover their influence
upon the world, we wonder not so much why Art is so bad, but why Art
has survived at all.

For, though for the moment we may exclude the influence of earlier
English thought upon general artistic achievement, at least the
degraded condition of Art at the present day cannot be divorced in this
manner from more recent English speculation, for even Mr. Bosanquet
counts Darwin and Lyell among those who have ushered in the new
renaissance of art in England![51]

"At present," says Nietzsche, "nobody has any longer the courage for
separate rights, for rights of domination, for a feeling of reverence
for himself and his equals,--for pathos of distance,... and even our
politics are morbid from this want of courage!"[52]

To-day, when all reverence has vanished, even before kings and
gods, when to respect oneself overmuch is regarded with undisguised
resentment, what can we hope from a quarter in which self-reverence
and reverence in general are the first needs of all?

We can only hope to find what we actually see, and that, as we all very
well know and cannot deny, is a condition of anarchy, incompetence,
purposelessness and chaos.

"Culture ... has a very important function to fulfil for mankind,"
said Matthew Arnold. "And this function is particularly important
in our modern world, of which the whole civilization is, to a much
greater degree than the civilization of Greece and Rome, mechanical
and external, and tends constantly to become more so. But, above all,
in our own country has culture a weighty part to perform, because,
here, that mechanical character, which civilization tends to take
everywhere, is shown in the most eminent degree.... The idea of
perfection as an inward condition of the mind and spirit is at variance
with the mechanical and material civilization in esteem with us, and
nowhere, as I have said, so much in esteem as with us."[53]

We may trust that it is not in vain that men like Matthew Arnold and
Nietzsche raised their voices against the spirit of the age. And we may
hope that it is not in vain that lesser men have taken up their cry.

In any case Nietzsche did not write in utter despair. His words do not
fall like faded autumn leaves announcing the general death that is
imminent. On the contrary, he saw himself approaching a new century,
this century, and he drew more than half his ardour from the hope
that we might now renounce this heritage of the past, the deleterious
effects of which he spent his lifetime in exposing.

"Awake and listen, ye lonely ones!" he says. "From the future winds are
coming with a gentle beating of wings, and there cometh good tidings
for fine ears.

"Ye lonely ones of to-day, ye who stand apart, ye shall one day be a
people, and from you who have chosen yourselves, a chosen people shall
arise.

"Verily a place of healing shall the earth become! And already
a new odour lieth around it, an odour which bringeth salvation--and a
new hope."[54]

[44] See Froude's _The Earl of Beaconsfield_ (9th Edition), pp. 176,
177: "The discoveries of science are not, we are told, consistent with
the teachings of the Church.... It is of great importance when this
tattle about science is mentioned, that we should attach to the phrase
precise ideas. The function of science is the interpretation of nature,
and the interpretation of the highest nature is the highest science.
What is the highest nature? Man is the highest nature. But I must say
that when I compare the interpretation of the highest nature by the
most advanced, the most fashionable school of modern science with some
other teaching with which we are familiar I am not prepared to admit
that the lecture room is more scientific than the Church. What is the
question now placed before society, with a glib assurance the most
astounding? The question is this: Is man an ape or an angel? I, my
Lord, I am on the side of the angels. I repudiate with indignation and
abhorrence the contrary view, which I believe foreign to the conscience
of humanity."

[45] See p. 37.

[46] Spencer, _Social Statics_ (Ed. 1892), p. 27.

[47] _Ibid_., p. 31.

[48] Two Christian principles are concealed here: 1. The depravity of
man. 2. Faith in a moral order of things.

[49] I have discussed this question, with as much detail as the space
would allow, in _Nietzsche, his Life and Works_, Chap. IV. (Constable's
Philosophies Ancient and Modern). See also my letter, "Nietzsche and
Science," in the _Spectator_ of 8th January, 1910.

[50] _G. M._, p. 17.

[51] _A History of Æsthetic_, p. 445.

[52] _A._, Aph. 43.

[53] _Culture and Anarchy_ (Smith, Elder, 1909), p. 10.

[54] _Z._, I, XXII.




Lecture II[1]


Government in Art. Nietzsche's Definition of Art




Part I


Divine Art and the Man-God


    "And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful,
    and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and
    have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of
    the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the
    earth."--Genesis i. 28.



Man has ceased from believing in miracles, because he is convinced that
the divine power of the miracle-worker has departed from him. At last
he has proclaimed the age of wonders to be at an end, because he no
longer knows himself capable of working wonders.

He acknowledges that miracles are still needed. He hears the
distressing cry for the super-natural everywhere. All about him to-day
he feels that wonders will have to be worked if the value of Life,
of his fellows, and of himself is to be raised, by however little;
and yet he halts like one paralyzed before the task he can no longer
accomplish, and finding that his hand has lost its cunning and that
his eye has lost its authority, he stammers helplessly that the age of
miracles has gone by.

Everything convinces him of the fact. Everybody, from his priest to
his porter, from his wife to his astrologer, from his child to his
neighbour, tells him plainly that he is no longer divine, no longer a
god, no longer even a king!

Not only has the age of miracles gone by; but with it, also, has
vanished that age in which man could conceive of god in his own image.
There are no gods now; because man himself has long since doubted that
man is godlike.

Soon there will be no kings,[2] finally there will be no greatness
at all, and this will mean the evanescence of man himself.

To speak of all this as the advance of knowledge, as the march
of progress, as the triumph of science, and as the glories of
enlightenment, is merely to deck a corpse, to grease-paint a sore, and
to pour rose-water over a cesspool.

If the triumph of science mean "The Descent of Man"; if the glories of
enlightenment mean, again, the descent of man; and if progress imply,
once more, the descent of man; then the question to be asked is: in
whose hands have science, enlightenment and the care of progress fallen?

This world is here for us to make of it what we will. It is a field of
yielding clay, in which, like sandboys, we can build our castles and
revel in our creations.

But what are these people doing? In building their castles they grow
ever more like beavers, and ants, and beetles. In laying out their
gardens they grow ever more like slugs, and worms, and centipedes. And
their joy seems to be to feel themselves small and despised.

Once, for instance, their sky was the mighty god Indra; the clouds were
his flock, and he drove his flock across his vast fields--blue and
fragrant with delicate flowers. Their fruitful rain was the milk which
their god Indra obtained from his herd of cows, and their seasons of
drought were times when the god Indra was robbed by brigands of his
flock.

Now, their sky is infinite space. Their clouds are masses of vapour in
a state of condensation more or less considerable, and their rain is
the outcome of that condensation becoming too considerable.

Not so many years ago their Heaven and their Earth were the father and
mother of all living things, who had become separated in order that
their offspring might have room to live and breathe and move. And thus
their mists were the passionate sighs of the loving wife, breathing her
love heavenwards; and the dew, the tearful response of her affectionate
and sorrowful spouse.

Now, their Heaven is a thing that no one knows anything at all about.
Their Earth is an oblate spheroid revolving aimlessly through a
hypothetical medium called ether; their mists are vaporous emanations;
while their dew is a discharge of moisture from the air upon substances
that have irradiated a sufficient quantity of heat.

Their Sun was once a god with long, shining streams of golden hair, of
which every year their goddess Night would rob him, thus leaving Winter
mistress of the earth.

Now, their sun is the central orb of their Solar system. It consists of
a nucleus, it is surrounded by a photosphere and a chromosphere, and
has a disease of the face called "spots."

The facts remain the same; the mist still rises, the dew still falls,
and the canopy of Heaven still spans the two horizons. Whatever the
interpretation of these phenomena may be, this at least is certain,
that they are still with us. But there is one thing that changes; one
thing that cannot remain indifferent to interpretation--even though
the facts do not alter,--and that is the soul of man.

A million times more sensitive to changes in interpretation than the
column of mercury is to changes in the atmosphere, the soul of man
rises or falls according to the nobility or the baseness of the meaning
which he himself puts into things; and, just as, in this matter, he may
be his own regenerator, so, also, may he be his own assassin.


[1] Delivered at University College on Dec. 8th, 1910.

[2] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 187: "The time of kings has gone by, because
people are no longer worthy of them. They do not wish to see the symbol
of their ideal in a king, but only a means to their own ends." See also
_Z._, III, LVI.




1. The World "without form" and "void."


For, in the beginning, the world was "without form" and "void," things
surrounded man; but they had no meaning. His senses received probably
the same number of impressions as they do now--and perhaps more--but
these impressions had no co-ordination and no order. He could neither
calculate them, reckon with them, nor communicate[3] them to his
fellows.

Before he could thus calculate, reckon with, and communicate the
things of this world, a vast process of simplification, co-ordination,
organization and ordering had to be undertaken, and this process,
however arbitrarily it may have been begun, was one of the first needs
of thinking man.

Everything had to be given some meaning, some interpretation, and some
place; and in every case, of course, this interpretation was in the
terms of man, this meaning was a human meaning, and this place was a
position relative to humanity.

Perhaps no object is adequately defined until the relation to it of
every creature and thing in the universe has been duly discovered and
recorded.[4] But no such transcendental meaning of a thing preoccupied
primeval man. All he wished was to understand the world, in order
that he might have power over it, reckon with it, and communicate his
impressions concerning it. And, to this end, the only relation of a
thing that he was concerned with was its relation to himself. It must
be given a name, a place, an order, a meaning--however arbitrary,
however fanciful, however euphemistic. Facts were useless, chaotic,
bewildering, meaningless, before they had been adjusted,[5] organized,
classified, and interpreted in accordance with the desires, hopes, aims
and needs of a particular kind of man.

Thus interpretation was the first activity of all to thinking humanity,
and it was human needs that interpreted the world.[6]

The love of interpreting and of adjusting--this primeval love and
desire, this power of the sandboy over his castles; how much of the
joy in Life, the love of Life, and, at the same time, the sorrow in
Life, does not depend upon it! For we can know only a world which we
ourselves have created.[7]

There was the universe--strange and inscrutable; terrible in its
strangeness, insufferable in its inscrutability, incalculable in its
multifariousness. With his consciousness just awaking, a cloud or a
shower might be anything to man--a godlike friend or a savage foe. The
dome of blue behind was also prodigious in its volume and depth, and
the stars upon it at night horrible in their mystery.

What, too, was this giant's breath that seemed to come from nowhere,
and which, while it cooled his face, also bent the toughest trees like
straws? The sun and moon were amazing--the one marvellously eloquent,
communicative, generous, hot and passionate: the other silent,
reserved, aloof, cold, incomprehensible.[8]

But there were other things to do, besides interpreting the stars, the
sun, the moon, the sea, and the sky above. There was the perplexing
multiplicity of changes and of tides in Life, to be mastered and
simplified. There was the fateful flow of all things into death and
into second birth, the appalling fact of Becoming and never-resting, of
change and instability, of bloom and of decay, of rise and of decline.
What was to be done?

It was impossible to live in chaos. And yet, in its relation to man
Nature was chaotic. There was no order anywhere. And, where there is
no order, there are surprises,[9] ambushes, lurking indignities. The
unexpected could jump out at any minute. And a masterful mind abhors
surprises and loathes disorder. His Will to Power is humiliated by
them. To man,--whether he be of yesterday, of to-day or of to-morrow--
unfamiliarity, constant change, and uncertainty, are sources of great
anxiety, great sorrow, great humiliation and sometimes great danger.
Hence everything must be familiarized, named and fixed. Values must
be definitely ascertained and determined. And thus valuing becomes a
biological need. Nietzsche even goes so far as to ascribe the doctrine
of causality to the inherent desire in man to trace the unfamiliar
to the familiar. "The so-called instinct of causality," he says, "is
nothing more than the fear of the unfamiliar, and the attempt at
finding something in it which is already known."[10]

In the torrent and pell-mell of Becoming, some milestones must be fixed
for the purpose of human orientation. In the avalanche of evolutionary
changes, pillars must be made to stand, to which man can hold tight for
a space and collect his senses. The slippery soil of a world that is
for ever in flux, must be transformed into a soil on which man can gain
some foothold.[11]

Primeval man stood baffled and oppressed by the complexity of his task.
Facts were insuperable as facts; they could, however, be overcome
spiritually--that is to say, by concepts. And that they must be
overcome, man never doubted for an instant--he was too proud for that.
For his aim was not existence, but a certain kind of existence--an
existence in which he could hold his head up, look down upon the world,
and stare defiance even at the firmament.

And thus all humanity began to cry out for a meaning, for an
interpretation, for a scheme, which would make all these distant and
uncontrollable facts their property, their spiritual possessions. This
was not a cry for science, or for a scientific explanation, as we
understand it; nor was it a cry for truth in the Christian sense.[12]
For the bare truth, the bare fact, the bald reality of the thing was
obvious to everybody. All who had eyes to see could see it. All who had
ears to hear could hear it. And all who had nerves to feel could feel
it. If ever there was a time when there was a truth for all, this was
the time; and it was ugly, bare and unsatisfying. What was wanted was a
scheme of life, a picture of life, in which all these naked facts and
truths could be given some place and some human significance--in fact,
some order and arrangement, whereby they would become the chattels
of the human spirit, and no longer subjects of independent existence
and awful strangeness.[13] Only thus could the dignity and pride of
humanity begin to breathe with freedom. Only thus could life be made
possible, where existence alone was not the single aim and desire.

"The purpose of 'knowledge,' "says Nietzsche, "in this case, as in
the case of 'good,' or 'beautiful,' must be regarded strictly and
narrowly from an anthropocentric and biological standpoint. In order
that a particular species may maintain and increase its power, its
conception of reality must contain enough which is calculable and
constant to allow of its formulating a scheme of conduct. The utility
of preservation--and _not_ some abstract or theoretical need to eschew
deception--stands as the motive force behind the development of the
organs of knowledge.... In other words, the measure of the desire
for knowledge depends upon the extent to which the _Will to Power_ grows
in a certain species: a species gets a grasp of a given amount of
reality in order to master it, in order to enlist that amount into its
service."[14]

And thus "the object was, not to know, but to schematize, to impose as
much regularity and form upon chaos as our practical needs required."[15]

"The whole apparatus of knowledge," says Nietzsche, "is an abstracting
and simplifying apparatus--not directed at knowledge, but at the
appropriation of things."[16]

No physical thirst, no physical hunger, has ever been stronger than
this thirst and hunger, which yearned to make all that is unfamiliar,
familiar; or in other words, all that is outside the spirit, inside the
spirit.[17]

Life without food and drink was bad enough; but Life without
nourishment for this spiritual appetite, this famished wonder,[18]
this starving amazement, was utterly intolerable!

The human system could appropriate, and could transform into man, in
bone and flesh, the vegetation and the animals of the earth; but what
was required was a process, a _Weltanschauung_, a general concept of
the earth which would enable man to appropriate also Life's other
facts, and transform them into man the spirit. Hence the so-called
thirst for knowledge may be traced to the lust of appropriation and
conquest,[19] and the "will to truth" to a process of establishing
things, to a process of making things true and lasting.... Thus
truth is not something which is present and which has to be found and
discovered; it is something which has to be created and which gives its
name to a process, or better still, to the "will to overpower."[20]

For what is truth? It is any interpretation of the world which has
succeeded in becoming the belief of a particular type of man.[21]
Therefore there can be many truths; therefore there must be an order of
rank among truths.

"Let this mean Will to Truth unto you," says Zarathustra, "that
everything be made thinkable, visible, tangible unto man!

"And what ye have called the world, shall have first to be created by
you:[22] your reason, your image, your will, your love shall the world be!
And, verily, for your own bliss, ye knights of Knowledge!"[23]

"The purpose was to deceive oneself in a useful way; the means thereto
was the invention of forms and signs, with the help of which, the
confusing multifariousness of Life could be reduced to a useful and
wieldly scheme."[24]

This was the craving. Not only must a meaning, a human meaning, be
given to all things, in order to subordinate them to man's power; but
Life itself must also be schematized and arranged. And, while all
humanity cried aloud for this to be done, it was humanity's artists and
higher men who set to and did it.[25]


[3] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 72: "... Communication is necessary, and for
it to be possible, something must be stable, simple and capable of
being stated precisely."

[4] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 65.

[5] Okakura-Kakuzo, _The Book of Tea_, p. 58: "Adjustment is Art."

[6] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 13. See also Th. Gomperz, _Greek Thinkers_,
Vol. I, p. 25. Speaking of interpretation, he says: "And this tendency
was notably strengthened by the suspicious circumstances of external
life, which awoke the desire for clearness, distinctness and a logical
sequence of ideas."

[7] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 21. See also Max Müller, _Introduction to the
Science of Religion_, pp. 198-207, _T. I._, Part 10, Aph. 19.

[8] Hegel, in his _Vorlesungen über Æsthetik_ (Vol. I, p. 406), says:
"If we should wish to speak of the first appearance of symbolic Art
as a subjective state, we should remember that artistic meditation in
general, like religious meditation--or rather the two in one--and even
scientific research, took their origin in wonderment."

[9] Hegel makes some interesting remarks on this point. See his
_Vorlesungen über Æsthetik_, Vol. I, p. 319. He shows that the extreme
regularity of gardens of the seventeenth century was indicative of
their owners' masterful natures.

[10] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 58. See also p. 11: "to 'understand' means
simply this: to be able to express something new in the terms of
something old or familiar."

[11] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 88.

[12] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 26: "The prerequisite of all living things
and of their lives is: that there should be a large amount of faith,
that it should be possible to pass definite judgments on things, and
that there should be no doubt at all concerning values. Thus it is
necessary that something should be assumed to be true, _not_ that it is
true."

[13] Felix Clay, _The Origin of the Sense of Beauty_, p. 95: "The
mind or the eye, brought face to face with a number of disconnected
and apparently different facts, ideas, shapes, sounds or objects, is
bothered and uneasy; the moment that some central conception is offered
or discovered by which they all fall into order, so that their due
relation to one another can be perceived and the whole grasped, there
is a sense of relief and pleasure which is very intense."

[14] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 12.

[15] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 29.

[16] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 24.

[17] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 76. Hegel was also approaching this truth
when he said, in his introduction to the _Vorlesungen über Æsthetik_
(pp. 58, 59 of the translation of that Introduction by B. Bosanquet):
"Man is realized for himself by poetical activity, inasmuch as he
has the impulse, in the medium which is directly given to him, and
externally presented before him, to produce himself. This purpose he
achieves by the modification of external things upon which he impresses
the seal of his inner being. Man does this in order, as a free subject,
to strip the outer world of its stubborn foreignness, and to enjoy, in
the shape and fashion of things, a mere external reality of himself."

[18] Hegel again seems to be on the road to Nietzsche's standpoint,
when he says: "Wonderment arises when man, as a spirit separated
from his immediate connection with Nature, and from the immediate
relation to his merely practical desires, steps back from Nature and
from his own singular existence, and then begins to seek and to see
generalities, permanent qualities, and absolute attributes in things"
(Vorlesungen über Æsthetik, Vol. I, p. 406).

[19] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 339. See also Hegel (_Vorlesungen über
Æsthetik_, p. 128): "The instinct of curiosity and the desire
for knowledge, from the lowest stage up to the highest degree of
philosophical insight, is the outcome only of man's yearning to make
the world his own in spirit and concepts."

[20] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 60.

[21] "Truth is that kind of error without which a certain species of
living being cannot exist" (_W. P._, Vol. II, p. 20). See also _G.
E._, pp. 8, 9: "A belief might be false and yet life-preserving."
See also _W. P._, Vol. II, pp. 36, 37: "We should not interpret
this _constraint_ in ourselves to imagine concepts, species, forms,
purposes, and laws as if we were in a position to construct a real
world; but as a constraint to adjust a world by means of which our
existence is ensured: we thereby create a world which is determinable,
simplified, comprehensible, etc., for us."

[22] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 76.

[23] _Z._, II, XXIV. See also _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 33: "Truth is
the will to be master over the manifold sensations that reach
consciousness; it is the will to classify phenomena according to
definite categories."

[24] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. M. See also Schelling, _System des
transcendentalen Idealismus_, p. 468, where the author says, "Science,
in the highest interpretation of this term, has one and the same
mission as Art."

[25] _W. P._, Vol. II, pp. 28, 90, 103.




2. The First Artists.


For it was then that man's strongest instinct became creative in
man's highest product--the artist--and the discovery was made that
the world, although "without form" and "void," as a fact, could be
simplified and made calculable and full of form and attractions, as a
valuation, as an interpretation, as a spiritual possession. With the
world at a distance from him, unfamiliar and unhuman, man's existence
was a torment. With it beneath him, inside him, bearing the impress of
his spirit, and proceeding from him, he became a lord, casting care to
the winds, and terror to the beasts around.

Man, the bravest animal on earth, thus conceived the only possible
condition of his existence; namely, to become master of the world.
And, when we think of the miracles he then began to perform, we cease
from wondering why he once believed in miracles, why he thought of God
as in his own image, and why he made his strongest instinct God, and
thereupon made Him say: "Replenish the earth and subdue it!"

It was therefore the powerful who made the names of things into law.[26]
It was their Will to Power that simplified, organized, ordered
and schematized the world, and it was their will to prevail which made
them proclaim their simplification, their organization, their order
and scheme, as the norm, as the thing to be believed, as the world of
values which must be regarded as creation itself.

These early artists conceived of no other way of subduing the earth
than by converting it into concepts; and, as time soon showed that
there actually was no other way, interpretation came to be regarded
as the greatest task of all.[27] Naming, adjusting, classifying,
qualifying, valuing, putting a meaning into things, and, above all,
simplifying--all these functions acquired a sacred character, and he
who performed them to the glory of his fellows became sacrosanct.

So great were the relief and solace that these functions bestowed upon
mankind, and so different did ugly reality appear, once it had been
interpreted by the artist mind, that creating and naming actually
began to acquire much the same sense. For to put a meaning into
things was clearly to create them afresh[28]--in fact, to create
them literally. And so it came to pass that, in one of the oldest
religions on earth, the religion of Egypt, God was imagined as a Being
who created things by naming them;[29] while, in the Judaic notion
of the creation of the world, which was probably derived from the
Egyptians themselves, Jehovah is also said to have brought things into
existence merely by pronouncing their names.[30]

The world thus became literally man's Work of Art,[31] man's Sculpture.[32]
Miracle after miracle at last reduced Nature to man's chattel, and it
was man's lust of mastership, his will to power, which thus became
creative in his highest specimen--the artist--and which, fighting for
"the higher worthiness and meaning of mankind,"[33]transfigured reality by
means of human valuations, and overcame Becoming by falsifying it as
Being.[34]

"We are in need of lies," says Nietzsche, "in order to rise superior to
reality, to truth--that is to say, in order to live.... That lies
should be necessary to life, is part and parcel of the terrible and
questionable character of existence. "Metaphysics, morality, religion,
science--all these things are merely different forms of falsehood,
by means of them we are led to believe in life. 'Life must inspire
confidence;' the task which this imposes upon us is enormous. In order
to solve this problem man must already be a liar in his heart. But he
must, above all, be an artist. And he is that. Metaphysics, religion,
morality, science--all these things are but an offshoot of his will to
Art, to falsehood, to a flight from 'truth,' to a denial of 'truth.'
This ability, this artistic capacity, _par excellence_, of man--thanks
to which he overcomes reality with lies--is a quality which he has in
common with all other forms of existence....

"To be blind to many things, to see many things falsely, to fancy
many things. Oh, how clever man has been in those circumstances in
which he believed that he was anything but clever! Love, enthusiasm,
'God'--are but subtle forms of ultimate self-deception; they are
but seductions to life and to the belief in life! In those moments
when man was deceived, when he befooled himself and when he believed
in life: Oh, how his spirit swelled within him! Oh, what ecstasies he
had! What power he felt! And what artistic triumphs in the feeling of
power!... Man had once more become master of 'matter'--master of
truth!... And whenever man rejoices, it is always in the same way:
he rejoices as an artist, his Power is his joy, he enjoys falsehood as
his power."[35]

"Subdue it!" said the Jehovah of the Old Testament, speaking to man,
and pointing to the earth: "have dominion over the fish of the sea, and
over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon
the earth."

This was man's original concept of his task on earth, and with it
before him he began to breathe at last, and to feel no longer a worm,
entangled in a mysterious piece of clockwork mechanism.

"What is it that created esteeming and despising and value and will?"
Zarathustra asks.

"The creating self created for itself esteeming and despising, it
created for itself joy and woe. The creating body created for itself
spirit, as a hand to its will."[36]

To appraise a thing was to create it for ever in the minds of a people.
But to create a thing in the minds of a people was to create that
people too; for it is to have values in common that constitutes a
people.[37]

"Creators were they who created peoples, and hung one belief and one
love over them," says Zarathustra; "thus they served life."[38]

"Values did man stamp upon things only that he might preserve himself
--he alone created the meaning of things--a human meaning! Therefore
calleth he himself man--that is, the valuing one.

"Valuing is creating: listen, ye creators! Valuation itself is the
treasure and jewel of valued things.

"Through valuing alone can value arise; and without valuing, the nut of
existence would be hollow. Listen, ye creators!

"Change of values--that is, change of creators.[39]

"Verily a prodigy is this power of praising and blaming. Tell me,
ye brethren, who will master it for me? Who will put a yoke on the
thousand necks of this animal?"[40]

"All the beauty and sublimity with which we have invested real and
imagined things," says Nietzsche, "I will show to be the property and
product of man, and this should be his most beautiful apology. Man
as a poet, as a thinker, as a god, as love, as power. Oh, the regal
liberality with which he has lavished gifts upon things!... Hitherto
this has been his greatest disinterestedness, that he admired and
worshipped, and knew how to conceal from himself that he it was who had
created what he admired."[41]

"Man as a poet, as a thinker, as a god, as love, as power"--this man,
following his divine inspiration to subdue the earth and to make it
his, became the greatest stimulus to Life itself, the greatest bond
between earth and the human soul; and, in shedding the glamour of his
personality, like the sun, upon the things he interpreted and valued,
he also gilded, by reflection, his fellow creatures.

There is not a thing we call sacred, beautiful, good or precious, that
has not been valued for us by this man, and when we, like children,
call out for the Truth about the riddles of this world, it is not for
the truth of reality which is the object of Christianity and of science
for which we crave; but for the simplifications[42] and values of
this man-god, who, by the art-form, into which he casts reality, makes
us believe that reality is as he says it is.

If this man is lacking, then we succumb to the blackest despair. If he
is with us, we voluntarily yield to boundless joy and good cheer. His
function is the divine principle on earth; his creation Art "is the
highest task and the properly metaphysical activity of this life."[43]


[26] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 28; also C.E., p. 288. See also Schelling,
Sämmtliche Werke, Vol. V, "_Vorlesungen über die Methode des
akademischen Studiums_," p. 286: "The first origin of religion in
general, as of every other kind of knowledge and culture, can be
explained only as the teaching of higher natures."

[27] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 89: "The Will to Truth at this stage is
essentially the art of interpretation."

[28] Thus Schiller, in one of his happy moments, called beauty our
second creator (zweite Schöpferin).

[29] Prof. W. M. Flinders Petrie, The Religion of Ancient Egypt, p. 67.

[30] That those who successfully determined values even in
comparatively recent times should have been regarded almost universally
as enjoying "some closer intimacy with the Deity than ordinary
mortals," proves how very godlike and sacred the establishment of order
was thought to be. See Max Müller, _Introduction to the Science of
Religion_, p. 88.

[31] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 102.

[32] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 107.

[33] _H. A. H._, Vol. I, p. 154.

[34] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 108: "Art is the will to overcome Becoming,
it is a process of eternalizing." And p. 107: "To stamp Becoming with
the character of Being--this is the highest Will to Power." See also
_G. M._, p. 199.

[35] _W. P._, Vol. II, pp. 289, 290. See also H.A.H., Vol. I, p. 154.

[36] _Z._, I, IV.

[37] Schelling and Hegel both held this view; the one expressed it
quite categorically in his lectures on Philosophy and Mythology, and
the other in his _Philosophy of History_.

[38] _Z._, I, XI.

[39] _Z._, I, XV.

[40] _Z._, I, XVI.

[41] _W. P._, Vol. I, p. 113.

[42] See Th. Gomperz, _Greek Thinkers_, p. 46, who, speaking of
the old Ionian Nature-philosophers, says: "The bold flight of
their imagination did not stop at the assumption of a plurality of
indestructible elements; it never rested till it reached the conception
of a single fundamental or primordial matter as the essence of natural
diversity.... The impulse to simplification, when it had once been
aroused, was like a stone set in motion, which rolls continuously till
it is checked by an obstacle." See also Dr. W. Worringer, _Abstraktion
und Einfühlung_, p. 20.

[43] _B. T._, p. 20.




3. The People and their Man-God.


Think of the joy that must have spread through a wondering people like
the Greeks, when they were told that Earth, as the bride of Heaven, and
fertilized by his life-giving rain, became the mother not only of deep
eddying Ocean, but also of all that lives and dies upon her broad bosom!

Imagine the jubilation, the feeling of power and the sense of extreme
relief that must have filled the hearts of the ancient New Zealanders,
when the first great Maori artist arose and said to his brothers and
sisters that it was the god of the forests, Tane Mahuta, with his tall
trees that had wrenched the sky by force from mother Earth, where once
upon a time he used to crush her teeming offspring to death.[44]

With what superior understanding could they now gaze up into the
sky, and snap their fingers scornfully at its former azure mystery!
No wonder that the artist who could come forward with such an
interpretation became a god! And no wonder that in strong nations gods
and men are one! The fact that the explanation was not a true one,
according to our notions, did not matter in the least.

History not only reveals, but also proves that lies are not necessarily
hostile to existence.

For thousands of years the human race not only lived, but also
flourished with the lie of the Ptolemaic theory of the heavens on their
tongue.

For centuries men thrived and multiplied, believing that the lightning
was Jehovah's anger, and that the rainbow was Jehovah's reminder of a
certain solemn covenant by which He promised never again to destroy all
life on earth by a flood.

I do not wish to imply that these two beliefs are false. For my part,
I would prefer to believe them, rather than accept the explanations
of these phenomena which modern science offers me. Still, the fact
remains that these two Judaic explanations have been exploded by
modern science, though the question whether, as explanations, they are
superior to modern science, scarcely requires a moment's consideration.

At any rate they were the work of an artist, and when we think of the
joy they must have spread among wondering mankind, we cannot wonder
that such an artist was made a god. It was an artist, too, who created
the unchanging thing;[45] who created every kind of permanency, _i.e._
Stability out of Evolution, and among other unchangeable things, the
soul of man, which was perhaps the greatest artistic achievement that
has ever been accomplished.

And this Man-God who created Being--that is to say, a stable world,
a world which can be reckoned with, and in which the incessant
kaleidoscopic character of things is entirely absent--this same
Man-God who found the earth "without form" and "void," and whose
magnificent Spirit "moved upon the face of the waters"; when people
grew too weak to look upon him as their brother and God at the same
time,[46] was relegated to his own world, and from a great distance they
now pray to him and worship him and say: "For Thine is the Kingdom, the
Power and the Glory, For ever and ever. Amen."

"For ever and ever;" this was something they could not say of the world
as it is; and the thought of stability and of Being was a delight to
them.

It may be difficult for us to picture how great the rejoicings must
have been which followed upon every fresh ordering and arranging of the
universe, every fresh interpretation of the world in the terms of man.

Perhaps only a few people to-day, who are beginning to cast dubious
glances at Life, and to question even the justification of man's
existence, may be able to form some conception of the thrill that must
have passed through an ancient community, when one of its higher men
uprose and ordered and adjusted Life for them, and, in so ordering it,
transfigured it.

How much richer they must have felt! And how inseparable the two
notions "artist" and "giver" must have appeared to them!

"If indeed this is Life," they must have said; "if Life is really as he
orders it"--and his voice and eye allowed them to prefix no such "if"
with genuine scepticism--"then of a truth it is a well of delight and
a fountain of blessedness."

Thus Art--this function which "is with us in order that we may not
perish through truth,"[47] this "enhancement of the feeling of Life and
Life's stimulant,"[48] which "acts as a tonic, increases strength and
kindles desire"[49]--became the "great seducer" to earth and to the world;[50]
and we can imagine the gratitude that swelled in the hearts of men
for him whose function it was. How could he help but become a god!
Even tradition was not necessary for this. For at the very moment when
his creative spirit lent its glory to the earth, man must have been
conscious of his divinity or of his use as a mouthpiece by a Divinity.[50]

"O, Lord Varuna, may this song go well to thy heart!" sang the
ancient Hindus.

"Thou who knowest the place of the birds that fly through the sky, who
on the waters knowest the ships.

"Thou the upholder of order, who knowest the twelve months with the
offspring of each, and who knowest the month that is engendered
afterwards.

"Thou who knowest the track of the wind, of the wide, the bright, the
mighty; and knowest those who reside on high.

"Thou the upholder of order, Varuna, sit down among thy people, thou,
the wise, sit there to govern.

"From thence perceiving all wondrous things, thou seest what has been
and what will be done.

"Thou who givest to men glory, and not half glory, who givest it even
to our own selves.

"Thou, O wise god, art Lord of all, of heaven and earth!"[51]

We can follow every word of this heartfelt worship with perfect
sympathy now.

"Thou, the upholder of order, who knowest the twelve months with the
offspring of each"--this is no empty praise. It is the cry of those
who feel inexpressibly grateful to their great artist; to him who has
put some meaning, some order into the world.

And "Thou who givest men glory, and not half glory"--here is the
sincere recognition of a people who have been raised and who not only
rejoice in their elevation, but also recognize that it has been a
creative act--a gift and a blessing from one who had something to
give. For the soul of man is a million times more sensitive to changes
in interpretation than the column of mercury is to changes in the
atmosphere, and nothing can be more grateful than the soul of man when
it is raised, however little, and thereby glorified.


[44] See Max Müller, _India. What can it teach us?_ pp. 154. 155; also
pp. 150 and 151.

[45] _W. P._, Vol. II, pp. 88, 89: "Happiness can be promised only by
Being: change and happiness exclude each other. The loftiest desire
is thus to be one with Being. That is the formula for the way to
happiness."

[46] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 313.

[47] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 264.

[48] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 244.

[49] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 252.

[50] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 290. See also p. 292: "Art is more divine
than truth."

[51] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 133. See also Schopenhauer, _Parerga und
Paralipomena_, Vol. II, Chap. XV, "_Ueber Religion_," para. 176, where
this view is ably upheld.

[52] Rig-Veda, I, 23.





4. The Danger.


Now, having reached this point, and having established--First: that
it is our artists who value and interpret things for us, and who put
a meaning into reality which, without them, it would never possess;
and, secondly: that it is their will to power that urges them thus to
appropriate Nature in concepts, and their will to prevail which gives
them the ardour to impose their valuation with authority upon their
fellows, thus forming a people; the thought which naturally arises is
this: The power that artists can exercise, and the prerogative they
possess, is one which might prove exceedingly dangerous; for while it
may work for good, it may also work very potently for evil. Does it
matter who interprets the world? who gives a meaning to things? who
adjusts and systematizes Nature? and who imposes order upon chaos?

Most certainly it matters. For a thousand meanings are possible, and
men may have a thousand been aiming for years, other interpretations
are still possible.

Listen to your artistic friend's description of the most trifling
excursion he has made, and then set your inartistic friend to relate
--say, his journey round the world. Whereupon ask yourself whether it
matters who sees things and who interprets life for you. The first,
even with his trifling excursion in his mind, will make you think
that life is really worth living, that the world is full, of hidden
treasure. The second will make you conclude that this earth is an
uninteresting monster, and that boredom can be killed only by the
dangers of motor racing, aerial navigation and glacier climbing.

"A thousand paths are there which never have been trodden," says
Zarathustra, "a thousand salubrities and hidden islands of life. Still
unexhausted and undiscovered is mankind and man's world."[53]

This interpreting of Nature and this making and moulding of a people
might therefore have brilliant or sinister results. There are many who
wish to prevail; there are many who wish to lure their fellows on, and
not all are standing on a superior plane.

For though artists, as a rule, are men of strong propensities[54] and
surplus energy, there is an instinct of chastity in the best of them,[55]
which impels them to devote all their power to prevailing in concepts
rather than in offspring, and which makes them avoid precisely that
quarter whither other men turn when they wish to prevail.[56]

The question as to what kind of man it is who walks up to Life and
orders and values her for us, is therefore of the most extraordinary
importance. Nothing could be more important than this. Because, as we
have seen, the question is not one of truth in the Christian and modern
scientific sense. A belief is often life-preserving and still false
from the standpoint of reality.[57] It is a matter, rather, of
finding that belief, whether true or false, which most conduces to the
love of an exalted form of Life. And if we ask, Who is the man who is
interpreting life for us? What is he? What is his rank? we practically
lay our finger upon the very worth of our view of the world.

There is no greater delight or passionate love on earth for the artist
than this: to feel that he has stamped his hand on a people and on
a millennium, to feel that his eyes, his ears, and his touch have
become their eyes, and their ears, and their touch. There is no deeper
enjoyment than this for him: to feel that as he sees, hears and feels,
they also will be compelled to see, hear and feel. Only thus is he able
to prevail. A people becomes his offspring.[58]

While their elation and blessedness consisted in being raised in
concepts to his level, and in seeing the world through his artistic
prisms--in fact, in scoring materially by allowing him, their higher
man, to establish their type; it was his solitary and unfathomable
glory to prevail for ever through their minds, and to lay the
foundation of his hazar, his thousand years of life on earth, in the
spirit of his fellows.

Utilitarian, if you will, are both points of view: the one giving from
his abundance, simply because he must discharge some of his plenitude
or perish, found his meaning in giving. The others, stepping up on the
gifts bestowed, found their meaning in receiving.[59]

The artist, then, as the highest manifestation of any human community,
justifies his existence merely by living his life, and by imparting
some of his magnificence to the things about him. To use a metaphor of
George Meredith's, he gilds his retainers as the sun gilds, with its
livery, the small clouds that gather round it. This is the artist's
power and it is also his bliss. From a lower and more economical
standpoint, he justifies his life by raising the community to its
highest power; by binding it to Life with the glories which he alone
can see, and by luring it up to heights which he is the first to scale
and to explore.[60]


[53] _Z._, I, XXII.

[54] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 243.

[55] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 259. Also _G. M._, p. 141.

[56] In this regard it is interesting to note that: "The Teutonic
'Kunst' (Art) is formed from _können_, and _können_ is developed from
a primitive Ich kann. Ich kann philology recognizes a preterite form
of a lost verb, of which we find the traces in Kin-d, a child; and the
form Ich kann, thus meaning originally, 'I begot,' contains the germ of
the two developments--_können_, 'to be master,' 'to be able,' and
'kennen' to know" (_Sidney Colvin_, in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_,
9th Edition. Article, "Art").

[57] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 14. See also _G. E._, pp. 8, 9.

[58] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 368: "The great man is conscious of his
power over a people, and of the fact that he coincides temporarily with
a people or with a century--this magnifying of his self-consciousness
as causa and voluntas is misunderstood as 'altruism': he feels driven
to means of communication: all great men are inventive in such means.
They want to form great communities in their own image; they would fain
give multiformity and disorder definite shape; it stimulates them to
behold chaos."

[59] _W. P._, pp. 255, 256.

[60] Even Fichte recognizes this power in Art to stamp values
upon a people. See the Sämmtliche Werke, Vol, IV, p. 353: "Art converts
the transcendental standpoint into the general standpoint.... The
philosopher can raise himself and others to this standpoint only with
great effort. But the artistic spirit actually finds himself there,
without having thought about it; he knows no other standpoint, and
those who yield to his influence are drawn so imperceptibly over to
his side, that they do not even notice how the change takes place."




5. The Two Kinds of Artists.


Up to the present I have spoken only of the desirable artist, of him
who, from the very health and fulness that is in him, cannot look on
Life without transfiguring her; of the man who naturally sees things
fuller, simpler, stronger and grander[61] than his fellows.[62] When
this man speaks of Life, his words are those of a lover extolling his
bride.[63] There is a ring of ardent desire and deep longing in his speech,
which is infectious because it is so sincere, which is convincing
because it is so authoritative, and which is beautiful because it
is so simple.

Intoxicated[64] by his love, giddy with enthusiasm, he rhapsodizes
about her, magnifies her; points to vast unknown qualities and beauties
in her, to which he is the first to give some lasting names; and stakes
his life upon her myriad charms. This Dionysian artist, the prototype
of all gods and demi-gods that have ever existed on earth, exalts Life
when he honours her with his love; and in exalting her, exalts humanity
as well.[65]

For the mediocre, simply because they cannot transfigure Life in that
way, benefit extremely from looking on the world through the Dionysian
artist's personality. It is his genius which, by putting ugly reality
into an art-form, makes life desirable. Beneath all his dithyrambs,
however, there is still the will to power and the will to prevail--
just as these instincts are to be found behind the magnificats of the
everyday lover; but, in the case of the former, it is the power in the
spirit.

There is, however, another kind of man who walks towards Life to value
and to order her. The kind of man who, as we saw in my last lecture,
declares that "man is born in sin,"--"that depravity is universal,"
--"that nothing exists in the intellect but what has before existed
in the senses; "and that "every man is his own priest"; the man who
defines Life as "the continuous adjustment of internal relations to
external relations"; and who says: "it is only the cultivation of
individuality which produces, or can produce, well-developed human
beings"; the man who declares that we are all equal, that there is one
truth for all, if only it can be found; and who thus not only kills all
higher men, but also deprives his fellow creatures of all the beauty
that these higher men have brought, and might still bring, into the
world; finally, the man who values humanity with figures and in the
terms of matter, who values progress in the terms of the engineer's
workshop, and who denies that Art can have any relation to Life.

This man is a sort of inverted Midas at whose touch all gold turns to
tinsel, all pearls turn to beads, and all beauty withers and fades, His
breath is that of the late autumn, and his words are hoarfrost. Having
nothing to give,[66] he merely robs things of the beauty that was once
laid in them, by insisting upon the truth of their reality; and he sees
Life smaller, thinner, weaker, and greyer than it is even to the people
themselves. He is the antithesis of the Dionysian artist. He comes from
the people, and very often from a substratum lower than they. How,
therefore, can he give the people anything they do not already possess?
He is a housewives have not already seen or felt? People have no use
for him, therefore, and whenever they are drawn to his side by his
seditious songs about equality, they find, when it is too late, that he
has made the world drabbier, uglier, colder, and stranger for them than
it was before.

This is the man who insists upon truth. Forgetting that truth is
ugly[67] and that humanity has done little else, since it first became
conscious, than to master and overcome truth, he wishes to make this
world what it was in the beginning, "without form" and "void," and to
empty things of the meaning that has been put into them, simply because
he is unable to create a world for himself.[68]

Aiming at a general truth for all, he is reduced to naked reality,
to Nature as it was before God's Spirit moved upon the face of the
waters, and this is his world of facts, stripped of all that higher
men have put into them. This man of science without Art, is gradually
reducing us to a state of absolute ignorance; for while he takes from
us what we know about things, he gives us nothing in return. How often
do we not hear people who are influenced by his science, exclaim that
the more they learn the less they feel they know. This exclamation
contains a very profound truth; for science is robbing us inch by inch
of all the groundfield-labourer among field-labourers, a housewife
among housewives--how could he point to any beauty or desire which
field-labourers and that was once conquered for us by bygone artists.[69]

Such a man, if he can be really useful in garnering and accumulating
facts, and in devising and developing novel mechanical contrivances,
ought in any case to be closeted apart, so that none of his breath
can reach the Art-made world. And when he begins valuing, all windows
and doors ought speedily to be barred and bolted against him. He is
the realist. It is he who sees spots on the sun's face; it is he who
denies that mist is the passionate sigh of mother Earth, yearning for
her spouse the sky; it is he who will not believe that the god of the
forest with his tallest trees separated the earth and the heavens
by force, and the explanations he gives of things, though they are
doubtless useful to him in his laboratory, are empty and colourless.
Granting, as I say, that he does anything useful in the department of
facts, let his profession at least be a strictly esoteric one. For his
interpretations are so often ignoble, in addition to being colourless,
that his business, like that of a certain Paris functionary, ought to
be pursued in the most severe and most zealous secrecy.

If the world grows ugly, and Life loses her bloom; if all winds are
ill winds, and the sunshine seems sickly and pale; if we turn our eyes
dubiously about us, and begin to question the justification of our
existence, we may be quite certain that this man, this realist, and his
type, are in the ascendancy, and that he it is who is stamping his ugly
fist upon our millennium.

For the function of Art is the function of the ruler. It relieves the
highest of their burden, so that mediocrity may be twice blessed,
and it makes us a people by luring us to a certain kind of Life. Its
essence is riches, its activity is giving and perfecting,[70] and while
it is a delight to the highest, it is also a boon to those beneath them.

The attempt of the Dionysian artist[71] to prevail, therefore, is
sacred and holy. In his efforts to make his eyes our eyes, his ears our
ears, and his touch our touch, though he does not pursue any altruistic
purpose, he confers considerable benefits upon mankind. Whereas
the attempt of that other man to prevail--the realist and devotee
of so-called truth--is barbarous and depraved. By his egoism he
depresses, depreciates and dismantles Life in great things as in small.
Woe to the age whose values allow his voice to be heard with respect!
There are necessary grey studies to be made, necessary uglinesses to
be described, perhaps. But let these studies and descriptions be kept
within the four walls of a laboratory until the time comes when, by
their collective means, man can be raised and not depressed by them.
Science is not with us to promulgate values. It is with us to be the
modest handmaiden of Art, working in secrecy until all its ugliness
can be collected, transfigured, and used for the purpose of man's
exaltation by the artist. It may be useful for our science-slaves,
working behind the scenes of Life, to know that the sky is merely our
limited peep into an infinite expanse of ether--whatever that is. But
when we ask to hear about it, let us be told as follows--

"O heaven above me! Thou pure! Thou deep! Thou abyss of light! Gazing
on Thee, I quiver with godlike desires.

"To cast myself up unto thy height--that is my profundity! To hide
myself in thy purity--that is mine innocence.

"We have been friends from the beginning, thou and I. Sorrow and horror
and soil we share: even the sun is common to us.

"We speak not to each other, for we know too many things. We stare
silently at each other; by smiles do we communicate our knowledge.

"And all my wanderings and mountain-climbings--these were but a
necessity and a makeshift of the helpless one. To fly is the one thing
that my will willeth, to fly into thee.

"And what have I hated more than passing clouds and all that defileth
thee!

"The passing clouds I loathe--those stealthy cats of prey. They take
from thee and me what we have in common--that immense, that infinite
saying of Yea and Amen.

"These mediators and mixers we loathe--the passing clouds.

"Rather would I sit in a tub, with the sky shut out; rather would I
sit in the abyss without a sky, than see thee, sky of Light, denied by
wandering clouds!

"And oft have I longed to pin them fast with the jagged gold wires of
lightning, that I might, like the thunder, beat the drum upon their
bellies.

"An angry drummer, because they bereave me of thy Yea and Amen I--
thou heaven above me, thou pure, thou bright, thou abyss of Light! And
because they bereave thee of my Yea and Amen.

"Thus spake Zarathustra."[72]


[61] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 243: "Artists should not see things
as they are; they should see them fuller, simpler, stronger. To this
end, however, a kind of youthfulness, of vernality, a sort of perpetual
elation, must be peculiar to their lives." See also T. I., Part 10,
Aph. 8.

[62] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 243. See also T. I., Part 10, Aph. 9.

[63] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 248.

[64] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 241: "The feeling of intoxication
(elation) is, as a matter of fact, equivalent to a sensation of surplus
strength." See also p. 254.

[65] Schelling also recognized the transfiguring power of Art;
but he traced it to the fact that the artist invariably paints Nature
at her zenith. See p. II, _The Philosophy of Art_ (translation by A.
Johnson): "Every growth of nature has but one moment of perfect beauty,
... Art, in that it presents the object in this moment, withdraws it
from time, and causes it to display its pure being in the form of
eternal beauty." This is making the natural object itself the adequate
source of its own transfiguration, and the theory overlooks the power
of the artist himself to see things as they are not.

[66] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 244: "The sober-minded man, the tired
man, the exhausted and dried-up man, can have no feeling for Art,
because he does not possess the primitive force of Art, which is the
tyranny of inner riches."

[67] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 101.

[68] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 89: "The belief that the world which
ought to be, is, really exists, is a belief proper to the unfruitful,
who do not wish to create a world. They take it for granted, they
seek for ways and means of attaining it. 'The will to truth' [in
the Christian and scientific sense] is the impotence of the will to
create."

[69] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 104: "The development of science tends
ever more to transform the known into the unknown: its aim, however, is
to do the _reverse_, and it starts out with the instinct of tracing the
unknown to the known. In short, science is laying the road to sovereign
ignorance, to a feeling that knowledge does not exist at all, that it
was merely a form of haughtiness to dream of such a thing."

[70] _W. P._, Vol. II, p. 263: "The essential feature in art is
its power of perfecting existence, its production of perfection and
plenitude. Art is essentially the affirmation, the blessing, and the
deification of existence."

[71] Fichte comes near to Nietzsche, here, with his idea of
the "beautiful spirit" which sees all nature full, large and abundant,
as opposed to him who sees all things thinner, smaller, and emptier
than they actually are. See Fichte's _Sämmtliche Werke_, Vol. IV, p.
354. See also Vol. III, p. 273.

[72] _Z._, III, XLVIII.




