Part I


Christianity and the Renaissance

    "For if ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but if ye
    through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye
    shall live."--Romans viii. 13.


I shall now endeavour to show you when and where Nietzsche's Art
doctrine, or part of it, has raised its head in the past, and to touch
lightly upon the conditions which led to its observance.

In doing this I shall travel backwards, zigzag fashion, from Rome,
viâ Greece to Egypt, and beginning with Christianity, I shall show
how the Holy Catholic Church succeeded in establishing one of the
conditions necessary to all great Art, which, as I have said, is unity
and solidarity lasting over a long period of time, and forming men
according to a definite and severe scheme of values.


[1] Delivered at University College on Dec. 15th, 1910.


1. Rome and the Christian Ideal.


The compass of these lectures does not allow me to say anything
concerning the Art of Rome. There are many aspects of this Art which
are both interesting and important from the historical standpoint;
but, from the particular point of view which I am now representing,
temporal Rome does not concern me nearly as much as sacred Rome and its
provincial Government.

For the first act of the Christian power was not to volatilize the
stone bulwarks of the monuments of antiquity, neither was it to
spiritualize the citizen of the Roman Empire; but it was to convert
Rome the secular administration into Rome the Eternal City.

Long before the exterior of the Græco-Roman column was divided up and
sub-divided, until, despite its volume, it seemed to have no solidity
whatever; and long before men's eyes and bodies were transformed from
broad, spacious wells of life into narrow, tenuous cylinders of fire,
a teaching was spread broadcast over the Roman Empire, the devouring
power of which was astounding, and the like of whose digestion has not
been paralleled in history.

The Romans in their latter days had degenerated through the decline
among them of that very principle which is the basis of all great
art--restraint. Always utilitarians, in the end they had become
materialists, and finally their will power had disintegrated.

Then, suddenly--perhaps through the very fact that their will power had
declined, and through a preponderance among them of a class of people
who were unfit to allow themselves any material enjoyment, and who were
conscious of this shortcoming--the pendulum of Life swung back with a
force so great to the opposite extreme, that the Pagan world was shaken
to its foundations, and in its death-agony stretched out its arms and
embraced the foreign creed which said--

"Flesh is death; Spirit is life and peace. The body is dead because of
sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness. If ye live after
the flesh ye shall die; but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live."[2]

Here was a fundamentally new valuation, a totally novel outlook upon
the world of man. Some extraordinarily magnetic creator of values had
spread his will over an empire, and stamped his hand upon a corner of
the globe, and "the blessedness to write upon the will of millenniums
as upon brass,"[3] promised to be his.

Here was a principle which obviously must have found its origin in a
class of mind which, in order to overcome the flesh at all, knew of no
better means thereto than to cut it right away and for ever. It was not
a matter of contriving some sort of desirable inner harmony; the will
of the people in whom this creed took its roots was incapable of such
an achievement. The order went: "If thy right eye offend thee, pluck
it out, and cast it from thee ... if thy right hand offend thee, cut
it off!" Whenever the Spirit was mentioned it was spelt in capital
letters and uttered in exalted tones; while the body, on the other
hand, as the great obstacle to salvation, was written small. States of
the soul became surer indices to the qualities "good," "beautiful,"
and "virtuous," than states of the body, and the paradox that Life was
the denial of Life, was honestly believed to be an attainable ideal.
In Lübke's words: "Christianity disturbed the harmony between man and
nature, and introduced a sense of discordance by proclaiming to man a
higher spiritual law, in the light of which his inborn nature became a
sinful thing which he was to overcome."[4]

The people who acclaimed this teaching by instinct ultimately organized
themselves, conquered the Pagan world, enlisted Pagan elements into
their organization--Pagan spirit and Pagan order--and gradually
accomplished a task which no other European values seem to have
been able to do. They established one idea, one thought, one hope,
in the breasts of almost all great Western peoples, from Ireland to
Constantinople, from the Mediterranean to the Baltic.

The power of their creation--the Church--was such that it
co-ordinated the most heterogeneous elements, the most conflicting
factors, and the most absurd contrasts. And, however much one may
deprecate the nature of the type they advocated, and the ignoble
valuation of humanity upon which their religion was based, as a
Nietzschean, one can but acknowledge the power they wielded, the might
with which they made one ideal prevail, and the art with which for a
while they united and harmonized such discordant voices as those of the
people of Europe.

One can admire all this, I say, even though it is but a spiritual
reflection of Rome's former power, her former victories, and her former
law and order.[5]

For, soon, however un-Pagan the ideal may have been which the Church
made to prevail, the methods it employed were purely Pagan methods.

Fearing nothing, respecting nothing that was opposed to it, and not
losing heart before the difficulty of vanquishing even the most
formidable enemies of the expiring Empire--the Teutons away in the
North--spiritual Rome thus set about its task of appropriating
humanity; and all the art of the organizer, of the orator, of the
painter, sculptor and architect, was speedily ordered into its service.
If the type to which its ideal aspired were not already a general fact,
then it must be made a general fact. It must be reared, cultivated
and maintained.

Strangely enough, the feat of vanquishing the German nation proved a
thousand times easier to Rome the Eternal City, than it had done to
Rome the Metropolis of the Greatest Empire of antiquity. The ancient
Germans, with their strong tendency to subjectivity, to fantastic
brooding and to cobweb spinning, and with their coarse, brutal natures
unused either to restraint or to the culture that arises from it, fell
easy victims to this burning teaching of the spirit, of faith, and
of sentiment;[6] and it was in their susceptible and untutored
breasts that Christianity laid its firmest foundation.

In its work of appropriation and consumption, as I say, the Church
halted at nothing.

[2] Romans viii. 6, 10, 13.

[3] _Z._, III, LVI.

[4] _Outlines of the History of Art_, Vol. I, p. 445.

[5] See H. H. Milman, D.D., _History of Latin Christianity_ (Ed.
1864), Vol. I, p. 10. Speaking of Catholicism, he says: "It was
the Roman Empire, again extended over Europe by a universal code,
and a provincial government; by a hierarchy of religious prætors
or proconsuls, and a host of inferior officers, each in strict
subordination to those immediately above them, and gradually descending
to the very lowest ranks of society, the whole with a certain degree of
freedom of action, but a restrained and limited freedom, and with an
appeal to the spiritual Cæsar in the last resort."

[6] See J. B. Bury, _A History of the Roman Empire_, Vol. I, p. 17:
"It has been said that the function of the German nations was to
be the bearers of Christianity. The growth of the new religion was
indeed contemporary with the spread of the new races in the Empire,
but at this time in the external events of history, so far from
being closely attached to the Germans, Christianity is identified
with the Roman Empire. It is long afterwards that we see the mission
fulfilled. The connection lies on a psychological basis: the German
character was essentially subjective. The Teutons were gifted with
that susceptibility which we call heart, and it was to the needs
of the heart that Christianity possessed endless potentialities of
adaptation.... Christianity and Teutonism were both solvents of the
ancient world, and as the German nations became afterwards entirely
Christian, we see that they were historically adapted to one another."




2. The Pagan Type appropriated and transformed by Christian Art.


Just as St. Paul had not refrained from taking possession of the
Unknown God whom the Athenians ignorantly worshipped, by declaring
Him to be precisely the God whom he had come among them to proclaim,
so Christianity did not refrain from incorporating all the suitable
features of the Pagan faith into its own creed.

The Pagan type was thus the first thing to be assimilated and absorbed,
and in the early Christian paintings of the catacombs you must not be
surprised to find the Saviour depicted with all the beauties and charms
of the classical god or hero. Here he appears as a Hermes, there as an
Apollo, and yonder as an Orpheus.[7] Beardless, young, and strong, Christ
stalks towards you. His gait is free his carriage majestic. Across his
shoulders you will sometimes see, as in the catacombs of the Via Appia
in Rome, that he bears a sheep, and he looks for all the world like a
young Hermes, who, as you know, was the Greek god of flocks.

Elsewhere he looks like a Roman senator, as in the catacomb of St.
Callixtus, for instance; his mother Mary looks like a Roman matron,
praying with uplifted hands, and the apostles Peter and Paul, together
with the prophets, appear as peripatetic philosophers, grasping
learned-looking scrolls of manuscript, while Daniel is presented as
a Hercules.[8]

Even the famous bronze statue of St. Peter in his great
church at Rome is in fact an antique statue of a consul which has
been transformed into a Peter, and the original of this monument was
probably quite innocent of the sanctity which has caused the foot of
his effigy to be worn away by the kisses of the faithful.[9]

This bold manner of appropriating the Pagan ideal in Art was but
the symbol of what was actually occurring in the outside world; for
the object was not to glorify the Pagan type, but to overthrow it,
to transform it by degrees into the type which was compatible with
Christian values, and thus to obliterate it.

We can watch this process. We can see the classic features and form
of body surely and permanently vanishing from the wall decorations of
the fourth, fifth and sixth centuries A.D., and the Christian type
asserting itself with ever greater assurance. Already in San Paolo
fuori-le-mura in Rome, which had been decorated about the middle of
the fifth century,[10] Christ appears bearded,[11] ugly and gloomy, and his
apostles reflect his appearance and mood. In the Church of San Vitale
in Ravenna, of the sixth century, the spirit of the antique had almost
passed away;[12] in the basilica of San Lorenzo fuori-le-mura the bearded
Christ is no longer sublime and dignified, but wan and emaciated;[13] while
in the Church of SS. Nazarus and Celsus at Ravenna, there is a mosaic
of the fifth century in which even the sheep are beginning to look with
gloomy and dissatisfied eyes upon the world about them.

Examples could be multiplied almost indefinitely to prove how slow but
sure was this gradual self-assertion of the type that was compatible
with Christian values, and the early period of mediæval art is well
described by Woltmann and Woermann as one in which the classical cast
of figure and features gets swallowed up in ugliness.[14]

Finally, in the seventh century, the most daring and most extraordinary
artistic feat of all was accomplished. The greatest paradox the world
had ever seen--a god on a cross--was portrayed for men's eyes
to behold. The Crucifixion became one of the loftiest subjects of
Christian art, and the god of the Christians was painted in his death
agony.

I will not dwell upon the manifold influences exercised by this
class of picture; I simply record the fact, in order to show with
what steadily increasing audacity the Church ultimately realized and
exhibited its type.

For, the fact that Christian Art was didactic, as all art is which is
associated with the will and idea of a fighting cause, and which is
born on a soil of clashing values, nobody seems to deny.[15] Paulinus
of Nola, Gregory the Great, Bishop Germanus, Gregory the Second,[16] John
of Damascus and Basil the Great were all agreed as to the incalculable
worth of images in the propagation of the Christian doctrine, and their
attitude, subsequently adopted by the Franciscans and Dominicans,
lasted, according to Milman, until very late in the Middle Ages. When
it is remembered, moreover, that illuminated manuscripts, which were
destined to remain in the hands of single individuals, retained the
classical mould of body and features much later than did the work for
church decoration, it is not difficult to discover the strong motive
which lay behind the production of public art.[17]

With Roman culture and art, the western and northern provinces of Gaul,
Spain, Germany and Britain thus received their religion and their ideal
type; and if to-day, in our ball-rooms and drawing-rooms we are often
confronted with tenuous, flamelike, swan-necked creatures, that recall
Burne-Jones, Botticelli, Duccio and Segna to our minds, we know to
which values these people owe their slender, heaven-aspiring stature,
and their long, sensitive fingers.

For the attitude of the Christian ideal to Life, to the body, and to
the world was an entirely negative one. The command from on high was,
that the deeds of the body should be mortified through the Spirit. All
beauty, all voluptuousness, smoothness and charm were very naturally
regarded with suspicion by the promoters of such an ideal; for beauty,
voluptuousness and shapeliness lure back to Life, lure back to the
flesh, and ultimately back to the body.

What else, then, could possibly have been expected from such an ideal
than the ultimate decline and uglification of the body? To what else
did such an ideal actually aspire? For was not ugliness the strongest
obstacle in the way of the loving one, in the way of him who wished
only to affirm and to promote life?

When the student of mediæval miniatures, wall-paintings and
stained-glass windows finds bodily charm almost completely eliminated,
when he sees ugliness prevailing, and even made seductive by a host
of the most subtle art-forms, by a gorgeous wealth of ornament
and repetitive design; and when he perceives a certain guilty
self-consciousness in regard to the attributes of sex revealing
itself in such paintings as that on the ceiling of the Church of St.
Michael at Hildesheim, where Adam and Eve are represented as naked
human monstrosities, exactly alike in frame and limbs, and with all
indications as to sex, save Eve's long tresses and Adam's beard,
carefully suppressed,[18] what can be concluded from all this irrefutable
and unimpeachable evidence?

When he finds the Gothic type of figure growing ever more tenuous, ever
more emaciated and more sickly as the centuries roll on; when he hears
of a Byzantine canon of the eleventh century in which the human body
is actually declared to be a monstrosity measuring nine heads; when he
finds strength and manhood gradually departing from the faces and the
limbs of the men, and an expression of tender sentiment, culminating
in puling sentimentality becoming the rule; finally, when he stands
opposite Segna's appalling picture of "Christ on the Cross" at the
National Gallery; what, under these circumstances, is he to say, save
that he is here concerned with an art which is antagonistic and hostile
to beauty, to Life and the world?

For the qualities of this art, qua art, although they never once attain
to the excellence of Ruler-Art, are sometimes exceedingly great. With
Meier Graefe I should be willing to agree that there has been no real
style since the Gothic,[19] or certainly not one that can claim anything
like such general distribution. And, if it had not been for the fact
that the more the paradox at the root of Christian doctrine was
realized, the more paradoxical it appeared--a fact which called forth
the energies of scores of apologists, commentators, and dialecticians,
and which made pictures retain to the very end a rhetorical,
persuasive, and therefore more or less realistic manner, sometimes
assisted (more especially towards the close of the Middle Ages) by
almost lyrical ornament and charm; there is no saying to what simple
power Christian art might not have attained. For behind it were all the
conditions which go to produce the greatest artistic achievements.

As a style, apart from its subject--or content beauty; as the
manifestation of a mighty will--who can help admiring this art of
Christianity? If only its ideal had been a possible one, and one which
would have required no rhetoric, seduction, or emotional oratory,
accompanied by the ringing of all the precious metals, to support it
until the end; it might have ascended to the highest pinnacle of art in
simplicity, restraint and order. Into simplicity, however, it was never
able to develop, while its constant need of explaining made it to the
very last retain more or less realism in the presentation of its ideal
type.


[7] On this point see Kraus, _Geschichte der christlichen Kunst_, Vol.
I, pp. 41, 46 et seq. Muther, _Geschichte der Malerei_, Vol. I, p. 13.
Woltmann and Woermann, _History of Painting_, Vol. I. pp. 151-156. Paul
Lacroix, _Les Arts au Moyen Age et à l'Epoque de la Renaissance_ (Ed.
1877, Paris), p. 254.

[8] See J. A. Crowe and G. B. Cavalcaselle, _The History of Painting
in Italy_ (Ed. 1903), Vol. I, p. 4. Woltmann and Woermann, _op. cit._,
Vol. I, p. 156.

[9] Woltmann and Woermann, _op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 156.

[10] J. A. Crowe and G. B. Cavalcaselle, _op. cit._, pp. 14, 15.

[11] For a discussion of the material causes of the change of type, see
Milman, _op. cit._. Vol. IX, p. 324.

[12] Crowe and Cavalcaselle, _op. cit._, Vol. I, pp. 24, 25.

[13] Woltmann and Woermann, _op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 185.

[14] Woltmann and Woermann, _op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 230.

[15] See an interesting discussion on the early Christian attitude
towards art in Kraus, _Geschichte der christlichen Kunst_, Vol. I, pp.
58 et seq. See also Milman's conclusions on the subject, _History of
Latin Christianity_, Vol. II, pp. 345, 346.

[16] See his letter to Leo the Isaurian, quoted by Milman, _op. cit._,
Vol. II, pp. 358-361. See also the Rev. J. S. Black's article on
"Images" in the _Encyclopædia Britannica_ (9th Edition).

[17] The Rev. J. S. Black says, in his article on "Images," above
referred to, that even as early as the fourth or fifth centuries there
is evidence of the tendency to enlist art in the service of the Church,
while Woltmann and Woermann (_op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 167) quote the
following instance: "When St. Nilus (A.D. 450) was consulted about
the decoration of a church, he rejected as childish and unworthy the
intended design of plants, birds, animals, and a number of crosses,
and desired the interior to be adorned with pictures from the Old
and New Testaments, with the same motive that Gregory II expressed
afterwards...."

[18] Kraus seems to be of the opinion that this suppression of primary
sexual characteristics in paintings was not at all uncommon in the
Middle Ages. See _Geschichte der christlichen Kunst_, Vol. II, p. 280.

[19] _Modern Art_, Vol. I, p. 24.




3. The Gothic Building and Sentiment.


But the hierarchy of the Church, although it left no doubt in the minds
of its followers as to the genuine type which was the apotheosis of
Christian values, was nevertheless unable completely to impose its culture
upon the barbarians under its sway. And soon, somewhere towards the end
of the twelfth century, there began to appear in Europe, in things that
did not seem to matter from the moral or didactic standpoint, a certain
uncouth and uncultured spirit, which showed to what extent the despotic
rule of Rome was beginning to be flouted.

In architecture, which, like music, has for some reason or other
always seemed to Europeans to be less intimately connected with the
thought and will of man than the graphic arts, an un-Catholic spirit
was preparing its road to triumph. When I say un-Catholic, I mean
emancipated from the law and order of the Universal Church.[20] And in
the Gothic edifice, from its early stages to its development
into the flamboyant style, all the impossibilities, all the terrible
self-immolations imposed by the Christian ideal upon man, begin to make
themselves openly felt.

Now churches begin to tower aloft into heights undreamt of heretofore.
Huge columns spring heavenwards, bearing up a roof that seems almost
ethereal because it is so high. Spires are thrust right into the very
breasts of clouds, and acres are covered by constructions which,
mechanically speaking, are alive. Kicks from the vaulted arches against
the hollowed-out walls below, necessitate counter-kicks; buttresses and
flying buttresses strive and struggle against the crushing pressure of
the stone or brick skies of these fantastic architectural feats. All
the parts of this mass of stone on baked clay are at loggerheads and at
variance with each other, and their strife never ceases.

Typical of the contest going on within the body of the mediæval
Christian, and the vain aspirations of his soul, the lofty buildings
are also symbolic of the discord and lack of equilibrium which, as
Lübke says, Christianity introduced into man's relations to Nature and
to himself. And when we find the columns of these buildings carved and
moulded to look like groups of pillars embracing each other to gain
strength, the salient parts of the construction grooved and striped,
and the extremities of the clustered pillars spreading after the manner
of a fan, over our heads; we are amazed at the manner in which mass and
volume have been volatilized, spiritualized, and apparently dissipated.

Elsewhere, too, there is variegated glass, gigantic filigree work,
festive decoration, as elaborated as that of a queen or a bride;
infinite grandeur and infinite littleness.[21] The ornament is nervous
and excited, festoons, trefoils, gables, gargoyles and niches, all
thrust themselves at you; all strive for individual effect, individual
attention, and individual value, with a restlessness and an importunacy
which knows no limits; until your eyes, bewildered and dazzled by the
jutting, projecting and budding details, and out-startled by surprise,
instinctively drop at last, and perhaps close in a paroxysm of despair,
before the High Altar.[22]

This was the germ of Protestantism in stone. Long before Martin Luther
burned the Papal Bull in the market-place of Wittenberg, the elements
of Protestantism had already found expression in Gothic architecture.
True the Pagan and Catholic spirit was still sufficiently master to
dominate them, just as it did the heretics, by a tremendous force
of style; but they are nevertheless present, and it is in this
architecture, if we choose to seek it, that we shall find, at once, all
the beauty, all the ugliness, and all the incompatible elements of the
Christian ideal.

Its beauty and the fact for which we ought to be grateful to it, is,
that by its one-sided and earnest advocacy of the spiritual in man, it
extended the domain of his spirit over an area so much greater than
that which had been covered theretofore, that only now can it be said
that he knows exactly where he stands and who he is. Its ugliness lies
in its contempt of the body and of Life; and its incompatible elements
are its negation of Life and the necessary attitude of affirmation
towards Life which all living creatures are bound to assume.

If, however, the above description of the Gothic may seem unfair, hear
what one of the greatest friends of the Gothic has said on the subject!

John Ruskin, in the early days of the last half of the nineteenth
century, wrote as follows--

"I believe that the characteristic or moral elements of the Gothic are
the following, placed in order of their importance: (1) Savageness, (2)
Changefulness, (3) Naturalism, (4) Grotesqueness, (5) Rigidity, (6)
Redundance."[23]

He speaks of it as being "instinct with work of an imagination
as wild and wayward as the Northern Sea";[24] lays stress upon its
rudeness,[25] and declares that it is that strange disquietude of
the Gothic spirit--that is its greatness, "that restlessness of the
dreaming mind, that wanders hither and thither among the niches, and
flickers feverishly around, and yet is not satisfied, nor shall be
satisfied."[26]

In fact, in no instance could the saying, "preserve me from my own
friends," be more aptly applied than in Ruskin's defence of the Gothic.
For Ruskin was a conscientious student, and things which even enemies
of his subject would be likely to overlook, he brings forward proudly
and ingenuously, like a truculent mother presenting an ugly child to a
friend, and with a broad smile in his forcible prose which sometimes
throws even the experienced reader quite off his guard.

Hippolyte Taine speaks of the people of the Middle Ages as being
possessed of delicate and over-excited imaginations, of morbid fancy
unto whom vivid sensation--manifold, changing, bizarre and extreme
--are necessary. In referring to their taste in ornament, he says,
"It is the adornment of a nervous, over-excited woman, similar to
the extravagant costumes of the day, whose delicate and morbid poesy
denotes by its excess the singular sentiments, the feverish, violent,
and impotent aspiration peculiar to an age of knights and monks."[27]

[Illustration: The Canon of Polycleitus (_Rome_)]

And if you think of the physical and spiritual operations they had been
made to undergo, you will not feel very much inclined to question these
conclusions. It must not be supposed that the canon of Polycletus,
measuring seven heads, was transformed into the Byzantine canon,
measuring nine heads, without some one's suffering--even though it
took centuries to effect the change. It must not be believed that the
calm Pagan idea of death was converted into the Christian terror of
death without the sacrifice of something; nor must these emaciated,
careworn, and neurotic faces in Mediæval paintings be conceived as mere
inventions of morbid phantasy. The deeds of the body are not mortified
through the Spirit with impunity. Such brilliant achievements have
their accounts to pay, and the Church never once deceived itself or
its followers as to what was paying, what was suffering, or where the
amputations and vivisections were taking place.

Look at the type of which the monks approved! Examine it in Cimabue's,
Duccio's, Segna's and the Cologne painters' pictures. Examine it in the
tapestry of Berne, known as the "Adoration of the Kings"; look at it
in countless stained glass windows, and see its repetition in hundreds
of illuminated manuscripts, some of which, like the Latin missal of
the Church of St. Bavon at Ghent, and the _Lives of the Saints_ by Simeon
Metaphrasi, have found their way into the British Museum.

Then ask yourself whether or not humanity was suffering in conforming
itself to this holy creed. "Like those mothers," says Lecky, "who
govern their children by persuading them that the dark is crowded
with spectres that' will seize the disobedient, and who often succeed
in creating an association of ideas which the adult man is unable
altogether to dissolve, the Catholic priests, by making the terrors of
death for centuries the nightmare of the imagination, resolved to base
their power upon the nerves."[28]

And, now that all this is known and realized, what is the meaning of
the Renaissance, what is its explanation?

[20] Speaking of Gothic buildings in general, Fergusson, in A History
of Architecture, Vol. I, p. 41, says: "It is in Nature's highest works
that we find the symmetry of proportion most prominent. When we descend
to the lower types of animals we find we lose it to a great extent, and
among trees and vegetables generally find it only in a far less degree,
and sometimes miss it altogether. In the mineral kingdom among rocks
and stones it is altogether absent. So universal is this principle in
Nature that we may safely apply it to our criticism on art, and say
that a building is perfect as a whole in proportion to its motived
regularity, and departs from the highest type in the ratio in which
symmetrical arrangement is neglected. It may, however, be incorrect to
say that an oak-tree is a less perfect work of creation than a human
body, but it is certain that a picturesque group of Gothic buildings
may be as perfect as the stately regularity of an Egyptian or classic
temple; but if it is so, it is equally certain that it belongs to a
lower and inferior class of design." Page 34: "The revival of the
rites and ceremonies of the Mediæval Church, our reverent love of our
own national antiquities, and our admiration of the rude but vigorous
manhood of the Middle Ages, all have combined to repress the classical
element, both in our literature and in our art, and to exalt in their
place Gothic feelings and Gothic art to an extent which cannot be
justified on any grounds of reasonable criticism."

[21] See Hippolyte Taine, _On the Nature of the Work of Art_
(translated by John Durand), pp. 130, 131, 132, 133, 134.

[22] Dr. Wilhelm Lübke, _op. cit._, Vol. II, p. 14, 15, says, speaking
of the Gothic: "What a contrast to the quiet, sober masses of the
Romanesque style ...! Here, on the other hand, everything thrusts
itself into prominence, everything strives for outward effect,
everything endeavours to work out its individuality with spirit and
energy. ... At the choir ... a positive sense of disquiet and confusion
is produced, which may indeed excite the fancy, but cannot satisfy the
sense of beauty."

[23] _On the Nature of Gothic Architecture_ (1854), p. 4.

[24] _On the Nature of Gothic Architecture_, p. 6.

[25] _Ibid_., p. 11.

[26] _Ibid_., p. 19.

[27] _On the Nature of the Work of Art_, pp. 131-33, 134.

[28] _History of European Morals from Augustus to Charlemagne_, Vol. I,
p. 211.




4. The Renaissance.


The Renaissance, in its early stages, at least, was a period neither
of pure realism nor of classicalism; it was neither a revival of
learning nor a revival of antiquity. These words are mere euphemisms,
mere drawing-room phrases. For, at its inception, the Renaissance
was nothing more nor less than man's convalescence, after an illness
that had lasted centuries. It was his first walk into the open, after
leaving his bed and his sick-room.

According to the Nietzschean doctrine of art, this realism of Van Eyck,
of Van der Weyden, Quintin Massys, Donatello, Pisanello, Masolino,
Ucello and others ought to disgust you. It is not art, or if it is, its
rank is inferior. Why, then, does it claim attention? Why is it far
superior to the realism of the present day, despite some appallingly
ugly features?[29]

It is superior only in this sense, that it is the work of
convalescents. After they had been laid on the rack in the attempt to
stretch their limbs and bodies to infinity, you must not be surprised
that these men could only limp along. How could they be expected to
walk majestically and with grace? That they could stand at all was a
mercy. That they were able to hobble along as they did was a triumph.

To expect these recovering invalids to impart something of themselves
to Life, to enrich her and to transfigure her, would be to expect the
impossible. But if you applaud them at all, applaud them for their
recovery, for the fact that it is well that they can give us even
drabby reality as it is. Do not congratulate them yet on their health.
For their realism, as realism, is as hopeless, as uninteresting and as
unelevating as any realism ever was and ever will be.

It is deceptive, too, for what seem to be beauties in their pictures
are borrowed from such of their predecessors of the late Gothic period
as were already overloading their pictures with ornamental art forms,
in order to disguise the ugliness of the type they presented. Where
they beguile you, it is often with a wealth of sweet ornament.[30]

In Ucello's "Battle of Sant' Eglidio," at the National Gallery, it is
impossible not to recognize the pains the artist has taken to make your
eye dwell on the dainty trappings and accoutrements of the knights
and their steeds, on the distracting balls of gold in the shrubbery,
artfully repeated in the bridles of the horses, and on the complex maze
of pikes, spears and lances, which makes the glimpse of hills in the
distance all the more restful and pleasing.

Also in Pisanello's "St. Anthony and St. George" (National Gallery),
whatever charm there is to be seen is still a Gothic charm, and the
same holds good of this painter's remarkable picture of the "Vision
of St. Eustace," in which the deliberately ornamental purpose of the
animals in the background charms you more than their startling realism.

If you leave these pictures, in the National Gallery, and walk over to
Orcagna's "Coronation of the Virgin," you will see where the ornamental
charm of the early Renaissance realists probably found its origin. For
these convalescent men made no sudden and unanticipated appearance.
They were preceded by painters like Orcagna, who were beginning to feel
the impossibility of making a beautiful image out of the Christian
type, and who therefore crammed their pictures with ornament in a
manner so prodigal that the human portion of them assumed quite a
subordinate place.

Look at this picture of Orcagna's. It seems positively to ring with
gold. Massed halos of the precious metal convert the faces of the
people into mere decorative discs of colour. The golden embroidery on
the dresses and on the hangings in the background give you a feeling of
sunshine, of wealth and of luxury, which makes you forget the ideal for
which all this lavish display is acting but as a subtle impresario. And
the utilization of every square inch of room by filigrees, festoons,
frills and fretwork of gorgeousness, almost convinces you at last that
you are in front of an art which says "Yea" to the glory of sunshine,
beauty and life.

In this very need of extravagant ornament, however, Orcagna confesses
quite openly to you that, as far as humanity is concerned, he, as
an artist, is bankrupt and destitute. His picture, like most things
connected with the art of Christianity, is a pictorial paradox; and
when you leave it, to wander through the other rooms, your mind must be
of a singularly ingenuous stamp if it feels no suspicion with regard to
Orcagna's use of such a deafening brass band in the exaltation of his
ideal.

If you doubt all this, how can you explain the fact that those painters
of the early Renaissance who remained faithful to the Christian
type--such men, I mean, as Fra Angelico, Fra Filippo Lippi, Alesso
Baldovinetti, Botticelli and Ghirlandaio--all remained more or less
faithful, too, to Orcagna's belief in ornament and pretty accessories;
while all those painters who either carried on or developed the new
spirit in Pisanello's, Ucello's, Masolino's and Masaccio's work--
such men as Pollajuolo, Verrochio, Perugini, Bellini, and ultimately
Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Titian and Raphael--all discarded
pretty and seductive accessories, or, when they did use them, made them
completely subordinate to the human element in their work?

The gradual growth in the importance of the human body and of the Pagan
type, in the Renaissance painters, from Masaccio to Michelangelo, with
whom there can no longer be any question of convalescence, the rapid
return to a healthy life-affirming type, and the ultimate triumph of
this type in the very heart of the Vatican--the headquarters of the
greatest negative religion on earth,--these are the facts which make
the art of this age so admirable and so thrilling.

It represents the greatest stand which Europe has ever made against the
denial of life, humanity and beauty; and if some of the artists, like
Pisanello, Piero della Francesca, and ultimately Titian, in their great
zeal, returned to nature with almost as much interest as to man, this
is easily accounted for when it is remembered how long nature and man
had been separated.[31]

But the fact that makes the final glory of the Renaissance type all the
more glorious is the extraordinary circumstance that almost every one
of the artists who fought for it, and for the principles it involved,
from Piero della Francesca to Titian, were one after the other captured
and enchained by the Church itself. Often it was in the very atmosphere
of the high altar, with the fumes of the incense about them, that they
asserted their positive faith in Life and Man. The greatest dangers,
the greatest temptations surrounded them But they planted their
banner, notwithstanding, in the centre of their true enemy's camp,
and, for a while, their true enemy acquiesced, because the command was
in the hands of men who were artists and pagans themselves, and who
consequently did not believe in one single tenet of the negative creed
which they professed.

Just as the realism of some of the early Renaissance artists, however,
was the inevitable outcome of their convalescent state, so the strong
realism of many of the painters and sculptors of the late Renaissance
was the natural result of their combative attitude.

Fighting for a particular kind of man, against centuries of false
and unhealthy tradition, it was necessary to bring forward the new
ideal with every characteristic plainly, emphatically and powerfully
expressed; for every characteristic of a new ideal is of the highest
importance.

These new values of the Renaissance spirit were scarcely one hundred
years old, when Michelangelo set himself the task of embodying them in
his sculpture and painting. Would it be fair to criticize him from the
standpoint of Egypt or even of Greece?

From the standpoint of Egypt he is disappointing. The preponderance
of characteristic traits over simplicity in his work spoils the power
of his conceptions. His prevailing lack of simplicity makes you guess
at the youth of the values on which he stood, and his tortuous bodies
often make you question whether his types have entirely left the
nerves of the Gothic period behind them. But are not all these defects
precisely of a kind which are unfortunately inseparable from the
position which Michelangelo assumed?

He was the greatest of the Renaissance artists. In criticizing him, I
have said all that can be said, from this particular standpoint, of his
predecessors and contemporaries. His power lies in the forcibleness,
the exhilaration, the exuberance and the wealth with which he brings
forward his type. It lies in his absolute contempt of seductive
prettiness, his sometimes terrible strength, his vehemence and his
energy, and above all in his magnificent conceptions and the types with
which he illustrates them. Compared with the art from which it had
sprung, his art was stupendous.

And where he is weak, compared with a higher--and by no means a modern
--concept of art, he suffers from the virtues of his position as a
fighter and as an innovator.

In valuing him, as I said in my first lecture, it all depends whence
you come. If you hail from Europe of the nineteenth and twentieth
century, you can but go on your knees before him. If you hail from
Memphis of the year 4000 B.C., you can but criticize and feel ill at
ease before his work.

I have not yet said anything concerning the relation of the Renaissance
artists to Greece, simply because, taking in view the circumstances of
their development, the relation seems fairly obvious. In discussing
the art of Greece itself, however, the matter will probably appear
quite clear to you. How much of the transfiguration in late Renaissance
art is actually due to Greek influence, or to the Dionysian spirit
of the age, it is difficult to determine. In my opinion, the latter
influence was more potent, and to the Greek influence I should be more
prepared to ascribe the spur which originally led to the adoption of a
thoroughly Pagan type.


[29] Kraus, in his _Geschichte der christlichen Kunst_, Vol. II, denies
that the revival of the antique was predominant in the Renaissance,
and argues that individualism and nature study were the prominent
notes. Venturi, the Italian art-historian, declares that the antique
began to be paramount only in the sixteenth century, and that with
it the decadence began. While Eugène Müntz, in his monumental work,
_L'Histoire de l'Art pendant la Renaissance_, Vol. I, p. 42, speaking
of the two movements of the period, says: "Deux voies s'ouvraient aux
novateurs, ou le naturalisme à outrance, un naturalisme qui, n'étant
plus soutenu par les hautes aspirations du moyen âge, risquait fort
de sombrer dans la vulgarité (l'exemple de Paolo Ucello, d'Andrea del
Castagna, de Pollajuolo l'a bien prouvé) ou bien la nature contrôlée,
purifiée, ennoblie par l'étude des modèles anciens." The latter was the
later movement. See also Woltmann and Woermann, _History of Painting_,
Vol. II, Introduction.

[30] Muther, in his _History of Painting_, Vol. I, p. 87, actually
declares that Jan van Eyck and Pisanello in their dainty manner
remained Gothic.

[31] Of Piero della Francesca, Muther says, _op. cit._, Vol. I, p. 97:
"He created the grammar of modern painting.... Four hundred years ago
he proposed the problem of realism, and endeavoured, as the forerunner
of the most modern artists, to establish in what manner atmosphere
changes colour impressions."




