The Project Gutenberg eBook of Spiritual Reformers in the 16th & 17th Centuries
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Spiritual Reformers in the 16th & 17th Centuries

Author: Rufus M. Jones


        
Release date: March 28, 2008 [eBook #24934]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/24934

Credits: E-text prepared by Al Haines




E-text prepared by Al Haines



Transcriber's note:

   Page numbers in this book are indicated by numbers enclosed
   in curly braces, e.g. {99}.  They have been located where page
   breaks occurred in the original book.





SPIRITUAL REFORMERS IN THE 16TH & 17TH CENTURIES

by

RUFUS M. JONES, M.A., D.Litt.

Professor Of Philosophy, Haverford College, U.S.A.







MacMillan and Co., Limited
St. Martin's Street, London
1914

Copyright




_OTHER VOLUMES IN THIS SERIES_

_EDITED By RUFUS M. JONES_


STUDIES IN MYSTICAL RELIGION.  (1908.)
  By Rufus M. Jones.

THE QUAKERS IN THE AMERICAN COLONIES.  (1911).
  By Rufus M. Jones, assisted by Isaac Sharpless and Amelia M. Gummere.

THE BEGINNINGS OF QUAKERISM.  (1912.)
  By William Charles Braithwaite.

THE SECOND PERIOD OF QUAKERISM.  (_In preparation._)
  By William Charles Braithwaite.

THE LATER PERIODS OF QUAKERISM.  (_In preparation._)
  By Rufus M. Jones.




{v}

PREFACE


In my _Quakers in the American Colonies_ I announced the preparation of
a volume to be devoted mainly to Jacob Boehme and his influence.  I
soon found, however, as my work of research proceeded, that Boehme was
no isolated prophet who discovered in solitude a fresh way of approach
to the supreme problems of the soul.  I came upon very clear evidence
that he was an organic part of a far-reaching and significant
historical movement--a movement which consciously aimed, throughout its
long period of travail, to carry the Reformation to its legitimate
terminus, the restoration of apostolic Christianity.  The men who
originated the movement, so far as anything historical can be said to
be "originated," were often scornfully called "Spirituals" by their
opponents, while they thought of themselves as divinely commissioned
and Spirit-guided "Reformers," so that I have with good right named
them "Spiritual Reformers."

I have had two purposes in view in these studies.  One purpose was the
tracing of a religious movement, profoundly interesting in itself, as a
great side current of the Reformation.  The other purpose was the
discovery of the background and environment of seventeenth century
Quakerism.  There can be little doubt, I think, that I have here found
at least one of the great historical sources of the Quaker movement.
This volume, together with my _Studies in Mystical Religion_, will at
any rate {vi} furnish convincing evidence that the ideas, aims,
experiences, practices, and aspirations of the early Quakers were the
fruit of long spiritual preparation.  This movement, as a whole, has
never been studied before, and my work has been beset with
difficulties.  I have been aided by helpful monographs on individual
"Reformers," written mainly by German and French scholars, who have
been duly credited at the proper places, but for the most part my
material has been drawn from original sources.  I am under much
obligation to my friend, Theodor Sippell of Schweinsberg, Germany.  I
am glad to announce that he is preparing a critical historical study on
John Everard and the Ranters, which will throw important light on the
religious ideas of the English Commonwealth.  He has read my proofs,
and has, throughout my period of research, given me the benefit of his
extensive knowledge of this historical field.  I wish to express my
appreciation of the courtesy and kindness which I have received from
the officials of the University Library at Marburg.  William Charles
Braithwaite of Banbury, England, has given me valuable help.  My wife
has assisted me in all my work of research.  She has read and re-read
the proofs, made the Index, and given me an immense amount of patient
help.  I cannot close this Preface without again referring to the
inspiration of my invisible friend, John Wilhelm Rowntree, in whose
memory this series was undertaken.


HAVERFORD, PENNSYLVANIA,

_January_ 1914.




{vii}

CONTENTS

                                                           PAGE

INTRODUCTION

WHAT IS "SPIRITUAL RELIGION" . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   xi


CHAPTER I

THE MAIN CURRENT OF THE REFORMATION  . . . . . . . . . . .    1


