part i. sect. 1. where it appears with no other variation than the
substitution of the word "considerable," for mighty. It thus appears
that whatever remarks Hutcheson made on the passage, they were not such
as to induce the author materially to alter it.

[121:1] It may be questioned if any reader of Hume's works has been able
to reconcile this admission of the existence of a moral sense, which,
according to his own account of it is an intuition, with his
metaphysical theory of impressions and ideas, notwithstanding his
ingenuity in ranking it among the impressions.

[124:1] Book iii. part ii. sect. 10.

[125:1] In the MSS. R.S.E.

[125:2] See p. 95.

[125:3] This circumstance, showing that a portion of the manuscript has
been written before the publication of these essays, points to the
present as the period to which a collection of extracts from the notes
will most aptly apply, although some of them may have been made at a
later date.

[129:1] Miscellaneous Tracts, by Michael Geddes. 1730.




CHAPTER IV.

1741-1745. ÆT. 30-34.

     Publication of the Essays, Moral and Political--Their
     Character--Correspondence with Home and Hutcheson--Hume's
     Remarks on Hutcheson's System--Education and Accomplishments
     of the Scottish Gentry--Hume's Intercourse with Mure of
     Caldwell and Oswald of Dunnikier--Opinions on a Sermon by Dr.
     Leechman--Attempts to succeed Dr. Pringle in the Chair of
     Moral Philosophy in Edinburgh.


A small duodecimo volume, the first of the "Essays Moral and Political,"
was published at Edinburgh in 1741, and the second was published in
1742. The publication was anonymous; and it is remarkable that, although
thus shielded, Hume appears to have, at that early period, been so
anxious to disconnect himself with the authorship of the Treatise, that,
in the advertisement, he addresses his readers as if he were then
appearing as an author for the first time. "Most of these essays," he
says, "were wrote with a view of being published as weekly papers, and
were intended to comprehend the designs both of the Spectators and
Craftsmen. But, having dropt that undertaking, partly from laziness,
partly from want of leisure, and being willing to make trial of my
talents for writing before I ventured upon any more serious
compositions, I was induced to commit these trifles to the judgment of
the public. Like most new authors, I must confess I feel some anxiety
concerning the success of my work; but one thing makes me more
secure,--that the reader may condemn my abilities, but must approve of
my moderation and impartiality in my method of handling political
subjects; and, as long as my moral character is in safety, I can, with
less anxiety, abandon my learning and capacity to the most severe
censure and examination."

Some of the subjects of these essays were not less untrodden at the time
when they appeared, than they are hackneyed in the present day. Of these
may be cited, "The Liberty of the Press;" "The Parties of Great
Britain;" "The Independency of Parliament." When they are compared with
the _Craftsman_, with _Mist's Journal_, and with the other periodicals
of the day, which had set the example of discussing such subjects, these
essays as little resemble their precursors, as De Lolme's "Remarks on
the British Constitution" do the articles in a daily London party paper.
Whatever he afterwards became, Hume was at that time no party
politician. He retained the Stoic severity of thought with which we have
found that he had sixteen years previously invested himself; and would
allow the excitements or rewards of no party in the state to drag him
out of the even middle path of philosophical observation. There is
consequently a wonderful impartiality in these essays, and an acuteness
of observation, which to the reader, who keeps in view how little the
true workings of the constitution were noticed in that day, is not less
remarkable. How completely, for instance, has the wisdom of the
following observations in the essay on "The Liberty of the Press," been
justified by the experience of a century.

     We need not dread from this liberty any such ill consequences
     as followed from the harangues of the popular demagogues of
     Athens and tribunes of Rome. A man reads a book or pamphlet
     alone and coolly. There is none present from whom he can catch
     the passion by contagion. He is not hurried away by the force
     and energy of action. And should he be wrought up to never so
     seditious a humour, there is no violent resolution presented
     to him by which he can immediately vent his passion. The
     liberty of the press, therefore, however abused, can scarce
     ever excite popular tumults or rebellion. And as to those
     murmurs or secret discontents it may occasion, 'tis better
     they should get vent in words, that they may come to the
     knowledge of the magistrate before it be too late, in order to
     his providing a remedy against them. Mankind, 'tis true, have
     always a greater propension to believe what is said to the
     disadvantage of their governors than the contrary; but this
     inclination is inseparable from them whether they have liberty
     or not. A whisper may fly as quick, and be as pernicious as a
     pamphlet. Nay, it will be more pernicious, where men are not
     accustomed to think freely, or distinguish betwixt truth and
     falsehood.

     It has also been found, as the experience of mankind
     increases, that the _people_ are no such dangerous monster as
     they have been represented, and that 'tis in every respect
     better to guide them like rational creatures, than to lead or
     drive them like brute beasts. Before the United Provinces set
     the example, toleration was deemed incompatible with good
     government; and 'twas thought impossible that a number of
     religious sects could live together in harmony and peace, and
     have all of them an equal affection to their common country
     and to each other. England has set a like example of civil
     liberty; and though this liberty seems to occasion some small
     ferment at present, it has not as yet produced any pernicious
     effects; and it is to be hoped that men, being every day more
     accustomed to the free discussion of public affairs, will
     improve in their judgment of them, and be with greater
     difficulty seduced by every idle rumour and popular clamour.

     'Tis a very comfortable reflection to the lovers of liberty,
     that this peculiar privilege of Britain is of a kind that
     cannot easily be wrested from us, and must last as long as our
     government remains in any degree free and independent. 'Tis
     seldom that liberty of any kind is lost all at once. Slavery
     has so frightful an aspect to men accustomed to freedom, that
     it must steal in upon them by decrees, and must disguise
     itself in a thousand shapes in order to be received. But if
     the liberty of the press ever be lost, it must be lost at
     once. The general laws against sedition and libelling are at
     present as strong as they possibly can be made. Nothing can
     impose a farther restraint but either the clapping an
     imprimatur upon the press, or the giving very large
     discretionary powers to the court to punish whatever
     displeases them. But these concessions would be such a
     barefaced violation of liberty, that they will probably be the
     last efforts of a despotic government. We may conclude that
     the liberty of Britain is gone for ever when these attempts
     shall succeed.

The opinion generally acceded to at the present day, that ministerial
and judicial functions should be intrusted to responsible individuals,
and not to bodies of men who may individually escape from a joint
responsibility, is anticipated in the following passage:--"Honour
is a great check upon mankind; but where a considerable body of
men act together, this check is in a great measure removed, since
a man is sure to be approved of by his own party for what promotes
the common interest, and he soon learns to despise the clamour of
adversaries."[139:1] The Grenville Act, and the subsequent measures for
reducing the number of the judges on controverted elections, are a
practical commentary on the truth of this remark.

It has often been observed, that foreigners have been the first to
remark the leading peculiarities of the British constitution, and of the
administration of justice in this country, in a manner rational and
unimpassioned, yet so as to give them greater prominence, and a more
full descriptive development than they obtain from our own impassioned
party writers--an observation attested by the character which the works
of Montesquieu and De Lolme held in the preceding century, and those of
Thierry, Cottu, Meyer, and Raumer, have obtained in the present.
The reason of this superiority is to be sought in the circumstance that
the acuteness of these foreign observers was not obscured, or their
feelings excited, by any connexion with the workings of the systems they
have described; and the isolation from active life in which Hume was
placed, appears to have in some measure given him like qualifications
for the examination of our political institutions. He expresses a
general partiality for the monarchical government of Britain, but it is
a partiality of a calm utilitarian character, which would not be
inconsistent with an equally great esteem for a well-ordered republic.
On his philosophical appreciation of its merits, the monarchy has no
stronger claims than these--that to have an individual at the head of
the government who is merely the name through which other persons act,
and who is not amenable to any laws, while the real actors are
personally responsible for what they do in his name, is an expedient
arrangement. That it is very convenient to have some fixed criterion
such as the hereditary principle, which shall obviate the trouble and
danger of a competition for this elevated station. But that these are
all recommendations on the ground of expediency, which may be outweighed
by others, and the misconduct of a weak or tyrannical prince will
justify an alteration in that arrangement, which convenience only, and
the avoidance of occasions for turbulence and anarchy, have sanctioned.

It may be observed, that in the edition of these essays which he
directed to be published after his death, many of those passages which
bear a democratic tendency are suppressed. Such was the fate of the
passage in "The Liberty of the Press" quoted above, and of the remarks
put within brackets in the quotation which follows, from the essay on
"The Parties of Great Britain."

     Some who will not venture to assert, that the real difference
     between Whig and Tory, was lost at the Revolution, seem
     inclined to think that the difference is now abolished, and
     that affairs are so far returned to their natural state, that
     there are at present no other parties amongst us but court and
     country; that is, men who, by interest or principle, are
     attached either to monarchy or to liberty. It must indeed be
     confessed, that the Tory party has of late decayed much in
     their numbers, still more in their zeal, and I may venture to
     say, still more in their credit and authority. [There is no
     man of knowledge or learning, who would not be ashamed to be
     thought of that party; and in almost all companies, the name
     of _Old Whig_ is mentioned as an incontestible appellation of
     honour and dignity. Accordingly, the enemies of the ministry,
     as a reproach, call the courtiers the true _Tories_; and, as
     an honour, denominate the gentlemen in the _Opposition_ the
     true _Whigs_.] The Tories have been so long obliged to talk in
     the republican style, that they seem to have made converts of
     themselves by their hypocrisy, and to have embraced the
     sentiments as well as language of their adversaries. There
     are, however, very considerable remains of that party in
     England, with all their old prejudices; and a proof that court
     and country are not our only parties, is, that almost all our
     dissenters side with the court, and the lower clergy, at least
     of the Church of England, with the opposition. This may
     convince us that some bias still hangs upon our constitution,
     some extrinsic weight which turns it from its natural course,
     and causes a confusion in our parties.[141:1]

Perhaps the most ambitious of the essays, and those on which the author
bestowed most of his skill and attention, are "The Epicurean," "The
Stoic," "The Sceptic," and "The Platonist." These are productions of the
imagination, suggested apparently by the style and method of _The
Spectator_. There is no attempt either to support or to attack the
systems represented by the names of the essays, nor is there a
description or definition of them; but on each occasion a member of one
of these celebrated schools speaks in his own person, and describes the
nature of the satisfaction that he finds in his own code of philosophy,
as a solution of the great difficulty of the right rule of thought and
action. "The Epicurean" takes a flight of imagination beyond that of
Hume's other works. It departs from the cold atmosphere of philosophy,
and desires to fascinate as well as enlighten. But though it possesses
all the marks of a fine intellect, the reader is apt to feel how far
more sweetly and gracefully the subject would have been handled by
Addison, to whose department of literature it seems rightly to belong.
The follower of Epicurus is not represented, as indulging in that gross
licentiousness, as wallowing in that disgusting "stye" which the
representations of Diogenes Laertius, and others, have impressed on the
vulgar associations with the name of that master. On the other hand, the
picture is far from embodying what many maintain to be the fundamental
precept of Epicurus, that happiness being the great end sought by man,
the proper method of reaching it is by the just regulation of the
passions and propensities; a precept embodied in the

     "Sperne voluptates. Nocet empta dolere voluptas."

Hume, who was not correcting errors, or instructing his readers in the
true meaning of terms, or appreciation of characters, draws in "The
Epicurean" a picture of one who is not gross or grovelling in his
pleasures, and who restrains himself lest he should outrun enjoyment;
but whose ruling principle is still that of the voluptuary.

The reader expects to find an attempt to draw his own picture in "The
Sceptic;" but it is not to be found there. The sceptic of the essays is
not a man analyzing the principles of knowledge, to find wherein they
consist, but one who is dissatisfied with rules of morality, and who,
examining the current codes one after another, tosses them aside as
unsatisfactory. It is into "The Stoic" that the writer has thrown most
of his heart and sympathy; and it is in that sketch that, though
probably without intention, some of the features of his own character
are portrayed. There are passages which have considerable unison of tone
with those autobiographical documents already quoted, in which he
describes himself as having laboured to subdue the rebellious passions,
to reduce the mind to a regulated system, to drive from it the influence
of petty impressions,--to hold one great object of life in view, and to
sacrifice before that object whatever stood in the way of his firmly
settled purpose.

Of the success of these essays, and the method in which he occupied
himself after their publication, he thus speaks in his "own life:"--"The
work was favourably received, and soon made me entirely forget my former
disappointment. I continued with my mother and brother in the country,
and in that time recovered the knowledge of the Greek language, which I
had too much neglected in my early youth." On 13th June, 1742, he says
to Henry Home:--"The _Essays_ are all sold in London, as I am informed
by two letters from English gentlemen of my acquaintance. There is a
demand for them; and, as one of them tells me, Innys, the great
bookseller in Paul's Churchyard, wonders there is not a new edition, for
that he cannot find copies for his customers. I am also told that Dr.
Butler has every where recommended them; so that I hope they will have
some success. They may prove like dung with marl, and bring forward the
rest of my Philosophy, which is of a more durable, though of a harder
and more stubborn nature. You see I can talk to you in your own style."
In consequence of this favourable reception, a second edition appeared
in 1742.

The communication of which the above is a part, contains the following
short essay on the Orations of Cicero:--

     I agree with you, that Cicero's reasonings in his "Orations"
     are very often loose, and what we should think to be wandering
     from the point; insomuch, that now-a-days a lawyer, who should
     give himself such liberties, would be in danger of meeting
     with a reprimand from the judge, or at least of being
     admonished of the point in question. His Orations against
     Verres, however, are an exception; though that plunderer was
     so impudent and open in his robberies, that there is the less
     merit in his conviction and condemnation. However, these
     orations have all a very great merit. The Oration for Milo is
     commonly esteemed Cicero's masterpiece, and indeed is, in many
     respects, very beautiful; but there are some points in the
     reasoning of it that surprise me. The true story of the death
     of Clodius, as we learn from the Roman historians, was
     this:--It was only a casual rencontre betwixt Milo and him;
     and the squabble was begun by their servants, as they passed
     each other on the road. Many of Clodius's servants were
     killed, the rest dispersed, and himself wounded, and obliged
     to hide himself in some neighbouring shops; from whence he was
     dragged out by Milo's orders, and killed in the street. These
     circumstances must have been largely insisted on by the
     prosecutors, and must have been proved too, since they have
     been received as truth by all antiquity. But not a word of
     them in Cicero, whose oration only labours to prove two
     points, that Milo did not waylay Clodius, and that Clodius was
     a bad citizen, and it was meritorious to kill him. If you read
     his oration, you'll agree with me. I believe that he has
     scarce spoke any thing to the question, as it would now be
     conceived, by a court of judicature.

     The Orations for Marcellus and Ligarius, as also that for
     Archias, are very fine, and chiefly because the subjects do
     not require or admit of close reasoning.

     'Tis worth your while to read the conclusion of the Oration
     for Plancius, where I think the passions are very well
     touched. There are many noble passages in the Oration for
     Muræna, though 'tis certain that the prosecutors (who,
     however, were Servius Sulpicius, and Cato,) must either have
     said nothing to the purpose, or Cicero has said nothing. There
     is some of that oration lost.

     'Twould be a pleasure to read and compare the two first
     philippics, that you may judge of the manners of those times,
     compared to modern manners. When Cicero spoke the first
     philippic, Antony and he had not broke all measures with each
     other, but there were still some remains of a very great
     intimacy and friendship betwixt them; and besides, Cicero
     lived in close correspondence with all the rest of Cæsar's
     captains; Dolabella had been his son-in-law; Hirtius and Pansa
     were his pupils; Trebasius was entirely his creature. For this
     reason, prudence laid him under great restraints at that time
     in his declamations against Antony; there is great elegance
     and delicacy in them; and many of the thoughts are very fine,
     particularly where he mentions his meeting Brutus, who had
     been obliged to leave Rome. "I was ashamed," says he, "that I
     durst return to Rome after Brutus had left it, and that I
     could be in safety where he could not." In short, the whole
     oration is of such a strain, that the Duke of Argyle might
     have spoke it in the House of Peers against my Lord Orford;
     and decency would not allow the greatest enemies to go
     farther. But this oration is not much admired by the ancients.
     The _Divine Philippic_, as Juvenal calls it, is the second,
     where he gives a full loose to his scurrility; and without
     having any point to gain by it, except vilifying his
     antagonist, and without supporting any fact by witnesses (for
     there was no trial or accusation) he rakes into all the filth
     of Antony's character; reproaches him with drunkenness and
     vomiting, and cowardice, and every sort of debauchery and
     villany. There is great genius and wit in many passages of
     this oration; but I think the whole turn of it would not now
     be generally admired.[145:1]

In 1742, Hutcheson published his celebrated outline of a system of
ethics, "Philosophiæ Moralis Institutio Compendiaria." The following
