CHAPTER IX.

1752-1755. Æt. 41-44.

     Appointment as keeper of the Advocates' Library--His Duties--
     Commences the History of England--Correspondence with Adam
     Smith and others on the History--Generosity to Blacklock the
     Poet--Quarrel with the Faculty of Advocates--Publication of
     the First Volume of the History--Its reception--Continues
     the History--Controversial and Polemical attacks--Attempt
     to subject him, along with Kames, to the Discipline of
     Ecclesiastical Courts--The Leader of the attack--Home's
     "Douglas"--The first Edinburgh Review.


"In 1752," says Hume in his "own life," "the Faculty of Advocates chose
me their librarian, an office from which I received little or no
emolument, but which gave me the command of a large library."[367:1] We
have a very glowing account of the contest for this appointment from
his own pen in the following letter:


HUME TO DR. CLEPHANE.

"_Edinburgh, February 4th, 1752._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--I have been ready to burst with vanity and self-conceit
this week past; and being obliged from decorum to keep a strict watch
over myself, and check all eruptions of that kind, I really begin to
find my health impaired by it, and perceive that there is an absolute
necessity for breathing a vein, and giving a loose to my inclination.
You shall therefore be my physician, "Dum podagricus fit pugil et
medicum urget." You must sustain the overflowings of my pride; and I
expect, too, that by a little flattery you are to help nature in her
discharge, and draw forth a still greater flux of the peccant matter.
'Tis not on my account alone you are to take part in this great event;
philosophy, letters, science, virtue, triumph along with me, and have
now in this one singular instance, brought over even the people from the
side of bigotry and superstition.

"This is a very pompous exordium, you see; but what will you say when I
tell you that all this is occasioned by my obtaining a petty office of
forty or fifty guineas a-year. Since Caligula of lunatic memory, who
triumphed on account of the cockle shells which he gathered on the sea
shore, no one has ever erected a trophy for so small an advantage. But
judge not by appearances! perhaps you will think, when you know all the
circumstances, that this success is both as extraordinary in itself, and
as advantageous to me, as any thing which could possibly have happened.

"You have probably heard that my friends in Glasgow, contrary to my
opinion and advice, undertook to get me elected into that college; and
they had succeeded, in spite of the violent and solemn remonstrances of
the clergy, if the Duke of Argyle had had courage to give me the least
countenance. Immediately upon the back of this failure, which should
have blasted for some time all my pretensions, the office of library
keeper to the Faculty of Advocates fell vacant, a genteel office, though
of small revenue; and as this happened suddenly, my name was immediately
set up by my friends without my knowledge. The President, and the Dean
of Faculty his son, who used to rule absolutely in this body of
advocates, formed an aversion to the project, because it had not come
from them; and they secretly engaged the whole party called squadroney
against me. The bigots joined them, and both together set up a gentleman
of character, and an advocate, and who had great favour on both these
accounts. The violent cry of deism, atheism, and scepticism, was raised
against me; and 'twas represented that my election would be giving the
sanction of the greatest and most learned body of men in this country
to my profane and irreligious principles. But what was more dangerous,
my opponents entered into a regular concert and cabal against me; while
my friends were contented to speak well of their project in general,
without having once formed a regular list of the electors, or considered
of the proper methods of engaging them. Things went on in this negligent
manner till within six days of the election, when they met together and
found themselves in some danger of being outnumbered; immediately upon
which they raised the cry of indignation against the opposite party; and
the public joined them so heartily, that our antagonists durst show
their heads in no companies nor assemblies: expresses were despatched to
the country, assistance flocked to us from all quarters, and I carried
the election by a considerable majority, to the great joy of all
bystanders. When faction and party enter into a cause, the smallest
trifle becomes important. Nothing since the rebellion has ever so much
engaged the attention of this town, except Provost Stewart's trial; and
there scarce is a man whose friendship or acquaintance I would desire,
who has not given me undoubted proofs of his concern and regard.

"What is more extraordinary, the cry of religion could not hinder the
ladies from being violently my partisans, and I owe my success in a
great measure to their solicitations. One has broke off all commerce
with her lover, because he voted against me! and W. Lockhart, in a
speech to the Faculty, said that there was no walking the streets, nor
even enjoying one's own fireside, on account of their importunate zeal.
The town says, that even his bed was not safe for him, though his wife
was cousin-german to my antagonist.

"'Twas vulgarly given out, that the contest was betwixt Deists and
Christians; and when the news of my success came to the Play-house, the
whisper ran that the Christians were defeated. Are you not surprised
that we could keep our popularity, notwithstanding this imputation,
which my friends could not deny to be well founded?

"The whole body of cadies bought flambeux, and made illuminations to
mark their pleasure at my success; and next morning I had the drums and
town music at my door, to express their joy, as they said, of my being
made a great man. They could not imagine, that so great a fray could be
raised about so mere a trifle.

"About a fortnight before, I had published a Discourse of the Protestant
Succession, wherein I had very liberally abused both Whigs and Tories;
yet I enjoyed the favour of both parties.

"Such, dear Doctor, is the triumph of your friend; yet, amidst all this
greatness and glory, even though master of 30,000 volumes, and
possessing the smiles of a hundred fair ones, in this very pinnacle of
human grandeur and felicity, I cast a favourable regard on you, and
earnestly desire your friendship and good-will: a little flattery too,
from so eminent a hand, would be very acceptable to me. You know you are
somewhat in my debt, in that particular. The present I made you of my
Inquiry, was calculated both as a mark of my regard, and as a snare to
catch a little incense from you. Why do you put me to the necessity of
giving it to myself?

"Please tell General St. Clair, that W. St. Clair, the Advocate, voted
for me on his account; but his nephew, Sir David, was so excessively
holy, that nothing could bring him over from the opposite party, for
which he is looked down upon a little by the fashionable company in
town. But he is a very pretty fellow, and will soon regain the little
ground he has lost.

"I am, dear Doctor, yours sincerely."


This letter is evidently but half serious. That there was a good deal of
contest and caballing is pretty clear; and it is equally clear that Hume
took a deep interest in the result: but he appears to have been inclined
to laugh a little at his own fervour, and to hide the full extent of his
feelings under a cloud of playful exaggeration.

The Advocates' Library, which is now probably next in extent in Britain
after the Bodleian, cannot then have borne any great proportion to its
present size. It had, however, existed for upwards of seventy years, and
was undoubtedly the largest collection of books in Scotland. It was
rich, perhaps unrivalled, in the works of the civilians and canonists,
and possessed, what was more valuable to Hume, a considerable body of
British historical literature, printed and MS.[373:1] Hume's duties must
have involved some attention, not only to the classification and custody
of the books, but to the arrangements for making them accessible to the
members of the Faculty, as numerous entries in his hand are to be found
in the receipt book for borrowed books.[373:2]

Hume informs us, that the stores thus put at his command enabled him to
put his historical designs in practice, by commencing the "History of
England." We shall now find a great part of his correspondence devoted
to the "History of the House of Stuart," which appears to have been
commenced early in 1752. The following is the earliest extant letter to
Smith:


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_24th Sept. 1752._

"DEAR SIR,--I confess I was once of the same opinion with you, and
thought that the best period to begin an English history was about Henry
the Seventh. But you will please to observe, that the change which then
happened in public affairs, was very insensible, and did not display its
influence till many years afterwards. 'Twas under James that the House
of Commons began first to raise their head, and then the quarrel betwixt
privilege and prerogative commenced. The government, no longer oppressed
by the enormous authority of the crown, displayed its genius; and the
factions which then arose, having an influence on our present affairs,
form the most curious, interesting, and instructive part of our history.
The preceding events, or causes, may easily be shown, in a reflection or
review, which may be artfully inserted in the body of the work; and the
whole, by that means, be rendered more compact and uniform. I confess,
that the subject appears to me very fine; and I enter upon it with great
ardour and pleasure. You need not doubt of my perseverance.

"I am just now diverted for a moment, by correcting my 'Essays Moral and
Political,' for a new edition. If any thing occur to you to be inserted
or retrenched, I shall be obliged to you for the hint. In case you
should not have the last edition by you, I shall send you a copy of it.
In that edition I was engaged to act contrary to my judgment, in
retaining the sixth and seventh Essays,[375:1] which I had resolved to
throw out, as too frivolous for the rest, and not very agreeable
neither, even in that trifling manner: but Millar, my bookseller, made
such protestations against it, and told me how much he had heard them
praised by the best judges, that the bowels of a parent melted, and I
preserved them alive.

"All the rest of Bolingbroke's works went to the press last week, as
Millar informs me. I confess my curiosity is not much raised.

"I had almost lost your letter by its being wrong directed. I received
it late, which was the reason why you got not sooner a copy of Joannes
Magnus. Direct to me in Riddal's Land, Lawnmarket. I am, dear Sir, yours
sincerely."[376:1]


HUME _to_ DR. CLEPHANE.

_1753._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--I need not inform you, that in certain polite countries,
a custom prevails, of writing _lettres de la nouvelle année_, and that
many advantages result from this practice, which may seem merely
ceremonious and formal. Acquaintance is thereby kept up, friendship
revived, quarrels extinguished, negligence atoned for, and
correspondences renewed. A man who has been so long conscious of his
sins, that he knows not how to return into the way of salvation, taking
advantage of this great jubilee, wipes off all past offences, and
obtains plenary indulgence; instances are not wanting of such reclaimed
sinners, who have afterwards proved the greatest saints, and have even
heaped up many works of supererogation. Will you allow me, therefore,
dear Doctor, in consideration of my present penitence, and hopes of my
future amendment, to address myself to you, and to wish you many and
happy new years, _multos et felices_. May pleasures spiritual
(_spirituels_) multiply upon you without a decay of the carnal. May
riches increase without an augmentation of desires. May your chariot
still roll along without a failure of your limbs. May your tongue in due
time acquire the _social sweet garrulity_ of age, without your teeth
losing the sharpness and keenness of youth. May ---- but you yourself
will best supply the last prayer, whether it should be for the recovery
or continuance of the blessing which I hint at. In either case, may your
prayer be granted, even though it should extend to the resurrection of
the dead.

"I must now set you an example, and speak of myself. By this I mean that
you are to speak to me of yourself. I shall exult and triumph to you a
little, that I have now at last--being turned of forty, to my own
honour, to that of learning, and to that of the present age--arrived at
the dignity of being a householder. About seven months ago, I got a
house of my own, and completed a regular family; consisting of a head,
viz. myself, and two inferior members, a maid and a cat. My sister has
since joined me, and keeps me company. With frugality I can reach, I
find, cleanliness, warmth, light, plenty, and contentment. What would
you have more? Independence? I have it in a supreme degree. Honour? that
is not altogether wanting. Grace? that will come in time. A wife? that
is none of the indispensable requisites of life. Books? that _is_ one of
them; and I have more than I can use. In short, I cannot find any
blessing of consequence which I am not possessed of, in a greater or
less degree; and without any great effort of philosophy, I may be easy
and satisfied.

"As there is no happiness without occupation, I have begun a work which
will employ me several years, and which yields me much satisfaction.
'Tis a History of Britain, from the Union of the Crowns to the present
time. I have already finished the reign of King James. My friends
flatter me (by this I mean that they don't flatter me) that I have
succeeded. You know that there is no post of honour in the English
Parnassus more vacant than that of history. Style, judgment,
impartiality, care--every thing is wanting to our historians; and even
Rapin, during this latter period, is extremely deficient. I make my work
very concise, after the manner of the ancients. It divides into three
very moderate volumes: one to end with the death of Charles the First;
the second at the Revolution; the third at the Accession,[378:1] for I
dare come no nearer the present times. The work will neither please the
Duke of Bedford nor James Fraser; but I hope it will please you and
posterity. Κτῆμα εις ἀεὶ.

"So, dear Doctor, after having mended my pen, and bit my nails, I return
to the narration of parliamentary factions, or court intrigues, or civil
wars, and bid you heartily adieu.

"_Edinburgh, Riddal's Land, 5th January, 1753._

"P.S.--When I say that I dare come no nearer the present time than the
Accession, you are not to imagine that I am afraid either of danger or
offence; I hope, in many instances, that I have shown myself to be above
all laws of prudence and discretion. I only mean, that I should be
afraid of committing mistakes, in writing of so recent a period, by
reason of the want of materials."[379:1]


HUME _to_ DR. CLEPHANE.

"_Edinburgh, 6th March, 1753._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--This is delivered to you by my friend Mr.
Wedderburn,[379:2] who makes a jaunt to London, partly with a view to
study, partly to entertainment. I thought I could not do him a better
office, nor more suitable to both these purposes, than to recommend him
to the friendship and acquaintance of a man of learning and
conversation. He is young:

                       'Mais dans les ames bien nées
     La vertue n'attend point le nombre des années.'

It will be a great obligation, both to him and me, if you give him
encouragement to see you frequently; and, after that, I doubt not you
will think that you owe me an obligation--

     'La in giovenile corpo senile senno.'

"But I will say no more of him, lest my letter fall into the same fault
which may be remarked in his behaviour and conduct in life; the only
fault which has been remarked in them, that of promising so much that it
will be difficult for him to support it. You will allow that he must
have been guilty of some error of this kind, when I tell you that the
man, with whose friendship and company I have thought myself very much
favoured, and whom I recommend to you as a friend and companion, is just
twenty. I am, dear Doctor, your affectionate friend and servant."[379:3]


HUME _to_ JAMES OSWALD.

"_Jack's Land, 28th June, 1753._

"DEAR SIR,--I am to give you great and very hearty thanks for your care
in providing for my cousin, at my desire. The quickness in doing it, and
the many obliging circumstances attending that good office, I shall not
readily forget. What is usual, they say, makes little impression; but
that this rule admits of exceptions, I feel upon every instance of your
friendship.

"Mr. Mure told me that you had undertaken to get satisfaction with
regard to the old English _subsidies_. I cannot satisfy myself on that
head; but I find that all historians and antiquarians are as much at a
loss. The nobility, I observe, paid according to their rank and quality,
not their estates. The counties were subjected to no valuation; but it
was in the power of the commissioners to sink the sums demanded upon
every individual, without raising it upon others; and they practised
this art when discontented with the court, as Charles complains of with
regard to the subsidies voted by his third parliament: yet it seems
certain that there must have been some rule of estimation. What was it?
Why was it so variable? Lord Strafford raised an Irish subsidy from
£12,000 to £40,000, by changing the rule of valuation; but the Irish
Parliament, after his impeachment, brought it down again: if Mr. Harding
undertakes the solution of this matter, it will be requisite to have
these difficulties in his eye. I am glad to hear that we are to have
your company here this summer, and that I shall have an opportunity of
talking over this, and many other subjects, where I want your advice and
opinion. The more I advance in my work, the more I am convinced that the
history of England has never yet been written; not only for style,
which is notorious to all the world, but also for matter; such is the
ignorance and partiality of all our historians. Rapin, whom I had an
esteem for, is totally despicable. I may be liable to the reproach of
ignorance, but I am certain of escaping that of partiality: the truth
is, there is so much reason to blame, and praise, alternately, king and
parliament, that I am afraid the mixture of both, in my composition,
being so equal, may pass sometimes for an affectation, and not the
result of judgment and evidence. Of this you shall be judge; for I am
resolved to encroach on your leisure and patience;

     Quem vero arripuit, tenet occiditque legendo.

Let me hear of you as you pass through the town, that we may concert
measures for my catching you idle, and without company, at Kirkcaldy. I
am," &c.[381:1]


The rapidity with which the first volume of the "History of England" was
composed and printed, has been the object both of surprise and censure.
Hume's labours at this time must have been intense; and during the whole
of the period in which he was engaged in the different departments of
this great work--from 1752 to 1763--his correspondence is more scanty
than at other periods of his history. Four months elapse between the
