notes on subjects that attracted his attention bear on this subject. The
collection from which they are taken will be noticed in the next
chapter; but as those which are set apart from the others, and are
headed "Natural Philosophy," seem to have been written at an earlier
period than the rest of the collection, and are appropriate to the
present subject, they are here given. It is not expected that they will
awaken in the natural philosopher any great respect for the extent of
Hume's inquiries in this department of knowledge.


NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.

"A ship sails always swiftest when her sides yield a little.

"Two pieces of timber, resting upon one another, will bear as much as
both of them laid across at the distance of their opening.

"Calcined antimony more heavy than before.[95:1]

"A proof that natural philosophy has no truth in it, is, that it has
only succeeded in things remote, as the heavenly bodies; or minute, as
light.

"'Tis probable that mineral waters are not formed by running over beds
of minerals, but by imbibing the vapours which form these minerals,
since we cannot make mineral waters with all the same qualities.

"Hot mineral waters come not a-boiling sooner than cold water.

"Hot iron put into cold water soon cools, but becomes hot again.

"There falls usually at Paris, in June, July, and August, as much rain
as in the other nine months.

"This seems to be a strong presumption against medicines, that they are
mostly disagreeable, and out of the common use of life. For the weak and
uncertain operation of the common food, &c. is well known by experience.
These others are the better objects of quackery."


The system of philosophy to which the foregoing remarks apply, was
published when its author was twenty-six years old, and he completed it
in voluntary exile, and in that isolation from the counsel and sympathy
of early friends, which is implied by a residence in an obscure spot in
a foreign country. While he was framing his metaphysical theory, Hume
appears to have permitted no confidential adviser to have access to the
workings of his inventive genius; and as little did he take for granted
any of the reasonings and opinions of the illustrious dead, as seek
counsel of the living. Nowhere is there a work of genius more completely
authenticated, as the produce of the solitary labour of one mind; and
when we reflect on the boldness and greatness of the undertaking, we
have a picture of self-reliance calculated to inspire both awe and
respect. The system seems to be characteristic of a lonely mind--of one
which, though it had no enmity with its fellows, had yet little sympathy
with them. It has few of the features that characterize a partaker in
the ordinary hopes and fears, the joys and sorrows, of humanity; little
to give impulse to the excitement of the enthusiast; nothing to dry the
tear of the mourner. It exposes to poor human reason her own weakness
and nakedness, and supplies her with no extrinsic support or protection.
Such a work, coming from a man at the time of life when our sympathies
with the world are strongest, and our anticipations brightest, would
seem to indicate a mind rendered callous by hardship and disappointment.
But it was not so with Hume. His coldness and isolation were in his
theories alone; as a man he was frank, warm, and friendly. But the same
impulses which gave him resolution to adopt so bold a step, seem at the
same time to have armed him with a hard contempt for the opinions of the
rest of mankind. Hence, though his philosophy is sceptical, his manner
is frequently dogmatical, even to intolerance; and while illustrating
the feebleness of all human reasoning, he seems as if he felt an innate
infallibility in his own. He afterwards regretted this peculiarity; and
in a letter, written apparently at an advanced period of life, we find
him deprecating not only the tone of the Inquiry, but many of its
opinions. He says:--


"Allow me to tell you, that I never asserted so absurd a proposition as
_that any thing might arise without a cause_. I only maintained that our
certainty of the falsehood of that proposition proceeded neither from
intuition nor demonstration, but from another source. _That Cæsar
existed_, that there is such an island as Sicily,--for these
propositions, I affirm, we have no demonstration nor intuitive
proof,--would you infer that I deny their _truth_, or even their
certainty? There are many different kinds of certainty; and some of them
as satisfactory to the mind, though perhaps not so regular as the
demonstrative kind.

"Where a man of sense mistakes my meaning, I own I am angry; but it is
only with myself, for having expressed my meaning so ill, as to have
given occasion to the mistake.

"That you may see I would no way scruple of owning my mistakes in
argument, I shall acknowledge (what is infinitely more material) a very
great mistake in conduct, viz. my publishing at all the 'Treatise of
Human Nature,' a book which pretended to innovate in all the sublimest
paths of philosophy, and which I composed before I was five-and-twenty;
above all, the positive air which prevails in that book, and which may
be imputed to the ardour of youth, so much displeases me, that I have
not patience to review it. But what success the same doctrines, better
illustrated and expressed, may meet with, _adhuc sub judice lis est_.
The arguments have been laid before the world, and by some philosophical
minds have been attended to. I am willing to be instructed by the
public; though human life is so short, that I despair of ever seeing the
decision. I wish I had always confined myself to the more easy parts of
erudition; but you will excuse me from submitting to a proverbial
decision, let it even be in Greek."[98:1]


The reader, who passes from the first book of the Treatise, on "the
Understanding," to the second, on "the Passions," will, in many
instances, feel like one who is awakened from a dream, or as if, after
penetrating in solitude and darkness into the unseen world of thought,
he had come forth to the cheerful company of mankind, and were holding
converse with a shrewd and penetrating observer of the passing world. As
Hume was never totally insensible to the elements of social enjoyment,
but had indeed an ample sympathy with the joys and sorrows of his fellow
men, he appears occasionally, in the midst of his most subtle
speculations, to experience a desire to burst from the dark prison of
solitude, into which he had voluntarily immured himself, and bask in the
sunshine of the world. "Man," he says, in his Treatise, "is the creature
of the universe who has the most ardent desire of society, and is fitted
for it by the most advantages. We can form no wish which has not a
reference to society. A perfect solitude is, perhaps, the greatest
punishment we can suffer. Every pleasure languishes when enjoyed apart
from company, and every pain becomes more cruel and intolerable." In a
remarkable passage, in which, after having long proceeded in enthusiasm
with his solitary labours, he seems to have stopped for a moment, and
recalling within himself the feelings and sympathies of an ordinary man,
to have reflected on the scope and tendency of the system in which he
was involving himself, he thus expresses himself, regarding its gloomy
tendency, and the effect it has in destroying, in the mind of its
fabricator, those stays of satisfactory belief in which it is so
comfortable for the wearied intellect to find a resting-place:--

     Before I launch out into those immense depths of philosophy
     which lie before me, I find myself inclined to stop a moment
     in my present station, and to ponder that voyage which I have
     undertaken, and which undoubtedly requires the utmost art and
     industry to be brought to a happy conclusion. Methinks I am
     like a man, who, having struck on many shoals, and having
     narrowly escaped shipwreck in passing a small frith, has yet
     the temerity to put out to sea in the same leaky
     weather-beaten vessel, and even carries his ambition so far as
     to think of compassing the globe under these disadvantageous
     circumstances. My memory of past errors and perplexities makes
     me diffident for the future. The wretched condition, weakness,
     and disorder of the faculties, I must employ in my inquiries,
     increase my apprehensions. And the impossibility of amending
     or correcting these faculties, reduces me almost to despair,
     and makes me resolve to perish on the barren rock, on which I
     am at present, rather than venture myself upon that boundless
     ocean which runs out into immensity. This sudden view of my
     danger strikes me with melancholy; and, as 'tis usual for that
     passion, above all others, to indulge itself, I cannot forbear
     feeding my despair with all those desponding reflections which
     the present subject furnishes me with in such abundance.

     I am first affrighted and confounded with that forlorn
     solitude in which I am placed in my philosophy, and fancy
     myself some strange uncouth monster, who, not being able to
     mingle and unite in society, has been expelled all human
     commerce, and left utterly abandoned and disconsolate. Fain
     would I run into the crowd for shelter and warmth, but cannot
     prevail with myself to mix with such deformity. I call upon
     others to join me, in order to make a company apart, but no
     one will hearken to me. Every one keeps at a distance, and
     dreads that storm which beats upon me from every side. I have
     exposed myself to the enmity of all metaphysicians, logicians,
     mathematicians, and even theologians; and can I wonder at the
     insults I must suffer? I have declared my disapprobation of
     their systems; and can I be surprised if they should express a
     hatred of mine and of my person? When I look abroad, I foresee
     on every side dispute, contradiction, anger, calumny, and
     detraction. When I turn my eye inward, I find nothing but
     doubt and ignorance. All the world conspires to oppose and
     contradict me; though such is my weakness, that I feel all my
     opinions loosen and fall of themselves, when unsupported by
     the approbation of others. Every step I take is with
     hesitation, and every new reflection makes me dread an error
     and absurdity in my reasoning.

     For with what confidence can I venture upon such bold
     enterprises, when, beside those numberless infirmities
     peculiar to myself, I find so many which are common to human
     nature? Can I be sure that, in leaving all established
     opinions, I am following truth? and by what criterion shall I
     distinguish her, even if fortune should at last guide me on
     her footsteps? After the most accurate and exact of my
     reasonings, I can give no reason why I should assent to it,
     and feel nothing but a _strong_ propensity to consider objects
     _strongly_ in that view under which they appear to me.[101:1]

Occasionally, seduced by some impulse of playful candour, we find him
giving us admission as it were into the chamber of his thoughts, and
desiring that some one would drag him into the common circle of the
world. When there, he consents for a short time to comport himself as a
man, is social and sympathetic with his kind, and pleased with what is
passing around; when anon the ambition which had prompted his solitary
musings stirs his soul, tells him that in active life and the world at
large, the sphere of his true greatness is not placed, and prompts him
to reimprison himself, and pursue the great aim of his existence.

     But what have I here said, that reflections very refined and
     metaphysical have little or no influence upon us? This opinion
     I can scarce forbear retracting, and condemning from my
     present feeling and experience. The _intense_ view of these
     manifold contradictions and imperfections in human reason has
     so wrought upon me, and heated my brain, that I am ready to
     reject all belief and reasoning, and can look upon no opinion
     even as more probable or likely than another. Where am I, or
     what? From what causes do I derive my existence, and to what
     condition shall I return? Whose favour shall I court, and
     whose anger must I dread? What beings surround me? and on whom
     have I any influence, or who have any influence on me? I am
     confounded with all these questions, and begin to fancy myself
     in the most deplorable condition imaginable, environed with
     the deepest darkness, and utterly deprived of the use of every
     member and faculty.

     Most fortunately it happens, that since Reason is incapable of
     dispelling these clouds, Nature herself suffices to that
     purpose, and cures me of this philosophical melancholy and
     delirium, either by relaxing this bent of mind, or by some
     avocation, and lively impression of my senses, which
     obliterate all these chimeras. I dine, I play a game of
     backgammon, I converse, and am merry with my friends; and
     when, after three or four hours' amusement, I would return to
     these speculations, they appear so cold, and strained, and
     ridiculous, that I cannot find in my heart to enter into them
     any farther.

     Here, then, I find myself absolutely and necessarily
     determined to live, and talk, and act like other people in the
     common affairs of life. But notwithstanding that my natural
     propensity, and the course of my animal spirits and passions
     reduce me to this indolent belief in the general maxims of the
     world, I still feel such remains of my former disposition,
     that I am ready to throw all my books and papers into the
     fire, and resolve never more to renounce the pleasures of life
     for the sake of reasoning and philosophy. For those are my
     sentiments in that splenetic humour which governs me at
     present. I may, nay I must yield to the current of nature, in
     submitting to my senses and understanding; and in this blind
     submission I show most perfectly my sceptical disposition and
     principles. But does it follow that I must strive against the
     current of nature, which leads me to indolence and pleasure;
     that I must seclude myself, in some measure, from the commerce
     and society of men, which is so agreeable; and that I must
     torture my brain with subtilties and sophistries, at the very
     time that I cannot satisfy myself concerning the
     reasonableness of so painful an application, nor have any
     tolerable prospect of arriving by its means at truth and
     certainty? Under what obligation do I lie of making such an
     abuse of time? And to what end can it serve, either for the
     service of mankind, or for my own private interest? No: if I
     must be a fool, as all those who reason or believe any thing
     _certainly_ are, my follies shall at least be natural and
     agreeable. Where I strive against my inclination, I shall have
     a good reason for my resistance; and will no more be led
     a-wandering into such dreary solitudes, and rough passages, as
     I have hitherto met with.

     These are the sentiments of my spleen and indolence; and
     indeed I must confess, that philosophy has nothing to oppose
     to them, and expects a victory more from the returns of a
     serious good-humoured disposition, than from the force of
     reason and conviction. In all the incidents of life, we ought
     still to preserve our scepticism. If we believe that fire
     warms, or water refreshes, 'tis only because it costs us too
     much pains to think otherwise. Nay, if we are philosophers, it
     ought only to be upon sceptical principles, and from an
     inclination which we feel to the employing ourselves after
     that manner. Where reason is lively, and mixes itself with
     some propensity, it ought to be assented to. Where it does
     not, it never can have any title to operate upon us.

     At the time, therefore, that I am tired with amusement and
     company, and have indulged a _reverie_ in my chamber, or in a
     solitary walk by a river side, I feel my mind all collected
     within itself, and am naturally _inclined_ to carry my view
     into all those subjects, about which I have met with so many
     disputes in the course of my reading and conversation. I
     cannot forbear having a curiosity to be acquainted with the
     principles of moral good and evil, the nature and foundation
     of government, and the cause of those several passions and
     inclinations which actuate and govern me. I am uneasy to think
     I approve of one object, and disapprove of another; call one
     thing beautiful, and another deformed; decide concerning truth
     and falsehood, reason and folly, without knowing upon what
     principles I proceed. I am concerned for the condition of the
     learned world, which lies under such a deplorable ignorance in
     all these particulars. I feel an ambition to arise in me of
     contributing to the instruction of mankind, and of acquiring a
     name by my inventions and discoveries. These sentiments spring
     up naturally in my present disposition; and should I
     endeavour to banish them, by attaching myself to any other
     business or diversion, I _feel_ I should be a loser in point
     of pleasure; and this is the origin of my philosophy.[104:1]

The acuteness which the solitary metaphysician brought to his aid when
he chose to contemplate mankind, is not the least interesting feature in
his book. That he could have seen much of men, since his life had been
but brief and his converse with books great, is not probable; yet
Chesterfield and Rochefoucauld did not observe men more clearly and
truly, though they may have done so more extensively. The following
sketch of the mental features of a vain man, would not have been
unworthy of Theophrastus.

     Every thing belonging to a vain man is the best that is any
     where to be found. His houses, equipage, furniture, clothes,
     horses, hounds, excel all others in his conceit; and 'tis easy
     to observe, that from the least advantage in any of these, he
     draws a new subject of pride and vanity. His wine, if you'll
     believe him, has a finer flavour than any other; his cookery
     is more exquisite; his table more orderly; his servant more
     expert; the air in which he lives more healthful; the soil he
     cultivates more fertile; his fruits ripen earlier, and to
     greater perfection; such a thing is remarkable for its
     novelty; such another for its antiquity: this is the
     workmanship of a famous artist; that belonged to such a prince
     or great man; all objects, in a word, that are useful,
     beautiful, or surprising, or are related to such, may, by
     means of property, give rise to this passion. These agree in
     giving pleasure, and agree in nothing else. This alone is
     common to them, and therefore must be the quality that
     produces the passion, which is their common effect.[104:2]


FOOTNOTES:

[48:1] A literary friend suggests that Hume has a quiet allusion to the
intellectual faculties of the people of Bristol, in the description of
James Naylor's attempts to personify our Saviour, where it is said, "he
entered Bristol mounted on a horse--I suppose from the difficulty in
that place of finding an ass." Retrospect of manners &c., at the end of
the History of the Commonwealth.

[52:1] It is not improbable that the person here alluded to is the Abbé
Pluche, a native of Rheims, the greatest literary ornament of that city,
and one who filled no small place in the lettered aristocracy of France,
where he held in many respects the position which Paley occupied in
England. He filled successively the chairs of Humanity and Rhetoric, in
the University of Rheims. His promotion in the Church was checked by his
partiality for Jansenism. He had the rare merit of uniting to a firm
belief in the great truths of Christianity a wide and full toleration
for the conscientious opinions of others; and he enjoyed, what is no
less rarely possessed by those who meddle in theological disputes, the
good opinion of his opponents. He was a great scholar, and wrote some
works on etymological and archæological subjects; but he is chiefly
known for his writings on natural theology, celebrated for their clear
and animated enunciation of the harmonies of nature, and not only
popular in their own country, but translated into most of the European
languages. His "Spectacle de la Nature," written in a series of
dialogues, was sketched while he acted as instructor to the son of Lord
Stafford; and the master and pupil, with the father and mother of the
latter, are the interlocutors. One of its main objects is, by tracing
effects in the operations of nature to their causes, to prove and
illustrate the beneficence and wisdom of the Deity. This work has been a
treasure to many an English schoolboy, in its well-known translation,
with the title, "Nature Displayed." An answer by Pluche to some _esprits
forts_, who wondered why a philosopher could believe so much, has been
preserved by his contemporaries: "It is more reasonable," he said, "to
believe in the dictates of the Supreme Being than to follow the feeble
lights of a reason bounded in its operations and subject to error."

It must be granted that what Hume calls the association of contrariety
has in some measure caused this digression, and that the Abbé Pluche
would not have been so amply discussed as the possible learned man that
Hume had an introduction to, had there not been so much that is common
in the subjects treated of by both, and so much that is contrasted in
the mode of treatment. Pluche was an opponent of Des Cartes, and thus a
name far greater than his, and as many will hold greater than Hume's, is
introduced into the circle of these local associations.

[53:1] The following passage in a recent work, Mrs. Shelley's "Rambles
in Germany and Italy," seems appropriate to this observation:--

"By this time I became aware of a truth which had dawned on me before,
that the French common people have lost much of that grace of manner
which once distinguished them above all other people. More courteous
than the Italians they could not be; but, while their manners were more
artificial, they were more playful and winning. All this has changed. I
did not remark the alteration so much with regard to myself, as in their
mode of speaking to one another. The 'Madame,' and 'Monsieur,' with
which stable boys, and old beggar women, used to address each other with
the deference of courtiers, has vanished. No trace of it is to be found
in France; a shadow faintly exists among the Parisian shopkeepers when
speaking to their customers, but only there is the traditional
phraseology still used: The courteous accent, the soft manner, erst so
charming, exists no longer. I speak of a thing known and acknowledged by
the French themselves. . . . . . Their phraseology, once so delicately
and even to us more straightforward people, amusingly deferential (not
to superiors only, but toward one another,) is become blunt, and almost
rude. The French allege several causes for this change, which they date
from the Revolution of 1830: some say it arises from every citizen
turning out as one of the national guard in his turn, so that they all
get a _ton de garnison_: others attribute it to their imitation of the
English. Of course, in the times of the _ancien regime_, the courtly
tone found an echo and reflexion, from the royal anti-chambers down to
the very ends of the kingdom. This has faded by degrees, till the
Revolution of 1830 gave it the _coup-de-grâce_."

[55:1] Sic in MS.

[56:1] This word is nearly obliterated. The passage appears to be a sort
of caricatured pompous politeness.

[56:2] MS. R.S.E.

[57:1] Dated 7th January, 1762, and written in relation to a copy of
Campbell's "Dissertation on Miracles," sent to him by Dr. Blair.

[58:1] It may be said, that, as Mackenzie's description of Hume's
character, this subject belongs to a later period of his life--the time
when Mackenzie was acquainted with him. But Mackenzie intended it to be
a true view of Hume's character as a young man; and it appears that it
properly belongs to that chronological period to which its author
assigned it.

[63:1] See above, p. 50. These reasonings appeared probably in a shape
more consonant with the author's later views in the "Philosophical
Essays," 1748.

[64:1] Tytler, Life of Kames, i. 84.

[65:1] Tytler, Life of Kames, i. 88.

[66:1] Original MS. R.S.E.

[67:1] According to some acceptations of the word metaphysical, which
seem to make it synonymous with transcendental, and referable solely to
the operations of pure reason, to the rejection of whatever is founded
on experiment, none of Hume's works are properly metaphysical; and by
the very foundation he has given to his philosophy, he has made it
empirical and consequently not metaphysical. The word metaphysical is,
however, here used in its ordinary, and, as it may be termed, popular
acceptation, and as applicable to any attempt to analyze mind or
describe its elements,--a subject in relation to which the word ontology
is also sometimes used.

[70:1] The term "ideas," in the philosophical nomenclature of Hume, is
thus used in a sense quite distinct from its previous current
acceptations, and as different from its vernacular use by Plato, in
reference to the archetypes of all the empirical objects of thought, as
from its employment by Locke, who used it to express "whatsoever is the
object of the understanding when a man thinks."

[75:1] "If we take as the utmost bounds of this system the orbit Uranus,
we shall find that it occupies a portion of space not less than three
thousand six hundred millions of miles in extent. The mind fails to form
an exact notion of a portion of space so immense; but some faint idea of
it may be obtained from the fact, that, if the swiftest race-horse ever
known, had begun to traverse it at full speed, at the time of the birth
of Moses, he could only as yet have accomplished half his
journey."--Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation, pp. 1-2. Here an
attempt is made to give a conception of abstract numbers, by calling up
in the mind the ideas deposited there from actual impressions. Hume had,
in the application of his theory to mathematics, to struggle with the
fact that no truths had a clearer and more distinct existence in the
mind than the abstract truths of the exact sciences; and feeling the
difficulty he thus had to encounter, he did not recur in his subsequent
works to this part of the sceptical theory. Kant seems to have filled up
the blank for him, by treating those truths as synthetical intuitions
anterior to experience in their abstract existence, though depending on
experience in the knowledge of their concrete application; but it may be
observed, that at the beginning of sect. 4. of his Inquiry, Hume seems
to have nearly anticipated some such principle.

[76:1] "If any impression gives rise to the idea of self, that
impression must continue invariably the same, through the whole course
of our lives: since self is supposed to exist after that manner. But
there is no impression constant and invariable. Pain and pleasure, grief
and joy, passions and sensations, succeed each other, and never all
exist at the same time. It cannot, therefore, be from any of these
impressions, or from any other, that the idea of self is derived;
and consequently there is no such idea. . . . . For my part, when
I enter most intimately into what I call _myself_, I always stumble
on some perception or other, of heat or cold, light or shade, love
or hatred, pain or pleasure. I never can catch _myself_ at any time
without a perception, and never can observe any thing but the
perception."--Treatise, B. i. p. iv. sect. 6.

[81:1] One cannot escape a feeling of astonishment on finding so great a
philosopher as Reid saying, (Active Powers, ch. ix.) that on this theory
day and night might be called mutually the cause and effect of each
other, on account of their mutual sequence: as if the observation of
those who have gone so far in civilisation as just to have seen ignited
bodies, had not data for concluding that that phenomenon which most
uniformly preceded the ramification of rays of light, was the appearance
of a luminous body.

[82:1] This refers to the notion, which may now be termed obsolete, at
least in philosophy, of an inherent power in the cause to produce the
effect--not to Kant's theory, which does not appear to be inconsistent
with the scientific application of Hume's.

[84:1] "Scepsis Scientifica; or, Confest Ignorance the Way to Science,
in an essay of the vanity of dogmatizing and confident opinion." By
Joseph Glanvill, M.A. 1665, 4to, p. 142. See this coincidence commented
on in the _Penny Cyclopædia_, art. Scepticism. The style of Glanvill's
work, in its rich variety of logical imagery and its powerful use of
antithesis, is formed on that of Sir Thomas Browne, whose "Vulgar
Errors" had been first published fifteen years earlier. That one who
wrote a book so full of wisdom--so bold, original, and firm in its
attacks on received fallacies, should also have been the champion of
belief in witchcraft, in which his prototype, Sir Thomas Browne, was
also a believer, is one of those inconsistencies in poor human nature,
which elicit much wonder, but no explanation. The following passages
from this curious and rare book are offered for the reader's
amusement:--

"We conclude many things impossibilities, which yet are easie
_feasables_. For by an unadvised transiliency, leaping from the effect
to its remotest cause, we observe not the connexion through the
interposal of more immediate causalities, which yet at last bring the
extremes together without a miracle. And hereupon we hastily conclude
that _impossible_ which we see not in the proximate capacity of its
_efficient_."--pp. 83-84.

"From this last-noted head ariseth that other of _joyning causes with
irrelevant effects_, which either refer not at all unto them, or in a
remoter capacity. Hence the Indian conceived so grossly of the _letter_
that discovered his theft; and that other who thought the watch an
_animal_. From hence grew the impostures of _charmes_ and _amulets_, and
other insignificant ceremonies; which to this day impose upon common
belief, as they did of old upon the _barbarism_ of the uncultivate
_heathen_. Thus effects unusual, whose causes run under ground, and are
more remote from ordinary discernment, are noted in the book of _vulgar
opinion_ with _digitus Deî_, or _Dæmonis_; though they owe no other
dependence to the _first_ than what is common to the whole _syntax_ of
beings, nor yet any more to the _second_ than what is given it by the
imagination of those unqualified judges. Thus, every unwonted _meteor_
is portentous; and the appearance of any unobserved _star_, some divine
_prognostick_. Antiquity thought _thunder_ the immediate voyce of
_Jupiter_, and impleaded them of impiety that referred it to natural
causalities. Neither can there happen a _storm_ at this remove from
_antique_ ignorance, but the multitude will have the _Devil_ in
it."--pp. 84-85.


_On the Influence of Education._

"We judge all things by our _anticipations_; and condemn or applaud
them, as they agree or differ from our _first receptions_. One country
laughs at the _laws_, _customs_, and _opinions_ of another as absurd and
ridiculous; and the other is as charitable to them in its conceit of
theirs."--pp. 93-94.

"Thus, like the hermite, we think the sun shines nowhere but in our
cell, and all the world to be darkness but ourselves. We judge truth to
be circumscribed by the confines of our belief, and the doctrines we
were brought up in; and, with as ill manners as those of _China_, repute
all the rest of the world _monoculous_. So that, what some astrologers
say of our _fortunes_ and the passages of our lives, may, by the
allowance of a metaphor, be said of our _opinions_--that they are
written in our _stars_, being to the most as fatal as those involuntary
occurrences, and as little in their power as the _placits_ of _destiny_.
We are bound to our country's _opinions_ as to its _laws_; and an
accustomed assent is tantamount to an infallible conclusion. He that
offers to dissent shall be an _outlaw_ in reputation; and the fears of
guilty Cain shall be fulfilled on him--whoever meets him _shall slay
him_."--pp. 95-96.

"We look with superstitious reverence upon the accounts of preterlapsed
ages, and with a supercilious severity on the more deserving products of
our own--a vanity which hath possessed all times as well as ours; and
the _golden age_ was never present. . . . We reverence gray-headed
doctrines, though feeble, decrepit, and within a step of dust: and on
this account maintain opinions which have nothing but our _charity_ to
uphold them."--p. 102.

[86:1] "Had I done but half as much as he [Hume] in labouring to subvert
principles which ought ever to be held sacred, I know not whether the
friends of truth would have granted me any indulgence, I am sure they
ought not. Let me be treated with the lenity due to a good citizen no
longer than I act as becomes one."--Beattie's Essay on the Nature and
Immutability of Truth, &c. p. 20.

On this Priestley says, "Certainly the obvious construction of this
passage is, that Mr. Hume ought not to be treated with the indulgence
and lenity due to a good citizen, but ought to be punished as a bad one.
And what is this but what a Bonner and a Gardiner might have put into
the preamble of an order for his execution. . . I for my part am truly
pleased with such publications as those of Mr. Hume, and I do not think
it requires any great sagacity or strength of mind, to see that such
writings must be of great service to religion, natural and revealed.
They have actually occasioned the subject to be more thoroughly
canvassed, and consequently to be better understood than ever it was
before, and thus _vice cotis funguntur_."[86:A]

     [86:A] Examination of Dr. Reid's Inquiry, &c. Dr. Beattie's
     Essay, &c. and Dr. Oswald's Appeal, &c. 1774, pp. 191-193.

[88:1] Critik der reinen Vernunft, (Methodenlehre,) 7th ed. p. 571.

[89:1] Preliminary Dissertation to the _Encyclopædia Britannica_, 210.

[95:1] A scientific friend observes, that this is the germ of the theory
of oxidation.

[98:1] I have been favoured by Mr. Chambers with an old copy of this
letter, in which it is titled as a letter to Gilbert Stuart. The
original is among the MSS. R.S.E. where there is a note in Baron Hume's
handwriting, with a supposition that it was addressed to Dr. Traill.

[101:1] B. i. part iv. sect. 7.

[104:1] B. i. part iv. sect. 7.

[104:2] B. ii. part i. sect. 10.




