letter last printed, and the next in order which has been preserved; and
in the latter, we find him very wittily alluding to those great labours
which he finds absorbing the petty duties of social intercourse.


HUME _to_ DR. CLEPHANE.

"_28th October, 1753._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--I know not if you remember the giant in Rabelais, who
swallowed every morning a windmill to breakfast, and at last was choked
upon a pound of melted butter, hot from an oven. I am going to compare
myself to that giant. I think nothing of despatching a quarto in fifteen
or eighteen months, but am not able to compose a letter once in two
years; and am very industrious to keep up a correspondence with
posterity, whom I know nothing about, and who, probably, will concern
themselves very little about me, while I allow myself to be forgot by my
friends, whom I value and regard. However, it is some satisfaction that
I can give you an account of my silence, with which I own I reproach
myself. I have now brought down my History to the death of Charles the
First: and here I intend to pause for some time; to read, and think, and
correct; to look forward and backward; and to adopt the most moderate
and most reasonable sentiments on all subjects. I am sensible that the
history of the two first Stuarts will be most agreeable to the Tories;
that of the two last to the Whigs; but we must endeavour to be above any
regard either to Whigs or Tories.

"Having thus satisfied your curiosity--for I will take it for granted
that your curiosity extends towards me--I must now gratify my own. I was
very anxious to hear that you had been molested with some disorders this
summer. I was told that you expected they would settle into a fit of the
gout. It is lucky where that distemper overtakes a man in his chariot:
we foot-walkers make but an awkward figure with it. I hope nobody has
the impertinence to say to you, Physician, cure thyself. All the world
allows that privilege to the gout, that it is not to be cured: it is
itself a physician; and, of course, sometimes cures and sometimes kills.
I fancy one fit of the gout would much increase your stock of
interjections, and render that part of speech, which in common grammars
is usually the most barren, with you more copious than either nouns or
verbs.

"I must tell you good news of our friend Sir Harry. I am informed that
his talent for eloquence will not rust for want of employment: he bids
fair for another seat of the house; and what is the charming part of the
story, it is General Anstruther's seat which he is to obtain. He has
made an attack on the General's boroughs, and, by the assistance of his
uncle's interest and purse, is likely to prevail. Is not this delicious
revenge? It brings to my mind the story of the Italian, who reading that
passage of Scripture, 'Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord,' burst forth,
'Ay, to be sure; it is too sweet for any mortal.' I own I envy Sir
Harry: I never can hope to hate any body so perfectly as he does that
renowned commander; and no victory, triumph, vengeance, success, can be
more complete. Are not you pleased too? Pray, anatomize your own mind,
and tell me how many grains of your satisfaction is owing to malice, and
how many ounces to friendship. I leave the rest of this paper to be
filled up by Edmonstone. I am, &c.

"P.S.--After keeping this by me eight days, I have never been able to
meet with Edmonstone. I must, therefore, send off my own part of a
letter which we projected in common. I shall only tell you, that I have
since seen Mr. Oswald, who assures me that Anstruther's defeat is
infallible."[383:1]


The following letter to the same friend is a curious instance of Hume's
diligent efforts to attain a correct English style:--


HUME _to_ DR. CLEPHANE.

"_Edinburgh, 8th Dec. 1753._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--I am at present reduced to the utmost straits and
difficulties. I know people are commonly ashamed to own such distresses.
But to whom can one have recourse in his misfortunes, but to his
friends? and who can I account my friend, if not Dr. Clephane? not a
friend only in the sunshine of fortune, but also in the shade of
adversity: not a security only in a calm; but in a storm a sheet-anchor.
But, to cut short all prefaces,--though, commonly, beggars and authors
abound with them, and I unite both these qualities,--the occasion of my
distress is as follows:

"You know that the word _enough_, or _enuff_, as it is pronounced by the
English, we commonly, in Scotland, when it is applied to number,
pronounce enow. Thus we would say: such a one has books enow for study,
but not leisure enuff. Now I want to know, whether the English make the
same distinction. I observed the distinction already in Lord
Shaftesbury; 'Though there be doors enow,' says he, 'to get out of
life;' and thinking that this distinction of spelling words, that had
both different letters, and different pronunciation, was an improvement,
I followed it in my learned productions, though I knew it was not usual.
But there has lately arisen in me a doubt, that this is a mere
Scotticism; and that the English always pronounce the word, as if it
were wrote enuff, whether it be applied to numbers or to quantity. To
you, therefore, I apply in this doubt and perplexity. Though I make no
question that your ear is well purged from all native impurities, yet
trust not entirely to it, but ask any of your English friends, that
frequent good company, and let me know their opinion.

"It is a rule of Vaugelas always to consult the ladies, rather than men,
in all doubts of language; and he asserts, that they have a more
delicate sense of the propriety of expressions. The same author advises
us, if we desire any one's opinion in any grammatical difficulty, not to
ask him directly; for that confounds his memory, and makes him forget
the use, which is the true standard of language. The best way, says he,
is to engage him as it were by accident, to employ the expression about
which we are in doubt. Now, if you are provided of any expedient, for
making the ladies pronounce the word enough, applied both to quantity
and number, I beg you to employ it, and to observe carefully and
attentively, whether they make any difference in the pronunciation. I
am, &c.

"P.S.--I am quite in earnest in desiring a solution of my grammatical
doubt."[385:1]


The gentle sensitive character, and hard fate of poor blind Thomas
Blacklock, the poet, operated strongly on Hume's kindly feelings. He
busied himself with many schemes for enabling his unfortunate friend to
gain a subsistence which might make him enjoy "the glorious privilege of
being independent:" but with small success. This appears to be the only
pursuit which he permitted to divert his attention, at this time, from
his great work. We find him writing the following letter to a person
whose position in society might enable him to do some substantial
service to Blacklock.


HUME _to_ MATTHEW SHARP _of Hoddam_.

"_Edinburgh, 25th February, 1754._

"DEAR SIR,--I have enclosed this letter under one to my friend Mr.
Blacklock, who has retired to Dumfries, and proposes to reside there for
some time. His character and situation are no doubt known to you, and
challenge the greatest regard from every one who has either good taste
or sentiments of humanity. He has printed a collection of poems, which
his friends are endeavouring to turn to the best account for him. Had he
published them in the common way, their merit would have recommended
them sufficiently to common sale; but, in that case, the greatest part
of the profit, it is well known, would have redounded to the
booksellers. His friends, therefore, take copies from him, and
distribute them among their acquaintances. The poems, if I have the
smallest judgment, are, many of them, extremely beautiful, and all of
them remarkable for correctness and propriety. Every man of taste, from
the merit of the performance, would be inclined to purchase them: every
benevolent man, from the situation of the author, would wish to
encourage him; and, as for those who have neither taste nor benevolence,
they should be forced, by importunity, to do good against their will. I
must, therefore, recommend it to you to send for a cargo of these poems,
which the author's great modesty will prevent him from offering to you,
and to engage your acquaintance to purchase them. But, dear sir, I would
fain go farther: I would fain presume upon our friendship, (which now
begins to be ancient between us,) and recommend to your civilities a man
who does honour to his country by his talents, and disgraces it by the
little encouragement he has hitherto met with. He is a man of very
extensive knowledge and of singular good dispositions; and his
poetical, though very much to be admired, is the least part of his
merit. He is very well qualified to instruct youth, by his acquaintance
both with the languages and sciences; and possesses so many arts of
supplying the want of sight, that that imperfection would be no
hinderance. Perhaps he may entertain some such project in Dumfries; and
be assured you could not do your friends a more real service than by
recommending them to him. Whatever scheme he may choose to embrace, I
was desirous you should be prepossessed in his favour, and be willing to
lend him your countenance and protection, which I am sensible would be
of great advantage to him.

"Since I saw you, I have not been idle. I have endeavoured to make some
use of the library which was intrusted to me, and have employed myself
in a composition of British History, beginning with the union of the two
crowns. I have finished the reigns of James and Charles, and will soon
send them to the press. I have the impudence to pretend that I am of no
party, and have no bias. Lord Elibank says, that I am a moderate Whig,
and Mr. Wallace that I am a candid Tory. I was extremely sorry that I
could not recommend your friend to Director Hume,[387:1] as Mr. Cummin
desired me. I have never exchanged a word with that gentleman since I
carried Jemmy Kirkpatrick to him; and our acquaintance has entirely
dropt. I am," &c.[387:2]


Another letter by Hume, longer and fuller of detail, though it has
already appeared in a work well known and much read,[387:3] seems to
demand insertion here. It is addressed to the author of Polymetis and
friend of Pope.


HUME _to_ JOSEPH SPENCE.

     _Edinburgh, Oct. 15, 1754._

     SIR,--The agreeable productions, with which you have
     entertained the public, have long given me a desire of being
     known to you: but this desire has been much increased by my
     finding you engage so warmly in protecting a man of merit, so
     helpless as Mr. Blacklock. I hope you will indulge me in the
     liberty I have taken of writing to you. I shall very willingly
     communicate all the particulars I know of him; though others,
     by their longer acquaintance with him, are better qualified
     for this undertaking.

     The first time I had ever seen or heard of Mr. Blacklock was
     about twelve years ago, when I met him in a visit to two young
     ladies. They informed me of his case, as far as they could in
     a conversation carried on in his presence. I soon found him to
     possess a very delicate taste, along with a passionate love of
     learning. Dr. Stevenson had, at that time, taken him under his
     protection; and he was perfecting himself in the Latin tongue.
     I repeated to him Mr. Pope's elegy to the memory of an
     unfortunate lady, which I happened to have by heart: and
     though I be a very bad reciter, I saw it affected him
     extremely. His eyes, indeed, the great index of the mind,
     could express no passion: but his whole body was thrown into
     agitation. That poem was equally qualified to touch the
     delicacy of his taste, and the tenderness of his feelings. I
     left the town a few days after; and being long absent from
     Scotland, I neither saw nor heard of him for several years. At
     last an acquaintance of mine told me of him, and said that he
     would have waited on me, if his excessive modesty had not
     prevented him. He soon appeared what I have ever since found
     him, a very elegant genius, of a most affectionate grateful
     disposition, a modest backward temper, accompanied with that
     delicate pride, which so naturally attends virtue in distress.
     His great moderation and frugality, along with the generosity
     of a few persons, particularly Dr. Stevenson and Provost
     Alexander, had hitherto enabled him to subsist. All his good
     qualities are diminished, or rather perhaps embellished, by a
     great want of knowledge of the world. Men of very benevolent
     or very malignant dispositions are apt to fall into this
     error; because they think all mankind like themselves: but I
     am sorry to say that the former are apt to be most egregiously
     mistaken.

     I have asked him whether he retained any idea of light or
     colours. He assured me that there remained not the least
     traces of them. I found, however, that all the poets, even the
     most descriptive ones, such as Milton and Thomson, were read
     by him with pleasure. Thomson is one of his favourites. I
     remembered a story in Locke of a blind man, who said that he
     knew very well what scarlet was: it was like the sound of a
     trumpet. I therefore asked him, whether he had not formed
     associations of that kind, and whether he did not connect
     colour and sound together. He answered, that as he met so
     often, both in books and conversation, with the terms
     expressing colours, he had formed some false associations,
     which supported him when he read, wrote, or talked of colours:
     but that the associations were of the intellectual kind. The
     illumination of the sun, for instance, he supposed to resemble
     the presence of a friend; the cheerful colour of green, to be
     like an amiable sympathy, &c. It was not altogether easy for
     me to understand him: though I believe, in much of our own
     thinking, there will be found some species of association.
     'Tis certain we always think in some language, viz. in that
     which is most familiar to us; and 'tis but too frequent to
     substitute words instead of ideas.

     If you was acquainted with any mystic, I fancy you would think
     Mr. Blacklock's case less paradoxical. The mystics certainly
     have associations by which their discourse, which seems jargon
     to us, becomes intelligible to themselves. I believe they
     commonly substitute the feelings of a common amour, in the
     place of their heavenly sympathies: and if they be not belied,
     the type is very apt to engross their hearts, and exclude the
     thing typified.

     Apropos to this passion, I once said to my friend, Mr.
     Blacklock, that I was sure he did not treat love as he did
     colours; he did not speak of it without feeling it. There
     appeared too much reality in all his expressions to allow that
     to be suspected. "Alas!" said he, with a sigh, "I could never
     bring my heart to a proper tranquillity on that head." Your
     passion, replied I, will always be better founded than ours,
     who have sight: we are so foolish as to allow ourselves to be
     captivated by exterior beauty: nothing but the beauty of the
     mind can affect you. "Not altogether neither," said he: "the
     sweetness of the voice has a mighty effect upon me: the
     symptoms of youth too, which the touch discovers, have great
     influence. And though such familiar approaches would be
     ill-bred in others, the girls of my acquaintance indulge me,
     on account of my blindness, with the liberty of running over
     them with my hand. And I can by that means judge entirely of
     their shape. However, no doubt, humour, and temper, and sense,
     and other beauties of the mind, have an influence upon me as
     upon others."

     You may see from this conversation how difficult it is even
     for a blind man to be a perfect Platonic. But though Mr.
     Blacklock never wants his Evanthe, who is the real object of
     his poetical addresses, I am well assured that all his
     passions have been perfectly consistent with the purest virtue
     and innocence. His life indeed has been in all respects
     perfectly irreproachable.

     He had got some rudiments of Latin in his youth, but could not
     easily read a Latin author till he was near twenty, when Dr.
     Stevenson put him to a grammar school in Edinburgh. He got a
     boy to lead him, whom he found very docible; and he taught him
     Latin. This boy accompanied him to the Greek class in the
     College, and they both learned Greek. Mr. Blacklock
     understands that language perfectly, and has read with a very
     lively pleasure all the Greek authors of taste. Mr. William
     Alexander, second son to our late provost, and present member,
     was so good as to teach him French; and he is quite master of
     that language. He has a very tenacious memory and a quick
     apprehension. The young students of the College were very
     desirous of his company, and he reaped the advantage of their
     eyes, and they of his instructions. He is a very good
     philosopher, and in general possesses all branches of
     erudition, except the mathematical. The lad who first attended
     him having left him, he has got another boy, whom he is
     beginning to instruct; and he writes me that he is extremely
     pleased with his docility. The boy's parents, who are people
     of substance, have put him into Mr. Blacklock's service,
     chiefly on account of the virtuous and learned education which
     they know he gives his pupils.

     As you are so generous to interest yourself in this poor man's
     case, who is so much an object both of admiration and
     compassion, I must inform you entirely of his situation. He
     has gained about one hundred guineas by this last edition of
     his poems, and this is the whole stock he has in the world. He
     has also a bursary, about six pounds a-year. I begun a
     subscription for supporting him during five years; and I made
     out twelve guineas a-year among my acquaintance. That is a
     most terrible undertaking; and some unexpected refusals I met
     with, damped me, though they have not quite discouraged me
     from proceeding. We have the prospect of another bursary of
     ten pounds a-year in the gift of the exchequer; but to the
     shame of human nature, we met with difficulties. Noblemen
     interpose with their valet-de-chambres or nurses' sons, who
     they think would be burdens on themselves. Could we ensure but
     thirty pounds a-year to this fine genius and man of virtue, he
     would be easy and happy: for his wants are none but those
     which Nature has given him, though she has unhappily loaded
     him with more than other men.

     His want of knowledge of the world, and the great delicacy of
     his temper, render him unfit for managing boys or teaching a
     school: he would retain no authority. Had it not been for this
     defect, he could have been made professor of Greek in the
     University of Aberdeen.

     Your scheme of publishing his poems by subscription, I hope
     will turn to account. I think it impossible he could want,
     were his case more generally known. I hope it will be so by
     your means. Sir George Lyttleton, who has so fine a taste, and
     so much benevolence of temper, would certainly, were the case
     laid before him in a just light, lend his assistance, or
     rather indeed quite overcome all difficulties. I know not,
     whether you have the happiness of that gentleman's
     acquaintance.

     As you are a lover of letters, I shall inform you of a piece
     of news, which will be agreeable to you: we may hope to see
     good tragedies in the English language. A young man called
     Hume, a clergyman of this country, discovers a very fine
     genius for that species of composition. Some years ago, he
     wrote a tragedy called Agis, which some of the best judges,
     such as the Duke of Argyle, Sir George Lyttleton, Mr. Pitt,
     very much approved of. I own, though I could perceive fine
     strokes in that tragedy, I never could in general bring myself
     to like it: the author, I thought, had corrupted his taste by
     the imitation of Shakspere, whom he ought only to have
     admired. But the same author has composed a new tragedy on a
     subject of invention; and here he appears a true disciple of
     Sophocles and Racine. I hope in time he will vindicate the
     English stage from the reproach of barbarism.

     I shall be very glad if the employing my name in your account
     of Mr. Blacklock can be of any service. I am, Sir, with great
     regard, &c.

     P.S.--Mr. Blacklock is very docible, and glad to receive
     corrections. I am only afraid he is too apt to have a
     deference for other people's judgment. I did not see the last
     edition till it was printed; but I have sent him some
     objections to passages, for which he was very thankful. I also
     desired him to retrench some poems entirely; such as the Ode
     on Fortitude, and some others, which seemed to me inferior to
     the rest of the collection. You will very much oblige him, if
     you use the same freedom. I remarked to him some Scotticisms;
     but you are better qualified for doing him that service. I
     have not seen any of his essays; and am afraid his prose is
     inferior to his poetry. He will soon be in town, when I shall
     be enabled to write you further particulars.

In 1756, Spence published his edition of Blacklock's poems, with a long
introduction, in which all allusion to Hume's letter, and his services
to Blacklock, is carefully avoided. Blacklock was subsequently
alienated from Hume, and was accused by some of ingratitude; while
others threw the odium of the dispute on Hume, who, they said, was
mortified because Spence's edition of Blacklock's Poems was not
dedicated to him. Whoever may have been in the wrong, the latter
supposition is erroneous, as we shall find Hume at a much later period
conferring services on Blacklock, who in his turn gratefully
acknowledges them. The zeal of Spence to blot from the work any mark
that might connect it with the name of Hume, is alluded to with
good-natured sarcasm, in a letter to Dr. Clephane, farther on.

The following letter, connected with another curious circumstance,
describes an incident in Hume's conduct to Blacklock.


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Edinburgh, 17th December, 1754._

"DEAR SIR,--I told you that I intended to apply to the Faculty for
redress; and, if refused, to throw up the library. I was assured that
two of the curators intended before the Faculty to declare their
willingness to redress me, after which there could be no difficulty to
gain a victory over the other two. But before the day came, the Dean
prevailed on them to change their resolution, and joined them himself
with all his interest. I saw it then impossible to succeed, and
accordingly retracted my application. But being equally unwilling to
lose the use of the books, and to bear an indignity, I retain the
office, but have given Blacklock, our blind poet, a bond of annuity for
the salary. I have now put it out of these malicious fellows' power to
offer me any indignity, while my motive for remaining in this office is
so apparent. I should be glad that you approve of my conduct. I own I
am satisfied with myself."[394:1]


The following minute or memorandum, in Hume's handwriting,[394:2]
explains the ground of his disgust. One of the "malicious fellows"
appears to have been Lord Monboddo; another, Sir David Dalrymple,
afterwards Lord Hailes, with whom he never was on very cordial terms.


"_Edinburgh, 27th June, 1754._

"This day Mr. James Burnet, [Mr. Thomas Millar,] and Sir David
Dalrymple, curators of the library, (then follow some arrangement as to
meetings,) having gone through some accounts of books, lately bought for
the library, and finding therein the three following French books, Les
Contes de La Fontaine, L'Histoire Amoureuse des Gaules, and L'Écumoire,
they ordain that the said books be struck out of the catalogue of the
library, and removed from the shelves as indecent books, and unworthy of
a place in a learned library.

"And to prevent the like abuses in time to come, they appoint that after
this no books shall be bought for the library, without the authority of
a meeting of the curators in time of session, and of two of them in time
of vacation."


It involves no approval of the licentious features of French literature,
to pronounce this resolution of the curators pre-eminently absurd. A
public library, purged of every book of which any portion might offend
the taste of a well-regulated mind of the present day, would
unfortunately be very barren in the most brilliant departments of the
literature of other days and other languages. It would be wrong in the
guardians of a public library to advance to the dignity of its shelves,
those loathsome books written for the promotion of vice, of which,
though they be published by no eminent bookseller, exhibited on no
respectable counter, advertised in no newspaper, too many have found
their way, by secret avenues, into the heart of society, where they
corrupt its life-blood. But if Greece, Rome, and France,--if our own
ancestors, had a freer tone in their imaginative literature than we
have, we must yet admit their works to our libraries, if we would have
these institutions depositaries of the genius of all times and all
places. The Faculty of Advocates are probably not less virtuous at this
moment than they were in 1754, yet they have now on their shelves the
brilliant edition of all La Fontaine's works, published at Amsterdam in
1762,--so that the expurgatory zeal of the three curators, had only put
their constituents to the expense of replacing the condemned
book.[396:1] L'Écumoire may also still be found in the Advocates'
library, along with the other still more censurable works of its author,
Crebillon the younger, who was certainly a free writer, but scarcely
deserved the very opprobrious name which he obtained, of the French
Petronius. Hume was afterwards the acquaintance and correspondent of
this author, who was anxious to hear that his works were well received
in Britain. Would Hume tell him that it was considered in Edinburgh an
offence against decency, to admit one of them to a national library? The
other condemned work, which is generally attributed to Bussy Rabutin, is
not now to be found in the catalogues of the Advocates' library.[396:2]

Amidst such unpleasant interruptions he brought the first volume of his
History to a conclusion; and thus announces the fact to a friend, while
in the midst of his satisfaction he does not forget poor Blacklock.


HUME _to_ DR. CLEPHANE.

"_Sept. 1, 1754._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--I desire you to give me joy. _Jamque opus exegi, &c._
This day I received from the press the last sheet of the volume of
history which I intended to publish; and I am already well advanced in
composing the second volume. It was impossible for the booksellers to
refuse to several the sight of the sheets as we went on; and Whig and
Tory, and Tory and Whig, (for I will alternately give them the
precedence,) combine as I am told in approving of my politics. A few
Christians only (and but a few) think I speak like a Libertine in
religion: be assured I am tolerably reserved on this head. Elliot tells
me that you had entertained apprehensions of my discretion: what I had
done to forfeit with you the character of prudence, I cannot tell, but
you will see little or no occasion for any such imputation in this work.
I composed it _ad populum_, as well as _ad clerum_, and thought, that
scepticism was not in its place in an historical production. I shall
take care to convey a copy to you by the first opportunity, and shall be
very proud of your approbation, and no less pleased with your
reprehensions.

"Our friend Aber is again to enjoy the privilege of franking after a
_hiatus valde deflendus_. Edmonstone is at Peterhead drinking the waters
for his health. Sir Harry lives among his boroughs, but not so assiduous
in his civilities as formerly; an instance of ingratitude which one
would not expect in a man of such nice honour. I was lately told, that
one day last winter he went to pay a visit to a deacon's wife, who
happened in that very instant to be gutting fish. He came up to her with
open arms, and said he hoped madam was well, and that the young ladies
her daughters were in good health. 'Oh, come not near me,' cried she,
'Sir Harry; I am in a sad pickle, as nasty as a beast.'--'Not at all,
madam,' replied he, 'you are in a very agreeable négligé.' 'Well,' said
she, 'I shall never be able to understand your fine English.'--'I mean,
madam,' returned he, 'that you are drest in a very genteel
_deshabillé_.'

"There is a young man of this country, Mr. Thomas Blacklock, who has
discovered a very fine genius for poetry, and under very extraordinary
circumstances. He is the son of a poor tradesman, and was born blind;
yet, notwithstanding these disadvantages, he has been able to acquire a
great knowledge of Greek, Latin, and French, and to be well acquainted
with all the classics in these languages, as well as in our own. He
published last winter a volume of Miscellanies, which all men of taste
admired extremely for their purity, elegance, and correctness; nor were
they devoid of force and invention. I sent up half-a-dozen to Dodsley,
desiring him to keep one, and to distribute the rest among men of taste
of his acquaintance. I find they have been much approved of, and that
Mr. Spence, in particular, has entertained thoughts of printing a new
edition by subscription, for the benefit of the author. You are an
acquaintance of Mr. Spence: encourage, I beseech you, so benevolent a
thought, and promote it every where by your recommendation. The young
man has a great deal of modesty, virtue, and goodness, as well as of
genius, and notwithstanding very strict frugality, is in great
necessities; but curst, or blest, with that honest pride of nature,
which makes him uneasy under obligations, and disdain all applications.
I need say no more to you. Dear Doctor, believe me, with great honesty
and affection, your friend and servant."[399:1]


Before the year 1754 came to an end, there was published, in a quarto
volume of four hundred and seventy-three pages, "The History of Great
Britain. Volume I. Containing the reigns of James I. and Charles I. By
David Hume, Esq."[399:2] He had now laid the foundation of a title to
that which all the genius and originality of his philosophical works
would never have procured for him--the reputation of a popular author.
His other works might exhibit a wider and a more original grasp of
thought: but the readers of metaphysics and ethics are a small number;
while the readers of history, and especially of the history of their own
country, are a community nearly as great as the number of those who can
read their own language. In this large market he produced his ware; and
after some hesitation on the part of those ordinary readers, who had
never known his genius as a philosopher, and of those who knew his
previous writings, but did not esteem them, it took the place of a
permanent marketable commodity--a sort of necessary of literary life.
The general reader found in it a distinct and animated narrative,
announced in a style easy, strong, and elegant. The philosopher and
statesman found in it profound and original views, such as the author of
the "Treatise of Human Nature" could not wield the pen without
occasionally dropping on his page. It was a work at once great in its
excellencies and beauties, and great in its defects; yet even the
latter circumstance swelled its fame, by producing a host of
controversial attacks, conducted by no mean champions. No author or
speaker could launch into a defence of monarchical prerogative without
triumphantly citing the opinion of Hume;--no friend of any popular
cause, from Chatham downwards, could appeal to history without
condemning his plausible perversions. No season of a debating society
has ever ended without the vexed questions he has started being
discussed in conjunction with his name. Every newspaper has recorded the
editor's opinion of the tendency of Hume's History. In reviews and
magazines, and political pamphlets, the references, laudatory or
condemnatory, are still, notwithstanding all that has been done for
British history in later times, unceasing; and some books, of no small
bulk, have been written, solely against the History, as one pamphlet is
written against another.

Of a book which is so universally known, and has been subjected to so
thorough a critical examination, both in its narrative and its
reflective parts, a detailed criticism in a work like the present would
be superfluous and unwelcome. But the great extent of the controversial
writings on the subject, the quantity of able criticism which the
controversy has produced, the new light it has frequently been the means
of throwing on portions of British history, and the variety of
contending opinions it has elicited, do, in some measure, enable one who
is partial to that kind of reading, to note slightly and fugitively the
leading opinions which this controversy has developed; and thus, looking
back through the whole vista of debate and inquiry, to describe, in
general terms, the estimate which those who have since Hume's time
studied British history to best effect, have formed of his great work.
Perhaps, for casting a glance at the general principles he has announced
as to the progress of the constitution and public opinion in Britain, as
well as the general scope and extent of his historical labours, his work
may be divided into two leading departments; the history from the
accession of the house of Tudor downwards, which he completed in 1759;
and the history anterior to that epoch, which was published at a later
period of his life. In this arrangement, the general observations will
find their place in a subsequent portion of this work; while, in the
meantime, the opinions entertained of the narrative department of the
volume, published in 1754, may be noticed.

The chief charge brought against it has been, that in describing the
great conflict which ended in the protectorate, the author has shown a
partiality to the side of the monarch, and particularly to Charles I.
and his followers; and has endeavoured to make the opposite
side--Independents, Presbyterians, Republicans, or under whatever name
they raised the banner of opposition to the court--odious and
ridiculous.

Before Hume's day, every historian of those times took his side from the
beginning of the narrative, and proclaimed himself either the champion
or the opponent of the monarchical party. Salmon, Echard, and
Carte[401:1] wrote histories, in which, if they had spoken with decency
or temper of Oliver Cromwell, the Long Parliament, the Presbyterians, or
the Independents, they would have felt that they had as much neglected
their duty, as an advocate who, seeing some irregularity in the case of
the opposite party, fails to take advantage of it. The title-page of
Salmon announced his project: it promised "Remarks on Rapin, Burnet, and
other Republican writers, vindicating the just right of the Established
Church, and the prerogatives of the crown, against the wild schemes of
enthusiasts and levellers, no less active and diligent in promoting the
subversion of this beautiful frame of government, than their artful
predecessors in hypocrisy," &c. But Hume professed to approach the
subject as a philosopher, and to hold the balance even between Salmon
and Echard on the one side, and Oldmixon and Rapin on the other. Hence,
when it was believed that, under this air of impartiality, he masked a
battery well loaded and skilfully pointed against the principles of the
constitution, and the efforts of those who had fought for freedom, a
louder cry of indignation was raised against him than had ever assailed
the avowed retainers of the anti-popular cause.

The tendency of the History was unexpected and inexplicable. In his
philosophical examination of the principles of government, written in
times of hot party feeling, he had discarded the theories of arbitrary
prerogative and divine right with bold and calm disdain. His utilitarian
theory represented the good of the people, not the will or advantage of
any one man, or small class of men, as the right object of government.
Harrison, Milton, and Sidney, had not expressed opinions more thoroughly
democratic than his. "Few things," says a critic, well accustomed to
trace literary anomalies to their causes in the minds of their authors,
"are more unaccountable, and, indeed, absurd, than that Hume should have
taken part with high church and high monarchy men. The persecutions
which he suffered in his youth from the Presbyterians, may, perhaps,
have influenced his ecclesiastical partialities.[403:1] But that he
should have sided with the Tudors and the Stuarts against the people,
seems quite inconsistent with all the great traits of his character. His
unrivalled sagacity must have looked with contempt on the preposterous
arguments by which the _jus divinum_ was maintained. His natural
benevolence must have suggested the cruelty of subjecting the enjoyments
of thousands to the caprice of one unfeeling individual; and his own
practical independence in private life, might have taught him the value
of those feelings which he has so mischievously derided."[403:2]

In truth, it does not appear that Hume had begun his work with the
intention of adopting a side in the politics of the time; and that
sympathy, rather than rational conviction or political prejudice,
dictated his partisanship. His misapprehensions regarding the state of
the constitution, and the early foundation of British liberties, may be
attributed to another cause; but in his treatment of the question
between Charles I. and his opponents, he appears to have set out with
the design of preserving a rigid neutrality; to have gradually felt his
sympathies wavering,--to have at first restrained them, then let them
sway him slightly from the even middle path, and finally allowed them to
take possession of his opinions; opinions which, in their form of
expression, still preserved that tone of calm impartiality with which
he had set out. In the work of Clarendon--a scholar, a gentleman, a
dignified and elegant writer, a man of high-toned and manly feeling--he
found an attractive guide. In looking at the structure of Hume's
narrative, we can see that Clarendon was the author, whose account of
the great conflict was chiefly present to his mind; and dwelling on his
words and ideas, he must have in some measure felt the influence of that
plausible writer. As he went on with his narrative, he found on the one
side refinement and heroism, an elevated and learned priesthood, a
chivalrous aristocracy, a refined court,--all "the divinity" that "doth
hedge a king," followed by all the sad solemnity of fallen
greatness,--an adverse contest, borne with steady courage, and
humiliation and death endured with patient magnanimity. On the other
side appeared plebeian thoughts, rude uncivil speech, barbarous and
ludicrous fanaticism, and success consummated by ungenerous triumphs.
His philosophical indifference gave way before such temptations, and he
went the way of his sympathies. Yet he never permitted himself boldly
and distinctly to profess partisanship: he still bore the badge of
neutrality; and perhaps believed that he was swerving neither to the
right hand nor to the left. An eloquent writer has thus vividly
described the tone of his History:

     Hume, without positively asserting more than he can prove,
     gives prominence to all the circumstances which can support
     his case. He glides lightly over those which are unfavourable
     to it. His own witnesses are applauded and encouraged; the
     statements which seem to throw discredit on them are
     controverted; the contradictions into which they fall are
     explained away; a clear and connected abstract of their
     evidence is given. Every thing that is offered on the other
     side is scrutinized with the utmost severity; every suspicious
     circumstance is a ground for comment and invective; what
     cannot be denied is extenuated, or passed by without notice.
     Concessions even are sometimes made; but this insidious
     candour only increases the effect of this vast mass of
     sophistry.[405:1]

Yet when there was any thing of a grand and solemn character in the
proceedings of the Republican party,--when they were not connected with
the rude guards, and their insults to the fallen majesty of England;
with the long psalms, long sermons, and long faces of the Puritans; with
Trouble-world Lilburne, Praise-God Barebones, or eccentric, stubborn,
impracticable William Prynne,--he could employ the easy majesty of his
language in surrounding them with a suiting dignity of tone; and he did
so with apparent pleasure. Witness his description of the meeting of the
Long Parliament, and of the preparations for the king's trial before the
High Court of Justice.

He seems to have felt, not unfrequently, the inconsistencies that must
be perceptible between the tone of his historical, and the political
doctrines of his philosophical works; and his attempts to reconcile them
with each other, sometimes only serve to make the difference more
conspicuous. Speaking of the act of holding judgment on Charles I., he
says, "If ever, on any occasion, it were laudable to conceal truth from
the populace, it must be confessed that the doctrine of resistance
affords such an example; and that all speculative reasoners ought to
observe, with regard to this principle, the same cautious silence which
the laws, in every species of government, have ever prescribed to
themselves." One could imagine a congress of crowned heads, or a
conclave of cardinals, adopting such a view; and resolving, at the same
moment, that it should be kept as secret as the grave. But that a man
should speak of the right of resistance as existing, and say the
knowledge of it ought not to be promulgated, and print and publish this
in a book in his own vernacular language, is surely as remarkable an
anomaly, as the history of practical contradictions can exhibit.

Owing to his opinion of the manner in which the Abbé Le Blanc had
rendered his "Political Discourses" into French, he expressed a wish, in
the following courteous letter, that the History should have the benefit
of being translated by the same hand.


HUME _to the_ ABBÉ LE BLANC.

"_Edinburgh, 15th October, 1754._

"SIR,--You will receive, along with this, a copy of the first volume of
my 'History of Great Britain,' which will be published next winter in
London. The honour which you did me in translating my 'Political
Discourses,' inspires me with an ambition of desiring to have this work
translated by the same excellent hand. The great curiosity of the events
related in this volume, embellished by your elegant pen, might challenge
the attention of the public. If you do not undertake this translation, I
despair of ever seeing it done in a satisfactory manner. Many
intricacies in the English government,--many customs peculiar to this
island, require explication; and it will be necessary to accompany the
translation with some notes, however short, in order to render it
intelligible to foreigners. None but a person as well acquainted as you
with England and the English constitution, can pretend to clear up
obscurities, or explain the difficulties which occur. If, at any time,
you find yourself at a loss, be so good as to inform me. I shall spare
no pains to solve all doubts; and convey all the lights which, by my
long and assiduous study of the subject, I may have acquired. The
distance betwixt us need be no impediment to this correspondence. If you
favour me frequently with your letters, I shall be able to render you
the same service as if I had the happiness of living next door to you,
and was able to inspect the whole translation. In this attempt, the
knowledge of the two languages is but one circumstance to qualify a man
for a translator. Though your attainments, in this respect, be known to
all the world, I own that I trust more to the spirit of reflection and
reasoning which you discover; and I thence expect that my performance
will not only have justice done it, but will even receive considerable
improvements as it passes through your hands. I am, with great regard,
Sir, your most obedient and most humble servant."[407:1]


The Abbé received the proposal with rapture: he offered to translate
with the zeal not only of the illustrious author's admirer, but of his
friend. He desired Hume to postpone the publication for a while in
London, and to send him the sheets with the utmost rapidity, lest he
might be forestalled by some of that numerous host of rapid penmen, who
are ready, in obedience to the commands of the booksellers, to translate
such works, without knowing English, or even French. Holland was at that
period a great book mart, and there the Abbé found rivals still more
expeditious; for he was obliged to write to Hume, at a time when he
seems to have made little or no progress with his work, stating that he
is disheartened by the prospect of the immediate appearance of a
translation in Holland, where they employ, in the rendering of excellent
books into French, people who are only fit to manufacture paper. In the
end, having encountered a host of interruptions, he intimates that he
has placed the work in the hands of another person.[408:1]


HUME _to_ DR. CLEPHANE.

"_Oct. 18th, 1754._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--I received your kind letter, for which I thank you. Poor
Aber[408:2] is disappointed by a train of Norland finesse, alas--what
you will. I have given orders to deliver to you a copy of my History,
as soon as it arrives in London, and before it be published. Lend it not
till it be published. It contains no paradoxes, and very little
profaneness,--as little as could be expected. The Abbé Le Blanc, who has
translated some other of my pieces, intends to translate it, and the
enclosed is part of a copy I send him: excuse the freedom--you may
perhaps receive some other packets of the same kind, which you will
please to send carefully to the post-house. The General and Sir Henry
are in town, who remember you. Edmonstone is well, and I just now left
him a-bed. I may perhaps be in London for good and all in a year or two.
Show me that frugality could make £120 a-year do, and I am with you: a
man of letters ought always to live in a capital, says Bayle. I believe
I have no more to say. You'll own that my style has not become more
verbose, on account of my writing quartos. Yours affectionately,"
&c.[409:1]


HUME _to_ WILLIAM MURE _of Caldwell_.

"DEAR MURE,--I had sent to Sharpe a copy of my History, of which I hope
you will tell me your opinion with freedom;

                             Finding, like a friend,
     Something to blame, and something to commend.

"The first quality of an historian, is to be true and impartial. The
next to be interesting. If you do not say that I have done both parties
justice, and if Mrs. Mure be not sorry for poor King Charles, I shall
burn all my papers and return to philosophy.

"I shall send a copy to Paris to L'Abbé Le Blanc, who has translated
some other of my pieces; and therefore your corrections and amendments
may still be of use, and prevent me from misleading or tiring the French
nation. We shall also make a Dublin edition; and it were a pity to put
the Irish farther wrong than they are already. I shall also be so
sanguine as to hope for a second edition, when I may correct all errors.
You know my docility."[410:1]


HUME _to_ MRS. DYSART _of Eccles_.

"_9th October._

"DEAR MADAM,--As I send you a long book, you will allow me to write a
short letter, with this fruit of near two years' very constant
application, my youngest and dearest child. You should have read it
sooner; but, during the fine weather, I foresaw that it would produce
some inconvenience: either you would attach yourself so much to the
perusal of me, as to neglect walking, riding, and field diversions,
which are much more beneficial than any history; or if this beautiful
season tempted you, I must lie in a corner, neglected and forgotten. I
assure you I would take the pet if so treated. Now that the weather has
at last broke, and long nights are joined to wind and rain, and that a
fireside has become the most agreeable object, a new book, especially if
wrote by a friend, may not be unwelcome. In expectation, then, that you
are to peruse me first with pleasure, then with ease, I expect to hear
your remarks, and Mr. Dysart's, and the Solicitor's. Whether am I Whig
or Tory? Protestant or Papist? Scotch or English? I hope you do not all
agree on this head, and that there are disputes among you about my
principles. We never see you in town, and I can never get to the
country; but I hope I preserve a place in your memory. I am, &c.

"P.S.--I have seen John Hume's new unbaptized play,[411:1] and it is a
very fine thing. He now discovers a great genius for the theatre."

[Written at the top.] "I must beg of you not to lend the book out of
your house, on any account, till the middle of November; any body may
read it in the house."[411:2]


In a continuation of the letter, of which the part relating to Blacklock
was cited above, he thus desires Adam Smith's opinion of the History:--


"Pray tell me, and tell me ingenuously, what success has my History met
with among the judges with you. I mean Dr. Cullen, Mr. Betham, Mrs.
Betham, Mr. Leichman, Mr. Muirhead, Mr. Crawford, &c. Dare I presume
that it has been thought worthy of examination, and that its beauties
are found to overbalance its defects? I am very desirous to know my
errors; and I dare swear you think me tolerably docile to be so veteran
an author. I cannot, indeed, hope soon to have an opportunity of
correcting my errors; this impression is so very numerous. The sale,
indeed, has been very great in Edinburgh; but how it goes on in London,
we have not been precisely informed. In all cases I am desirous of
storing up instruction; and as you are now idle, (I mean, have nothing
but your class to teach, which to you is comparative idleness,) I will
insist upon hearing from you.

"_Edinburgh, 17th Dec. 1754._"


The following letter, still on the same subject, introduces the name of
a new correspondent.


HUME _to the_ EARL _of_ BALCARRES.

"_Edinburgh, 17th December, 1754._

"MY LORD,--I did really intend to have paid my respects to your lordship
this harvest; but I have got into such a recluse, studious habit, that I
believe myself only fit to converse with books; and, however I may
pretend to be acquainted with dead kings, shall become quite unsuitable
for my friends and cotemporaries. Besides, the great gulf that is fixed
between us terrifies me. I am not only very sick at sea, but often can
scarce get over the sickness for some days.

"I am very proud that my History, even upon second thoughts, appears to
have something tolerable in your lordship's eyes. It has been very much
canvassed and read here in town, as I am told; and it has full as many
inveterate enemies as partial defenders. The misfortune of a book, says
Boileau, is not the being ill spoke of, but the not being spoken of at
all. The sale has been very considerable here, about four hundred and
fifty copies in five weeks. How it has succeeded in London, I cannot
precisely tell; only I observe that some of the weekly papers have been
busy with me.--I am as great an Atheist as Bolingbroke; as great a
Jacobite as Carte; I cannot write English, &c. I do, indeed, observe
that the book is in general rather more agreeable to those they call
Tories; and I believe, chiefly for this reason, that, having no places
to bestow, they are naturally more moderate in their expectations from a
writer. A Whig, who can give hundreds a-year, will not be contented with
small sacrifices of truth; and most authors are willing to purchase
favour at so reasonable a price.

"I wish it were in my power to pass this Christmas at Balcarres. I
should be glad to accompany your lordship in your rural improvements,
and return thence to relish with pleasure the comforts of your fireside.
You enjoy peace and contentment, my lord, which all the power and wealth
of the nation cannot give to our rulers. The whole ministry, they say,
is by the ears. This quarrel, I hope, they will fight out among
themselves, and not expect to draw us in as formerly, by pretending it
is for our good. We will not be the dupes twice in our life.

"I have the honour to be, my lord, your lordship's most obedient and
most humble servant."[413:1]


The literary success that would satisfy Hume required to be of no small
amount. Though neither, in any sense, a vain man, nor a caterer for
ephemeral applause, he was greedy of fame; and what would have been to
others pre-eminent success, appears to have, in his eyes, scarcely risen
above failure. His expressions about the reception of his History, have
a tinge of morbidness. In John Home's memorandum of his latest
conversations, it is said that "he recurred to a subject not unfrequent
with him, that is, the design to ruin him as an author, by the people
that were ministers at the first publication of his History."[414:1] In
his "own life," written at the same time, the only passage truly bitter
in its tone, gives fuller expression to a like feeling:--"I was, I own,
sanguine in my expectations of the success of this work. I thought that
I was the only historian that had at once neglected present power,
interest, and authority, and the cry of popular prejudices; and as the
subject was suited to every capacity, I expected proportional applause.
But miserable was my disappointment: I was assailed by one cry of
reproach, disapprobation, and even detestation; English, Scotch, and
Irish, Whig and Tory, Churchman and Sectary, Freethinker and
Religionist, Patriot and Courtier, united in their rage against the man
who had presumed to shed a generous tear for the fate of Charles I. and
the Earl of Strafford; and after the first ebullitions of their fury
were over, what was still more mortifying, the book seemed to sink into
oblivion. Mr. Millar told me, that in a twelvemonth he sold only
forty-five copies of it. I scarcely, indeed, heard of one man in the
three kingdoms, considerable for rank or letters, that could endure the
book. I must only except the primate of England, Dr. Herring, and the
primate of Ireland, Dr. Stone, which seem two odd exceptions. These
dignified prelates separately sent me messages not to be discouraged.

"I was however, I confess, discouraged; and had not the war been, at
that time, breaking out between France and England, I had certainly
retired to some provincial town of the former kingdom, have changed my
name, and never more have returned to my native country. But as this
scheme was not now practicable, and the subsequent volume was
considerably advanced, I resolved to pick up courage, and to persevere."

Andrew Millar, a countryman of Hume, had, about this time, formed an
extensive publishing connexion in London. An arrangement was made, by
which he should take the History under his protection,--publish the
subsequent volumes, and push the sale of the first. The arrangement is
said to have been recommended by Hume's Edinburgh publishers; and it
shows how much, in that age, as probably also in this, even a great work
may depend on the publisher's exertions, for giving it a hold on the
public mind. Hume had a pretty extensive correspondence with Millar.
Many of the letters are purely on business, and sometimes on business
not very important; but others, such as the following, have some
literary interest. Hume appears to have contemplated a translation of
Plutarch, and Millar seems to have wished to make him editor of a London
newspaper.


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

"_12th April, 1755._

"The second volume of my History I can easily find a way of conveying
to you when finished and corrected, and fairly copied. Perhaps I may be
in London myself about that time. I have always said, to all my
acquaintance, that if the first volume bore a little of a Tory aspect,
the second would probably be as grateful to the opposite party. The two
first princes of the house of Stuart were certainly more excusable than
the two second. The constitution was, in their time, very ambiguous and
undetermined; and their parliaments were, in many respects, refractory
and obstinate. But Charles the Second knew that he had succeeded to a
very limited monarchy. His long parliament was indulgent to him, and
even consisted almost entirely of royalists. Yet he could not be quiet,
nor contented with a legal authority. I need not mention the oppressions
in Scotland, nor the absurd conduct of King James the Second. These are
obvious and glaring points. Upon the whole, I wish the two volumes had
been published together. Neither one party nor the other would, in that
case, have had the least pretext of reproaching me with partiality.

"I shall give no farther umbrage to the godly, though I am far from
thinking, that my liberties on that head have been the real cause of
checking the sale of the first volume. They might afford a pretext for
decrying it to those who were resolved on other accounts to lay hold of
pretexts.

"Pray tell Dr. Birch, if you have occasion to see him, that his story of
the warrant for Lord Loudon's execution, though at first I thought it
highly improbable, appears to me at present a great deal more
likely.[416:1] I find the same story in "Scotstarvet's Staggering
State,"[417:1] which was published here a few months ago. The same
story, coming from different canals, without any dependence on each
other, bears a strong air of probability. I have spoke to Duke Hamilton,
who says, that I shall be very welcome to peruse all his papers. I shall
take the first opportunity of going to the bottom of that affair; and if
I find any confirmation of the suspicion, will be sure to inform Dr.
Birch. I own it is the strongest instance of any which history affords,
of King Charles's arbitrary principles.

"I have made a trial of Plutarch, and find that I take pleasure in it;
but cannot yet form so just a notion of the time and pains which it will
require, as to tell you what sum of money I would think an equivalent.
But I shall be sure to inform you as soon as I come to a resolution. The
notes requisite will not be numerous,--not so many as in the former
edition. I think so bulky a book ought to be swelled as little as
possible; and nothing added but what is absolutely requisite. The little
trial I have made, convinces me that the undertaking will require time.
My manner of composing is slow, and I have great difficulty to satisfy
myself."[417:2]


HUME _to_ ADAM SMITH.

"_Edinburgh, 9th January, 1755._

 "DEAR SIR,--I beg you to make my compliments to the Society,[417:3]
and to take the fault on yourself, if I have not executed my duty, and
sent them, this time, my anniversary paper. Had I got a week's warning I
should have been able to have supplied them. I should willingly have
sent some sheets of the history of the Commonwealth, or Protectorship;
but they are all of them out of my hand at present, and I have not been
able to recall them.

"I think you are extremely in the right, that the Parliament's bigotry
has nothing in common with Hiero's generosity. They were, themselves,
violent persecutors at home, to the utmost of their power. Besides, the
Hugunots in France were not persecuted; they were really seditious,
turbulent people, whom their king was not able to reduce to obedience.
The French persecutions did not begin till sixty years after.

"Your objection to the Irish massacre is just, but falls not on the
execution, but the subject. Had I been to describe the massacre of
Paris, I should not have fallen into that fault. But, in the Irish
massacre, no single eminent man fell, or by a remarkable death.[418:1]
If the elocution of the whole chapter be blamable, it is because my
conception laboured with too great an idea of my subject, which is there
the most important. But that misfortune is not unusual. I am,"
&c.[418:2]


We shall have farther occasion to notice the deep interest which Hume
took in John Home's tragedy of Douglas. The following letter, which is
without date, was, probably, written at the beginning of the year 1755,
and before Home made his unsuccessful journey to London, to submit his
effort to the judgment of Garrick.


HUME _to_ JOHN HOME.

"DEAR SIR,--With great pleasure I have more than once perused your
tragedy. It is interesting, affecting, pathetic. The story is simple and
natural; but what chiefly delights me, is to find the language so pure,
correct, and moderate. For God's sake read Shakspere, but get Racine and
Sophocles by heart. It is reserved to you, and you alone, to redeem our
stage from the reproach of barbarism.

"I have not forgot your request to find fault; but as you had neither
numbered the pages nor the lines in your copy, I cannot point out
particular expressions. I have marked the margin, and shall tell you my
opinion when I have the pleasure of seeing you. The more considerable
objections seem to be these: _Glenalvon's_ character is too abandoned.
Such a man is scarce in nature; at least it is inartificial in a poet to
suppose such a one, as if he could not conduct his fable by the ordinary
passions, infirmities, and vices of human nature. _Lord Barnet's_[419:1]
character is not enough decided; he hovers betwixt vice and virtue;
which, though it be not unnatural, is not sufficiently theatrical nor
tragic. After _Anna_ had lived eighteen years with _Lady Barnet_, and
yet had been kept out of the secret, there seems to be no sufficient
reason why, at that very time, she should have been let into it. The
spectator is apt to suspect that it was in order to instruct him; a very
good end, indeed, but which might have been attained by a careful and
artificial conduct of the dialogue.

"There seem to be too many casual rencounters. _Young Forman_[420:1]
passing by chance, saves _Lord Barnet_; _Old Forman_, passing that way,
by chance, is arrested. Why might not _Young Forman_ be supposed to be
coming to the castle, in order to serve under _Lord Barnet_, and _Old
Forman_, having had some hint of his intention, to have followed him
that way?

     [Some lines torn off and lost.]

Might not _Anna_ be supposed to have returned to her mistress after long
absence? This might account for a greater flow of confidence."[420:2]


HUME _to_ ANDREW MILLAR.

"_Edinburgh, 12th June, 1755._

"DEAR SIR,--I give you a great many thanks for thinking of me in your
project of a weekly paper. I approve very much of the design, as you
explain it to me; and there is nobody I would more willingly engage
with. But, as I have another work in hand, which requires great labour
and care to finish, I cannot think of entering on a new undertaking,
till I have brought this to a conclusion. Your scheme would require me
immediately to remove to London; and I live here, at present, in great
tranquillity, with all my books around me; and I cannot think of
changing while I have so great a work in hand as the finishing of my
History.

"There are four short Dissertations, which I have kept some years by me,
in order to polish them as much as possible. One of them is that which
Allan Ramsay mentioned to you. Another, of the Passions; a third, of
Tragedy; a fourth, some Considerations previous to Geometry and Natural
Philosophy.[421:1] The whole, I think, would make a volume, a fourth
less than my Inquiry, as nearly as I can calculate; but it would be
proper to print it in a larger type, in order to bring it to the same
size and price. I would have it published about the new year; and I
offer you the property for fifty guineas, payable at the publication.
You may judge, by my being so moderate in my demands, that I do not
propose to make any words about the bargain. It would be more convenient
for me to print here, especially one of the Dissertations, where there
is a good deal of literature; but, as the manuscript is distinct and
accurate, it would not be impossible for me to correct it, though
printed at London. I leave it to your choice; though I believe that it
might be as cheaply and conveniently and safely executed here. However,
the matter is pretty near indifferent to me. I would fain prognosticate
better than you say with regard to my History; that you expect little
sale till the publication of the second volume. I hope the prejudices
will dissipate sooner. I am," &c.[422:1]


In 1755, an effort was made to establish a periodical Review in
Scotland, characterized by a higher literary spirit, and a more original
tone of thinking, than the other periodical literature of the day could
boast. It assumed the name, so famous in later times, of _The Edinburgh
Review_. With such contributors as Smith, Robertson, Blair, and Jardine,
it could not fail to achieve its object, so far as its own merit was
concerned; but the public did not appreciate its excellence, and it died
after two half-yearly numbers, which may now be found on the shelves of
the curious. On this matter, Mackenzie says,

     David Hume was not among the number of the writers of the
     _Review_, though we should have thought he would have been the
     first person whose co-operation they would have sought. But I
     think I have heard that they were afraid both of his extreme
     good nature, and his extreme artlessness; that, from the one,
     their criticisms would have been weakened or suppressed; and,
     from the other, their secret discovered. The merits of the
     work strongly attracted his attention, and he expressed his
     surprise, to some of the gentlemen concerned in it, with whom
     he was daily in the habit of meeting, at the excellence of a
     performance written, as he presumed, from his ignorance on the
     subject, by some persons out of their own literary circle. It
     was agreed to communicate the secret to him at a dinner, which
     was shortly after given by one of their number. At that dinner
     he repeated his wonder on the subject of _The Edinburgh
     Review_. One of the company said he knew the authors, and
     would tell them to Mr. Hume upon his giving an oath of
     secrecy. "How is the oath to be taken," said David, with his
     usual pleasantry, "of a man accused of so much scepticism as I
     am? You would not trust my Bible oath; but I will swear by the
     το καλον and the το πρεπον never to reveal your secret." He
     was then told the names of the authors and the plan of the
     work; but it was not continued long enough to allow of his
     contributing any articles.[423:1]

It was a strong judgment to pass on a man who filled the office of
secretary of legation, and under-secretary of state, that a secret was
not safe in his keeping. Perhaps Hume had acquired absent habits about
trifles. But he could transact important business with ability, and keep
important secrets with strictness. There is a general propensity to
find, in the nature and habits of abstruse thinkers, an innocent
simplicity about the passing affairs of the world, which is often
dispelled by a nearer view of their characters. Hume was careless about
small matters; but in the serious transactions of life, he was
sagacious, prompt, and energetic. Though he did not contribute to it,
he owed some substantial services to this periodical, in the conflict in
the ecclesiastical courts, which, in the course of events, comes now to
be considered.[424:1]

Hume was not one of those who, when they find that the opinions they
have formed are at variance with those of the rest of mankind, blaze the
unpopular portions forth in the light of day, or fling them in the face
of their adversaries. Among his intimate friends, he could pass sly
jests about his opinions; using, in regard to them, those strong
expressions which he knew his adversaries would apply to them. But he
disliked ostentation of any kind. He particularly disliked the
ostentation of singularity; and so little was he aware that he was
outraging any of the world's opinions, in promulgating the fruits of his
metaphysical speculations, that he appears to have been much astonished
that any one should find in them any ground for serious objection, and
to have marvelled greatly that clergymen and others should deem him an
unfit person to be a professor of moral philosophy, or a teacher of
youth. "Rara temporum felicitas, ubi sentire quæ velis, et quæ sentias
dicere, licet," was the motto of his first work; and he seems to have
thought that he lived in an age when speculation might soar with
unclipped wings, and when his opinions would be questioned only before
the tribunal of reason.

In all this, however, he now found that he was mistaken, and that there
were persons who, professing to have charge of these matters, and to
know the final judgment concerning them, thought right to execute it on
earth, by punishing the man whose opinions were different from their
own. The soul of this crusade was a certain Reverend George Anderson, a
restless, fiery, persevering being, probably of great polemical note in
his day, the observed of all observers as he passed through the city, a
Boanerges in church courts; but now only known through the eminence of
those against whom the fury of his zeal was directed. Hume was not the
only object of pursuit. Other game was started at the same time in the
person of his friend, Lord Kames. It is somewhat remarkable, that it was
against the latter that the pursuit was most persevering and bitter. He
was certainly not a man likely to have provoked such attacks. It is true
that he meddled with dangerous subjects, but he did so with great
caution and skill. Bred to the practice of the bar, at a time when the
advocate often felt a temptation to insinuate doctrines which could not
be proclaimed without risk, he became like a chemist who is expert in
the safe manipulation of detonating materials. Yet he made a narrow
escape; for as he had been raised to the bench in 1752, any proceeding
by a church court, professing to subject him to punishment, temporal or
eternal, however lightly it might have fallen on a philosopher, might
have tended materially to injure the usefulness of a judge.

Kames' work, which was published in 1751, and entitled "Essays on the
Principles of Morality and Natural Religion," bears evident marks of
having been written in opposition to the opinions laid down by Hume,
although the author probably did not wish to expose the works of his
kind friend to odium, by making a particular reference to them. It is
clear that he considered his own opinions likely to be so very popular
among the orthodox, that it would be doing an evil turn to his friend,
to mention him as the promulgator of views on the other side. In his
advertisement, he said, the object of his book was "to prepare the way
for a proof of the existence of the Deity," and the Essays end with a
prayer. Their leading principle is, that according to the doctrine of
predestination, there can be no liberty to human beings, in the ordinary
acceptation of the term, while the Deity has nevertheless, for wise
purposes, which we cannot fathom, implanted in our race the feeling that
we are free. Some have held that, while the scheme of predestination was
exhibited by Hume as a mere metaphysical theory, Kames united it to
vital religion. He had the misfortune, however, to write in a
philosophical tone; and those who constituted themselves judges of the
matter, seem to have taken example from the stern father, who, when
there is a quarrel in the nursery, punishes both sides, because
quarrelling is a thing not allowed in the house. In a letter to Michael
Ramsay, Hume says, in continuation of a passage printed above,[427:1]
"Have you seen our friend Harry's Essays? They are well wrote, and are
an unusual instance of an obliging method of answering a book.
Philosophers must judge of the question; but the clergy have already
decided it, and say he is as bad as me! Nay, some affirm him to be
worse,--as much as a treacherous friend is worse than an open enemy."
Dr. Blair is believed to have been the champion of Kames; and the
following notice of his connexion with the controversy, given by
Mackenzie, is valuable and instructive.

     It is a singular enough coincidence with some church
     proceedings, about fifty years after,[427:2] that Dr. Blair,
     in defence of his friend's Essays, expressly states, that one
     purpose of those Essays was to controvert what appeared to him
     to be a very dangerous doctrine, held by the author of certain
     other _Essays_, then recently published, (by Mr. David Hume,)
     that, by no principle in human nature, can we discover any
     real connexion between _cause_ and _effect_. According to Dr.
     Blair, the object of one of Lord Kames' Essays is to show,
     that though such connexion is not discoverable by _reason_,
     and by a process of argumentative induction, there is,
     nevertheless, a real and obvious connexion, which every one
     intuitively perceives between an _effect_ and its _cause_. We
     feel and acknowledge, that every effect implies a cause; that
     nothing can begin to exist without a cause of its existence.
     "We are not left," says the author of the Vindication, "to
     gather our belief of a _Deity_, from inferences and
     conclusions deduced through intermediate steps, many or few.
     How unhappy would it be, for the great bulk of mankind, if
     this were necessary!"

The first attack was made in a pamphlet, called "An Estimate of the
Profit and Loss of Religion, personally and publicly stated: illustrated
with reference to 'Essays on Morality and Natural Religion,'" published
at Edinburgh, in 1753; the work of Anderson himself, and endowed with
all the marks of its author. This was levelled against Kames alone; but
it was followed in 1755 by a pamphlet, in which, under the name of
Sopho, he was coupled with Hume, thus: "An Analysis of the Moral and
Religious Sentiments contained in the Writings of Sopho and David Hume,
Esq., addressed to the consideration of the reverend and honourable
members of the General Assembly of the Church of Scotland." "My design,"
says the author, "is to analyze the works of these celebrated authors,
giving their own expressions under the different heads to which they
seem to belong. This method, I imagine, will not only give the clearest
view of the sentiments of these gentlemen, but is such as they
themselves must allow to be the most fair and candid; because if, in
stating the proposition, I should happen to mistake their meaning, their
own words, subjoined, must immediately do them justice." With this
preamble, the writer ranges his quotations under such heads as, "All
distinction betwixt virtue and vice is merely imaginary;" "Adultery is
very lawful, but sometimes not expedient," &c.

A counter pamphlet was published, called "Observations upon a pamphlet,
entitled 'An Analysis of the Moral and Religious Sentiments contained in
the Writings of Sopho and David Hume, Esq.'"[428:1] In reference to his
opponents' boasted series of accurate quotations, the writer of this
answer says, "If there should be found passages which are neither the
words nor the meaning of the author, the falsehood cannot be palliated
nor excused." And then, after giving a specimen of these "accurate"
quotations, he says,--

     "In all that page there is no such sentence, neither is there
     any such sentiment to be found. The passage from the beginning
     is as follows," &c. and he continues: "To glean disunited
     sentences, to patch them together arbitrarily, to omit the
     limitations or remarks with which a proposition is delivered;
     can this be styled exhibiting the sentiments of an author? I
     hope I shall not be thought to deviate into any thing
     ludicrous, when I refer the reader to a well-known treatise of
     the Dean of St. Patrick's, in which the inquisitorial method
     of interpretation in the Church of Rome is by so just and so
     severe raillery rendered detestable. _Si non totidem
     sententiis, ast totidem verbis; si non totidem verbis, ast
     totidem syllabis; si non totidem syllabis ast totidem
     literis._ This is the genuine logic of persecution."[429:1]

The matter was brought before the immediately ensuing General Assembly,
that of 1755; by which a general resolution was passed, expressive of
the Church's "utmost abhorrence" of "impious and infidel principles,"
and of "the deepest concern on account of the prevalence of infidelity
and immorality, the principles whereof have been, to the disgrace of
our age and nation, so openly avowed in several books published of late
in this country, and which are but too well known amongst us." But this
general anathema was not sufficient to satisfy the pious zeal of Mr.
Anderson, who, in anticipation of the meeting of the Assembly in 1756,
wrote another pamphlet, called "Infidelity a proper object of censure."

The initiatory step in the legislative business of the General Assembly,
is the bringing before it an overture, which has previously obtained the
sanction, either of one of the inferior church courts, or of a committee
of the Assembly for preparing overtures. In such a committee, it was
moved on 28th May, 1756, that the following overture should be
transmitted to the Assembly.

     "The General Assembly, judging it their duty to do all in
     their power to check the growth and progress of infidelity;
     and considering, that as infidel writings have begun of late
     years to be published in this nation, against which they have
     hitherto only testified in general, so there is one person
     styling himself David Hume, Esq. who hath arrived at such a
     degree of boldness as publicly to avow himself the author of
     books containing the most rude and open attacks upon the
     glorious gospel of Christ, and principles evidently subversive
     even of natural religion, and the foundations of morality, if
     not establishing direct atheism: therefore the Assembly
     appoint the following persons . . . . . as a committee to
     inquire into the writings of this author, to call him before
     them, and prepare the matter for the next General Assembly."

The matter was discussed with the usual keenness of such debates in such
bodies. But toleration was triumphant, and the overture was rejected by
fifty votes to seventeen.[430:1]

Still the indefatigable Anderson returned to the charge, though he
brought it against humbler persons in a less conspicuous arena. As he
found the authors above his reach, he resolved to proceed against the
booksellers; and he brought before the Presbytery of Edinburgh a
"Petition and Complaint" against Alexander Kincaid and Alexander
Donaldson, the publishers of "Kames' Essays," praying, "that the said
printer and booksellers may be summoned to the next meeting of the
Presbytery, and there and then to declare and give up the author of the
said book; and that he and they may be censured, according to the law of
the gospel, and the practice of this and all other well-governed
churches." Anderson indeed would seem to have imbibed the spirit of the
great Anthony Arnauld: who, when Nicole spoke of some rest from the
endless war of polemical controversy, exclaimed, "Rest! will you not
have enough of rest hereafter, through all eternity?" Before the
Presbytery could meet he accordingly published another pamphlet, called
"the Complaint of George Anderson, minister of the gospel, verified by
passages in the book libelled." He died in the 19th October,[432:1] just
ten days before the meeting of the presbytery, for which he had made
such active preparation. He fell in harness, and the departure of the
restless spirit of the champion from its tenement of clay, was death to
the cause. After the perusal of written pleadings, and a formal debate,
the complaint was dismissed.

This matter appears to have given Hume very little disturbance. He does
not mention it in his "own life." He laboured uninterruptedly at the
second volume of his History; and his correspondence, which we may now
resume, will be found to pursue its even tenor, taking no farther notice
of the proceedings of his opponents, than the simple question put to
Smith, whether it will be a matter of much consequence if he should be
excommunicated?


HUME _to_ DR. CLEPHANE.

"_Edinburgh, 20th April, 1756._

"DEAR DOCTOR,--There is certainly nothing so unaccountable as my long
silence with you; that is, with a man whose friendship I desire most to
preserve of any I know, and whose conversation I would be the most
covetous to enjoy, were I in the same place with him. But to tell the
truth, we people in the country, (for such you Londoners esteem our
city,) are apt to be troublesome to you people in town; we are vastly
glad to receive letters which convey intelligence to us of things which
we should otherwise have been ignorant of, and can pay them back with
nothing but provincial stories, which are no way interesting. It was
perhaps an apprehension of this kind which held my pen: but really, I
believe, the truth is, when I was idle, I was lazy--when I was busy, I
was so extremely busy, that I had no leisure to think of any thing else.
For, dear Doctor, what have we to do with news on either side, unless it
be literary news, which I hope will always interest us? and of these,
London seems to me as barren as Edinburgh; or rather more so, since I
can tell you that our friend Hume's 'Douglas,' is altered and finished,
and will be brought out on the stage next winter, and is a singular, as
well as fine performance, [----[433:1]] of the spirit of the English
theatre, not devoid of Attic and French elegance. You have sent us
nothing worth reading this winter; even your vein of wretched novels is
dried up, though not that of scurrilous partial politics. We hear of Sir
George Lyttleton's History, from which the populace expect a great deal:
but I hear it is to be three quarto volumes. 'O, magnum horribilem et
sacrum Libellum.'--This last epithet of _sacrum_ will probably be
applicable to it in more senses than one. However, it cannot well fail
to be readable, which is a great deal for an English book now-a-days.

"But, dear Doctor, even places more hyperborean than this, more
provincial, more uncultivated, and more barbarous, may furnish articles
for a literary correspondence. Have you seen the second volume of
Blackwell's 'Court of Augustus?' I had it some days lying on my table,
and, on turning it over, met with passages very singular for their
ridicule and absurdity. He says that Mark Antony, travelling from Rome
in a post-chaise, lay the first night at Redstones: I own I did not
think this a very classical name; but, on recollection, I found, by the
Philippics, that he lay at Saxa Rubra. He talks also of Mark Antony's
favourite poet, Mr. Gosling, meaning Anser, who, methinks, should rather
be called Mr. Goose. He also takes notice of Virgil's distinguishing
himself, in his youth, by his epigram on Crossbow the robber! Look your
Virgil, you'll find that, like other robbers, this man bore various
names. Crossbow is the name he took at Aberdeen, but Balista at Rome.
The book has many other flowers[434:1] of a like nature, which made me
exclaim, with regard to the author,

     Nec _certe_[435:1] apparet . . . utrum
     Minxerit in patrios cineres, an triste bidental
     Moverit incestus. Certe furit.

But other people, who have read through the volume, say that,
notwithstanding these absurdities, it does not want merit; and, if it be
so, I own the case is still more singular. What would you think of a man
who should speak of the mayorality of Mr. Veitch; meaning the consulship
of Cicero?--Is not this a fine way of avoiding the imputation of
pedantry? Perhaps Cicero, to modernize him entirely, should be called
Sir Mark Veitch, because his father was a Roman knight.

"I do not find your name among the subscribers of my friend Blacklock's
poems, you have forgot; buy a copy of them and read them, they are many
of them very elegant, and merit esteem, if they came from any one, but
are admirable from him. [----[435:2]] Spence's industry in so good a
work, but there is a circumstance of his conduct that will entertain
you. In the Edinburgh edition there was a stanza to this effect:

     The wise in every age conclude,
     What Pyrrho taught and Hume renewed,
       That Dogmatists are fools.

"Mr. Spence would not undertake to promote a London subscription, unless
my name, as well as Lord Shaftesbury's, (who was mentioned in another
place,) were erased: the author frankly gave up Shaftesbury, but said
that he would forfeit all the profit he might expect from a
subscription, rather than relinquish the small tribute of praise which
he had paid to a man whom he was more indebted to than to all the world
beside. I heard by chance of this controversy, and wrote to Mr. Spence,
that, without farther consulting the author, I, who was chiefly
concerned, would take upon me to empower him to alter the stanza where I
was mentioned. He did so, and farther, having prefixed the life of the
author, he took occasion to mention some people to whom he had been
obliged, but is careful not to name me; judging rightly that such good
deeds were only _splendida peccata_, and that till they were sanctified
by the grace of God they would be of no benefit to salvation.[436:1]

"I have seen (but, I thank God, was not bound to read) Dr. [Birch's]
'History of the Royal Society.' Pray make my compliments to him, and
tell him, that I am his most obliged humble servant. I hope you
understand that the last clause was spoken ironically. You would have
surprised _him_ very much had you executed the compliment. I shall
conclude this article of literature by mentioning myself. I have
finished the second volume of my History, and have maintained the same
unbounded liberty in my politics which gave so much offence: religion
lay more out of my way; and there will not be . . .[436:2] in this
particular: I think reason, and even some eloquence, are on my side, and
. . . will, I am confident, get the better of faction and folly, which
are the . . .[436:2] least they never continue long in the same shape. I
am sorry, however, that you speak nothing on this head in your
postscript to me.

"It gives me great affliction, dear Doctor, when you speak of gouts and
old age. Alas! you are going down hill, and I am tumbling fast after
you. I have, however, very entire health, notwithstanding my studious
sedentary life. I only grow fat more than I could wish. When shall I see
you? God knows. I am settled here; have no pretensions, nor hopes, nor
desires, to carry me to court the great. I live frugally on a small
fortune, which I care not to dissipate by jaunts of pleasure. All these
circumstances give me little prospect of seeing London. Were I to change
my habitation, I would retire to some provincial town in France, to
trifle out my old age, near a warm sun in a good climate, a pleasant
country, and amidst a sociable people. My stock would then maintain me
in some opulence; for I have the satisfaction to tell you, dear Doctor,
that on reviewing my affairs, I find that I am worth £1600 sterling,
which, at five per cent, makes near 1800 livres a-year--that is, the pay
of two French captains.

"Edmonstone left this town for Ireland. I wish he were out of the way:
he has no prospect of advancement suitable to his merit. Sir Harry, I
hope, has only run backwards to make a better jump. Pray imitate not my
example--delay not to write; or, if you do, I will imitate yours, and
write again without waiting for an answer. Ever most sincerely."[437:1]


FOOTNOTES:

[367:1] The appointment is thus recorded in the minutes of the Faculty
of Advocates.

"_28th January, 1752._

"The Faculty proceeded to the choice of a keeper of their library, in
place of the said Mr. Thomas Ruddiman; and some members proposed that a
dignified member of their own body, viz. Mr. Kenneth Mackenzie,
Advocate, Professor of the Civil Law in the University of Edinburgh,
should be named to that office, and others inclining that Mr. David Hume
should be elected, it was agreed that the matter should be put to a
vote. And the rolls being called, and votes distinctly marked and taken
down and numbered, it was found that the majority had declared for the
latter; upon which, the Dean and Faculty declared the said Mr. David
Hume duly elected keeper of their library, and appointed that the usual
salary of forty pounds sterling should be paid to him yearly on that
account. And in regard that he was to have their minutes, acts, and
records, under his custody, they appointed him also clerk to the
Faculty, which office had been lately resigned by Mr. David Falconer,
with power to the said Mr. Hume to officiate therein by a depute.

"Mr. Gilbert Elliot, senior, curator of the library, here proposed, that
in consideration that there would be a good deal of labour and trouble
in delivering over the library to Mr. Hume, and his receiving the same,
and doing several other things requisite and necessary relating thereto,
that the Faculty should name a certain salary to some person as under
keeper for some time till that business may be accomplished. The Dean
and Faculty resolved, that they would name no person, nor no salary, but
leave Mr. Hume, their library keeper, himself the nomination and choice
of his own depute, as he was to be answerable and accountable to the
Faculty for his whole charge and intromissions; but that, against the
next anniversary meeting, they would take under their consideration what
extraordinary work should be then accomplished, and do therein as should
be found reasonable.

"Lastly, the Dean and Faculty appointed Mr. George Brown to intimate to
Mr. David Hume their election of him for their library keeper, and that
he should be present at their next meeting to have the oath _de fideli_
administered to him."

In this office, Hume succeeded the celebrated Thomas Ruddiman. The life
of this distinguished critic and philologist was written in an 8vo
volume by George Chalmers, (1794.) This book is valuable as containing
some of the finest specimens of mixed bombast and bathos in the English
language. Chalmers was a distinguished antiquary, and his high fame in
that department of research was well earned; but this did not content
his ambition, and like an eminent Anglo-Saxon antiquary of the present
day, he must needs mount a cap and bells on his head, by aping the style
of the fine writers of his age. Gibbon and Johnson seem to have been
honoured with an equal share in the elements of his style. He can say
nothing without a due pomp and state; when he tells us how John Love was
the son of a bookseller in Dumbarton, he must put it thus: "He was born
in July, 1695, at Dunbarton, the Dunbriton of the British, the _arx
Britonum_ of the Romans, the Dunclidon of Ravennas, the Alcluyd of Bede,
and he was the son of John Love, a bookseller, who, like greater dealers
in greater towns, supplied his customers with such books as their taste
required, and, like the father of Johnson, occasionally exhibited his
books at the neighbouring fairs." We are then of course provided with a
list of what these books sold by Love's father might or might not
probably be, which has this reference to the life of Ruddiman, that
_young_ Love quarrelled with him. We then find such solemn announcements
as the following: "Love had scarcely animadverted on Trotter, when he
was carried before the judicatories of the kirk by Mr. Sydserf, the
minister of Dumbarton, who accused him of _brewing on a Sunday_; and
who, after a juridical trial, was obliged to make a public apology for
having maliciously accused calumniated innocence." A printer publishing
books calculated for an extensive sale is thus described:--"To these
other qualities of prudence, of industry, and of attention, Ruddiman
added judgment. He did not print splendid editions of books for the
public good; he did not publish volumes for the perusal of the few; but
he chiefly employed his press in supplying Scotland with books, which,
from their daily use, had a general sale; and he was by this motive
induced to furnish country shopkeepers with school-books at the lowest
rate."

[373:1] The state of the library in Hume's time may be guessed at by
consulting the first volume of the catalogue, printed under Ruddiman's
auspices in 1742, folio. It is a singular circumstance that this library
has always been very deficient in the early editions of Hume's
works--those which were published before his librarianship. Another set
of works, which one misses in the early catalogues, consists in the
controversial books, written by Logan _against_ its previous librarian,
Ruddiman.

[373:2] The assistant, whose remuneration was to be at the pleasure of
the Faculty, according to the above minute, was Walter Goodall, an
unfortunate scholar, whom Hume's predecessor in office, the celebrated
Thomas Ruddiman, had attached to the library as a hanger-on and
miscellaneous drudge. The extent of his emoluments may be appreciated
from a minute of Faculty, (7th Jan. 1758,) which, in consideration of
his long services, awards him a salary of "£5 a-year, over and above
what he may receive from the keeper of the library." Goodall's character
and fate are summed up in the sententious remark of Lord Hailes, that
"Walter was seldom sober." Yet he did not a little for historical
literature. He was a violent Jacobite and champion of the innocence of
Queen Mary; and in 1754 he published, in two volumes 8vo, his
"Examination of the Letters said to be written by Mary, Queen of Scots,
to James, Earl of Bothwell, showing by intrinsick and extrinsick
evidence that they are forgeries." In 1759 he edited the best edition of
Fordun's Scotichronicon, in two volumes folio.

The following traditional anecdote has been preserved, of the keeper and
his assistant. "One day, while Goodall was composing his treatise
concerning Queen Mary, he became drowsy, and laying down his head upon
his MSS. in that posture fell asleep. Hume entering the library, and
finding the controversialist in that position, stepped softly up to him,
and laying his mouth to Watty's ear, roared out with the voice of a
stentor, that Queen Mary was a whore and had murdered her husband.
Watty, not knowing whether it was a dream or a real adventure, or
whether the voice proceeded from a ghost or a living creature, started
up, and before he was awake or his eyes well opened, he sprang upon
Hume, and seizing him by the throat, pushed him to the farther end of
the library, exclaiming all the while that he was some base Presbyterian
parson, who was come to murder the character of Queen Mary, as his
predecessors had contributed to murder her person. Hume used to tell
this story with much glee, and Watty acknowledged the truth of it with
much frankness." Chambers's Biographical Dictionary of Eminent Scotsmen,
_voce_ GOODALL.

[375:1] "Of Love and Marriage," and "Of the Study of History."

[376:1] _Literary Gazette_, 1821, p. 745. The original is in the MSS.
R.S.E.

[378:1] Thus it appears that it was his original intention to continue
the history down to 1714, before he went back to the earlier periods.

[379:1] From the original at Kilravock.

[379:2] Probably Alexander Wedderburn, afterwards Lord Chancellor
Loughborough, who was then twenty years of age.

[379:3] From the original at Kilravock.

[381:1] Memorials of James Oswald, p. 72.

[383:1] _Scots Mag._ 1802, p. 794. Collated with original at Kilravock.

[385:1] _Scots Magazine_, 1802, p. 902.

[387:1] Alexander Hume, a director of the East India Company.

[387:2] _Edinburgh Annual Register_ for 1809, p. 553.

[387:3] Singer's edition of Spence's Anecdotes of Books and Men, p. 448.

[394:1] It is out of some vague rumour as to this transaction, that Lord
Charlemont must have constructed the following romantic story of Hume.
"He was tender-hearted, friendly, and charitable in the extreme, as will
appear from a fact, which I have from good authority. When a member of
the University of Edinburgh, and in great want of money, having little
or no paternal fortune, and the collegiate stipend being very
inconsiderable, he had procured, through the interest of some friend, an
office in the university, which was worth about £40 a-year. On the day
when he had received this good news, and just when he had got into his
possession the patent or grant entitling him to his office, he was
visited by his friend Blacklock, the poet, who is much better known by
his poverty and blindness than by his genius. This poor man began a long
descant on his misery, bewailing his want of sight, his large family of
children, and his utter inability to provide for them, or even procure
them the necessaries of life. Hume, unable to bear his complaints, and
destitute of money to assist him, ran instantly to his desk, took out
the grant, and presented it to his miserable friend, who received it
with exultation, and whose name was soon after, by Hume's interest,
inserted instead of his own."--_Hardy's Memoirs of Charlemont_, p. 9.
This story is constructed after the received model of the current
anecdotes of Fielding, Goldsmith, and others, and is perhaps as close to
the truth as many of them would be found to be, if they were minutely
investigated. It is pretty clear that Hume's generosity,--for generosity
he certainly had, to a very large extent, by the testimony of all who
knew him,--was not so much the creature of impulse, as that of the
authors who have been mentioned above: but such an instance as that just
given, is a warning to distrust those anecdotes of the inconsiderate
generosity of men of genius, that are put into a very dramatic shape.

[394:2] It is along with the letter to Smith in the MSS. R.S.E.

[396:1] The fastidious Gray's appreciation of La Fontaine, is thus
recorded. "The sly, delicate, and exquisitely elegant pleasantry of La
Fontaine he thought inimitable, whose muse, however licentious, is never
gross; not perhaps on that account the less dangerous."--Nicholls'
Reminiscences. Gray's Works, v. 45.

[396:2] In 1756, some disputes appear to have arisen between the Faculty
and their curators, owing to the arbitrary disposal of the books by the
latter. On 6th January it was represented by Mr. William Johnstone, that
the curators had ordered certain books to be sold, and that the practice
was a very questionable one, "seeing as one curator succeeded another
yearly, and different men had different tastes, the library might by
that means happen to suffer considerably." It was declared that the
curators had no right to dispose of books.

[399:1] From the original at Kilravock.

[399:2] Edinburgh: published by Hamilton, Balfour, and Neill. It is
entered in the _Gentleman's Magazine_ list for October.

[401:1] Carte's last volume was posthumously published in the year after
Hume's first.

[403:1] He does not appear to have suffered any _persecutions_ before he
wrote the first volume of the History of the Stuarts, unless the
opposition to his appointment as a professor deserves that name. The
tone of the History itself was indeed one of the grounds on which he was
attacked in the ecclesiastical courts.

[403:2] Article by Lord Jeffrey in _The Edinburgh Review_, xii. 276.

[405:1] Article on History by Mr. Macaulay. _Edinburgh Review_, xlvii.
p. 359.

[407:1] Printed in the Appendix of Voltaire et Rousseau, par Henry Lord
Brougham, p. 340.

[408:1] See the letters in Appendix. The French bibliographical works
of reference, which are in general very full, do not mention any
translation of the History of the Stuarts earlier than 1760, when
Querard and Brunet give the following:

     Histoire de la Maison de Stuart sur le trône d'Angleterre,
     jusqu'au détrônement de Jacques II. traduite de l'Anglois de
     David Hume, (par L'Abbé Prévost.) Londres (Paris) 1760. 3
     vols. in 4to.

The edition about to appear in Holland, which threw Le Blanc into
despair, seems to have been overlooked. This Prévost, or Prévôt, is the
well-known author of the "Histoire du Chevalier des Grieux et de Manon
Lescaut," which still holds its place in French popular literature,
though it bears but a small proportion to the bulk of his other
voluminous works which are forgotten. The authors of the Dictionnaire
Historique, say they find in his translation of Hume, "un air étranger,
un style souvent embarrassé, sémé d'Anglicismes, d'expressions peu
Françoises, de tours durs, de phrases louches et mal construites." This
abbé led an irregular life, being a sort of disgraced ecclesiastic, and
his death was singularly tragical. He had fallen by the side of a wood
in a fit of apoplexy. Being found insensible, he was removed as a dead
body to the residence of a magistrate, where a surgeon was to open the
body to discover the cause of death. At the first insertion of the
knife, a scream from the victim terrified all present: but it was too
late; the instrument had entered a vital part.

[408:2] Colonel Abercrombie.

[409:1] From the original at Kilravock.

[410:1] MS. R.S.E.

[411:1] "I presume this was 'Douglas;' and the expression, 'he now
discovers a great genius for the theatre,' I suppose was meant to imply
Mr. D. Hume's opinion of its being better fitted for the stage than
_Agis_."--_Mackenzie._

[411:2] Mackenzie's Account of Home, p. 102. The original in the MS.
R.S.E.

[413:1] "Lives of the Lindsays, or a Memoir of the Houses of Crawford
and Balcarres, by Lord Lindsay." Hume's correspondent was James, the
fifth earl. He had had the misfortune to be "out in the fifteen," and
though a zealous and hardy soldier, he in vain attempted to rise in the
army; and at last retiring in disgust, he betook himself to learned
leisure. In the pleasing work above referred to, he is thus
picturesquely described: "Though his aspect was noble, and his air and
deportment showed him at once a man of rank, yet there was no denying
that a degree of singularity attended his appearance. To his large
brigadier wig, which hung down with three tails, he generally added a
few curls of his own application, which I suspect would not have been
considered quite orthodox by the trade. His shoe, which resembled
nothing so much as a little boat with a cabin at the end of it, was
slashed with his pen-knife, for the benefit of giving ease to his honest
toes; here--there--he slashed it where he chose to slash, without an
idea that the world or its fashions had the smallest right to smile at
his shoe; had they smiled, he would have smiled too, and probably said,
'Odsfish! I believe it is not like other people's; but as to that, look,
d' ye see? what matters it whether so old a fellow as myself wears a
shoe or a slipper.'"

[414:1] Mackenzie's Account of Home, p. 175.

[416:1] He does not, however, mention it in any of the subsequent
editions of his History.

[417:1] Scott of Scotstarvet's Staggering State of Scots Statesmen.--A
collection of contemporary characters, drawn by a shrewd but bitter and
unscrupulous observer.

[417:2] MS. R.S.E.

[417:3] Evidently the Philosophical Society. It was instituted in 1731,
chiefly as a medical society; but, in 1739, its plan was so far
enlarged, as to admit of the above comprehensive denomination.

[418:1] Sic in MS.

[418:2] _Lit. Gazette_, 1822, p. 745. The original is in the MSS. R.S.E.

[419:1] This name changed to _Randolph_, after the first
representation.--_Mackenzie._

[420:1] Changed to _Norval_, before the tragedy was brought on the
stage.--_Mackenzie._

[420:2] Mackenzie's Account of Home, p. 100.

The following paper made its first appearance in _The Edinburgh Weekly
Chronicle_, a few years ago, when it was edited by Mr. Hislop, a
gentleman said to be well acquainted with theatrical matters. It is here
repeated, not as being believed, but because having excited some
attention when it first appeared, it found its way into some books
connected with Scottish literature.

"It may not be generally known, that the first rehearsal took place in
the lodgings in the Canongate, occupied by Mrs. Sarah Warde, one of
Digges's company; and that it was rehearsed by, and in presence of the
most distinguished literary characters Scotland ever could boast of. The
following was the cast of the piece on the occasion:--

DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.

     Lord Randolph,       Dr. Robertson, Principal, Edinburgh.
     Glenalvon,           David Hume, Historian.
     Old Norval,          Dr. Carlyle, Minister of Musselburgh.
     Douglas,             John Home, the Author.
     Lady Randolph,       Dr. Ferguson, Professor.
     Anna, (the Maid,)    Dr. Blair, Minister, High Church.

"The audience that day, besides Mr. Digges, and Mrs. Warde, were, the
Right Honourable Patrick Lord Elibank, Lord Milton, Lord Kames, Lord
Monboddo, (the two last were then only lawyers,) the Rev. John Steele
and William Home, ministers. The company, all but Mrs. Warde, dined
afterwards in the Erskine Club, in the Abbey."

The reader must take this statement at its own value, which he will
probably not consider high. The "cast," has no pretensions to be a
transcript of any contemporary document; for Dr. Robertson was not then
Principal of the University, but minister of the country parish of
Gladsmuir; and Ferguson was not a Professor, but an army chaplain, with
leave of absence, spending his time chiefly in Perthshire. Lord Kames,
spoken of as "only" a lawyer, had been raised to the bench in 1752.

[421:1] This last appears to have been suppressed. The publication of
the others is mentioned further on.

[422:1] MS. R.S.E.

[423:1] Account of John Home, p. 24.

[424:1] There is an amusing traditional anecdote, with which this
periodical has some connexion. Dr. Walter Anderson, minister of
Chirnside, having caught the fire of literary ambition, made the remark
to Hume, one afternoon when they had been enjoying the hospitalities of
Ninewells: "Mr. David, I daresay other people might write books too; but
you clever fellows have taken up all the good subjects. When I look
about me, I cannot find one unoccupied."--"What would you think, Mr.
Anderson," said Hume, in reply, "of a History of Croesus, king of Lydia?
This has never yet been written." Dr. Anderson was a man who understood
no jesting, and held no words as uttered in vain; so away he goes, pulls
down his Herodotus, and translates all the passages in the first book
relating to Croesus, with all the consultations of the oracles, and all
the dreams; only interweaving with them, from his own particular genius,
some very sage and lengthy remarks on the extent to which there was real
truth in the prophetic revelations of the Pythoness. This book, which is
now a great rarity, was reviewed with much gravity and kindness in _The
Edinburgh Review_. It was more severely treated in _The Critical
Review_, edited by Smollett, where it is said, "There is still a race of
soothsayers in the Highlands, derived, if we may believe some curious
antiquaries, from the Druids and Bards that were set apart for the
worship of Apollo. The author of the History before us may, for aught we
know, be one of these venerable seers, though we rather take him to be a
Presbyterian teacher, who has been used to expound apothegms that need
no explanation."

[427:1] Page 342. MS. R.S.E.

[427:2] The case of Sir John Leslie, see above, p. 89.

[428:1] Attributed to Dr. Blair by Tytler, (Life of Kames, i. 142,) as
well as by Mackenzie; as on the preceding page.

[429:1] Besides those mentioned above, the occasion seems to have called
forth some blasts of the trumpet, still better suited to split the ears
of the groundlings--such as "The Deist stretched on a Death-bed, or a
lively Portraiture of a Dying Infidel." The contemporary _Edinburgh
Review_, which carried on a guerilla warfare on the side of the
threatened philosophers, thus commences a notice of this production.
"This is a most extraordinary performance. The hero of it is an infidel,
'a humorous youth,' as the author describes him, 'a youth whose life was
one successive scene of pleasantry and humour: who laughed at
revelation, and called religion _priestcraft_ and _grimace_: a gay and
sprightly free-thinker. But yesterday,' says he 'this gay and sprightly
free-thinker _revelled_ his usual _round_ of gallantry and applause,
till, satiated at length, he staggered to bed devoid of sense and
reason.' We suppose, (continues the reviewer,) the author's meaning is,
that he went to bed very drunk.'"

[430:1] _Scots Magazine_, 1756, pp. 248, 280, where those who are
partial to such reading, will find a pretty clear abstract of the
debate. The General Assembly had its hands at that time pretty full. A
deadly dispute had arisen between the partisans of the old and new
church music, which is thus described in Ritchie's Life of Hume, p. 57:

"At this time the Scottish church was thrown into a general ferment by
an attempt to introduce the reformed music. In accomplishing this, the
most indecent scenes were exhibited. It was not uncommon for a
congregation to divide themselves into two parties, one of which, in
chaunting the psalms, followed the old, and the other the new mode of
musical execution; while the infidel, who was not in the habit of
frequenting the temple, now resorted to it, not for the laudable purpose
of repentance and edification, but from the ungodly motive of being a
spectator of the contest. . . . .

"During the present dispute, it was customary for the partisans of the
different kinds of music to convene apart, in numerous bodies, for the
purpose of practising, and to muster their whole strength on the
Sabbath. The moment the psalm was read from the pulpit, each side, in
general chorus, commenced their operations; and as the pastor and clerk,
or precentor, often differed in their sentiments, the church was
immediately in an uproar. Blows and bruises were interchanged by the
impassioned songsters, and, in many parts of the country, the most
serious disturbances took place."

They had, at the same time, to conduct the war against the tragedy of
Douglas, and the frequenters of the theatre. Home himself, as is well
known, escaped the odium of ecclesiastical punishment, by resigning his
ministerial charge. Order was then taken with those clergy who could not
resist being present on so memorable an occasion as the performance of a
great national tragedy, written by a member of their own body. Among
these the Rev. Mr. White of Libberton was subjected to the modified
punishment of a month's suspension from office, because 'he had attended
the representation only once, when he endeavoured to conceal himself in
a corner, to avoid giving offence.' _Scots Mag._ for 1757, p. 47.

[432:1] Ritchie says, (p. 79,) that he was in his eightieth year. One is
tempted to say with Lady Macbeth, "Who would have thought the old man
had so much blood in him." Besides these conflicts in Scotland, he was
conducting a war in England against Mallet, for the publication of
Bolingbroke's works.

[433:1] Word illegible.

[434:1] That such flowers were not confined to Aberdeen, may be seen in
the following passage of the "Carpentariana."

"Si l'on vouloit traduire les noms Grecs et Romains en François, on les
rendroit souvent ridicules. J'ai vu une traduction des épitres de
Cicéron à Atticus, imprimée chez Thiboust, en 1666, pag. 217, où
l'auteur est tombé dans cette faute ridicule, en traduisant cet endroit:
_Pridie autem apud me Crassipes fuerat_, Le jour précédent Gros-pied fut
chez moi. Véritablement _Crassipes_, veut dire Gros-pied, mais il est
ridicule de la traduire ainsi: et il ne faut jamais toucher aux noms
propres, soit qu'ils fassent un bon ou mauvais effet, rendus dans notre
langue. Un autre traducteur des épitres de Cicéron, lui fait dire,
Mademoiselle votre fille, Madame votre femme; et je me souviens d'un
auteur qui appelloit Brutus et Collatinus, les Bourgmestres de la ville
de Rome."

[435:1] Satis.

[435:2] Words obliterated.

[436:1] See above p. 393.

[436:2] Words obliterated by decay of the MS.

[437:1] Original at Kilravock.




APPENDIX.




APPENDIX A.

FRAGMENTS OF A PAPER IN HUME'S HANDWRITING, DESCRIBING THE DESCENT ON
THE COAST OF BRITTANY, IN 1746, AND THE CAUSES OF ITS FAILURE.[441:1]


     The forces under Lieutenant General St. Clair consisted of
     five battalions, viz. the first battalion of the 1st Royal,
     the 5th Highlanders, 3d Brag's, 4th Richbell's, 2d Harrison's,
     together with part of Frampton's, and some companies of
     Marines, making in all about 4500 men. The fleet consisted of
     __________. Though this army and fleet had been at first
     fitted out for entering upon action in summer 1746, and making
     conquest of Canada, it was found, after several vain efforts
     to get out of the Channel, first under Commodore Cotes, then
     under Admiral Listock, that so much time had been unavoidably
     lost, from contrary winds and contrary orders, as to render it
     dangerous for so large a body of ships to proceed thither. The
     middle of May was the last day of rendezvous appointed at
     Spithead; and in the latter end of August, the fleet had yet
     got no farther than St. Helen's, about a league below it. It
     is an observation, that in the latter end of autumn, or
     beginning of winter, the north-west winds blow so furiously on
     the coast of North America, as to render it always difficult,
     and often impossible, for ships that set out late to reach any
     harbour in those parts. Instances have been found of vessels
     that have been obliged to take shelter from these storms, even
     in the Leeward Islands. It was therefore become necessary to
     abandon all thoughts of proceeding to America that season; and
     as the transports were fitted out and fleet equipped at great
     expense, an attempt was hastily made to turn them to some
     account in Europe, during the small remainder of the summer.
     The distress of the allies in Flanders demanded the more
     immediate attention of the English nation and ministry, and
     required, if possible, some speedy remedy. 'Twas too late to
     think of sending the six battalions under General St. Clair,
     to reinforce Prince Charles of Lorraine, who commanded the
     armies of the allies; and their number was, besides, too
     inconsiderable to hope for any great advantages from that
     expedient. 'Twas more to be expected, that falling on the
     parts of France, supposed to be defenceless and disarmed, they
     might make a diversion, and occasion the sending a
     considerable detachment from the enemy's army in Flanders. But
     as time pressed, and allowed not leisure to concert and
     prepare this measure, the Duke of Newcastle, Secretary of
     State, hoped to find that General St. Clair had already
     planned and projected some enterprise of this nature. He
     formed this presumption on a hint which had been started very
     casually, and which had been immediately dropped by the
     General.

     In the spring, when the obstructions and delays thrown in the
     way of the American enterprise were partly felt and partly
     foreseen, the Secretary, lamenting the great and, he feared,
     useless expense to which the nation had been put by that
     undertaking, gave occasion to the General to throw out a
     thought, which would naturally occur in such a situation. He
     said, "Why may you not send the squadron and troops to some
     part of the coast of France, and at least frighten and alarm
     them as they have done us; and, as all their troops are on the
     Flanders and German frontiers, 'tis most probable that such an
     alarm may make them recall some of them?" The subject was then
     no farther prosecuted; but the King, being informed of this
     casual hint of the General's, asked him if he had formed any
     plan or project by which the service above-mentioned might be
     effectuated. He assured his majesty that he had never so much
     as thought of it; but that, if it was his pleasure, he would
     confer with Sir John Ligonier, and endeavour to find other
     people in London who could let him into some knowledge of the
     coast of France. To this the King replied, "No, no; you need
     not give yourself any trouble about it." And accordingly the
     General never more thought of it, farther than to inform the
     Duke of Newcastle of this conference with his majesty.
     However, the Duke being willing that the person who was to
     execute the undertaking should also be the projector of it, by
     which means both greater success might be hoped from it, and
     every body else be screened from reflection in case of its
     miscarriage, desired, in his letter of the 22d of August, that
     both the Admiral and General should give their opinion of such
     an invasion; and particularly the General, who, having, he
     said, formed some time ago a project of this nature, might be
     the better prepared to give his thoughts with regard to it.
     They both jointly replied, that their utter ignorance made
     them incapable of delivering their sentiments on so delicate a
     subject; and the General, in a separate letter, recalled to
     the Duke's memory the circumstances of the story, as above
     related.

     Though they declined proposing a project, they both cheerfully
     offered, that if his majesty would honour them with any plan
     of operation for a descent, they would do their best to carry
     it into execution. They hoped that the Secretary of State,
     who, by his office, is led to turn his eyes every where, and
     who lives at London, the centre of commerce and intelligence,
     could better form and digest such a plan, than they who were
     cooped up in their ships, in a remote sea-port town, without
     any former acquaintance with the coast of France, and without
     any possibility of acquiring new knowledge. They at least
     hoped, that so difficult a task would not be required of them
     as either to give their sentiments without any materials
     afforded them to judge upon, or to collect materials, while
     the most inviolable secrecy was strictly enjoined on them. It
     is remarkable, that the Duke of Newcastle, among other
     advantages proposed by this expedition, mentions the giving
     assistance to such Protestants as are already in arms, or may
     be disposed to rise on the appearance of the English, as if we
     were living in the time of the League, or during the confusion
     of Francis the Second's minority.

     Full of these reflections, they sailed from St. Helens on the
     23d of August, and arrived at Plymouth on the 29th, in
     obedience to their orders, which required them to put into
     that harbour for farther instructions. They there found
     positive orders to sail immediately, with the first fair wind,
     to the coast of France, and make an attempt on L'Orient, or
     Rochefort, or Rochelle, or sail up the river of Bourdeaux; or,
     if they judged any of these enterprises impracticable, to sail
     to whatever other place on the western coast they should think
     proper. Such unbounded discretionary powers could not but be
     agreeable to commanders, had it been accompanied with better,
     or indeed with any intelligence. As the wind was then
     contrary, they had leisure to reply in their letters of the
     29th and 30th. They jointly represented the difficulties, or
     rather impossibilities, of any attempt on L'Orient, Rochefort,
     and Rochelle, by reason of the real strength of these places,
     so far as their imperfect information could reach; or, if that
     were erroneous, by reason of their own absolute want of
     intelligence, guides, and pilots, which are the soul of all
     military operations.

     The General, in a separate letter, enforced the same topics,
     and added many other reflections of moment. He said, that of
     all the places mentioned in his orders, Bourdeaux, if
     accessible, appeared to him the properest to be attempted;
     both as it is one of the towns of greatest commerce and riches
     in France, and as it is the farthest situated from their
     Flanders' army, and on these accounts an attack on it would
     most probably produce the wished-for alarm and diversion. He
     added, that he himself knew the town to be of no strength, and
     that the only place there capable of making any defence, is
     Chateau Trompette, which serves it as a citadel, and was
     intended, as almost all citadels are, more as a curb, than a
     defence, on the inhabitants. But though these circumstances
     promised some success, he observed that there were many other
     difficulties to struggle with, which threw a mighty damp on
     these promising expectations. In the first place, he much
     questioned if there was in the fleet any one person who had
     been ashore on the western coast of France, except himself,
     who was once at Bourdeaux; and he, too, was a stranger to all
     the country betwixt the town and the sea. He had no single map
     of any part of France on board with him; and what intelligence
     he may be able to force from the people of the country can be
     but little to be depended on, as it must be their interest to
     mislead him. And if money prove necessary, either for
     obtaining intelligence, carrying on of works, or even
     subsisting the officers, he must raise it in the country; for,
     except a few chests of Mexican dollars, consigned to other
     uses, he carried no money with him. If he advanced any where
     into the country, he must be at a very great loss for want of
     horses to draw the artillery; as the inhabitants will
     undoubtedly carry off as many of them as they could, and he
     had neither hussars nor dragoons to force them back again. And
     as to the preserving any conquests he might make, (of which
     the Duke had dropped some hints,) he observed that every place
     which was not impregnable to him, with such small force, must
     be untenable by him. On the whole, he engaged for nothing but
     obedience; he promised no success; he professed absolute
     ignorance with regard to every circumstance of the
     undertaking; he even could not fix on any particular
     undertaking; and yet he lay under positive orders to sail with
     the first fair wind, to approach the unknown coast, march
     through the unknown country, and attack the unknown cities of
     the most potent nation of the universe.

     Meanwhile, Admiral Anson, who had put into Plymouth, and had
     been detained there by the same contrary winds, which still
     prevailed, had a conversation with the General and Admiral on
     the subject of their enterprise. He told them, that he
     remembered to have once casually heard from Mr. Hume, member
     for Southwark, that he had been at L'Orient, and that, though
     it be very strong by sea, it is not so by land. Though Mr.
     Hume, the gentleman mentioned, be bred to a mercantile
     profession, not to war, and though the intelligence received
     from him was only casual, imperfect, and by second-hand, yet
     it gave pleasure to the Admiral and General, as it afforded
     them a faint glimmering ray in their present obscurity and
     ignorance; and they accordingly resolved to follow it. They
     wrote to the Duke of Newcastle, September the 3d, that 'twas
     to L'Orient they intended to bend their course, as soon as the
     wind offered. To remedy the ignorance of the coast and want of
     pilots, as far as possible, Commodore Cotes in the Ruby,
     together with Captain Stewart in the Hastings, and a sloop and
     tender, was immediately despatched by the Admiral to view Port
     L'Orient and all the places near it, so far as might regard
     the safe approach and anchorage of the ships. The ignorance of
     the country, and want of guides, was a desperate evil, for
     which the General could provide no remedy. But as the wind
     still continued contrary to the fleet and transports, though
     single ships of war might work their way against it, the
     General had occasion to see farther alterations made by the
     ministry in their project of an invasion.

     The Duke of Newcastle, who had before informed the General
     that, if he could establish himself on any part of the coast
     of France, two battalions of the Guards, and General Huske's
     regiment, should be despatched after him, now says, (Sept. 3,)
     that these three battalions have got immediate orders to
     follow him. He farther adds, that if the General finds it
     impracticable to make any descent on the coast of Brittany, or
     higher up in the Bay of Biscay, he would probably find, on his
     return, some intelligence sent him, by the reinforcement, with
     regard to the coast of Normandy. Next day the Duke changes his
     mind, and sends immediately this intelligence with regard to
     the coast of Normandy, and a plan for annoying the French on
     that quarter, proposed by Major Macdonald; and to this plan he
     seems entirely to give the preference to the other, of making
     an attempt on the western coast of France, to which he had
     before confined the Admiral and General. They considered the
     plan, and conversed with Major Macdonald, who came down to
     Plymouth a few days after. They found that this plan had been
     given in some years before, and was not in the least
     calculated for the present expedition, but required a body of
     cavalry as an essential point towards its execution; an
     advantage of which the General was entirely destitute. They
     found that Major Macdonald had had so few opportunities of
     improving himself in the art of war, that it would be
     dangerous, without farther information, to follow his plan in
     any military operations. They found that he pretended only to
     know the strength of the town, and nature of the country, in
     that province, but had never acquainted himself with the
     sea-coast, or pitched upon any proper place for
     disembarkation. They considered that a very considerable step
     had been already taken towards the execution of the other
     project on the coast of Brittany, viz. the sending Commodore
     Cotes to inspect and sound the coast; and that the same step
     must now be taken anew, in so late a season, with regard to
     the coast of Normandy. They thought that, if their whole
     operations were to begin, an attempt on the western coast was
     preferable, chiefly because of its remoteness from the
     Flanders' army, which must increase and spread the alarm, if
     the country were really so defenceless as was believed. They
     represented all those reasons to the Secretary; but at the
     same time expressed their intentions of remaining at Plymouth
     till they should receive his majesty's positive orders with
     regard to the enterprise on which they were to engage.

     The Duke immediately despatched a messenger, with full powers
     to them to go whithersoever they pleased. During this
     interval, the General was obliged, to his great regret, to
     remain in a manner wholly inactive. Plymouth was so remote a
     place, that it was not to be expected he could there get any
     proper intelligence. He was bound up by his orders to such
     inviolable secrecy, that he could not make any inquiries for
     it, or scarce receive it, if offered. The Secretary had sent
     Major Macdonald, and one Cooke, captain of a privateer, who,
     'twas found, could be of no manner of service in this
     undertaking. These, he said, were the only persons he could
     find in London that pretended to know any thing of the coast
     of France, as if the question had been with regard to the
     coast of Japan or of California. The General desired to have
     maps of France, chiefly of Gascony and Brittany. He receives
     only a map of Gascony, together with one of Normandy. No map
     of Brittany; none of France; he is obliged to set out on so
     important an enterprise without intelligence, without pilots,
     without guides, without any map of the country to which he was
     bound, except a common map, on a small scale, of the kingdom
     of France, which his Aid-de-camp had been able to pick up in a
     shop at Plymouth. He represented all these difficulties to the
     ministry; he begged them not to flatter themselves with any
     success from a General who had such obstacles to surmount, and
     who must leave his conduct to the government of chance more
     than prudence. He was answered, that nothing was expected of
     him, but to land any where he pleased in France, to produce an
     alarm, and to return safe, with the fleet and transports, to
     the British dominions. Though he was sensible that more would
     be expected by the people, yet he cheerfully despised their
     rash judgments, while he acted in obedience to orders, and in
     the prosecution of his duty. The fleet sailed from Plymouth on
     the 15th of September, and, after a short voyage of three
     days, arrived, in the evening of the 18th, off the island of
     Groa, where they found Commodore Cotes and Captain Stuart, who
     gave them an account of the success which they had met with in
     the survey of the coast near L'Orient. The place they had
     pitched on for landing, was ten miles from that town, at the
     mouth of the river of Quimperlay. They represented it as a
     flat open shore, with deep water: on these accounts a good
     landing-place for the troops, but a dangerous place for the
     ships to ride in, on account of the rocks with which it was
     every where surrounded, and the high swell which was thrown
     in, from the Bay of Biscay, by the west and south-west winds.

     It was then about eight in the evening, a full moon and a
     clear sky, with a gentle breeze blowing in shore. The question
     was, whether to sail directly to the landing-place, or hold
     off till morning. The two officers who had surveyed the coast
     were divided in opinion: one recommended the former measure,
     the other suggested some scruples, by representing the
     dangerous rocks that lay on every side of them, and the
     ignorance of all the pilots with regard to their number and
     situation. The Admiral was determined, by these reasons, to
     agree to this opinion. The question seemed little important,
     as it regarded only a short delay; but really was of the
     utmost consequence, and was, indeed, the spring whence all the
     ill success in this expedition flowed.

     The great age of Admiral Listock, as it increased his
     experience, should make us cautious of censuring his opinion
     in sea affairs, where he was allowed to have such consummate
     knowledge. But at the same time, it may beget a suspicion,
     that being now in the decline of life, he was thence naturally
     inclined rather to the prudent counsels which suit a concerted
     enterprise, than to the bold temerity which belongs to such
     hasty and blind undertakings. The unhappy consequences of this
     over-cautious measure immediately appeared. The Admiral had
     laid his account, that by a delay, which procured a greater
     safety to the fleet and transports, only four or five hours
     would be lost; but the wind changing in the morning, and
     blowing fresh off shore, all next day, and part of next night,
     was spent before the ships could reach the landing-place. Some
     of them were not able to reach it till two days after.

     During this time, the fleet lay full in view of the coast,
     and preparations were making in Port Louis, L'Orient, and
     over the whole country, for the reception of an enemy, who
     threatened them with so unexpected an invasion.

     The force of France, either for offence or defence, consists
     chiefly in three different bodies of men: first, in a numerous
     veteran army, which was then entirely employed in Italy and on
     their frontiers, except some shattered regiments, which were
     dispersed about the country, for the advantage of recruiting,
     and of which there were two regiments of dragoons at that time
     in Brittany; secondly, in a regular and disciplined militia,
     with which all the fortified cities along the sea-coast were
     garrisoned, and many of the frontier towns, that seemed not to
     be threatened with any immediate attack. Some bodies of this
     militia had also been employed in the field with the regular
     troops, and had acquired honour, which gave spirits and
     courage to the rest: thirdly, in a numerous body of coast
     militia, or gardes-du-cote, amounting to near 200,000, ill
     armed and ill disciplined, formidable alone by their numbers;
     and in Brittany, by the ferocity of the inhabitants, esteemed
     of old and at present, the most warlike and least civilized of
     all the French peasants. Regular signals were concerted for
     the assembling of these forces, by alarm guns, flags, and
     fires; and in the morning of the 20th of September, by break
     of day, a considerable body of all these different kinds of
     troops, but chiefly of the last, amounting to above 3000 men,
     were seen upon the sea-shore to oppose the disembarkation of
     the British forces. A disposition, therefore, of ships and
     boats must be made for the regular landing of the army; and as
     the weather was then very blustering, and the wind blew almost
     off shore, this could not be effected till afternoon.

     There appeared, in view of the fleet, three places which
     seemed proper for a disembarkation, and which were separated
     from each other either by a rising ground, or by a small arm
     of the sea. The French militia had posted themselves in the
     two places which lay nearest to L'Orient; and finding that
     they were not numerous enough to cover the whole, they left
     the third, which lay to the windward, almost wholly
     defenceless. The General ordered the boats to rendezvous
     opposite to this beach; and he saw the French troops march off
     from the next contiguous landing-place, and take post opposite
     to him. They placed themselves behind some sandbanks, in such
     a manner as to be entirely sheltered from the cannon of those
     English ships which covered the landing, while at the same
     time they could rush in upon the troops, as soon as their
     approach to the shore had obliged the ships to leave off
     firing.

     The General remarked their plan of defence, and was
     determined to disappoint them. He observed, that the next
     landing-place to the leeward was now empty; and that, though
     the troops which had been posted on the more distant beach had
     quitted their station, and were making a circuit round an arm
     of the sea, in order to occupy the place deserted by the
     others, they had not as yet reached it. He immediately seized
     the opportunity. He ordered his boats to row directly forward,
     as if he intended to land on the beach opposite to him; but
     while the enemy were expecting him to advance, he ordered the
     boats to turn, at a signal; and, making all the speed that
     both oars and sails could give them, to steer directly to the
     place deserted by the enemy. In order to render the
     disembarkation more safe, he had previously ordered two
     tenders to attack a battery, which had been placed on a mount
     towards the right, and which was well situated for annoying
     the boats on their approach. The tenders succeeded in chasing
     the French from their guns; the boats reached the shore before
     any of the French could be opposite to them. The soldiers
     landed, to the number of about six hundred men, and formed in
     an instant; immediately upon which the whole militia dispersed
     and fled up into the country. The English followed them
     regularly and in good order; prognosticating success to the
     enterprise from such a fortunate beginning.

     There was a creek, or arm of the sea, dry at low water, which
     lay on the right hand of the landing-place, and through which
     ran the nearest road to L'Orient, and the only one fit for the
     march of troops, or the draught of cannon and heavy carriages.
     As it was then high water, the French runaways were obliged,
     by this creek, to make a circuit of some miles; and they
     thereby misled the general, who, justly concluding they would
     take shelter in that town, and having no other guides to
     conduct him, thought that, by following their footsteps, he
     would be led the readiest and shortest way to L'Orient. He
     detached, therefore, in pursuit of the flying militia, about a
     thousand men, under the command of Brigadier O'Farrel; who,
     after being harassed by some firing from the hedges, (by which
     Lieut.-Col. Erskine, Quarter-Master General, was dangerously
     wounded,) arrived that evening at Guidel, a village about a
     league distant from the landing-place. The general himself lay
     near the sea-shore, to wait for the landing of the rest of the
     forces. By break of day he led them up to join the brigadier
     at Guidel. He there learned from some peasants, taken
     prisoners, and who spoke the French language, (which few of
     the common people in Brittany are able to do,) that the road
     into which he had been led, by the reasons above specified,
     was the longest by four or five miles. He was also informed,
     what he had partly seen, that the road was very dangerous and
     difficult, running through narrow lanes and defiles, betwixt
     high hedges, faced with stone walls, and bordered in many
     places with thick woods and brushes, where a very few
     disciplined and brave troops might stop a whole army; and
     where even a few, without discipline or bravery, might, by
     firing suddenly upon the forces, throw them into confusion.

     In order to acquire a more thorough knowledge of the country,
     of which he and the whole army were utterly ignorant, he here
     divided the troops into two equal bodies, and marched them up
     to L'Orient, by two different roads, which were pointed out to
     him. The one part, which he himself conducted, passed without
     much molestation. The other, under Brigadier O'Farrel, was not
     so fortunate. Two battalions of that detachment, Richbell's
     and Frampton's, partly from their want of experience, and
     partly from the terror naturally inspired into soldiers by
     finding themselves in a difficult country unknown both to
     themselves and leaders, and partly, perhaps, from accident, to
     which the courage of men is extremely liable, fell into
     confusion, before a handful of French peasants who fired at
     them from behind the hedges. Notwithstanding all the
     endeavours of the Brigadier, many of them threw down their
     arms, and ran away; others fired in confusion, and wounded
     each other; and if any regular forces had been present to take
     advantage of this disorder, the most fatal consequences might
     have ensued. And though they were at last led on, and joined
     the general that evening before L'Orient, the panic still
     remained in these two battalions afterwards, and communicated
     itself to others; kept the whole army in anxiety, even when
     they were not in danger, and threw a mighty damp on the
     expectations of success, conceived from this undertaking.
     L'Orient, lately a small village, now a considerable town, on
     the coast of Brittany, lies in the extremity of a fine bay,
     the mouth of which is very narrow, and guarded by the strong
     citadel of Port Louis. This town has become the centre of the
     French East India trade, the seat of the company established
     for that commerce, and the magazine whence they distribute the
     East India commodities. The great prizes made upon them by the
     English, during the course of the war, had given a check to
     this growing commerce; yet still the town was esteemed a
     valuable acquisition, were it only on account of the wealth it
     contained, and the store-houses of the company, a range of
     stately buildings, erected at public charge, both for use and
     ornament. The town itself is far from being strong. Two sides
     of it, which are not protected with water, are defended only
     with a plain wall, near thirty feet high, of no great
     thickness, and without any fosse or parapet. But the water
     which covers the other two sides, rendered it impossible to
     be invested, and gave an opportunity for multitudes of people
     to throw themselves into it from every corner of that populous
     country. And though these, for want of discipline, could not
     be trusted in the field against regular forces, yet became
     they of great use in a defence behind walls, by throwing up
     works, erecting batteries, and digging trenches, to secure
     (what was sufficient) for a few days, a weak town against a
     small and ill-provided army. The East India Company had
     numbers of cannon in their magazines, and had there erected a
     school of engineers, for the service of their ships and
     settlements; the vessels in the harbour supplied them with
     more cannon, and with seamen accustomed to their management
     and use; and whatever was wanting, either in artillery or
     warlike stores, could easily be brought by water from Port
     Louis, with which the town of L'Orient kept always an open
     communication.

     But as these advantages, though great, require both a
     sufficient presence of mind, and some time, to be employed
     against an enemy, 'tis not improbable, that if the admiral had
     been supplied with proper pilots, and the general with proper
     guides, which could have led the English immediately upon the
     coast, and to the town, the very terror of so unexpected an
     invasion would have rendered the inhabitants incapable of
     resistance, and made them surrender at discretion. The want of
     these advantages had already lost two days; and more time must
     yet be consumed, before they could so much as make the
     appearance of an attack. Cannon was wanting, and the road by
     which the army had marched, was absolutely unfit for the
     conveyance of them. The general, therefore, having first
     despatched an officer and a party to reconnoitre the country,
     and find a nearer and better road, September 22d, went himself
     next day to the sea-shore, for the same purpose, and also in
     order to concert with the admiral the proper method of
     bringing up cannon; as almost all the horses in the country,
     which are extremely weak and of a diminutive size, had been
     driven away by the peasants. Accordingly, a road was found,
     much nearer, though still ten miles of length; and much
     better, though easily rendered impassable by rainy weather, as
     was afterwards experienced.

     A council of war was held on board the Princessa, consisting
     of the admiral and general, Brigadier O'Farrel and Commodore
     Cotes. The engineers, Director-General Armstrong, and Captain
     Watson, who had surveyed the town of L'Orient, being called
     in, were asked their opinion with regard to the practicability
     of an attempt on it, together with the time, and artillery,
     and ammunition, requisite for that purpose. Their answer was,
     that with two twelve pounders, and a ten inch mortar, planted
     on the spot which they had pitched on for erecting a battery,
     they engaged either to make a practicable breach in the walls,
     or with cartridges, bombs, and red-hot balls, destroy the
     town, by laying it in ashes in twenty-four hours. Captain
     Chalmers, the captain of the artillery, who had not then seen
     the town, was of the same opinion, from their description of
     it, provided the battery was within the proper distance. Had
     the king's orders been less positive for making an attempt on
     some part of the coast of France, yet such flattering views
     offered by men who promised what lay within the sphere of
     their own profession, must have engaged the attention of the
     admiral and general, and induced them to venture on a much
     more hazardous and difficult undertaking. 'Twas accordingly
     agreed that four twelve pounders, and a ten inch mortar,
     together with three field-pieces, should be drawn up to the
     camp by sailors, in order to make, with still greater
     assurance, the attempt, whose success seemed so certain to the
     engineers. These pieces of artillery, with the stores
     demanded, notwithstanding all difficulties, were drawn to the
     camp in two days, except two twelve pounders, which arrived
     not till the day afterwards. A third part of the sailors of
     the whole fleet, together with all the marines, were employed
     in this drudgery; the admiral gave all assistance in his power
     to the general; and the public, in one instance, saw that it
     was not impossible for land and sea officers to live in
     harmony together, and concur in promoting the success of an
     enterprise.

     The general, on his arrival in the camp, found the officer
     returned whom he had sent to summon the town of L'Orient. By
     his information, it appeared that the inhabitants were so much
     alarmed by the suddenness of this incursion, and the terror of
     a force, which their fears magnified, as to think of
     surrendering, though upon conditions, which would have
     rendered the conquest of no avail to their enemies. The
     inhabitants insisted upon an absolute security to their houses
     and goods; the East India Company to their magazines and
     store-houses; and the garrison, consisting of about seven
     hundred regular militia and troops, besides a great number of
     irregulars, demanded a liberty of marching out with all the
     honours of war. A weak town that opened its gates on such
     conditions was not worth the entering; since it must
     immediately be abandoned, leaving only to its conquerors the
     shame of their own folly, and perhaps the reproach of
     treachery. The general, therefore, partly trusting to the
     promise of the engineers, and partly desirous of improving the
     advantages gained by the present danger, when the deputies
     arrived next day, September 23d, from the governor, from the
     town, and from the East India Company, refused to receive any
     articles but those from the governor, who commanded in the
     name of his most Christian majesty. He even refused liberty to
     the garrison to march out; well knowing that, as the town was
     not invested, they could take that liberty whenever they
     pleased.

     Meanwhile, every accident concurred to render the enterprise
     of the English abortive. Some deserters got into the town, who
     informed the garrison of the true force of the English, which,
     conjecturing from the greatness and number of the ships, they
     had much magnified. Even this small body diminished daily,
     from the fatigue of excessive duty, and from the great rains
     that began to fall. Scarce three thousand were left to do
     duty, which still augmented the fatigue to the few that
     remained; especially when joined to the frequent alarms, that
     the unaccountable panic they were struck with made but too
     frequent. Rains had so spoilt the roads as to render it
     impracticable to bring up any heavier cannon, or more of the
     same calibre, so long a way, by the mere force of seamen. But
     what, above all things, made the enterprise appear desperate,
     was the discovery of the ignorance of the engineers, chiefly
     of the director-general, who in the whole course of his
     proceedings appeared neither to have skill in contrivance, nor
     order and diligence in execution. His own want of capacity and
     experience, made his projects of no use; his blind obstinacy
     rendered him incapable of making use of the capacity of
     others. Though the general offered to place and support the
     battery wherever the engineer thought proper, he chose to set
     it above six hundred yards from the wall, where such small
     cannon could do no manner of execution. He planted it at so
     oblique an angle to the wall that the ball thrown from the
     largest cannon must have recoiled, without making any
     impression. He trusted much to the red-hot balls, with which
     he promised to lay the town in ashes in twenty-four hours;
     yet, by his negligence, or that of others, the furnace with
     which these balls were to be heated, was forgot. After the
     furnace was brought, he found that the bellows, and other
     implements necessary for the execution of that work, were also
     left on board the store-ships. With great difficulty, and
     infinite pains, ammunition and artillery stores were drawn up
     from the sea-shore in tumbrels. He was totally ignorant, till
     some days after, that he had along with him ammunition wagons,
     which would have much facilitated this labour. His orders to
     the officers of the train were so confused, or so ill obeyed,
     that no ammunition came regularly up to the camp, to serve the
     few cannon and the mortars that played upon the town. Not only
     fascines, piquets, and every thing necessary for the battery,
     were supplied him beyond his demand; but even workmen,
     notwithstanding the great fatigue and small numbers of the
     army. These workmen found no addition to their fatigue in
     obeying his orders. He left them often unemployed, for want of
     knowing in what business he should occupy them.

     Meanwhile the French garrison, being so weakly attacked, had
     leisure to prepare for a defence, and make proper use of their
     great number of workmen, if not of soldiers, and the nearness
     and plenty of their military stores. By throwing up earth in
     the inside of the wall, they had planted a great many cannon,
     some of a large calibre, and opened six batteries against one
     that played upon them from the English. The distance alone of
     the besiegers' battery, made these cannon of the enemy do less
     execution; but that same distance rendered the attack
     absolutely ineffectual. Were the battery brought nearer, to a
     hundred paces for instance, 'twould be requisite to make it
     communicate with the camp by trenches and a covered way, to
     dig which was the work of some days for so small an army.
     During this time, the besieged, foreseeing the place to which
     the attack must be directed, could easily fortify it by
     retrenchments in the inside of the wall; and planting ten
     cannon to one, could silence the besiegers' feeble battery in
     a few hours. They would not even have had leisure to make a
     breach in the thin wall, which first discovered itself; and
     that breach, if made, could not possibly serve to any purpose.
     Above fifteen thousand men, completely armed by the East India
     Company, and brave while protected by cannon and ramparts,
     still stood in opposition to three thousand, discouraged with
     fatigue, with sickness, and with despair of ever succeeding in
     so unequal a contest.

            *       *       *       *       *

     A certain foreign writer, more anxious to tell his stories in
     an entertaining manner than to assure himself of their
     reality, has endeavoured to put this expedition in a
     ridiculous light; but as there is not one circumstance of his
     narration, which has truth in it, or even the least appearance
     of truth, it would be needless to lose time in refuting it.
     With regard to the prejudices of the public, a few questions
     may suffice.

     Was the attempt altogether impracticable from the beginning?
     The general neither proposed it, nor planned it, nor approved
     it, nor answered for its success. Did the disappointment
     proceed from want of expedition? He had no pilots, guides, nor
     intelligence, afforded him; and could not possibly provide
     himself in any of these advantages, so necessary to all
     military operations. Were the engineers blamable? This has
     always been considered as a branch of military knowledge,
     distinct from that of a commander, and which is altogether
     intrusted to those to whose profession it peculiarly belongs.
     By his vigour in combating the vain terrors spread amongst the
     troops, and by his prudence in timely desisting from a
     fruitless enterprise, the misfortune was confined merely to a
     disappointment, without any loss or any dishonour to the
     British arms. Commanders, from the situation of affairs, have
     had opportunities of acquiring more honour; yet there is no
     one whose conduct, in every circumstance, could be more free
     from reproach. On the first of October, the fleet sailed out
     of Quimperlay Road, from one of the most dangerous situations
     that so large a fleet had ever lain in, at so late a season,
     and in so stormy a sea as the Bay of Biscay. The reflection on
     this danger had been no inconsiderable cause of hastening the
     re-embarkation of the troops. And the more so, that the
     secretary had given express orders to the admiral not to bring
     the fleet into any hazard. The prudence of the hasty departure
     appeared the more visibly the very day the fleet sailed, when
     a violent storm arising from the south west, it was concluded,
     that if the ships had been lying at anchor on the coast, many
     of them must have necessarily been driven ashore, and wrecked
     on the rocks that surrounded them. The fleet was dispersed,
     and six transports being separated from the rest, went
     immediately for England, carrying with them about eight
     hundred of the forces. The rest put into Quiberon Bay, and the
     general landed his small body on the peninsula of that name.
     By erecting a battery of some guns on the narrow neck of land,
     which joins the peninsula to the continent, he rendered his
     situation almost impregnable, while he saw the fleet riding
     secure in his neighbourhood, in one of the finest bays in the
     world.

     The industry and spirit of the general supported both himself
     and the army against all these disadvantages, while there was
     the smallest prospect of success. But his prudence determined
     him to abandon it, when it appeared altogether desperate.

     The engineers, seeing no manner of effect from their shells
     and red-hot balls, and sensible that 'twas impossible either
     to make a breach from a battery, erected at so great a
     distance, or to place the battery nearer, under such a
     superiority of French cannon, at last unanimously brought a
     report to the general, that they had no longer any hope of
     success; and that even all the ammunition, which, with
     infinite labour, had been brought, was expended: no prospect
     remained of being farther supplied, on account of the broken
     roads, which lay between them and the fleet. The council of
     war held in consequence of this report, balanced the reasons
     for continuing or abandoning the enterprise, if men can be
     said to balance where they find nothing on the one side but an
     extreme desire to serve their king and country, and on the
     other every maxim of war and prudence. They unanimously agreed
     to abandon the attempt, and return on board the transports.
     The whole troops were accordingly re-embarked by the 28th of
     September, with the loss of near twenty men killed and
     wounded, on the whole enterprise.


FOOTNOTES:

[441:1] See ante, p. 218.




APPENDIX B.

LETTERS REFERRED TO IN THE TEXT.[456:1]


I.--LETTERS FROM MONTESQUIEU TO HUME.[456:2]


(1.)

     J'ai reçu Monsieur, comme une chose très précieuse, la belle
     lettre que vous m'avez fait l'honneur de m'écrire au sujet de
     mon ouvrage. Elle est remplie de réflexions si judicieuses et
     si sensées, que je ne sçaurois vous dire à quel point j'en ai
     été charmé. Ce que vous dites sur la forme dont les jurés
     prononcent en Angleterre, ou en Ecosse, m'a surtout fait un
     grand plaisir, et l'endroit de mon livre où j'ai traité cette
     matière est peut-être celui qui m'a fait le plus de peine, et
     où j'ai le plus souvent changé. Ce que j'avois fait, parce-que
     je n'avois trouvé personne qui eut la-dessus des idées aussi
     nettes, que vous avez. Mais c'est assez parler de mon livre
     que j'ai l'honneur de vous présenter. J'aime mieux vous parler
     d'une belle dissertation où vous donnez une beaucoup plus
     grande influence aux causes morales qu'aux causes
     physiques--et il m'a paru, autant que je suis capable d'en
     juger, que ce sujet est traité à fond, quelque difficile qu'il
     soit à traiter, et écrit de main de maître, et rempli d'idées
     et de réflexions très neuves. Nous commençâmes aussi à
     lire--M. Stuart et moi--un autre ouvrage de vous où vous
     maltraitez un peu l'ordre ecclésiastique. Vous croyez bien que
     Monsr. Stuart et moi n'avons pas pu entièrement vous
     approuver--nous nous sommes contentés de vous admirer. Nous ne
     crûmes pas que ces Messieurs furent tels, mais nous trouvâmes
     fort bonnes les raisons que vous donnez pour qu'ils dussent
     être tels. M. Stuart m'a fait un grand plaisir en me faisant
     espérer que je trouverois à Paris une partie de ces beaux
     ouvrages. J'ai l'honneur, Monsieur, de vous en remercier, et
     d'être avec les sentimens de la plus parfaite estime, votre
     très humble et très obéissant serviteur.

                                                MONTESQUIEU.

     _A Bordeaux, ce 19 May, 1749._


(2.)

     Monsieur j'ai reçu la lettre que vous m'avez fait l'honneur de
     m'écrire du 16 de Juillet, et il ne m'a été possible de la
     lire qu' aujourdhui, à cause d'une grande fluxion sur les yeux
     et que n'ayant point actuellement de secrétaire Anglais je ne
     pouvois me la faire lire. J'étois prêt à y faire réponse quand
     Mr. Le Mosnier est entré chez moi, et m'a parlé de l'honneur
     qu'on veut faire à mon livre en Ecosse de l'y imprimer, et m'a
     dit ce que vous m'avez déjà appris par votre lettre. Je suis
     très obligé à vous Monsieur et à Monsieur Alexandre, de la
     peine que vous avez prise. Je suis convenu avec M. Le Mosnier
     que je ferais faire une copie des corrections que j'ai
     envoiées en Angleterre, et à Paris, de la première édition de
     Genève, en 2 volumes in 4to qui est très fautive, et qu'il se
     chargeroit de les envoyer. J'ai reçu Monsieur, les exemplaires
     de vos beaux ouvrages que vous avez eu la bonté de m'envoyer,
     et j'ai lu avec un très grand plaisir l'essay sur l'esprit
     humain, qui ne peut partir que d'un esprit extrêmement
     philosophique. Tout ceci est rempli de belles idées, et je
     vous remercie du plaisir que la lecture m'en a fait; à l'égard
     de la citation des Lettres Persanes il vaut autant que mon nom
     y soit que celui d'un autre, et cela n'est d'aucune
     conséquence.

     La réputation de Monsieur le Docteur Midleton est certainement
     venue jusqu'à nous. Notior ut jam sit canibus non Delia
     nostris, et j'espère bien me procurer l'avantage de lire les
     ouvrages dont vous me parlez. Je sçais que Mr. de Midleton est
     un homme éminent. J'ai Monsieur l'honneur d'être, &c.

     _A Paris ce 3 7bre, 1749._

     Je vous prie Monsieur, de vouloir bien faire mes compliments
     très humbles à Mons. Stewart: il fairoit bien de venir nous
     revoir cet automne prochain.


(3.)

     J'ai Monsieur reçu l'honneur de votre lettre avec la postille
     qui y est jointe, et j'ai de plus reçu un exemplaire de vos
     excellentes compositions par la voie de Milord Morton. Mr. de
     Jouquart qui a formé le dessein de traduire l'ouvrage de
     Mons{r.} Wallace, me dit hier qu'il traduiroit aussi le vôtre
     sur le nombre des peuples chez les anciennes nations. Cela
     dépendra du succès qu'aura sa traduction qui est la première
     qu'il ait faite. Il est certain qu'il a tous les talents qu'il
     faut pour s'en acquitter, et je ne doute pas que le public ne
     l'encourage à continuer. Le public qui admirera les deux
     ouvrages, n'admirera pas moins deux amis qui font céder d'une
     manière si noble les petits intérêts de l'esprit aux intérêts
     de l'amitié; et pour moi, je regarderai comme un très grand
     bonheur, si je puis me flatter d'avoir quelque part dans cette
     amitié. J'ai l'honneur d'être, &c.

     _Paris, ce 13 Juillet, 1753._


II.--LETTERS FROM THE ABBÉ LE BLANC TO HUME.

_Referred to in_ vol. i. p. 366, _and_ p. 408.


(1.)

     MONSIEUR,--La traduction de vos discours politiques, que j'ai
     l'honneur de vous envoyer, est la preuve la plus éclatante que
     je pouvois vous donner de l'estime que j'en fais; vous en
     serez peut-être plus content si j'avois été à portée de
     profiter de vos lumières. Je vous prie, et votre intérêt s'y
     trouve comme le mien, de me faire la grâce de la lire avec
     attention, et de m'avertir des endroits, ou malgré toute
     l'attention que j'y ai apportée, j'aurois pu m'écarter de
     votre sens. J'en profiterai à la première édition, ainsi que
     des remarques, changements, ou additions, qu'il vous plaira me
     communiquer, soit à l'occasion de vos discours, soit sur les
     autres ouvrages Anglois dont je parle dans mes notes.

     Je vous prie encore Monsieur que ce soit le plus tôt qu'il
     vous sera possible, car il est bon de vous dire que cette
     traduction, grâce à l'excellence de l'original, se débite ici
     comme un Roman; c'est tout dire, notre goût pour les futilités
     vous est connu; il vous étoit réservé de nous y faire
     renoncer, pour nous occuper des matières les plus dignes
     d'exercer les esprits raisonnables. Le Libraire m'avertit
     qu'il sera bientôt tems de penser à la seconde édition.
     J'attendrai votre réponse pour l'enrichir de vos remarques qui
     feront que celle-ci sera reçue du public avec encore plus
     d'applaudissements.

     Je profite de cette occasion pour vous offrir une amitié qui
     vous sera, peut-être, inutile, et vous demander la vôtre que
     je serois très flatté d'obtenir. Il semble que l'auteur et le
     traducteur sont faits pour être liés ensemble: il est à
     présumer qui celui que traduit un ouvrage a d'avance ou du
     moins épousé la façon de parler de celui qui l'a fait. J'ai
     trouvé dans vos discours un politique Philosophe, et un
     Philosophe citoyen. Je n'ai moi-même donné aucun ouvrage qui
     ne porte ce double caractère, et je me flatte que vous le
     trouverez dans les Lettres d'un François, si par hazard elles
     vous sont connues.

     J'ai l'honneur d'être, avec les sentiments d'estime dont je
     viens de vous donner des témoignages publics, et cette sorte
     de respect que je n'ai que pour quelques Philosophes tels que
     vous. Monsieur, votre très humble et très obéissant serviteur,

     L'ABBÉ LE BLANC, Historiographe des Bâtiments du Roy de France.

     _De Paris, le 25th Août, 1754._


(2.)

     MONSIEUR,--La traduction de vos discours politiques est la
     première que j'ai donnée au public; et l'utilité que j'ai cru
     que ma patrie en pouvoit retirer, est l'unique motif que m'ait
     déterminé à l'entreprendre. Je n'ose me répondre que vous la
     trouverez telle que vous l'espérez. C'est à moi à vous
     demander votre indulgence pour les fautes que vous y
     trouverez, et à vous prier de me communiquer vos remarques sur
     des notes que j'ai cru y devoir adjouter. Je vous promets de
     corriger avec soumission les erreurs que vos m'y ferez
     apercevoir. A la fin du 2d vol. j'ai donné une notice des
     meilleurs ouvrages Anglois que j'ai consultés, sur les
     matières du commerce; j'ai hazardé de porter mon jugement sur
     chacun de ceux dont j'ai parlé. Je le rectifierai sur vos
     lumières, si vous voulez bien me les communiquer. Si j'en ai
     omis quelqu'un d'important, je vous prie de me le faire
     connoître, et de me dire vous-même, qui êtes un si excellent
     juge, ce que l'on en doit penser. J'enricherai la 2 Edition de
     tout ce dont vous voudrez bien me faire part.

     A l'égard de votre histoire de la Grande Bretagne que vous
     m'annoncez, ce ne sera plus simplement comme votre admirateur
     mais comme votre ami Monsieur, que j'en entreprendrai la
     traduction, et je ferai de mon mieux pour qu'elle perde le
     moins qu'il est possible. J'aime votre façon de penser, et je
     suis familiarisé avec votre stile; si la matière exige qu'il
     soit plus élevé je tacherai d'y atteindre. Mais pour que je
     puisse entreprendre cette traduction avec succès, il faut s'il
     est possible, que vous retardiez à Londres au moins d'un mois
     la publication de votre ouvrage, et que vous me l'envoyez tout
     de suite par la poste, addressé sans autre enveloppe à Mr.
     Jannes, Chevalier de l'ordre du Roi, Controlleur Général des
     Postes à Paris. Nous avons ici une foule d'écrivains
     médiocres, qui sans savoir ni l'Anglois ni le François même,
     sont a l'affût de tout ce qui s'imprime chez vous, et qui à
     l'aide d'un dictionnaire vous massacreront impitoyablement. On
     nous a donné ainsi plusieurs bons ouvrages, et entre autres la
     dissertation de M. Wallace dont il n'est pas possible de
     supporter la lecture en François. Pour faire de pareille
     besogne, il ne faut pas beaucoup de tems à ces Messieurs là.
     Ils travaillent vîte, parce qu'ils travaillent _fami potius
     quam famæ_. Si je n'ai pas du tems devant eux, je serai
     prévenu, et si je le suis, je serai obligé d'abandonner
     l'ouvrage. Je ne vous parle pas des traducteurs de Hollande
     qui sont encore plus mauvais s'il est possible. Cette fois-ci
     je veux faire un office d'amitié, je vous prie de me mettre à
     portée de le bien faire. Vos discours Politiques vous ont,
     comme je m'y attendois, donné ici la plus haute réputation,
     dès que votre histoire paroîtra, un libraire la fera venir par
     la poste, et mettra ses ouvriers après, à moins que vous ne
     m'accordiez la grâce que je vous demande. Alors on saura que
     je la traduis, et je suis sûr que ces messieurs me laisseront
     faire.

     J'ai encore à vous apprendre, monsieur, que le succès de vos
     Discours Politiques ne fait qu'augmenter tous les jours, et
     que tout retentit de vos Éloges. Nos ministres même n'en sont
     pas moins satisfaits que le public. Mr. le Comte d'Argenson,
     Mr. Le Maréchal de Noailles, en un mot tous ceux qui ont ici
     part au gouvernement ont parlé de votre ouvrage, comme d'un
     des meilleurs qui ayent jamais été faits sur ces matières.
     J'ai été obligé de céder mon exemplaire à un d'entre eux;
     ainsi je vous prie de m'en adresser un par la même voie que je
     vous ai indiquée, la poste après que vous m'aurez envoyé le I.
     vol. de votre histoire, d'autant plus que les additions et
     corrections dont vous m'avez fait part se rapportent à la 3{e}
     edition qui je crois se trouveroit difficilement a Paris.


(3.)

     MONSIEUR,--Je vous avois promis, et je m'étois flatté de
     pouvoir consacrer mes veilles à traduire aussi votre admirable
     Histoire de l'infortunée Maison de Stewart. Les obstacles les
     plus puissants, ceux-mêmes qui ôtent à l'esprit cette liberté
     sans laquelle on ne fait rien de bien, voyages, affaires,
     disgrâces, maladies--tout s'est opposé à l'exécution d'un
     projet qui rioit si fort à mon imagination et dont l'exécution
     ne pouroit que me faire honneur.

     A ce défaut j'ai prêté à un de mes amis, homme d'esprit et
     laborieux, le premier volume que vous avez eu la bonté de
     m'envoyer. Il l'a traduit et le rendra public au commencement
     de l'hiver prochain.

     J'ai de même que tous ceux qui savent ici l'Anglois, le plus
     grand empressement de lire votre second volume. J'en ferai le
     même usage que du premier.

     Je vous avois annoncé que vos discours Politiques feroient
     parmi nous le même effet que _L'Esprit des Loix_. L'évènement
     m'a justifié, non seulement ils jouissent parmi nous de cette
     haute réputation qu'ils méritent, mais ils ont donné lieu à
     un grand nombre d'autres ouvrages plus ou moins estimables et
     qui la plus part n'ont d'original que la forme. Vous en
     trouverez le catalogue à la suite d'une troisième édition de
     ma traduction que je vais donner incessamment.

     Il vient d'en paroître un qui fait ici un grand bruit, et que
     je n'ai garde de confondre avec tous ceux dont je viens de
     parler. Il est intitulé, L'AMI DES HOMMES OU TRAITÉ DE LA
     POPULATION. L'Auteur est un génie hardi, original, qui comme
     Montaigne se laisse aller à ses idées, les expose sans
     orgueil, sans modestie; il ne suit ni ordre ni méthode; mais
     son ouvrage, plein d'excellentes choses, respire le bien de
     l'humanité et de la patrie. Il prêche l'agriculture, et
     foudroye la finance. Il combat votre système sur le luxe, mais
     avec les égards élevés à la superiorité de vos lumières. Il
     m'a remis un exemplaire de son ouvrage, qu'il me prie de vous
     présenter comme un tribut de son estime et de la
     reconnoissance qu'il vous doit, pour l'utilité qu'il a tirée
     de vos Discours Politiques. Il ne demande pas mieux que d'
     être éclairé et par la noblesse des sentiments et la politesse
     de la conduite. Je ne crains pas de le dire. L'adversaire est
     digne de vous. C'est _Monsieur le Marquis de Mirabeau_, qui
     est tel qu'il paroît dans son livre--c'est à dire un des plus
     extraordinaires des hommes qu'il y ait en quelque pays que ce
     soit. Je vous prie Monsieur de m'indiquer une voie sûre pour
     vous faire parvenir son ouvrage.


(4.)

     _Dresde, le 25 Dec. 1754._

     J'ai vu ici la traduction de vos Discours Politiques imprimée
     en Hollande; elle ne se peut pas lire; vous souffririez vous,
     Monsieur, de vous voir ainsi défiguré. Le Traducteur quel
     qu'il soit ne sait constamment ni l'Anglois ni le François.
     C'est probablement un de ces auteurs qui travaillent à la
     foire pour les libraires de Hollande, et dont les ouvrages
     bons ou mauvais se débitent aux foires de Leipsig et de
     Francfort. Les bibliothèques de ce pays ci sont remplies de
     livres François qui n'ont jamais été et ne seront jamais
     connus en France. Cette traduction passe ici pour être d'un
     Mr. Mauvillon de Leipsic dont le métier est de faire des
     livres François pour L'Allemagne, et d'enseigner ce qu'il ne
     sait--c'est à dire, votre langue et la nôtre. Ce qu'il y a de
     Saxons lettrés qui les possèdent l'une ou l'autre, et qui
     s'intéressent au bien de leur pays, connoissent l'excellence
     de votre ouvrage, me pressent de faire imprimer à Dresde même
     la seconde édition de ma traduction, et je pourrois bien me
     rendre à leur avis. Je n'attends plus que votre réponse pour
     me décider. Quelque part qu'elle se fasse, je tâcherai de
     faire en sorte qu'elle soit belle et correcte.


(5.)

     MONSIEUR,--Il y a à peu près un an que notre commerce
     épistolaire a commencé, et j'ai grand regret que par des
     contretems de tout espèce il ait été sitôt interrompu. Vous
     m'avez donné trop de preuves de votre politesse pour que je ne
     sois pas à présent convaincu que vous n'avez reçu aucune des
     lettres que je vous ai écrites de Dresde, et que j'avois
     essayé de vous faire passer par la voie de votre ambassadeur à
     cette cour. Prêt a quitter la Saxe, je vous écrivis encor de
     Leïpzic, pour vous rendre compte de mon séjour en ce pays, et
     vous dire que la dissipation où j'y avois vécu forcément, ne
     m'avoit pas permis d'avancer beaucoup dans la traduction de
     votre histoire de la malheureuse famille des Stuarts. J'ai
     depuis été en Hollande, et, comme je l'avois prévu j'ai appris
     qu'un de ces auteurs, qui travaillent à la fois aux gages des
     libraires qui les employent, en avoit fait une de son coté,
     qui étoit toute prête à paroître. Vous pouvez aisément juger
     du découragement où une pareille nouvelle m'a jetté. La
     manufacture des livres de Hollande fait réellement grand tort
     à notre littérature Françoise. On y employe à traduire un
     excellent ouvrage des gens qui ne seroient bons qu'à
     travailler à la fabrique du papier.


FOOTNOTES:

[456:1] From the MSS. R.S.E.

[456:2] See _antea_, p. 304.




APPENDIX C.

DOCUMENTS RELATING TO THE POEMS OF OSSIAN.


I.--CORRESPONDENCE.


(1.)

HUME _to_ ----.

     _Edinburgh, August 16, 1760._

     SIR,--I am not surprised to find by your letter, that Mr. Gray
     should have entertained suspicions with regard to the
     authenticity of these fragments of our Highland poetry. The
     first time I was shown the copies of some of them in
     manuscript, by our friend John Home, I was inclined to be a
     little incredulous on that head; but Mr. Home removed my
     scruples, by informing me of the manner in which he procured
     them from Mr. Macpherson, the translator.

     These two gentlemen were drinking the waters together at
     Moffat last autumn, when their conversation fell upon Highland
     poetry, which Mr. Macpherson extolled very highly. Our friend,
     who knew him to be a good scholar, and a man of taste, found
     his curiosity excited, and asked whether he had ever
     translated any of them. Mr. Macpherson replied, that he never
     had attempted any such thing; and doubted whether it was
     possible to transfuse such beauties into our language; but,
     for Mr. Home's satisfaction, and in order to give him a
     general notion of the strain of that wild poetry, he would
     endeavour to turn one of them into English. He accordingly
     brought him one next day, which our friend was so much pleased
     with, that he never ceased soliciting Mr. Macpherson, till he
     insensibly produced that small volume which has been
     published.

     After this volume was in every body's hands, and universally
     admired, we heard every day new reasons, which put the
     authenticity, not the great antiquity which the translator
     ascribes to them, beyond all question; for their antiquity is
     a point, which must be ascertained by reasoning; though the
     arguments he employs seem very probable and convincing. But
     certain it is, that these poems are in every body's mouth in
     the Highlands, have been handed down from father to son, and
     are of an age beyond all memory and tradition.

     In the family of every Highland chieftain, there was anciently
     retained a bard, whose office was the same with that of the
     Greek rhapsodists; and the general subject of the poems which
     they recited was the wars of Fingal; an epoch no less
     remarkable among them, than the wars of Troy among the Greek
     poets. This custom is not even yet altogether abolished: the
     bard and piper are esteemed the most honourable offices in a
     chieftain's family, and these two characters are frequently
     united in the same person. Adam Smith, the celebrated
     Professor in Glasgow, told me that the piper of the
     Argyleshire militia repeated to him all those poems which Mr.
     Macpherson has translated, and many more of equal beauty.
     Major Mackay, Lord Reay's brother, also told me that he
     remembers them perfectly; as likewise did the Laird of
     Macfarlane, the greatest antiquarian whom we have in this
     country, and who insists so strongly on the historical truth,
     as well as on the poetical beauty of these productions. I
     could add the Laird and Lady Macleod to these authorities,
     with many more, if these were not sufficient, as they live in
     different parts of the Highlands, very remote from each other,
     and they could only be acquainted with poems that had become
     in a manner national works, and had gradually spread
     themselves into every mouth, and imprinted themselves on every
     memory.

     Every body in Edinburgh is so convinced of this truth, that we
     have endeavoured to put Mr. Macpherson on a way of procuring
     us more of these wild flowers. He is a modest, sensible, young
     man, not settled in any living, but employed as a private
     tutor in Mr. Grahame of Balgowan's family, a way of life which
     he is not fond of. We have, therefore, set about a
     subscription of a guinea or two guineas a-piece, in order to
     enable him to quit that family, and undertake a mission into
     the Highlands, where he hopes to recover more of these
     fragments. There is, in particular, a country surgeon
     somewhere in Lochaber, who, he says, can recite a great number
     of them, but never committed them to writing; as indeed the
     orthography of the Highland language is not fixed, and the
     natives have always employed more the sword than the pen. This
     surgeon has by heart the Epic poem mentioned by Mr. Macpherson
     in his Preface; and as he is somewhat old, and is the only
     person living that has it entire, we are in the more haste to
     recover a monument, which will certainly be regarded as a
     curiosity in the republic of letters.

     I own that my first and chief objection to the authenticity of
     these fragments, was not on account of the noble and even
     tender strokes which they contain; for these are the offspring
     of genius and passion in all countries; I was only surprised
     at the regular plan which appears in some of these pieces, and
     which seems to be the work of a more cultivated age. None of
     the specimens of barbarous poetry known to us, the Hebrew,
     Arabian, or any other, contain this species of beauty; and if
     a regular epic poem, or even any thing of that kind, nearly
     regular, should also come from that rough climate or
     uncivilized people, it would appear to me a phenomenon
     altogether unaccountable.

     I remember Mr. Macpherson told me, that the heroes of this
     Highland epic were not only, like Homer's heroes, their own
     butchers, bakers, and cooks, but also their own shoemakers,
     carpenters, and smiths. He mentioned an incident which put
     this matter in a remarkable light. A warrior had the head of
     his spear struck off in battle; upon which he immediately
     retires behind the army, where a large forge was erected,
     makes a new one, hurries back to the action, pierces his
     enemy, while the iron, which was yet red-hot, hisses in the
     wound. This imagery you will allow to be singular, and so well
     imagined, that it would have been adopted by Homer, had the
     manners of the Greeks allowed him to have employed it.

     I forgot to mention, as another proof of the authenticity of
     these poems, and even of the reality of the adventures
     contained in them, that the names of the heroes, Fingal,
     Oscar, Osur, Oscan, Dermid, are still given in the Highlands
     to large mastiffs, in the same manner as we affix to them the
     names of Cæsar, Pompey, Hector, or the French that of
     Marlborough.

     It gives me pleasure to find, that a person of so fine a taste
     as Mr. Gray approves of these fragments; as it may convince
     us, that our fondness of them is not altogether founded on
     national prepossessions, which, however, you know to be a
     little strong. The translation is elegant; but I made an
     objection to the author, which I wish you would communicate to
     Mr. Gray, that we may judge of the justness of it. There
     appeared to me many verses in his prose, and all of them in
     the same measure with Mr. Shenstone's famous ballad:

     "Ye shepherds so cheerful and gay,
     Whose flocks never carelessly roam, &c."

     Pray, ask Mr. Gray, whether he made the same remark, &c. and
     whether he thinks it a blemish. Yours most sincerely,
     &c.[465:1]


(2.)

HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

     _Lisle St. Leicester Fields, 19th Sept. 1763._

     DEAR SIR,--I live in a place where I have the pleasure of
     frequently hearing justice done to your Dissertation; but
     never heard it mentioned in a company where some one person or
     other did not express his doubts with regard to the
     authenticity of the poems which are its subject; and I often
     hear them totally rejected with disdain and indignation, as a
     palpable and most impudent forgery. This opinion has, indeed,
     become very prevalent among the men of letters in London; and
     I can foresee, that in a few years the poems, if they continue
     to stand on their present footing, will be thrown aside, and
     will fall into final oblivion. It is in vain to say that their
     beauty will support them, independent of their authenticity.
     No; that beauty is not so much to the general taste as to
     ensure you of this event; and if people be once disgusted with
     the idea of a forgery, they are thence apt to entertain a more
     disadvantageous notion of the excellency of the production
     itself. The absurd pride and caprice of Macpherson himself,
     who scorns, as he pretends, to satisfy any body that doubts
     his veracity, has tended much to confirm this general
     scepticism; and I must own, for my own part, that, though I
     have had many particular reasons to believe these poems
     genuine, more than it is possible for any Englishman of
     letters to have, yet I am not entirely without my scruples on
     that head. You think that the internal proofs in favour of the
     poems are very convincing; so they are: but there are also
     internal reasons against them, particularly from the manners,
     notwithstanding all the art with which you have endeavoured to
     throw a varnish on that circumstance; and the preservation of
     such long and such connected poems by oral tradition alone,
     during a course of fourteen centuries, is so much out of the
     ordinary course of human affairs, that it requires the
     strongest reasons to make us believe it.

     My present purpose, therefore, is to apply to you, in the name
     of all the men of letters of this, and I may say of all other
     countries, to establish this capital point, and to give us
     proof that these poems are, I do not say so ancient as the age
     of Severus, but that they were not forged within these five
     years by James Macpherson. These proofs must not be arguments,
     but testimonies. People's ears are fortified against the
     former: the latter may yet find their way before the poems are
     consigned to total oblivion. Now the testimonies may, in my
     opinion, be of two kinds. Macpherson pretends that there is an
     ancient manuscript of part of Fingal, in the family, I think,
     of Clanronald. Get that fact ascertained by more than one
     person of credit; let these persons be acquainted with the
     Gaelic; let them compare the original and the translation; and
     let them testify the fidelity of the latter. But the chief
     point in which it will be necessary for you to exert yourself,
     will be to get positive testimony from many different hands,
     that such poems are vulgarly recited in the Highlands, and
     have there long been the entertainment of the people. This
     testimony must be as particular as it is positive. It will not
     be sufficient that a Highland gentleman or clergyman say or
     write to you, that he has heard such poems; nobody questions
     that there are traditional poems in that part of the country,
     where the names of Ossian and Fingal, and Oscar, and Gaul, are
     mentioned in every stanza. The only doubt is, whether these
     poems have any farther resemblance to the poems published by
     Macpherson. I was told by Bourke, a very ingenious Irish
     gentleman, the author of a tract on the Sublime and Beautiful,
     that on the first publication of Macpherson's book, all the
     Irish cried out, We know all these poems, we have always heard
     them from our infancy. But when he asked more particular
     questions, he could never learn that any one had ever heard,
     or could repeat the original of any one paragraph of the
     pretended translation. This generality, then, must be
     carefully guarded against, as being of no authority.

     Your connexions among your brethren of the clergy, may here
     be of great use to you. You may easily learn the names of all
     ministers of that country, who understand the language of it;
     you may write to them, expressing the doubts that have arisen,
     and desiring them to send for such of the bards as remain, and
     make them rehearse their ancient poems. Let the clergymen,
     then, have the translation in their hands, and let them write
     back to you, and inform you that they heard such a one,
     (naming him,) living in such a place, rehearse the original of
     such a passage, from such a page to such a page of the English
     translation, which appeared exact and faithful. If you give to
     the public a sufficient number of such testimonies, you may
     prevail. But I venture to foretel to you that nothing less
     will serve the purpose; nothing less will so much as command
     the attention of the public. Becket tells me that he is to
     give us a new edition of your Dissertation, accompanied with
     some remarks on Temora; here is a favourable opportunity for
     you to execute this purpose. You have a just and laudable zeal
     for the credit of these poems; they are, if genuine, one of
     the greatest curiosities, in all respects, that ever was
     discovered in the commonwealth of letters; and the child is,
     in a manner, become yours by adoption, as Macpherson has
     totally abandoned all care of it. These motives call upon you
     to exert yourself; and I think it were suitable to your
     candour, and most satisfactory also to the reader, to publish
     all the answers to all the letters you write, even though some
     of these letters should make somewhat against your own opinion
     in this affair. We shall always be the more assured that no
     arguments are strained beyond their proper force, and no
     contrary arguments suppressed, where such an entire
     communication is made to us. Becket joins me heartily in this
     application, and he owns to me, that the believers in the
     authenticity of the poems diminish every day among the men of
     sense and reflection. Nothing less than what I propose, can
     throw the balance on the other side. I depart from hence in
     about three weeks, and should be glad to hear your resolution
     before that time.

     This journey to Paris is likely to contribute much to my
     entertainment, and will certainly tend much to improve my
     fortune; so that I have no reason to repent that I have
     allowed myself to be dragged from my retreat. I shall
     henceforth converse with authors, but shall not probably for
     some time have much leisure to peruse them; which is not
     perhaps the way of knowing them most to their advantage. I
     carried only four books along with me, a Virgil, a Horace, a
     Tasso, and a Tacitus. I could have wished also to carry my
     Homer, but I found him too bulky. I own that, in common
     decency, I ought to have left my Horace behind me, and that I
     ought to be ashamed to look him in the face. For I am sensible
     that, at my years, no temptation would have seduced him from
     his retreat; nor would he ever have been induced to enter so
     late into the path of ambition.[468:1] But I deny that I enter
     into the path of ambition; I only walk into the green fields
     of amusement; and I affirm, that external amusement becomes
     more and more necessary as one advances in years, and can find
     less supplies from his own passions or imagination. I am,
     &c.[468:2]


(3.)

DR. BLAIR _to_ HUME.

     _Edinburgh, 29th September, 1763._

     DEAR SIR,--I am much obliged to you for the information you
     have communicated to me, and for the concern you show that
     justice should be done to our Highland Poems. From what I saw
     myself when at London, I could easily believe that the
     disposition of men of letters was rather averse to their
     reception as genuine; but I trusted that the internal
     characters of their authenticity, together with the occasional
     testimonies given to them by Highland gentlemen who are every
     where scattered, would gradually surmount these prejudices.
     For my own part, it is impossible for me to entertain the
     smallest doubt of their being real productions, and ancient
     ones, too, of the Highlands. Neither Macpherson's parts,
     though good, nor his industry, were equal to such a forgery.
     The whole publication, you know, was in its first rise
     accidental. Macpherson was entreated and dragged into it. Some
     of the MSS. sent to him passed through my hands. Severals of
     them he translated, in a manner, under my eye. He gave me
     these native and genuine accounts of them, which bore plain
     characters of truth. What he said was often confirmed to me by
     others. I had testimonies from several Highlanders concerning
     their authenticity, in words strong and explicit. And, setting
     all this aside, is it a thing which any man of sense can
     suppose, that Macpherson would venture to forge such a body of
     poetry, and give it to the public as ancient poems and songs,
     well known at this day through all the Highlands of Scotland,
     when he could have been refuted and exposed by every one of
     his own countrymen? Is it credible that he could bring so many
     thousand people into a conspiracy with him to keep his secret?
     or that some would not be found who, attached to their own
     ancient songs, would not cry out, "These are not the poems we
     deal in. You have forged characters and sentiments we know
     nothing about; you have modernized and dressed us up: we have
     much better songs and poems of our own." Who but John Bull
     could entertain the belief of an imposture so incredible as
     this? The utmost I should think any rational scepticism could
     suppose is this, that Macpherson might have sometimes
     interpolated, or endeavoured to improve, by some corrections
     of his own. Of this I am verily persuaded there was very
     little, if any at all. Had it prevailed, we would have been
     able to trace more marks of inconsistency, and a different
     hand and style; whereas, these poems are more remarkable for
     nothing than an entire, and supported, and uniform consistency
     of character and manner through the whole.

     However, seeing we have to do with such incredulous people, I
     think it were a pity not to do justice to such valuable
     monuments of genius. I have already, therefore, entered upon
     the task you prescribe me, though I foresee it may give me
     some trouble. I have writ by last post to Sir James Macdonald,
     who is fortunately at this time in the Isle of Skye. I have
     also, through the Laird of Macleod, writ to Clanronald, and
     likewise to two clergymen in the Isle of Skye, men of letters
     and character; one of them, Macpherson minister of Sleat, the
     author of a very learned work about to be published concerning
     the Antiquities of Scotland. Several others in Argyleshire,
     the Islands, and other poetical regions, worthy clergymen, who
     are well versed in the Gaelic, I intend also without delay to
     make application to.

     My requisition to them all is for such positive and express
     testimonies as you desire; MSS. if they have any, compared
     before witnesses with the printed book, and recitations of
     bards compared in the same manner. I have given them express
     directions in what manner to proceed, so as to avoid that
     loose generality which, as you observe, can signify nothing.
     What use it may be proper to put these testimonies to, I can
     only judge after having got all my materials. I apprehend
     there may be some difficulty in obtaining the consent of those
     concerned to publish their letters, nor might it be proper.
     But concerning this, I may afterwards advise with you and my
     other friends.

     In the meantime, you may please acquaint Mr. Becket, that this
     must retard for some time the publication of his new edition
     with my Dissertation; as the least I can allow for the return
     of letters from such distant parts, where the communication by
     post is irregular and slow, together with the time necessary
     for their executing what is desired, will be three months,
     perhaps some more; and, assuredly, any new evidence we can
     give the world, must accompany my Dissertation.

     I am in some difficulty with Macpherson himself in this
     affair. Capricious as he is, I would not willingly hurt or
     disoblige him; and yet I apprehend that such an inquiry as
     this, which is like tracing him out, and supposing his
     veracity called in question, will not please him. I must write
     him by next post, and endeavour to put the affair in such a
     light as to soften him; which you, if you see him, may do
     likewise, and show him the necessity of something of this kind
     being done; and with more propriety, perhaps, by another than
     himself.[470:1]


(4.)

HUME _to_ DR. BLAIR.

     _6th October, 1763._

MY DEAR SIR,--I am very glad you have undertaken the task which I used
the freedom to recommend to you. Nothing less than what you propose will
serve the purpose. You need expect no assistance from Macpherson, who
flew into a passion when I told him of the letter I had wrote to you.
But you must not mind so strange and heteroclite a mortal, than whom I
have scarce ever known a man more perverse and unamiable. He will
probably depart for Florida with governor Johnstone, and I would advise
him to travel among the Chickisaws or Cherokees, in order to tame him
and civilize him.

     I should be much pleased to hear of the success of your
     labours. Your method of directing to me is under cover to the
     Earl of Hertford, Northumberland House; any letters that come
     to me under that direction, will be sent over to me at Paris.

     I beg my compliments to Robertson and Jardine. I am very sorry
     to hear of the state of Ferguson's health. John Hume went to
     the country yesterday with Lord Bute. I was introduced the
     other day to that noble lord, at his desire. I believe him a
     very good man, a better man than a politician.

     Since writing the above, I have been in company with Mrs.
     Montague, a lady of great distinction in this place, and a
     zealous partisan of Ossian. I told her of your intention, and
     even used the freedom to read your letter to her. She was
     extremely pleased with your project; and the rather as the Duc
     de Nivernois, she said, had talked to her much on that subject
     last winter, and desired, if possible, to get collected some
     proofs of the authenticity of these poems, which he proposed
     to lay before the Académie des Belles Lettres at Paris. You
     see, then, that you are upon a great stage in this inquiry,
     and that many people have their eyes upon you. This is a new
     motive for rendering your proofs as complete as possible. I
     cannot conceive any objection, which a man, even of the
     gravest character, could have to your publication of his
     letters, which will only attest a plain fact known to him.
     Such scruples, if they occur, you must endeavour to remove.
     For on this trial of yours will the judgment of the public
     finally depend.

     Lord Bath, who was in the company, agreed with me, that such
     documents of authenticity are entirely necessary and
     indispensable.

     Please to write to me as soon as you make any advances, that I
     may have something to say on the subject to the literati of
     Paris. I beg my compliments to all those who bear that
     character at Edinburgh. I cannot but look upon all of them as
     my friends. I am, &c.[471:1]


