CHAPTER IV.

THIRD DAY.

_Section_ I.--THE SEA.

    Water and land separated -- Formation of the sea -- Its
    restrictions -- Extent -- Depth -- Composition -- Saltness
    -- Motion -- Tides -- Four states of water -- Circulation --
    Religious improvement.


On the _third day_, the earth was drained, and the waters, which before
covered its surface, were gathered into copious receptacles, and called
seas. God said, “Let the waters under the heaven be gathered into one
place, and let the dry land appear; and it was so. And God called the
dry land Earth; and the gathering together of the waters called he
Seas.” The almighty Creator proceeds to separate, put in order, and
control the element nearest to _light_ and _air_ in quality and use,
and, although not elastic, yet of great power. Probably the air was
used by him as the great agent in gathering the waters into one place.
Thus, instead of the confusion, which existed when the earth and the
water were mixed in one great mass, there is now order; and by their
separation each is rendered useful: the earth affording a habitation
and support for man and the various orders of land animals; and the
water forming an abode for the numerous tribes of living creatures
adapted to subsist in that liquid element.[74]

Previous to this arrangement, the water, being a pure element, was
above the earth. Thus the Psalmist, “Thou coveredst it with the deep
as with a garment: the waters stood above the mountains,” so that they
did not appear. “At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder
they hasted away.” At the omnipotent word they started back, and shrunk
away, says Bishop Patrick; like an affrighted slave at the thunder
of his master’s threatenings, if his commands are not obeyed. They
gathered themselves in those places where they now are, which by Moses
are called seas; and there God shut them up, confining them that they
might not return to cover the earth. God “brake up,” for the reception
of the waters, his “decreed place,” that vast concave or hollow in the
earth; “and set bars and doors,” banks and shores, the weak sand to
control this element, which, however it roar and struggle, it cannot
pass.

It is wonderful that the sea, which has a natural disposition, from its
being a purer and lighter element, to be above the earth, should not
overflow it; but the amazing power of Omnipotence retains it within its
prescribed limits. For he has pronounced, “Hitherto shalt thou come,
but no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed.” As if he had
said, Though thy tides flow with mighty strength, though the swelling
billows of thy pride (so the original) rise high in a storm, and dash
against the shore with impetuous force and overwhelming rage, yet here
shall they stop: though they roar and foam, as if irritated at the
opposing strand, yet dare not to approach beyond those limits to thee
assigned; but, obedient to thy Lord and Master, submissively retire.
Here we see the power and dominion of the supreme Being in the kingdom
of nature, whose sway the sea is subject to! Our preservation from its
threatening destruction, by the continual restrictions it is under, is
a perpetual expression of Divine goodness and mercy, and should induce
all men to live always in the reverential fear of God. “Fear ye not
me? saith the Lord: will ye not tremble at my presence, which have
placed the sand for the bound of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that
it cannot pass; and though the waters thereof toss themselves, yet they
cannot pass over it.”

If we look upon the map of the world, we shall find that the ocean
occupies a considerably greater surface of the globe than the land
is found to do. Although the ocean, properly speaking, is but one
extensive sheet of water, continued over every part of the globe
without interruption; and although no part is divided from the rest,
yet geographers have distinguished it by different names, as the
Atlantic or Western Ocean; the Northern, Southern, Pacific, Indian,
and German Oceans. In this vast receptacle, almost all the rivers of
the earth ultimately terminate. And yet these vast and inexhaustable
supplies do not seem to increase its stores; for it is neither
apparently swelled by their tribute, nor diminished by their failure;
it continues constantly the same. Indeed, the quantity of water of
all the rivers and lakes in the world is nothing compared to that
contained in this prodigious reservoir. And some natural philosophers
have carried their ideas on this subject so far as to assert, in
consequence of certain calculations, that, if the bed of the sea were
empty, all the rivers of the world flowing into it with a continuance
of their present stores, would take up at least 800 years to fill it
again to its present height.[75]

To ascertain the _depth_ of the sea has been found impracticable,
both on account of the numerous experiments which it would be found
necessary to make, and the want of proper instruments for that purpose.
Beyond a certain depth the sea has hitherto been found unfathomable;
and though several methods have been contrived to obviate this
difficulty, none of them has completely answered the purpose. We know
in general that the depth of the sea increases gradually as we leave
the shore; but if this continued beyond a certain distance, the depth
in the middle of the ocean would be prodigious. Indeed, the numerous
islands every where scattered in the sea demonstrate the contrary,
by showing us that the bottom of the water is unequal like the land,
and that so far from uniformly sinking, it sometimes rises into lofty
mountains. If the depth of the sea be in proportion to the elevation
of the land, as has been generally supposed, its greatest depth will
not exceed five or six miles; for there is no mountain six miles
perpendicular above the level of the sea. The sea has never been
actually sounded to a greater depth than a mile and 66 feet; every
thing beyond that, therefore, rests entirely upon conjecture and
analogical reasoning, which, in this case, are in no wise conclusive.
Along the coasts, where the depth of the sea is generally well known,
it has always been found proportioned to the height of the shore; when
the coast is high and mountainous, the sea that washes it is deep;
when, on the contrary, the coast is low, the water is shallow. Whether
this analogy holds at a distance from the shore, experiments alone can
determine.

Water is an uninflammable fluid, says Dr. O. Gregory, and, when pure,
is transparent, colorless, and void of taste and smell. Mr. Cavendish
made a discovery that it is formed by the union of _hydrogen_ and
_oxygen_. It may, therefore, be considered as _oxide of hydrogen_:
oxygen and hydrogen appearing to unite, only in that certain proportion
of which water is the result. In 1798, (observes Mr. Parkes) Mr. Sequin
made a grand experiment for the composition of water. He expended no
less than 25,582 cubic inches (or nearly two hogsheads) of inflammable
air, and 12,457 of vital air. The first weighed 1,039 grains, and
the second 6,210, amounting to 7,249 grains, and the water obtained
amounted to 7,245 grains, or about three-fourths of a wine pint. The
loss was only four grains. Another experiment was afterwards made
by Le Fevre, in which nearly two pounds and a quarter of water was
produced.

The sea water contains a quantity of _salt_, but not in the same
proportions every where. In the torrid zone, where otherwise, from the
excessive heat, it would be in danger of putrefaction, the water is
found most salt; as we advance northward its briny quality diminishes,
till at the poles it is nearly gone altogether. Under the line,
Lucas found that the sea comprised a seventh part of solid contents,
consisting chiefly of sea-salt. At Harwich, he found it yielded 1-25 of
the same matter. At Carlscroon, in Sweden, it contains 1-30 part, and
on the coast of Greenland a great deal less. This gradual diminution
of saltness from the equator to the pole, is not, however, without
particular exceptions. The Mediterranean sea contain 1-22 of the
sea-salt, which is less than the German sea contains. The saltness of
some seas, or of particular parts of the same seas, may be increased,
as Mr. Boyle intimates, from rocks and other masses of salt, either at
the bottom of the sea, or dispersed near their shores.

This phenomenon of the sea perplexed the philosophers before the time
of Aristotle, and surpassed even the great genius of that philosopher.
Father Kircher, after having consulted three and thirty authors
upon the subject, could not help remarking, that the fluctuations
of the ocean itself were scarcely more various than the opinions
concerning the origin of its saline impregnation. Bernadine Gomesins,
(observes Bishop Watson) about 200 years ago, published an ingenious
treatise on salt: in this treatise, after reciting and refuting the
opinions of Empedocles, Anaxagoras, and Aristotle, on the subject in
question, he proposes his own; wherein he maintains, that the sea was
originally created in the same state in which we at present find it,
and impregnated, from the very first, with the salt which it contains.
Indeed, we cannot account for the general saltness of the sea from
second causes; hence we must suppose it has had this property from
the creation. Naturalists assure us, that, though some few species of
fishes thrive in fresh water, and some others live alternately in fresh
and salt, yet by far the greatest number cannot exist out of the sea;
which is a proof that the sea was at the creation impregnated with salt.

The saltness of the sea has been considered by some as a peculiar
blessing from Providence, in order to keep so great an element pure
and wholesome: but facts prove that this property is not capable of
preserving it from putrefaction. Sir Robert Hawkins, one of our most
enlightened navigators, gives an account of a calm, in which the sea
continuing for some time without its usual motion, began to assume a
very formidable appearance. “Were it not (says he) for the moving of
the sea, by the force of winds, tides, and currents, it would corrupt
all the world. The experiment of this I saw in the year 1590, lying
with a fleet about the islands of Azores, almost six months; the
greatest part of the which time we were becalmed. Upon which all the
sea became so replenished with various sorts of gelies, and forms of
serpents, adders, and snakes, as seemed wonderful; some green, some
black, some yellow, some white, some of divers colors, and many of
them had life; and some there were a yard and a half and two yards
long; which had I not seen, I could hardly have believed. And hereof
are witnesses all the companies of the ships which were then present;
so that hardly a man could draw a bucket of water clear of some
corruption. In which voyage, towards the end thereof, many of every
ship fell sick, and began to die apace. But the speedy passage into
our country was a remedy to the crazed, and a preservative for those
that were not touched.”[76] Mr. Boyle informs us, that he once kept a
quantity of sea water, taken from the English channel, for some time
barrelled up; and, in a few weeks, it began to acquire a fetid smell.
He was also assured by one of his acquaintance, who had been becalmed
for about fourteen days in the Indian ocean, that the water, for want
of motion, began to stink; and, that had the calm continued much
longer, the stench would probably have poisoned him. It is the motion,
therefore, and not the saltness of the sea, that preserves it in its
present state of salubrity.[77]

The sea has three kinds of motion: the _first_ is that undulation
which is occasioned by the wind. This motion is evidently confined to
the surface; the bottom, even during the most violent storms, remains
perfectly calm. Mr. Boyle has remarked, from the testimony of several
divers, that the sea is affected by the winds to the depth only of six
feet. It would follow from this, that the height of the waves above
the surface does not exceed six feet; and that this holds, in the
Mediterranean sea at least, we are informed by the Compte de Marsigli;
though he also sometimes observed them, during a very violent tempest,
rise two feet higher.

The _second_ kind of motion is that continual tendency which the whole
water in the sea has towards the west. It is greater near the equator
than about the poles; and, indeed, cannot be said to take place at all
in the northern hemisphere beyond the tropic. It begins on the west
side of America, where it is moderate; hence that part of the ocean has
been called _Pacific_. As the waters advance westward, their motion is
accelerated; so that, after having traversed the globe, they strike
with great violence on the eastern shore of America. Being stopped
by that continent, they turn northward, and run with considerable
impetuosity in the Gulf of Mexico; from thence they proceed along
the coast of North America, till they come to the south side of the
great bank of Newfoundland, when they turn off, and run down to the
Western Isles. This current is called the _Gulf stream_. It was first
accurately described by Dr. Franklin, who remarked also, that the
water in it having been originally heated in the torrid zone, cools so
gradually in its passage northward, that even the latitude might be
found in any part of the stream by means of a thermometer. This motion
of the sea westward has never been explained: it seems to have some
connection with the trade-winds, and the diurnal revolution of the
earth upon its axis.

The _third_, and most remarkable motion of the sea, is the tide; which
is a regular swell of the ocean every 12 hours, accounted for from the
principal of gravitation. The sagacious Kepler long ago conjectured,
that the earth and moon, and every particle of them, mutually gravitate
towards each other, and are the cause of the tides. If, says he, the
earth ceased to attract its waters towards itself, all the water in
the ocean would rise and flow into the moon: the sphere of the moon’s
attraction extends to our earth, and draws up the water. This, at that
time, was mere conjecture; for Sir Isaac Newton was the first who
clearly pointed out the cause of this phenomenon. On the shores of the
ocean, and in bays, creeks, and harbors, which communicate freely with
it, the waters rise above their mean height twice a day, and as often
sink below it, forming what is called a _flood_ and an _ebb_, a _high_
and _low water_. It has been stated, that in the middle of the sea the
tide seldom rises higher than one or two feet; but, on the coast, it
frequently reaches to the height of 45 feet, and, in some places, even
to more. At Plymouth, it is sometimes 21 feet between the greatest and
least depth of the water in the same day, and sometimes only 12 feet.

When the sun and moon act conjointly on the tides, which is at the
change and full of the moon, they are stronger and run higher than at
other times, and are called _spring tides_; but when the sun and moon
are 90 degrees apart, their attractive powers, being in opposition to
each other, occasion the tides to be weaker and lower than at other
times, and these are called _neap tides_. The word _neap_ is derived
from the Saxon; it signifies low, decrescent, and is used only of the
tide. These different heights of tide are observed to succeed each
other in a regular series, diminishing from the greatest to the least,
and then increasing from the least to the greatest, according to the
age and situation of the moon.

    “The moon turns ocean in his bed,
    From side to side, in constant ebb and flow,
    And purifies from stench his watery realms.”

Sir Isaac Newton calculated the attractive powers of the sun and moon
on the tides, and found the attraction of the latter to be about three
times greater than that of the former.

Water is found to exist in four states: namely, solid, or ice;
liquid, or water; vapor, or steam; and in a state of composition
in other bodies. The younger Lemery observes, that ice is only the
re-establishment of the parts of water in their natural state;
that the mere absence of fire is sufficient to account for this
re-establishment; and that the fluidity of water is a real fusion, like
metals exposed to the fire; differing only in this, that a greater
quantity of fire is necessary to the one than the other.

Underneath the poles, water is always solid; there it is similar to the
hardest rocks, and may be formed by the chisel of the statuary like a
stone. The following circumstance, noticed by Bishop Watson, will show
the solidity that water is capable of acquiring when divested of a
large portion of caloric. It is related that at the whimsical marriage
of Prince Gallitzen, in 1739, the Russians applied ice to the same
purposes as stone. A house, consisting of two apartments, was built
with large blocks of ice; and the icy cannon, which were fired in honor
of the day, performed their office more than once without bursting.

During the severe winter of 1740, observes M. de Bomare, a palace of
ice, 52 feet long, 16 wide, and 20 high, was built at Petersburgh,
according to the most elegant rules of art. The river Neva afforded the
ice, which was from two to three feet thick, blocks of which were cut
and embellished with various ornaments. When built up, the different
parts were colored by sprinkling them over with water of various tints.
Six cannons, made of and mounted with ice, with wheels of the same
matter, were placed before the palace; and a hempen bullet was driven
by one of these cannons, in the presence of the whole court, through
a board two inches thick, at the distance of sixty paces. Cowper
remarks,--

                        “No forest fell,
    Imperial mistress of the fur-clad Russ,
    When thou wouldst build--no quarry sent its stores
    T’ enrich thy walls; but thou didst hew the floods,
    And make thy marble of the glassy wave.
    Silently as a dream the fabric rose,
    Ice upon ice; the well-adjusted parts
    Were soon conjoin’d; nor other cement ask’d
    Than water interfused to make them one.
    Lamps gracefully disposed, and of all hues,
    Illumin’d ev’ry side. Long wavy wreaths
    Of flowers, that feared no enemy but warmth,
    Blush’d on the pannels, which were once a stream,
    And soon to slide into a stream again.”

In the most northern part of the Russian territory, the cold is
sometimes sufficient to freeze mercury, or 72 degrees below the
freezing point of water.[78] It is so intense in some seasons, that the
poor inhabitants cannot venture out of their miserable huts but at the
hazard of their lives.

    “There, through the prison of unbounded wilds,
    Barr’d by the hand of nature from escape,
    Wide roams the Russian exile. Nought around
    Strikes his sad eye but deserts lost in snow,
    And heavy loaded groves, and solid floods,
    That stretch athwart the solitary vast
    Their icy horrors to the frozen main.”

In Iceland and Germany the thermometer frequently falls to zero, which
is 32 degrees below the freezing point. At Hudson’s Bay it has been
known to sink even 50 degrees lower. When stones or metals, which have
been exposed to such degrees of cold, are touched by the tongue, or
the softer parts of the human body, they absorb the heat from those
parts with such rapidity, that the flesh becomes instantly frozen and
mortified, and the principle of life in them is extinguished. Some
French academicians, who made a journey to the northern end of the
Baltic, and wintered under the polar circle, found it necessary to use
all possible precautions to secure themselves from the dreadful cold
which prevailed. They prevented, as much as possible, the entrance of
the external air into their apartments; and if at any time they had
occasion to open a window or a door, the humidity of their breath,
confined in the air of the house, was condensed and frozen into a
shower of snow; their lungs, when they ventured to breathe the cold
air, felt as if they were torn asunder; and they often heard the
rending of the timber around them by the expansive power of the frost
on the fluid in its pores. In this terrible cold the thermometer
fell to 33 below zero.[79] The most intense cold ever known in the
neighborhood of London was on December 25th, 1796, when the thermometer
indicated 2 below zero.

The ice at each pole of the earth forms an immense cupola, the arch of
which extends some thousand miles over the continents; the thickness
of which, beyond the 60th degree of latitude, is several hundred
feet. Navigators have assigned to detached masses, which are met with
floating at sea, an elevation of from 1,500 to 1,800 feet.[80] There
can be no doubt but that the thickness of these cupolas of ice is much
greater nearer the poles; for astronomy sometimes presents in the
heavens so vast an image of them, that the rotundity of the earth seems
to be considerably affected thereby. Captain Cook could never approach
nearer the south pole, where there is no land, than the 70th degree of
latitude; that is, no nearer than 1,500 miles; and it was only under
the favor of a bay, that he was permitted to advance even so far.[81]
All the results of observations made by navigators, concur in proving
that the temperature of the sea decreases according to the depth; and
that the deepest gulfs are continually covered with ice, even under the
equator. From a late memoir by M. Perron, some say, there is reason to
believe that these mountains of ice at the poles, which have hitherto
impeded the progress of European navigators, have been detached from
the depths of the sea to float at the surface.[82]

When water is converted into ice, it is lighter[83] than when in a
fluid state, which is a circumstance of great importance. Galileo
was the first who observed this. Ice consequently floats upon water,
its specific gravity being to that of water as eight to nine. This
rarefaction seems to be owing to the air-bubbles produced in water
by freezing; and which, being considerably larger in proportion to
the water frozen, render the body so much specifically lighter: these
air-bubbles, during their production, acquire a great expansive power,
so as to burst the containing vessels though ever so strong.

    [The specific weight of ice is known to be less than
    that of water. Our author assigns a reason not entirely
    satisfactory. We must admit that the freezing of the upper
    stratum of water, although it may _include_ the air which was
    in the water frozen, yet, _it does not expel the air from the
    subjacent volumes of water_. Hence the air in the water below
    will balance the effects of the air included in the ice.

    It is a singular fact, and is regarded as a deviation from
    the general rule, that water _expands_ in volume in proportion
    as its temperature is _reduced below_ 40° Fahrenheit. It also
    expands by raising its temperature above this degree.

    The _expansion_ of the volume then, and not the enclosed
    air bubbles, is the cause of water being specifically lighter
    when converted into ice. But it remains to account for its
    expansion by a _reduction_ of temperature.

    This is a difficult question. It seems most probable
    that this expansion is owing to a peculiar arrangement, of
    the particles of water, in the act of crystallization, i.e.
    _freezing_. M. Mairan found that the particles of water, in
    the act of freezing, arranged themselves constantly at an angle
    of 60°, and by this arrangement _increased the bulk_ of the
    water thus crystallized.

    It is obviously a mistake to attribute the “expansive
    power” of freezing to the force of the inclosed air-bubbles:
    because the reduction of temperature would reduce this supposed
    expansion of the inclosed air. The true cause of the expansion
    of ice is supposed above, in the arrangements of the particles
    of water in the process of crystallization.

    The _power_ which disposes these particles to arrange,
    _increases with the reduction of temperature_, until the
    disposing power becomes sufficiently great to force every
    impediment to the inclination to arrange. Hence the strongest
    vessels burst in the process of freezing.

    The impediments may restrain the accomplishment of the
    arrangement of the particles for a time, but the disposing
    power will overcome them, if the reduction of temperature go
    on; and when they are overcome _suddenly_, the crystallization
    will take place _instantly_. Hence the sudden rending of
    vessels, trees, mountain rocks, &c, upon the sudden congelation
    of water.

    Even when there is no cause to impede crystallization, it
    is well known that the _preparation_ to crystallize, or freeze,
    may be observed in the liquid; the particles seeming to be
    _preparing_ to arrange themselves; and then, at a given stage
    of the preparation, they take their places _suddenly_, and thus
    we have ice.

    This consummation may be retarded, or hastened by
    _artificial_ means. Water may be reduced to a lower temperature
    by being kept _still_, than when _agitated_. And if it be
    cooled down to the lowest possible temperature, _without
    congealing_, it may remain fluid at that temperature for a long
    time. But if the vessel be _suddenly struck_; or the surface
    of the water _touched with a piece of ice_; or _a large piece
    of cold metal be brought in contact with the outside of the
    vessel; the water will instantly crystallize or freeze in
    beautiful crystals_.

    These facts establish the above theory. Because, 1. there
    is no increased reduction of temperature effected, by striking
    the vessel, touching the surface of the water with ice, or the
    outside of the vessel with cold metal. 2. There is every reason
    to conclude these things _commence the motion_ in the water,
    which is at rest, balanced between an inclination to be at
    rest, and an inclination to move in arranging the particles;
    the motion communicated overcomes this balance in favor of
    the disposition to crystallize, and hence the water freezes
    instantly, with an expansion of volume.]

It is owing to the _expansion_ of water in freezing, that rocks
and trees are often split during intense frosts. According to the
calculations of the Florentine academicians, a spherule of water, only
one inch in diameter, expands in freezing with a force superior to the
resistance of 13½ tons weight. Major Williams also attempted to prevent
this expansion; but during the operation the iron plug which stopped
the orifice of the bomb-shell containing the freezing water, and which
was more than two pounds weight, was projected several hundred feet
with great velocity; and in another experiment the shell burst. This
property of water is taken advantage of in splitting slate. At Colly
Western, the slate is dug from the quarries in large blocks: these are
placed in an opposite direction to what they had in the quarry, and the
rain is allowed to fall on them: it penetrates their fissures, and the
sharp frost freezes the water, which, expanding with its usual force,
splits the slate into thin layers.[84]

M. Mairan, in a dissertation on ice, attributes the increase of its
bulk chiefly to a different arrangement of the parts of the water
from which it is formed; the icy skin on the water being composed
of filaments, which according to him, are found to be constantly
and regularly joined at an angle of 60°; and which, by this angular
disposition, occupy a greater volume than if they were parallel. He
found the augmentation of the volume of water by freezing, in different
trials, a 14th, an 18th, a 19th, and when the water was previously
purged of air, only a 22d part: that ice, after its formation,
continues to expand by cold; for, after water had been frozen to some
thickness, the fluid part being let out by a hole in the bottom of the
vessel, a continuance of the cold made the ice convex; and a piece of
ice, which was at first only a 14th part specifically lighter than
water, on being exposed some days to the frost, became a 12th part
lighter. To this cause he attributes the bursting of ice on ponds.

Several philosophers have been very desirous to experience how far the
expansive force of freezing water might be carried. “An iron gun of an
inch thickness,” says M. Haüy, “filled with water and exactly closed,
having been exposed by Buot to a strong frost, was found to be burst
in two places at the end of twelve hours. The Florentine philosophers
were able, by means of the same cause, to burst a sphere of very thick
copper; and Musschenbroek, having calculated the effort which would
occasion the rupture, found that it would be capable of raising a
weight of 27,720 pounds.”

“Colonel E. Williams, of the Royal Artillery, when at Quebec, in the
years 1794 and 1795,” says Dr. O. Gregory, “made many experiments.
He filled all sizes of iron bomb-shells with water, then plugged the
fusee-hole close up, and exposed them to the strong freezing air of the
winter in that climate; sometimes driving in the iron plugs as hard as
possible with a sledge-hammer: and yet, though they weighed near three
pounds, they were always forced out by a sudden expansion of the water
in the act of freezing, like a ball impelled by gunpowder, sometimes
to the distance of between 400 and 500 feet: and when the plugs were
screwed in, or furnished with hooks and barbs, by which to lay hold of
the inside of the shell, so that they could not possibly be forced
out; in that case the shell was always split in two, though its
thickness of metal was about an inch and three quarters. It is further
remarkable, that through the circular crack, round about the shells
where they burst, there stood out a thin film or sheet of ice, like a
fin; and in the cases where the plugs were projected by freezing water,
there suddenly issued from the fusee-hole a bolt of ice of the same
diameter, and stood over it sometimes to the height of eight inches
and a half. Hence we need not be surprised that excessive frost should
cause the ice to split rocks, and other solid substances.”[85]

It was necessary for the preservation of the world, that water should
in this instance be subjected to a law different from that of other
substances which change from fluid to solid. The wisdom and goodness
of the great ARTIFICER of the world will manifest itself in this
arrangement, if we consider what would have been the consequences had
water been subject to the general law, and like other fluids, become
specifically heavier by the loss of its caloric. In winter, when the
atmosphere became reduced to 32°, the water on the surface of our
rivers would have sunk as it froze; another sheet of water would
have frozen immediately, and sunk also; the ultimate consequence of
which would have been, that the beds of our rivers would have become
repositories of immense masses of ice, which no subsequent summer could
unbind; and the world would shortly have been converted into a frozen
chaos. How admirable the wisdom, how skilful the contrivance, that by
subjecting water to a law contrary to what is observed by other fluids,
as it freezes it becomes specifically lighter, and, swimming upon the
surface, performs an important service by preserving a vast body of
caloric in the _subjacent_ fluid from the effects of the surrounding
cold, ready to receive its own accustomed quantity on the first change
of the atmosphere?[86]

Owing to the distance of this globe from the sun, and to the vast
mountains of ice at the poles, the atmosphere over a large portion of
the earth is at times reduced to so low a temperature, that, if it
were not for a wise provision of nature, all vegetable life must be
destroyed. Caloric has always a tendency to equilibrium; therefore, if
the temperature of the air be lowered, the earth cools in proportion:
but when the atmosphere is reduced to 32°, the water which it held
in solution becomes frozen, and precipitates in the form of snow on
the earth, covering it as with a carpet, and thereby preventing the
escape of that caloric which is necessary for the preservation of
those families of vegetables that depend on it for their support and
maturity. Be the air ever so cold, the ground, thus covered, is seldom
reduced below 32°, but is maintained equably at that temperature for
the purpose above mentioned.[87] Homer has described a shower of snow,
and its extensive effects, in a fine strain of poetry.

    “In Winter’s bleak uncomfortable reign,
    A snowy inundation hides the plain:
    Jove stills the winds, and bids the skies to sleep;
    Then pours the silent tempest thick and deep:
    And first the mountain tops are covered o’er,
    Then the green fields, and then the sandy shore;
    Bent with the weight the nodding woods are seen,
    And one bright waste hides all the works of men:
    The circling seas alone, absorbing all,
    Drink the dissolving fleeces as they fall”--POPE.

Snow is furnished with the power of absorbing and combining with a
large portion of oxygen, which gives it its fertilizing property. The
snow melting and penetrating into the softened earth communicates to it
oxygen, and this oxygen promotes the germination of seeds. The carbon
of the earth combining with the oxygen, is converted into carbonic
acid, and thereby acquires more solubility; while the water contributes
to excite that activity which had been rendered dormant in the roots
by the cold. It is this property of carbon which deprives water of the
superabundant oxygen that would render it prejudicial to health, and
unfit for the purposes of life. Thus what would otherwise be injurious
to us is improved by the ground, and gives at the same time power and
activity to the mould. How multiplied are those means which infinite
wisdom and goodness employ for the preservation of the productions of
Nature![88]

Ice at 32° must absorb 140° of caloric before it can become a fluid;
or such a quantity as would raise a body of water of equal bulk with
itself from 32° to 172°. For instance: “Take any quantity by weight of
ice or snow at 32°, and mix it with an equal weight of water heated
exactly to 172°. The snow instantly melts, and the temperature of
the mixture is still only at _thirty-two_ degrees. Here the water is
cooled 140°, while the temperature of the snow is not increased at
all; so that 140° of caloric have disappeared. They must have combined
with the snow; but they have only melted it, without increasing its
temperature. Hence it follows irresistibly that ice, when converted
into water, absorbs and combines with 140° of caloric. Water then,
after being cooled down to 32°, cannot freeze till it has parted with
140° of caloric; and ice, after being heated to 32°, (which is the
exact freezing point), cannot melt till it has absorbed 140° more of
caloric. This is the cause of the extreme slowness of these operations.
There can be no doubt, then, but water owes its fluidity to its latent
caloric, and that its caloric of fluidity is 140°.”[89] And all this
arrangement in nature, connected with the operation of these elements,
is immediately under the control and direction of the infinitely wise
and almighty Creator of the universe. “He sendeth forth his commandment
upon earth: his word runneth very swiftly. He giveth snow like wool:
he scattereth the hoar-frost like ashes. He casteth forth his ice like
morsels: who can stand before his cold? He sendeth out his word, and
melteth them: he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters flow.”

Drops of rain, falling through a cold region of the atmosphere, are
frozen and converted into hail; and thus the _hail_ is produced by
_rain_. When it begins to fall, it is _rain_; when it is falling, it
is converted into _hail_; so that it is literally true, that _it rains
hail_. The further a hail-stone falls, the larger it generally is;
because, in its descent, meeting with innumerable particles of water,
they become attached to it, are also frozen, and thus its bulk is
continually increasing till it reaches the earth.[90] A storm of hail
fell near Liverpool, in Lancashire, in the year 1795, which greatly
damaged the vegetation, broke windows, &c, &c. Many of the stones
measured five inches in circumference. Dr. Halley mentions a similar
storm of hail in Lancashire, Cheshire, &c, April 29, 1697, that for
sixty miles in length, and two miles in breadth, did immense damage,
by splitting trees, killing fowls and all small animals, knocking
down men and horses, &c, &c. Mezeray, in his History of France, says,
that in Italy, in 1510, there was for some time a horrible darkness,
thicker than that of night; after which the clouds broke into thunder
and lightning, and there fell a shower of hail-stones which destroyed
all the beasts, birds, and even fish of the country. It was attended
with a strong smell of sulphur, and the stones were of a blueish color,
some of them weighing one hundred pounds weight. The Almighty says to
Job--“Hast thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I have reserved
against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war.” While
God has such artillery at his command, how soon may he desolate a
country, or a world![91]

The aqueous fluid is in continual circulation. The constant _round_
which it travels, says Dr. Paley, and by which, (without suffering
either adulteration or waste,) it is continually offering itself to
the wants of the habitable globe, is much to be admired. From the sea
are exhaled, by the heat of the sun, into the air, those vapors which
are there condensed into clouds: these clouds are dissolved into rain
and dew, or into snow and hail, which are but rain congealed, by the
coldness of the air, and descend in showers, which, penetrating into
the crevices of the hills, supply the springs: which springs flow in
little streams into the valleys; and there uniting, become rivers,
which rivers, in return, feed the ocean. So there is an incessant
circulation of the same fluid; and not one drop probably more or less
now than there was at the creation. A particle of water takes its
departure from the surface of the sea, in order to discharge certain
important offices to the earth: and, having executed the service which
was assigned to it, returns to the bosom which it left.[92] Thus, as
one of the greatest of naturalists says, “All the rivers run into the
sea; yet the sea is not full: unto the place from whence the rivers
come, thither they return again.”

Water, when taken up by the atmosphere, is not in an aqueous state, but
is converted into vapor by the efficiency of heat, and then combines
with more than five times the quantity of caloric than is required to
bring ice-cold water to a boiling heat, and occupies a space 800 times
greater than it does when in the form of water. A large portion of the
matter of heat combining chemically with water, renders it specifically
_lighter_; which is the cause of its rising and mixing with the
atmosphere. The waters on the face of the earth would be dissipated in
vapor by a small degree of heat, if we had no atmosphere. Under the
pressure of the atmosphere water boils at 212°, but in vacuo it boils
when heated only to 67°. On the contrary, if additional pressure be
given to water by a Papin’s digester, it may be heated to 400°, without
producing ebullition. However long we boil a fluid, in an open vessel,
we cannot make it in the smallest degree hotter than the boiling
point.[93] When arrived at this point, the vapor absorbs the heat, and
carries it off as fast as it is generated. When water is received into
the atmosphere, if the air be warm, it becomes so far changed by its
union with the matter of heat as to be perfectly invisible. In this
state it occupies a space 1,400 times greater than its ordinary liquid
state.

After vapor has remained some time in the atmosphere, it becomes in a
measure condensed; and the particles of water of which it is composed
unite, and form hollow vesicles, which accumulate together and produce
clouds. How this is effected, those who have attentively considered
the subject are not agreed. Dr. Thomson, after well investigating the
matter, concludes, from all the facts, that “the formation of clouds
and rain cannot be accounted for by a single principle with which
we are acquainted.” It is, however, says Mr. Parkes, probable that
_electricity_ alone is the primary cause. Saussure conjectures that it
is the electrical fluid which surrounds these vesicles, and prevents
them from dissolving in the air. And the idea of the formation of
clouds by the agency of electricity was mentioned by Volta, and also by
Dr. Franklin.

    [It is allowed by all, that clouds are formed by the
    aqueous vapors which are held suspended, or in solution, by
    the atmosphere. It is not a settled question, whether the air
    holds these vapors in solution, or merely suspended; and thus,
    keeping the particles asunder, prevents their condensation.

    This aqueous vapor is _invisible_ when perfectly in union
    with the air. When it begins to separate from the air, it
    becomes visible by condensation, in the form of _clouds_,
    _mists_, and _fogs_. When it is perfectly separated and
    sufficiently condensed it becomes _rain_, and when the
    temperature is sufficiently low to freeze the condensed drops,
    they become _snow_, or _hail_.

    The above process is quite intelligible, but the _agent_ of
    this condensation is, perhaps, inexplicable. It is impossible
    to solve all the phenomena of the formation of clouds, by
    supposing the vapors condensed by a reduction of temperature,
    produced by the warmer volumes of clouds rising into the
    regions of colder ones. For we know the natural tendency of the
    warmer strata of air, from the neighborhood of the earth, is to
    rise, with its watery particles, to colder regions. Hence there
    would be a constant condensation, which would seem to require a
    constant deposition of rain, or mist; or, at least, a constant
    accumulation of clouds.

    Again: On this theory, the nights would be cloudy and
    rainy: as the vapors raised during the day would be condensed
    by the superior coldness of the night succeeding. Moreover, it
    is well known that great rains fall in very warm weather, and
    when a _rise_ of temperature is observed.

    These, and other considerations, have induced many persons
    to have recourse to _electricity_ to solve this difficult
    question, and various observations seem to countenance the
    idea that it may be the remote agent of the formation of
    clouds, by producing a sudden rarefaction of the air, which
    would, of course, produce a sudden reduction of temperature;
    the consequence of which would be a rapid condensation of the
    watery particles in combination with the air. This condensation
    would form clouds, and if sufficiently rapid and extensive, a
    fall of rain would ensue.

    This supposition is much strengthened by a fact of common
    observation, viz: _when clouds are impending over us, but no
    rain falling, a sudden shower comes down instantly upon a
    flash of lightning._ In this case it is so obvious that the
    lightning had an immediate agency, that none can doubt, who
    ever observed the phenomenon.

    The _electrified_ state of _clouds_, _fogs_, and _mists_,
    is considered strong proof in favor of this theory. Clouds are
    almost always highly charged with electricity, and sometimes so
    highly charged as to become _luminous_, and very destructive.

    On the 11th of August, 1772, about midnight, a bright cloud
    was observed covering a mountain in the district of Cheribon,
    in the island of Java, at the same time several reports were
    heard like those of a gun. The people who dwelt upon the upper
    parts of the mountain not being able to fly fast enough, a
    great part of the cloud, almost three leagues in circumference,
    detached itself under them, and was seen at a distance rising
    and falling like the waves of the sea, and emitting globes of
    fire so luminous, that the night became as clear as day. The
    effects of it were astonishing; every thing was destroyed for
    seven leagues round; the houses were demolished; plantations
    were buried in the earth, and 2,140 people lost their lives.
    _Ency. Brit. Article_, CLOUDS.

    In another case, October 29th, 1757, in the island of
    Malta, a little after midnight, there was seen to the South
    west of the city Melita, a great black cloud, which, as it
    approached, changed its color, till at last it became like a
    flame of fire mixed with smoke. A dreadful noise was heard on
    its approach, which alarmed the whole city. It passed over the
    port, and came first on an English ship, which in an instant
    was torn to pieces, and nothing left but the hulk; part of
    the masts, sails, and cordage were carried to a considerable
    distance along with the cloud. The small craft were sunk
    instantly. It demolished a part of the city, and passed over to
    Sicily, but did no injury there as it was previously exhausted.
    Several hundred were killed. _Ency. Brit. Article_, CLOUD.]

The principle of evaporation is the primary cause of all rain, mist,
dew, &c. The ocean loses many millions of gallons of water hourly by
evaporation. The Mediterranean alone is said to lose more by it, than
it receives from the Nile, the Tiber, the Rhone, the Po, and all the
other rivers that fall into it. When Dr. Halley made his celestial
observations upon the tops of the mountains at St. Helena, he found
that the quantity of vapor which fell there (even when the sky was
clear) was so great, that his observations were thereby much impeded:
his glasses were so covered with water through the condensation of the
vapors, that he was obliged to wipe them every ten minutes. In order to
determine, with some degree of accuracy, how much water would be raised
in vapor in any space of time, he took a vessel of water salted to the
same degree with that of sea-water, in which he placed a thermometer,
and by means of a pan of coals brought the water to the same degree of
heat as would be produced by the sun in summer: he then affixed the
vessel of water with the thermometer in it, to one end of a pair of
scales, and exactly counterpoised it with weights on the other. Then,
at the end of two hours, he found by the alteration in the weight of
the vessel, that a sixtieth part of an inch in the depth of the water
was gone off in vapor; and therefore, in twelve hours, one-tenth of an
inch would have gone off. From this experiment the Doctor calculates
(in as accurate a manner as the subject will admit of) the quantity of
water raised by evaporation from the Mediterranean Sea, to be at least
five thousand two hundred and eighty millions of tons of water in a
day; and from the river Thames twenty millions three hundred thousand
tons per day, on the average.

This water is conveyed by the winds to every part of the continents:
these it fertilizes in the form of rain, and afterwards supplies the
rivers, which flow again into the sea. In our climate, evaporation is
found to be about four times as much from the vernal to the autumnal
equinox, as from the autumnal to the vernal. Heat facilitates all
solutions; and the greater the difference between the temperature
of the air and the evaporating surface, the greater will be the
evaporation. Bishop Watson found that, even when there had been no rain
for a considerable time, and the earth had been dried by the parching
heat of summer, an acre of ground dispersed into the air above 1,600
gallons of water in the space of twelve hours of a summer’s day. A
little reflection would convince any one of the importance of the
principle of evaporation. Innumerable instances of its use might be
adduced; suffice to add, that without it neither grass nor corn could
be sufficiently void of moisture to lay up for use. Our clothes when
washed could not be dried; neither could a variety of the most common
operations, which conduce much to our comfort and convenience, be
performed without it.

It is evident that water exists in the atmosphere in abundance, even in
the driest seasons, and under the clearest sky. By the experiments of
Saussure, it appears, that a cubic foot of atmospheric air will hold
eleven grains of water in solution. From this property of the air we
derive many advantages. It has a tendency to preserve every thing on
the face of the earth in a proper degree of moisture. It appears, from
the experiments of some aëronauts, that the air is much drier in the
higher regions than it is near the surface of the earth.

When two opposite currents of air meet, of different temperatures,
the vapors are sometimes condensed thereby, and rain ensues. It may
be remarked, that if the temperature of our atmosphere had been 212,
or upwards, rain could never have fallen on the earth; for the water
taken up by evaporation would have been converted into a _permanently_
elastic fluid. Such is the necessity of rain, that it _alone_ not only
affords a proper degree of moisture to the vegetable creation, but
is of service in bringing the soils into a fit state to perform their
office. Dry earth of itself is ineffective; but when _moistened_ it
has the property of decomposing atmospheric air, and of conveying its
oxygen to the roots of those plants which vegetate within it. We are
indebted to Humboldt for the knowledge of this fact. It is impossible
ever to contemplate the various ways in which the different operations
of nature are made to correct and balance each other, without being
struck with the infinite comprehension of the Divine Mind, which could
thus foresee the tendency of every law which it was about to establish.
How many cases are there in which the slightest oversight would have
produced the destruction of the world!

The effects of vapor have furnished a new moving force to mechanics,
says Haüy, which it required no ordinary genius to have created, and to
have measured its energy. This science, during a long time, had only
employed water as a moving force, by availing itself of its natural
course, or by judiciously managing its fall, so as to subject it to the
operation of machines which is regulated by an impulsion continually
renewed. The experiments made upon the force of water reduced to
vapor, gave birth to the idea of applying that vapor so much the more
advantageously to the same purpose, because independently of its
great energy, it may be transported wherever it is called for by the
interests of commerce and industry.

The execution of steam-engines has had, like that of all other
machines, its different epochs, to which successively corresponded new
degrees of perfection. To diminish, as far as possible, the quantity
of vaporisation requisite for the effect in contemplation, and to make
a moderate use of the combustible; to combine with this chief economy
that of substance and of workmanship, by contracting the dimensions of
the pieces without diminishing their utility; to prevent explosions,
by the wisest precautions adopted in the management of an agent whose
power becomes destructive when it is not limited: these are in general
the objects which have fixed the attention of engineers, and have
excited among them a laudable kind of rivalship.[94]

In no invention, either for ingenuity or utility, has modern genius
been more conspicuous than in the invention of the steam-engine.
The amazing power wielded by man, by this means, is just matter
of astonishment and wonder. In no part of the kingdom have these
stupendous machines been brought to greater perfection, either in size
or principle, than in the mining counties of Cornwall and Devon. The
largest ever built has lately been erected at Chacewater mine, in the
county of Cornwall, by Mr. S. Moyle, of that place, and is for size and
efficiency, as well as neatness, without a parallel. This stupendous
machine is equal to 1,010 horses; it works day and night in pumping dry
a mine of 100 fathoms deep, and of a large extent: and the quantity of
water pumped out in one minute, and the column consequently lifted,
is greater than any other machine of the kind ever erected. The whole
reflects the greatest credit on the abilities of the engineer, and
forms an interesting object to all those who are curious in mechanism,
or who may visit the mines of Cornwall.[95]

A very ingenious naturalist suggests the idea, that subterraneous
fire, and steam generated from it, are the true and real causes of
earthquakes. And he thinks the elasticity of steam and its expansive
force, are every way capable of producing the stupendous effects
attributed to earthquakes, when it is considered that this expansive
force of steam is to that of gunpowder as 140 to 5. He also apprehends
that subterraneous fire must, at different times, have existed
universally in the bowels of the earth, and that in union with water,
or by the expansive power of steam, it has produced the immense
continents, as well as the mountains of our globe.[96] There are,
in the Memoirs of the Paris Academy of Sciences for the year 1707,
some observations communicated by Vauban, from which it results that
140 pounds of water converted into vapor, would produce an explosion
capable of blowing up a mass of 77,000 pounds, while 140 pounds of
powder could only produce a similar effect upon a mass of 30,000.

Water would be the purest of all drinks, says Sturm, were it as
absolutely simple body; but on the other hand, its medicinal virtue
would be reduced to nothing. If we consider the manner in which water
nourishes plants, it is easy to presume that it communicates the
nutritious juices which it contains, to men and animals in the same
way. Water is not very nutritive by itself, but being very subtile, it
dissolves the nutritious parts of aliments, is a vehicle for them, and
carries them along into the minutest vessels. It is consequently the
most wholesome drink; and is essentially necessary to men and animals;
and its salutary effects are felt, where all other liquids are found
hurtful to health. “The water of Egypt,” says the Abbé Mascrier, “is
so delicious, that one would not wish the heat to be less, or to be
delivered from the sensation of thirst. The Turks find it so exquisite,
that they excite themselves to drink of it by eating _salt_. It is a
common saying among them, that if Mahomed had drank of it, he would
have besought God that he might never die, in order to have had this
continual gratification. When the Egyptians undertake the pilgrimage of
Mecca, or go out of their country on any other account, they speak of
nothing but the pleasure they shall have, at their return, in drinking
of the waters of the Nile. There is no gratification to be compared to
this: it surpasses, in their esteem, that of seeing their relations
and families. All those who have tasted of this water, allow that they
never met with the like in any other place. When a person drinks of it
for the first time, he can scarcely be persuaded that it is not a water
prepared by art: for it has something in it inexpressibly agreeable and
pleasing to the taste; and it should have the same rank among _waters_,
that _champaigne_ has among _wines_. But its most valuable quality is,
that it is exceedingly salutary. It never incommodes, let it be drank
in what quantity it may: this is so true, that it is no uncommon thing
to see some persons drink three buckets full of it in a day, without
the least inconvenience! When I pass such encomiums on the water of
Egypt, it is right to observe, that I speak only of that of the _Nile_,
which indeed is the only water, drinkable, for their _well-water_ is
detestable and unwholesome. _Fountains_ are so rare, that they are a
kind of prodigy in that country; and as to _rain-water_, that is out of
the question, as scarcely any falls in Egypt.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Having attended to the situation and properties of water in the world
of nature, we shall now show that by this element is represented the
blessings of Divine grace in the moral or spiritual world. God is
the _fountain of living waters_, ever-living, all-sufficient, and
incessantly flowing; like waters, arising and issuing from a spring,
which continue during the whole year: not like waters that proceed only
from some excess of rain, such as land-floods, or those flowing down
from hills, which in the winter season run in torrents, but in the
heat of summer are dried up and fail. Such uncertain waters are well
expressed by Job--“My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and
as the stream of brooks they pass away; which are blackish by reason
of the ice, and wherein the snow is hid: what time they wax warm they
vanish: when it is hot they are consumed out of their place. The paths
of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and perish. The
troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them. They
are confounded because they had hoped; they came thither, and were
ashamed.” He alludes to those merchants who travelled in companies or
caravans, with beasts of burden, through the deserts of Arabia; who,
having in the winter observed and marked out in certain places on the
road great pools of water, or copious streams locked up in the valleys
by severe frosts; so that, when travelling the same road in summer,
they expected finding water there still to refresh themselves and their
thirsty camels; but, to their great grief and consternation, instead
of pools or brooks of water, found heaps of dry sand, occasioned by
intense heat. But God is a fountain which sends forth streams of
blessings in all seasons, and never fails. The _living waters_ which
proceed from him as their fountain, are not stagnant, or dead, but
running, like those that issue from springs which are never dry, and
possess the most refreshing and invigorating properties.

The element of water is used for washing and purifying the body; so the
operation of Divine grace on the soul removes its moral defilement.
All the purifications by water under the law, were outward expressions
of this inward cleansing. Thus those important words by the prophet
Ezekiel, “I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean;
from all your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I cleanse you:
a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you.” Accordingly the Psalmist says, “Thou shalt wash me, and I shall
be whiter than snow.” He also prays, “Create in me a clean heart, oh
God; and renew a right spirit within me.” As purity is necessary for
enjoying communion with God in all his instituted ordinances, he says,
“I will wash mine hands in innocency: so will I compass thine altar,
oh Lord.” Similar language is used in the New Testament. Our Lord said
to Peter, “If I wash thee not, thou hast no part in me.” The apostle
Paul, after mentioning several immoral characters to the Christians at
Corinth, says, “And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
by the Spirit of our God.”

Our Lord gave himself for us, not only that he might redeem us from
all iniquity, but also that he might purify us unto himself a peculiar
people. This cleansing, washing, and purifying the soul from sin, is,
in the Holy Scripture, attributed to the virtual efficacy of his blood.
“The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin.” “Unto
him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.”
The primary effect of his blood is the expiation of sin; and, as a
consequence thereof, the remission of it. “This is my blood which is
shed for the remission of sins.” “In whom we have redemption through
his blood, the forgiveness of sins.” Now by the blood of Christ in
these places we are to understand his sufferings, which were completed
in the shedding of his blood on the cross.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ II.--THE EARTH.

    Surface of the Earth -- Mountains -- Fertility of Plants --
    Dissemination of Seeds -- Preservation of Plants -- Adaptation
    to different Climates -- Number of vegetables -- Succession of
    vegetables -- Remarkable Trees -- Sensitive Plants -- Kitchen
    vegetables -- Garden flowers -- Religious Improvement.


The dry land and the seas constitute what is called the _terraqueous
globe_; what proportion the superficies of the sea bears to that of the
land, cannot be easily ascertained; but, as one observes, the earth
and the water exist in a most judicious proportion to each other.
According to the most exact calculations, the surface of the earth is
199,512,595 square miles; and that of the sea is to the land as three
to one. There is no certain measurement of the proportion of land and
water which the parts within the polar circles contain. The superficies
of the sea appearing so large, may lead some persons to suppose, that
the proportions between the land and water are not wisely adjusted; and
that had there been less sea and more dry land, this would have been
more adapted to the accommodation and service of mankind. As such a
supposition as this tends to arraign the wisdom of God, so it proceeds
from ignorance of natural philosophy. For, as Dr. Keill asserts, “if
there were but half the sea that now is, there would be also only half
the quantity of vapors; and, consequently, we could have no more than
half so many rivers as there now are, to supply not only all the dry
land we have at present, but half as much more; for the quantity of
vapors which are raised, bears a proportion to the surface whence they
are raised, as well as the heat which raised them. The wise Creator so
prudently ordered it, that the sea should be large enough to supply
vapors sufficient for all the land, which it would not do if it were
less than it now is.”[97] The Scriptures speak of God as making all
things in number, weight, and measure; as proceeding in his works with
the greatest exactness. “He hath measured the waters in the hollow of
his hand, and meted out heaven with a span, and comprehended the dust
of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the
hills in a balance.” Those who wish to see this further illustrated,
would do well to consult Ray’s “Wisdom of God manifested in the works
of the Creation,” and his “Physico-theological Discourses.”

The stately mountains, that lift their lofty heads above the clouds,
serve for very beneficial purposes. Does the bold atheist call them
blemishes, and irregularities in the formation of the earth? Surely
he never considered how necessary they are, for arresting the clouds
in their flight, and conveying their waters through imperceptible
channels, till they meet in some common receptacle, whence they burst
out in springs to fertilize the lower grounds, and afford refreshing
streams for man and beast. “This,” says Mr. Halley, “seems to be the
design of the hills, that their ridges, being placed through the midst
of the continents, might serve as it were for alembics, to distil
fresh water for the use of man and beast; and that their heights might
give a descent to those streams to run gently, like so many veins of
the microcosm, to be more beneficial to the creation.” They are, says
Mr. Ray, “for the generation and maintenance of rivers and fountains,
which--on the hypothesis that all proceed from rain water--could not
subsist without them, or but rarely. So we should have only torrents,
which would fail in summer, or in any dry season, and nothing to trust
to, but stagnating water, reserved in pools and cisterns. The great
inconvenience resulting from this I need not take pains to show. I say
that fountains and rivers would be but rare, were there no mountains.
For the whole dry land being but one continued mountain, and ascending
all along from the sea to the mid-land, as is undeniably proved by
the descent of rivers even in plain countries; the water sinking into
the earth, may run under ground, and, according as the vein leads it,
break out in the side of this mountain, though the place, as to outward
appearance, be a plain. There are huge ridges and extended chains of
mountains directed for the most part to run east and west; by which
means they give admittance and passage to the vapors, brought by the
winds from the Atlantic and Pacific oceans; but stop and inhibit their
excursions to the north and south, either condensing them on their
sides into water, by a kind of external distillation; or by straitening
and constipating them, compelling them to gather into drops, or descend
down in the rain.”

After the waters had subsided, the land appeared, dry and fit for
vegetation. “And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb
yielding seed, and the fruit-tree yielding fruit after his kind,
whose seed is in itself upon the earth: and it was so. And the earth
brought forth grass, and herb yielding seed after his kind, and the
tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind.” Here we
rise to organized and vegetative bodies. At the Divine command, herbs,
plants, trees, and all the almost endless varieties of the vegetable
world, bearing their several seeds and fruits, according to their
different kinds, immediately began to appear. Thus before God formed
any living creature to dwell upon the earth, he provided abundantly
for its sustenance. “Now as God delights to manifest himself in the
little as well as the great,” says a celebrated commentator, “he has
shown his consummate wisdom in every part of the vegetable creation.
Who can account for, or comprehend, the structure of a single tree or
plant? The roots, the stem, the woody fibres, the bark, the rind, the
air-vessels, the sap-vessels, the leaves, the flowers, and the fruits,
are so many mysteries. All the skill, wisdom, and power of men and
angels, could not produce a single grain of wheat!”

Dr. Hales, in his Statistical Essays, has observed, that the substances
of vegetables appear, by a chemical analysis, to be composed of
sulphur, volatile salt, water, and earth, which are all endued with
mutually attracting powers; and also of a large portion of air, which
has a wonderful power of strongly attracting in a fixed state, or
of repelling in an elastic state, with a power which is superior to
great compressive forces.[98] By the infinite combinations, action,
and reaction of these principles, all the operations in animal and
vegetable bodies are effected. These active aërial principles are very
serviceable in carrying on the work of vegetation to its perfection
and maturity; not only in helping, by their elasticity, to distend
each ductile part, but, also, by enlivening and invigorating their
sap, where, mixing with the other mutually attracting principles, they
are, by gentle heat and motion, set at liberty to assimilate into the
nourishment of the respective parts. The sum of the attracting powers
of these mutually acting and re-acting principles, is, while in this
nutritive state, superior to their repelling power; by which the work
of nutrition is gradually advanced by the nearer and nearer union of
these principles from a less to a greater degree of consistency, till
they are advanced to that viscid, ductile state, whence the several
parts of vegetables are formed; and are, at length, firmly compacted
into hard substances, by the flying off of the watery diluting vehicle:
but when they are again disunited by the watery particles, their
repelling power is thereby become superior to their attracting power,
and the union of the parts of vegetables is so thoroughly dissolved,
that putrefaction commences.

God has endued the vegetable creation with the astonishing power
of multiplying itself by seeds, slips, roots. &c. ad infinitum: it
contains in itself all the rudiments of the future plants through
their endless generations. The celebrated Linnæus, in an “oration
concerning the augmentation of the habitable earth,” which proceeds on
the supposition of the existence of a sexual system in the vegetable
world, shows how from one plant of each species the immense number
of individuals now existing might arise. He gives some instances of
the surprising fertility of certain plants; as, of the elecampane,
one plant of which produced 3,000 seeds; of spelt, 2,000; of the
sun-flower, 4,000; of the poppy, 3,200; of tobacco, 40,320: and one
grain of Turkey-corn produces 2,000 others! But supposing any annual
plant producing yearly only two seeds, even of these, after 20 years,
there would be 1,048,576 individuals. For they would increase yearly
in a double proportion, _viz._ 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, &c. The seed of the
_elm_, as a learned author observes, affords a remarkable instance of
the prolific power with which the vegetable creation is endued, to
multiply its different species. “This tree produces one thousand five
hundred and eighty-four millions of seeds; and each of these seeds
has the power of producing the same number. How astonishing is this
produce! At first one seed is deposited in the earth; from this one a
tree springs, which in the course of its vegetative life produces one
thousand five hundred and eighty-four millions of seeds. This is the
first generation. The second generation will amount to two trillions,
five hundred and ten thousand and fifty-six billions. The third
generation will amount to fourteen thousand six hundred and fifty-eight
quadrillions, seven hundred and twenty-seven thousand and forty
trillions! And the fourth generation from these would amount to fifty
one sextillions, four hundred and eighty-one thousand three hundred
and eighty-one quintillions, one hundred and twenty-three thousand one
hundred and thirty-six quadrillions! Sums too immense for the human
mind to conceive; and when we allow the most confined space in which a
tree can grow, it appears that the seeds of the third generation from
one elm would be many myriads of times more than sufficient to stock
the whole superficies of all the planets in the solar system!”

While many plants and trees may be propagated by branches, buds,
suckers, and leaves fixed in the ground; so concerning the
dissemination of seeds after they come to maturity, the Author of
nature has wisely provided in various ways; this being absolutely
necessary, since without it no crop could follow. The stalks and stems
favor this purpose; for these raise the fruit above the ground, so that
the winds, shaking them to and fro, widely disperse the ripe seeds.
The pericarpium, a pellicle or thin membrane encompassing the fruit or
grain of a plant, is generally shut at the top, that the seeds may not
fall before they are shaken out by stormy winds. Wings are given to
many seeds, by the help of which they fly far from the mother plant,
and frequently spread over a large tract of country. These wings
consist either of down, as in most of the composite-flowered plants;
or of a membrane, as in birch, alder, ash, &c. Several kinds of fruits
are endued with a remarkable elasticity, by the force of which the
ripe pericarpies throw the seeds to a great distance; as wood-sorrel,
spurge, phyllanthus, and dittany. Other seeds or pericarpies are rough,
or provided with hooks, as hounds-tongue, agrimony, &c; so that they
are apt to stick to animals which pass by them, and by this means are
carried to their holes, where they are both sown and manured. Berries,
as well as other pericarpies, are by nature allotted for aliment to
animals; but, with this condition, that while they eat the pulp, they
shall sow the seeds: for when they feed on it, they either disperse
them at the same time; or, if they swallow them, they are returned
unhurt. The mistletoe always grows on other trees, because the thrush
eating its seeds, casts them forth with its dung. The cross-bill living
on fircones, and the haw-finch feeding on pinecones, sow many of their
seeds.

The structure of plants contributes essentially both to their own
preservation, and that of others. But the wisdom of the Creator appears
very remarkable in the manner of the growth of trees. For as their
roots descend deeper than those of other plants, provision is thereby
made that they shall not rob them too much of nourishment;[99] and
what is still more, a stem, not above a span in diameter, often shoots
its branches very high; these bear perhaps many thousand buds, each of
which is a plant, with its leaves, flowers, and stipulæ. Now if all
these grew on the plain, they would take up a thousand times as much
space as trees do; and, in this case, there would scarcely be room in
all the earth for so many plants as at present trees alone afford.
Besides, plants that shoot up in this way are more easily preserved
from cattle by a natural defence: their leaves also, falling in autumn,
cover the plants growing about them against the rigor of the winter;
and, in the summer, they afford a pleasing shade, not only to animals,
but to plants, against the intense heat of the sun. We may add, that
trees, like all other vegetables, imbibe water from the earth: which
does not circulate again to the root, but being dispersed like small
rain, by the transpiration of the leaves, moistens the plants that grow
around. Many plants and shrubs are armed with thorns, as the buckthorn,
sloe, carduus, cotton-thistle, &c: these serve to keep off animals,
which otherwise would destroy their fruit. At the same time, they cover
many other plants, especially of the annual kind, under their branches.
Nay it has frequently been observed on commons where furze grows, that
wherever a bush was left untouched for some years by the inhabitants a
tree has sprung up, being secured by the prickles of that shrub from
the bite of cattle. So that while adjacent grounds are robbed of plants
by voracious animals, some may be preserved to ripen flowers and
fruit, and stock the surrounding parts with seeds which otherwise would
be quite extirpated. All herbs cover the ground with their leaves, and
by their shade hinder it from being totally deprived of that moisture
which is necessary to their nourishment. Mosses, which adorn the most
barren places, do, at the same time, preserve lesser plants when they
begin to shoot, from cold and drought; as is evident in gardens, where
plants are preserved in the same way. They also hinder the fermenting
earth from forcing the roots of plants upwards in the spring; like what
happens annually to trunks of trees, and other things put into the
ground. Hence very few mosses grow in warm climates, the same necessity
not existing in those places.

The great Author of all things intended that the whole earth should be
covered with plants, and that no place should be void or barren. But
since all countries have not the same changes of seasons, and every
soil is not equally adapted to every plant; therefore, that no place
should be without some, he gave to each of them such a nature as might
be chiefly accommodated to their own climate: so that some of them can
bear intense cold, others an equal degree of heat; some delight in dry
ground, others in moist, &c. Hence plants grow where the seasons of the
year and the soil are friendly to their constitution. Grasses, the most
common of all plants, can bear almost any temperature of air: in this
the good providence of the Creator particularly appears; for all over
the globe they are necessary for the nourishment of cattle. The same
is observed in relation to our most common grains. Thus neither the
scorching sun, nor the pinching cold, hinders any country from having
vegetables. Nor is there any soil which does not bring forth many kinds
of plants. Deserts and sandy places are adorned with trees and plants.

If we connect the vast fecundity of vegetables with their number,
how bountiful will the great Author of nature appear! Solomon had a
comprehensive knowledge of the different species of plants, for he
“spake of trees, from the cedar-tree that is in Lebanon even unto
the hyssop that springeth out of the wall;” but his writings on this
subject, not being quoted by any ancient author, nor the least fragment
remaining, are entirely lost. Theophrastus, a Greek philosopher, who
succeeded Aristotle in his school at Athens, where his name became so
celebrated that he was attended by two thousand pupils, wrote a work
entitled “The History of Plants,” in which above 500 different plants
are described. Dioscorides, a Grecian by birth, but under the Roman
empire, a physician and botanist in the time of Nero, being near 300
years posterior to Theophrastus, describes about 600 plants. Pliny
the elder,[100] in his voluminous work entitled “The History of the
World,” gives descriptions of above 1,000 different species of plants.
Hieronymus Bock, or Bouc, a German, generally known by the name of
_Tragus_, in 1532, published a History of Plants, in which he describes
800 species.

From later botanical researches, we learn, that the bountiful
Creator has enriched the earth with about 20,000 different species
of vegetables. The following statement of the progress of botanical
knowledge has recently been given to the public. Messrs. Humboldt
and Boupland, the celebrated travellers, have collected in their
five years’ travels through South America, 3,800 species of plants,
of which upwards of 3,000 were new, and absolutely unknown before
to the botanists of Europe. We are at present acquainted altogether
with 44,000 species of plants; while the whole number mentioned by
the Greeks, Romans, and Arabians, does not exceed 1,400. It is worth
remarking, that the vegetable productions of the new world seem to have
been in an inverse ratio, both in point of number and luxuriance, to
those of the animal kingdom. In North America, for instance, the number
of lofty trees is far greater than in Europe. In the former country,
there are found 137 species of trees, whose trunks exceed the height
of 30 feet; while in Europe there are scarcely 45 species. But it is
singular there are no firs to be found on any part of the mountains of
South America, between the tropics, though they are very abundant in
North America. The reason why Magnolias, and other equinoxial plants,
appear so far north in America, is, that as far as lat. 48 deg. the
summers are 9 degrees (of Fahrenheit) hotter than in the corresponding
European latitudes. The winters, however, are more than proportionably
colder. At Philadelphia the summer is as hot as at Rome; while the
winter corresponds with that of Vienna. At Quebec, the summer is warmer
than at Paris; the winter colder than at St. Petersburgh. Beyond Lake
Superior, and at Hudson’s Bay, it is said that the earth is perpetually
frozen at the depth of three feet from the surface, which prevents the
inhabitants from digging wells. The same thing happens in Siberia,
on the banks of the Lena; while in South America there are cities at
a greater height than the highest summit of the Pyrenees, and houses
more elevated than the Peak of Teneriffe, the region, in Europe, of
perpetual congelation. To this we may add, that Linnæus, the celebrated
botanist, divided all plants into classes, the classes into orders, the
orders into genera, and the genera into species: and the species, we
are told, amount perhaps to 40,000, or 50,000, or more!

The fertility of the earth has been continued from the creation,
through every successive period, to the present time. Plants spring
up, grow, flourish, ripen their fruit, wither, and at last, having
finished their course, die, and return to the dust again, from whence
they first took their rise. Thus black mould, which covers the earth,
is generally owing to dead vegetables. For all roots descend into the
sand by their branches, and after a plant has lost its stem, the root
remains; but this too rots at last, and changes into mould. Thus this
kind of earth is mixed with sand, by the arrangement of nature, nearly
in the same way as dung thrown on fields is wrought into the earth by
the industry of the husbandman. But the earth offers again to plants
from its bosom what it has thus received. For when seeds are committed
to the earth, they draw to themselves, accommodate to their nature,
and turn into plants, the more subtile parts of this mould by the
co-operation of the sun, air, and rain; so that the tallest tree is,
properly speaking, nothing but mould wonderfully compounded with air
and water, and modified by a virtue communicated to a small seed by the
Creator. From these plants, when they die, just the same kind of mould
is formed as gave birth to them originally; whence fertility remains
continually uninterrupted. Whereas the earth could not make good its
annual consumption, unless it were constantly recruited by new supplies.

That the Author of nature had so constituted the world that none of the
elements should be subject to destruction, might have been supposed by
the ancients; but, till the present advanced state of the science of
chemistry, no proof of this interesting fact could have been adduced.
Of the indestructibility of matter it may be remarked, that provision
has been made even for the restoration of the fallen leaves of
vegetables, which rot on the ground, and, to a careless observer, would
appear to be lost for ever. Berthollet has shown by experiment, that,
whenever the soil becomes charged with such matter, the oxygen of the
atmosphere combines with it, and converts it into carbonic acid gas.
The consequence of this is, that this same carbon in process of time
is absorbed by a new race of vegetables, which it clothes with a new
foliage, and which is itself destined to undergo similar putrefaction
and renovation to the end of time.

The selection of a few remarkable trees and plants will serve to
impress the reader with a sense of the wisdom and power of God, as
displayed in the vegetable kingdom. As rivers and brooks are very
seldom found in deserts and sandy places, many of the trees growing
there distil water; and, by that means, afford great comfort both to
man and beast. Thus the _Tillandsia_, which is a parasitical plant,
growing on the tops of trees in the deserts of America, has its leaves
turned at the base into the shape of a pitcher, with the extremity
expanded; in these the rain is collected, and preserved for the use of
men, beasts, and birds. The water-tree in Ceylon produces cylindrical
bladders, covered with a lid; into these is secreted a most pure
and refreshing water. There is a kind of cuckow-pint in New France,
of which, if a person break a branch, it will afford him a pint of
excellent water. How wise, how beneficial is the adaptation of plants
to the inhabitants of those countries where they grow!

On the top of a rock, in one of the Canary Islands, says Glass, in
his History, grows the _Fountain Tree_, called, in the language of
the ancient inhabitants, _Garse_, (sacred or holy tree,) which for
many years has been preserved sound, entire, and fresh. Its leaves
constantly distil such a quantity of water as is sufficient to furnish
drink to every living creature in Hierro; nature having provided this
remedy for the drought of the island. It is situated about a league
and a half from the sea. Nobody knows of what species it is, only
that it is called _Til_. It is distinct from other trees, and stands
by itself. The circumference of its trunk is about twelve spans, the
diameter four, and in height from the ground to the top of the highest
branch forty spans: the circumference of all the branches together, is
one hundred and twenty feet. The branches are thick and extended: the
lowest commence an ell from the ground. Its fruit resembles the acorn,
and tastes something like the kernel of a pine-apple, but is softer and
more aromatic. The leaves of this tree resemble those of the laurel,
but are larger, wider, and more curved; they come forth in perpetual
succession, so that the tree always remains green. On the north side
of the trunk, are two large tanks, or cisterns, of rough stone, or
rather one cistern divided, each half being twenty feet square, and
sixteen spans in depth. One of these contains water for the drinking of
the inhabitants; and the other that which they use for their cattle,
washing, and such like purposes. Every morning, near this part of
the island, a cloud or mist arises from the sea, which the south and
easterly winds force against the fore-mentioned steep cliff, so that
the cloud, having no vent but by the gutter, gradually ascends it,
and from thence advances slowly to the extremity of the valley, where
it is stopped and checked by the front of the rock, which terminates
the valley, and then rests upon the thick leaves and wide-spreading
branches of the tree, from whence it distils in drops, during the
remainder of the day, until it is at length exhausted, in the same
manner that we see water drip from the leaves of trees after a heavy
shower of rain. This tree yields most water in those years when the
Levant or easterly winds have prevailed for a continuance, for by these
winds only the clouds or mists are drawn hither from the sea. A person
lives on the spot near where this tree grows, who is appointed by the
council to take care of it, and its water; and is allowed a house to
live in, with a certain salary. He every day distributes to each family
of the district, seven pots or vessels full of water, besides what he
gives to the principal people in the island.

In Cockburn’s Voyages we find the following account of the _Dropping
Tree_, near the mountains of Vera Paz, in America. “On the morning of
the fourth day we came out on a large plain where were numbers of fine
deer, and in the middle stood a tree of an unusual size, spreading its
branches over a vast compass of ground. Curiosity led us up to it; we
had perceived, at some distance, the ground about it to be wet, at
which we began to be somewhat surprised, as well knowing there had no
rain fallen for near six months past, according to the certain course
of the season in that latitude; that it was impossible to be occasioned
by the fall of dew on the tree, we were convinced, by the sun having
power to exhale all moisture of that nature a few minutes after his
rising. At last, to our great amazement, as well as joy, we saw water
dropping, or, as it were, distilling fast from the end of every leaf of
this wonderful (nor had it been amiss, if I had said miraculous) tree;
at least it was so with respect to us, who had been laboring four days
through extreme heat without receiving the least moisture, and were now
almost expiring for the want of it. We could not help looking on this
as liquor sent from heaven to comfort us under our great extremity. We
catched what we could of it in our hands, and drank very plentifully
of it, liking it so well, that we could hardly prevail with ourselves
to give it over. A matter of this nature could not but excite us to
make the strictest observations concerning it; and accordingly we staid
under the tree near three hours: we found that we could not clasp its
body by five times. We observed the soil where it grew to be very
stony; and upon the nicest inquiry we could afterwards make, both of
the natives of the country, and the Spanish inhabitants, we could not
learn that there was any such tree known throughout New Spain, nor
perhaps all America over.”

The _Tallow Tree_, mentioned by Du Halde in his History of China, grows
in great plenty in that country, producing a substance much like our
tallow, and serving for the same purposes. It is about the height of a
cherry tree; its leaves are in form of a heart, of a deep shining red
color, and its bark very smooth. Its fruit is enclosed in a kind of pod
or cover, like a chestnut, and consists of three round white grains,
of the size and form of a small nut, each having its peculiar capsule,
and within that a little stone. This stone is encompassed with a white
pulp, which has all the properties of true tallow, as to consistence,
color, and even smell; and accordingly the Chinese make their candles
of it, which doubtless would be as good as those in Europe, if they
knew how to purify this vegetable as we do the animal tallow, and make
their wicks as fine. All the preparation they give it, is to melt it
down, and mix a little oil with it, to make it softer and more pliant.
It is true, their candles made of it yield a thicker smoke, and give a
dimmer light than those of ours; but these defects are owing in a great
measure to the wicks, which are not of cotton, but only a little rod or
switch of dry light wood, covered with the pith of a rush, wound round
it, which, being very porous, serves to filtrate the minute parts of
the tallow, attracted by the burning stick, and which by this means is
kept burning.

The _Tea Tree_ is a native of China, of very slow growth; it has a
black, woody, irregular, branched root, and rises to a fathom high, or
rather more. Its leaves are very thick set, without any regularity,
and are, in substance, like those of the morella cherry tree; but,
when young, they resemble, except in color, the spindle tree, with red
berries, called _euonymus_. The larger leaves are about two inches
long, and one broad. The method of gathering them is one by one, lest
they should be torn. The first gathering begins at the middle of the
first moon, immediately before the vernal equinox; these leaves are
scarcely full opened, being only of two or three days growth; but
they are accounted the best, fetch the best price, and are called the
flower of the tea; but, by the Chinese, _veui boui_, or bohea tea. The
second gathering begins about a month after, and the last gathering is
in June; the leaves of the gatherings are sorted into three several
classes, according to their size and goodness, and sold accordingly.
After the leaves are gathered, they are the same day carried to the
work-house, and roasted over a slow fire in an iron pan; and, that they
may be thoroughly and equally dried, the roaster keeps them continually
stirring with his hands, then takes them out, with a shovel like a fan,
and commits them to the rollers, who roll them with the palms of their
hands in small parcels, till they are equally cooled, and the sharp
yellow and greenish juice is quite discharged. They are then poured
upon a mat, and sorted a second time into different classes according
to their goodness, and those that are less curled or burnt are taken
out.--It is said that the Dutch were the first importers of tea into
Europe, about the year 1606, for which they exchanged dried sage with
the Chinese: and though the English did certainly about the same time
gain a knowledge of this plant, we do not find that the government
took any cognizance of it till the Restoration, when in 1660, a duty
of eight-pence per gallon was laid on the liquor made, and sold in all
coffee-houses.

The _Coffee Tree_ is a native of the Indies, grows surprisingly quick,
and its body is naturally of an upright form; its leaves are something
like those of the common bay, but curl at the end and hang downwards.
The blossoms first appear in July, when they show themselves in bunches
at the joints, near the ends of the branches; they are much like
the flowers of the jessamine, but have the addition of some yellow
_apices_, which are loose on the top of the blossom, and a _style_
which shoots out near half an inch above it. The fruit appears about
October, which hangs on the tree till the next July before it is ripe:
it is then gathered and prepared for the market, or for propagating
other plants. Coffee is, perhaps, one of the greatest blessings, among
those that are not really necessaries of life, that Providence has
granted to mankind; and, considering its beneficial qualities as well
as its agreeable properties, it should be ranked among the most elegant
plants, in foliage, blossom, and fruit. It is a wholesome, pleasant,
and cheap beverage, and of great use in many disorders. The origin of
the use of coffee is stated to be as follows. A prior of a monastery
in the part of Arabia where this berry grows, having remarked that the
goats which eat of it became extremely brisk and alert, resolved to try
the experiment on his monks, of whom he so continually complained for
their lethargic propensities. The experiment turned out successful;
and, it is said, it was owing to this circumstance that the use of this
Arabian berry came to be so universal.

The _Banian Tree_ is a native of several parts of the East Indies. It
has a woody stem, branching to a great height and vast extent, with
heart-shaped entire leaves, ending in acute points. Of this tree the
following lines of Milton contain a description equally beautiful and
just.

                    “There soon they chose
    The fig tree; not that tree for fruit renown’d,
    But such as at this day to Indians known
    In Malabar or Decan, spreads her arms,
    Branching so broad and long, that in the ground
    The bended twigs take root and daughters grow
    About the mother tree, a pillar’d shade,
    High over arch’d and echoing walks between;
    There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat,
    Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds
    At loop-holes cut through thickest shade.”

The banian tree, or Indian fig, is perhaps the most beautiful of
nature’s productions in that genial climate, where her luxuriance is
displayed with the greatest profusion and variety. Some of these trees,
as they are continually increasing, and, contrary to most other things
in animal and vegetable life, seem to be exempted from decay, grow to
an amazing size. Every branch projecting from the main body throws out
its own roots, at first in small tender fibres, several yards from the
ground; these continually grow thicker till they reach the surface; and
there striking in, they increase to large trunks, and become parent
trees, shooting out new branches from the top; these at length suspend
their roots, which, swelling into trunks, produce other branches:
thus continuing in a state of progression as long as the earth, the
first parent of them all, contributes her sustenance. The Hindoos
are peculiarly fond of this tree; they view it as an emblem of the
Deity, from its long duration, outstretching arms, and overshadowing
beneficence; they almost pay it divine honors, and

    “Find a fane in every sacred grove.”

Near these trees the most esteemed pagodas are generally erected; under
their shade the brahmins spend their lives in religious solitude; and
the natives of all casts and tribes are fond of recreating in the cool
recesses, beautiful walks, and lovely vistas of this umbrageous canopy,
impervious to the hottest beams of a tropical sun.

A description of a tree in the island of Java, called the _Upas_, or
Poison Tree, is given to the public by a surgeon belonging to the
Dutch East India Company, of the name of Foersch, who was stationed at
Batavia, in the year 1774. Surprising its this account may be, it is
accompanied by so many public facts, and names of persons and places,
that it is somewhat difficult to conceive it fabulous. The Upas grows
about seven leagues from Batavia, in a plain surrounded by rocky
mountains, the whole of which plain, containing a circle of ten or
twelve miles round the tree, is totally barren. Nothing that breathes
or vegetates can live within its influence. The bird that flies over
it drops down dead. The beast that wanders into it expires. The whole
dreadful area is covered with sand, over which lie scattered loose
flints and whitened bones, Thus,

    “Fierce in dread silence on the blasted heath,
    Fell Upas sits!”

This tree may be called the emperor’s great military magazine. In
a solution of the poisonous gum which exudes from it, his arrows
and offensive weapons are dipped; the procuring, therefore, of this
poisonous gum, is a matter of as much attention as of difficulty.
Criminals are only employed in this dreadful service. Of these, several
every year are sent with a promise of pardon and reward if they procure
it. Hooded in leather cases, with glass eyelet-holes, and secured as
much as possible from the foul effluvia of the air they are to breathe,
they undertake this melancholy journey, travelling always with the
wind. About one in ten escapes, and brings away a little box of this
direful commodity!

Every one skilled in natural history knows, that the mimosæ, or
sensitive plants, close their leaves, and bend their joints, on
the least touch. This is truly astonishing: but hitherto no end or
design of nature has appeared from these motions; they soon recover
themselves, and the leaves are expanded as before. Dionæ Muscipula, or
Venus’s Fly Trap, is a newly discovered sensitive plant; and shows that
nature may have some view towards its nourishment, in forming the upper
joint of its leaf like a machine to catch food. Upon the middle of this
lies the bait for the unhappy insect that becomes its prey. Many minute
red glands, that cover its inner surface, and which, perhaps, discharge
some sweet liquor, tempt the poor animal to taste them; and the instant
these tender plants are irritated by its feet, the two lobes rise up,
grasp it fast, lock the two rows of spines together, and squeeze it to
death. Further, lest the strong efforts for life, in the creature thus
taken, should serve to disengage it, three small erect spines are fixed
near the middle of each lobe among the glands, that effectually put an
end to all its struggles. Nor do the lobes ever open again, while the
dead animal continues there. But it is nevertheless certain that the
plant cannot distinguish between an animal and a mineral substance; for
if we introduce a straw, or a pin, between the lobes, it will grasp it
full as fast as if it were an insect. This plant grows in America, in
wet shady places, and flowers in July and August. The largest leaves
are about three inches long, and an inch and a half across the lobes:
the glands of those exposed to the sun are of a beautiful red color;
but those in the shade are pale, and inclining to green. The roots are
squamous, sending forth few fibres, and are perennial. The leaves are
numerous, inclining to bend downwards, and are placed in a circular
order; they are jointed and succulent; the lower joint, which is a kind
of stalk, is flat, longish, two-edged, and inclining to heart-shaped.
In some varieties, they are serrated on the edges near the top. The
upper joint consists of two lobes, each lobe is of a semi-oval form,
with their margins furnished with stiff hairs, like eye-brows, which
embrace or lock in each other when they are inwardly irritated. The
upper surfaces of these lobes are covered with small red glands, each
of which appears, when highly magnified, like a compressed arbutus
berry. Among the glands, about the middle of each lobe, are three very
small erect spines. When the lobes enclose any substance, they never
open again while it continues there. If it can be shoved out, so as
not to strain the lobes, they expand again; but if force is used to
open them, so strong has nature formed the spring of their fibres,
that one of the lobes will generally snap off, rather than yield. The
stalk is about six inches high, round, smooth, and without leaves,
ending in a spike of flowers. The flowers are milk-white, and stand,
on foot stalks, at the bottom of which is a little painted bractea, or
flower-leaf.

There is not an article in botany more admirable than a contrivance,
visible in many plants, to take advantage of good weather, and to
protect themselves against bad. They open and close their flowers and
leaves in different circumstances; some close before sun-set, some
after; some open to receive rain, some close to avoid it. The petals
of many flowers expand in the sun; but contract at night, or on the
approach of rain. After the seeds are fecundated, the petals no longer
contract. All the trefoils may serve as a barometer to the husbandman;
they always contract their leaves on an impending storm. Some plants
follow the sun, others turn from it. Many plants, on the sun’s recess,
vary the position of their leaves, which is styled, the _sleep of
plants_. A singular plant was lately discovered in Bengal. Its leaves
are in continual motion all day long; but when night approaches; they
fall down from an erect posture to rest.[101]

A plant has a power of directing its roots for procuring food. The red
whortle-berry, a low evergreen plant, grows naturally on the tops of
our highest hills, among stones and gravel. This shrub was planted in
an edging to a rich border, under a fruit wall. In two or three years
it over-ran the adjoining deep-laid gravel walk, and seemed to fly from
the border, in which not a runner appeared. An effort to come at food,
in a bad situation, is extremely remarkable, in the following instance.
Among the ruins of New Abbey, formerly a monastery in Galloway, there
grows on the top of a wall, a plane tree, about twenty feet high.
Straitened for nourishment in that barren situation, it several years
ago directed roots down the side of the wall, till they reached the
ground ten feet below; and now the nourishment it afforded to those
roots during the time of their descending, is amply repaid, having
every year, since that time, made vigorous shoots. From the top of the
wall to the surface of the earth these roots have not thrown out a
single fibre, but are now united in a single root.

Plants, when forced from their natural position, are endowed with the
power to restore themselves. A hop-plant, twisting round a stick,
directs its course from south to west, as the sun does. Untwist it, and
tie it in the opposite direction, it dies. Leave it loose in the wrong
direction, it recovers its natural direction in a single night. Twist
the branch of a tree, so as to invert its leaves, and fix it in that
position, if left in any degree loose, it untwists itself gradually,
till the leaves be restored to their natural position. What better can
an animal do for its welfare? A root of a tree meeting with a ditch
in its progress, is laid open to the air. What follows? It alters its
course, like a rational being, dips into the ground, surrounds the
ditch, rises on the opposite side to its wonted distance from the
surface, and then proceeds in its original direction. Lay a wet sponge
near a root laid open to the air; the root will direct its course
to the sponge. Change the place of the sponge; the root varies its
direction. Thrust a pole into the ground at a moderate distance from
a climbing plant; the plant directs its course to the pole, lays hold
of it, and rises on it to its natural height. A honeysuckle proceeds
in its course till it be too long for supporting its weight; and then
strengthens itself by shooting into a spiral. If it meet with another
plant of the same kind, they coalesce for mutual support, the one
screwing to the right, the other to the left. The claspers of briony
shoot into a spiral, and lay hold of whatever comes in their way for
support. If, after completing a spiral of three rounds, they meet with
nothing, they try again, by altering their course.

By comparing these and other instances of seeming voluntary motion
in plants, with that share of life wherewith some of the inferior
kind of animals are endowed, we can scarce hesitate at ascribing
the superiority to the former: that is, putting sensation out of
the question. Muscles, for instance, are fixed to one place as much
as plants are; nor have they any power of motion, besides that of
opening and shutting their shells; and in this respect, they have no
superiority over the motion of the sensitive plant: nor does their
action discover more sagacity, or even so much, as the roots of the
plane tree, mentioned by Lord Kames.[102]

Beckmann’s History of Inventions and Discoveries presents us with an
interesting account of Kitchen Vegetables and Garden Flowers, collected
from numerous authorities; some parts of which I shall now transcribe,
and incorporate with information derived from other sources.

Our foreign kitchen vegetables have, for the most part, been procured
from the southern countries, but chiefly from Italy; and the number of
them has rapidly increased, in the course of the last two centuries.
Many of them require laborious attention to make them thrive in our
climate. On the other hand, some grow so readily, and increase so much
without culture, even in the open fields, that they have become like
indigenous weeds, as is the case with hops, which at present abound
in our hedges. Some plants, however, both indigenous and foreign,
which were formerly raised by art and used at the table, are no
longer cultivated, because we have become acquainted with others more
beneficial.

Among many which were formerly cultivated, but at present are no longer
esteemed, are the following. Winter-cresses, _erysimum barbarea_;
common alexander, _smyrnium olosatrum_, which in the seventeenth
century was used instead of celery; bulbous chærophyllum, the roots of
which are still brought to market at Vienna, where they are boiled and
eaten as salad. Rampion, _phyteuma spicata_, was formerly used in like
manner. The earth nut, the tuberous roots of the _lathyrus tuberosus_,
which grows wild in many parts of Germany, is still cultivated in
Holland and in some districts on the Rhine. Rocket, _brassica eruca_,
in Italian, _ruchette_, the young leaves of which were eaten by our
forefathers as salad, and is still retained in Italy. And there are
several others either but imperfectly known or little regarded.

Among the kitchen vegetables of which no certain traces are to be found
in the works of the ancients, is spinage, _spinacea oleracea_. Its
native country is unknown; but the name is new, and certainly derived
from the nature of its prickly seeds. As far as I know, it first occurs
in the year 1351, among the food used by the monks on fast-days; and at
that time it was written _spinagium_ or _spinachium_.

The ancients were acquainted with curled cabbages, and even with
some of those kinds which we call _broccoli_. Under this term is
understood all those species, the numerous young flower heads of which,
particularly in spring and autumn, can be used like cauliflowers.
The broccoli used at present was however first brought from Italy to
France, together with the name, about the end of the sixteenth century.

Our cauliflower, about the same time, was first brought from the Levant
to Italy; and in the end of the seventeenth century was transplanted
thence to Germany. For a long time the seeds were procured annually
from Cyprus, Candia, and Constantinople, by the Venetians and Genoese,
who sent them to every part of Europe, because at that time the art
of raising seed was not understood. The seeds of cauliflowers were
brought from Italy to Antwerp, where no seed was raised, or such only
as produced degenerate plants. Prosper Alpinus, in the year 1588, found
abundance of this vegetable in Egypt, and from his account there is
reason to conjecture it was then very little known in Europe. Conrad
Gesner seems not to have been acquainted with it; at any rate it is not
mentioned by him in a list of the cabbage kind of plants. Even in the
time of Bauhin, it must have belonged to those vegetables which were
scarce; because he has been so particular in naming the garden in which
he saw it. Von Hohberg, who wrote about 1682, says that cauliflower, a
few years before, had been brought to Germany for the first time.--It
would be difficult to define all the species of the cabbage kind, the
leaves and flowers of which were used by the ancients as food; but
it would be a task still more arduous to determine those that have
esculent roots.

Potatoes were first imported into Europe, in the year 1565, by Hawkins,
from Santa-Fe, New Mexico, Spanish America. They were planted for
the first time in Ireland, by Sir Walter Raleigh, who had an estate
in that kingdom. The natural history of the potatoe was so little
understood, that a total ignorance which part of the plant was the
proper food, had nearly ruined any further attention towards its
cultivation. For perceiving green apples appear on the stems, these
were first supposed to be the fruit; but on being boiled, and finding
them unpalatable, or rather nauseous, Raleigh was disgusted with his
acquisition, nor thought any more of cultivating this plant. Accident,
however, discovered the real fruit, owing to the ground being turned
over, through necessity, that very season; and to his surprise, a
plentiful crop was found under ground, which being boiled, proved
nourishing to the stomach, and grateful to the taste. On its utility
being known, its cultivation became general through Ireland. It found
its way to this kingdom, and was first planted on the western coast,
in consequence of a vessel containing some potatoes, being wrecked at
the village of Formby, in Lancashire; a place still famed for this
excellent vegetable.

Asparagus was first planted in England in the year 1662, in the reign
of Charles II. Artichokes were first introduced about the same time.
Cos lettuces were originally brought from the island of Cos, near
Rhodes, in the Mediterranean. Turnips were brought into this country
from Hanover. In the time of Henry VIII, several kinds of fruits and
plants were cultivated in England, as apricots, and a fine gooseberry
from Flanders; also salads, carrots, and other edible roots. These
vegetables were before this period imported from Holland and Flanders.
So that Queen Catherine, to procure a salad, had to dispatch a
messenger to fetch it from those countries. Fruit seems to have been
scarce in the time of Henry VII. In an original manuscript, signed by
himself, and kept in the Remembrance office, it appears that apples
were not less than one or two shillings each, and that a red one cost
two shillings. The great plenty and variety of vegetables displayed
upon modern tables, through every month in the year, evidently shows
what superior blessings we enjoy, in this respect, compared with those
of our forefathers.

Some of the flowers introduced into our gardens, and now cultivated
either on account of their beauty, or the pleasantness of their smell,
have been procured from plants which grew wild, and which have been
changed, or, according to the opinion of florists, improved by the art
of the gardener. The greater part of them however came originally from
distant countries, where they grow in as great perfection as ours,
without the assistance of man. It is probable that the modern taste for
flowers came from Persia to Constantinople, and was imported thence
to Europe for the first time, in the sixteenth century. At any rate,
many of the productions of our flower-gardens were conveyed to us by
that channel. Clusius and his friends, in particular, contributed very
much to excite this taste; and the new plants brought from both the
Indies by travellers who frequently visited these countries, tended
to increase it. That period also produced some skilful gardeners, who
carried on a considerable trade in the roots and seeds of flowers; and
these, likewise assisted to render it more general. Among these were
John and Vespasian Robin, gardeners to Henry IV, of France, and Emanuel
Sweert, gardener to the emperor Rodolphus II, from whom the botanists
of that time procured many rarities, as appears from different passages
of their works.

Simon de Tovar, a Spanish physician, brought the tuberose to Europe
before the year 1594 from the East Indies, where it grows wild in Java
and Ceylon, and sent some roots of it to Barnard Paludanus, who first
made this flower publicly known, in his annotations on Linschoten’s
voyage. The full tuberoses were first procured from seed by one Le
Cour, at Leyden, who kept them scarce for some years, by destroying
the roots. The propagation of them in most countries is attended with
difficulties: but in Italy, Sicily, and Spain, it requires no trouble;
and at present the Genoese send a great many roots to England, Holland,
and Germany. The oldest botanists classed them among the hyacinths, and
their modern name _polianthes tuberose_ was given them by Linnæus in
his Hortus Cliffortianus.

The auricula, _primula auricula_, grows wild among the long moss
covered with snow, on the confines of Switzerland and Steyermark,
whence it was brought to our gardens, where, by art and accident, it
has produced more varieties than any other species of flower. I do not
know who first transplanted it from its native soil. Pluche says only
that some roots were pulled up by Walloon merchants, and carried to
Brussels. However, this is certain, that it was first cultivated with
care by the Flemings, who were very successful in propagating it. In
the time of Clusius, most of the varieties of the auricula were scarce.

The common fritillary, or chequered lily, _fritillaria meleagris_,
was first observed in some parts of France, Hungary, Italy, and other
warm countries, and introduced into gardens about the middle of the
sixteenth century. At first it was called _lilium variegatum_; but
Noel Capperon, an apothecary at Orleans, who collected a great many
scarce plants, gave it the name of _fritillaria_, because the red or
reddish-brown spots of the flower form regular squares. It was first
called _meleagris_ by Dodonæus, because the feathers of that fowl are
variegated almost in the same manner.

The roots of the magnificent crown imperial, _fritillaria imperialis_,
were about the middle of the sixteenth century brought from Persia to
Constantinople, and were carried thence to the Emperor’s garden at
Vienna, from which they were dispersed all over Europe. This flower was
first known by the Persian name _tusac_, until the Italians gave it
that of _corona imperialis_, or crown imperial. It has been imagined
that the figure of it is to be found represented on the coins of Herod,
and that, on this account, it has been considered as the lily so much
celebrated in the Scripture.

The Persian lily, _fritillaria Persica_, which is nearly related to
it, was made known almost about the same time. The bulbs or roots
were brought from Susa to Constantinople, and for that reason it was
formerly called _lilium Susianum_.

African and French marigolds, _tagetes erecta_ and _patula_, are
indigenous in South America, and were known to botanists under the
name of _caryophillus Indicus_, from which is derived the French
appellation _œillet d’ Inde_. Cordus calls them, from their native
country, _tanacetum Peruvianum_.

Among the most beautiful ornaments of our gardens, is the bella-donna
lily, _amaryllis formosissima_, the flower of which, composed of six
petals, is of a deep red color, and in a strong light, or when the
sun shines upon it, has an agreeable yellow lustre like gold. The
first roots of it ever seen in Europe were procured in 1593, on board
a ship which had returned from South America, by Simon de Tovar, a
physician at Seville. In the year following, he sent a description of
this flower to Clusius; and as he had at the same time transmitted
some roots to Bernard Paludanus, and count d’Aremberg, the former
sent a dried flower, and the latter an accurate drawing of it, to
Clusius, who published it in 1601. One of the Robins gave, in 1608,
a larger and more correct figure, which was afterwards copied by
Bry, Parkinson, and Rudbeck; but a complete description, with a good
engraving, was published in 1742, by Linnæus, who in 1737 gave to that
genus the name by which they are known at present. Tovar received it
from South America, where it was found by Plumier and Barrere, and at
a later period by Thiery de Menonville. At first it was classed with
the narcissus, and it was afterwards called _lilio-narcissus_, because
its flower resembled that of the lily, and its roots those of the
narcissus. It was named _flos-Jacobæus_, because some imagined that
they discovered in it a likeness to the badge of the knights of the
order of St. James in Spain, whose founder, in the fourteenth century,
could not indeed have been acquainted with this beautiful amaryllis.

Another species of this genus is the Guernsey lily, _amaryllis
Sarniensis_, which in the magnificence of its flower is not inferior
to the former. This plant was brought from Japan, where it was found
by Kæmpfer, and also by Thunberg, during his travels some years ago
in that country. It was first cultivated in the beginning of the
seventeenth century, in the garden of John Morin, at Paris, where it
flowered, for the first time, on the 7th of October, 1634. It was then
made known by Jacob Cornutus, under the name of _narcissus Japonicus
flore rutilo_. After this it was again noticed by John Ray, an
Englishman, in 1665, who called it the _Guernsey lily_, which name it
still very properly bears. A ship returning from Japan was wrecked on
the coast of Guernsey, and a number of the bulbs of this plant, which
were on board, being cast on shore, took root in that sandy soil. As
they soon increased, and produced beautiful flowers, they were observed
by the inhabitants, and engaged the attention of Mr. Hatton, the
governor’s son, whose botanical knowledge is highly spoken of by Ray,
and who sent roots of them to several of his friends who were fond of
cultivating curious plants. Of this elegant flower Dr. Douglass gave a
description and figure in a small treatise published in 1725, which is
quoted by Linnæus in his Bibliotheca, but not by Haller.

Of the numerous genus of the ranunculus, florists, to speak in a
botanical sense, have obtained a thousand different kinds; for,
according to the manner in which they are distinguished by gardeners,
the varieties increase almost every summer.

The principal part of them, however, and those most esteemed, were
brought to us from the Levant. Some were carried from that part of the
world so early as in the time of the crusades; but most of them have
been introduced into Europe from Constantinople since the end of the
sixteenth century, particularly the Persian ranunculus, the varieties
of which, if I am not mistaken, hold at present the first rank. Clusius
describes both the single and the full flowers as new rarities. This
flower was in the highest repute during the time of Mahomet IV. His
Grand Vizir, Cara Mustapha, well known by his hatred against the
Christians and the siege of Vienna, in 1683, wishing to turn the
Sultan’s thoughts to some milder amusement than that of the chase,
for which he had a strong passion, diverted his attention to flowers;
and, as he remarked that the Emperor preferred the ranunculus to all
others, he wrote to the different Pachas throughout the whole kingdom
to send him seeds or roots of the most beautiful kinds. The Pachas of
Candia, Cyprus, Aleppo, and Rhodes, paid most regard to this request;
and the elegant flowers which they transmitted to court were shut up
in the seraglio as unfortunate offerings to the voluptuousness of the
Sultan, till some of them, by the force of money, were at length freed
from their imprisonment. The ambassadors from the European courts,
in particular, made it their business to procure roots of as many
kinds as they could, which they sent to their different sovereigns.
Marseilles, which at that period carried on the greatest trade to the
Levant, received on this account these flowers very early; and a person
there, of the name of Malaval is said to have contributed very much to
disperse them all over Europe.

Some of our most common flowering shrubs have been long introduced into
the gardens: the bay-tree has been cultivated more than two centuries;
it is mentioned by Tusser, in the list of garden plants inserted in
his work called, “Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandry,” printed in
1573. The laurel was introduced by Cole, a merchant at Hampstead, some
years before 1629, when Parkinson published his Paradisus Terrestris,
and at that time we had in our gardens oranges, myrtles of three sorts,
lauristinus, cypress, phyllyrea, alaternus, arbuttus; a cactus, brought
from Bermuda, and the passion-flower, which last had flowered here, and
showed a remarkable peculiarity, by rising from the ground near a month
sooner, if a seedling plant, than if it grew from roots brought from
Virginia.


_Crust of the Earth._

    [In the preceding section the Author has noticed the
    _superficies_ of the earth principally; as its inequalities
    because of seas, lakes, rivers, mountains, vallies, &c. The
    _rocky_, and _earthy_ masses and strata, which cover the
    nucleus of our globe, are scarcely mentioned at all. Whether
    the _central_ parts of the earth be solid, soft, or hollow, and
    filled with gaseous matter, is not the subject of enquiry here:
    but the _composition_ and _arrangement_ of the _solid crust_ of
    the planet come under consideration.

    As it regards the composition of the crust of the earth
    considered principally, it consists of _metallic oxides_.
    The bases of the different earths are well known to be
    _metals_. The metal called _Silicon_, is the base of silex or
    flint--_Aluminum_ is the metallic base of pure clay--_Calcium_,
    of lime--_Magnesium_, of magnesia--_Potasium_, of potash, &c.
    Iron, also, enters largely into the composition; and soda,
    whose metallic base is _sodium_, forms a considerable portion.

    These bases, at their creation, existed in an _uncombined_
    state, as did all the elementary substances. When they entered
    into combination with _oxygen_ they became _earths_, which are
    simple metallic oxides, which readily combine with the _acids_,
    in which combination they are generally seen, though not
    always, at the earth’s surface; as carbonate of lime, or common
    limestone; the composition of which is _calcium_, _oxygen_, and
    _carbonic acid_.

    Rocks of the _silicious_ family are not considered _earthy
    salts_, though, occasionally, they may contain a small per
    cent. of acid. They are called _earthy compounds_. _Granite_
    is an instance; composed of _feldspar_, _quartz_, and _mica_.
    Gneiss, and mica slate are of similar composition, though in
    different proportions, and under different arrangements.

    It will readily occur to the reader that there are some
    other earths, and other substances also, as the acids, and
    gases, which enter into the composition of the earth’s crust,
    though in small proportions, and, therefore, are not considered
    _principal_ ingredients, and hence not noticed in this general
    sketch.

    The rocky, or stony substances, composed of the above
    elements, under the influence of chemical affinities, and
    other principles, are found in _crystalline_, _stratified_,
    _amorphous_, and _aggregate masses_. The _position_,
    _structure_, and _contents_ of these masses will develope the
    _natural history of the solid crust of our Earth_.

    In order to facilitate this development, the rocks have
    been divided, according to their age into,

    1. _Primitive Rocks._ These were deposited _first_, as is
    evident from their position, being the lowest of all the rocks.
    Their name indicates their relative age.

    2. _Transition Rocks._ These rocks are deposited
    immediately above the primitive, of course subsequently to
    them. They are called _transition_ rocks, because they were
    deposited as the earth was _passing_ from an uninhabitable to a
    habitable state, as is evident from the fact that _they contain
    the first traces of organized being imbedded in them_.

    3. _Secondary Rocks._ These are deposited next in
    succession to the transition rocks, and mark a _third_ grand
    geological epoch, by being almost altogether a _mechanical_
    deposition, and lie _horizontally_ when _in situ_, and contain
    an increase of organic remains, both in quantity and variety.

    4. _Tertiary Rocks._ These derive their name from their
    succession to the secondary, and of course mark the _fourth_
    geological epoch in the history of the arrangement of the
    earth’s crust, which completed its redemption from the abyss of
    waters, and fitted it for the habitation of man.

    This division of the rocks designates the _order of time_
    in which they were successively deposited, as is evident from
    their position.

    Considering these rocks _in situ_, they may be reckoned
    _general formations_, extended all around the globe in
    concentric circles, as the coats of an onion around its centre,
    in the order above stated, beginning with the primitive rocks.

    It is, however, well known that _fractures_ and
    _dislocations_ prevail to a great extent, the result of
    violence subsequently to the deposition of these rocks,
    removing large portions of them _out of place_. But this
    circumstance need not interrupt the grand _natural_ order of
    the construction of the earth’s crust.

    There is also a class of stony substances which follow no
    general laws, either in regard to _position_, _form_, or _age_.
    These are volcanic and igneous productions of every kind; as
    basalt, lava, &c. These shall be mentioned subsequently.

    In the above remarks we have an _outline_ of the structure
    of the crust of the earth; but in order to have a more
    satisfactory development, the principal and distinctive
    features of the leading rock formations must be stated in order.


    _Primitive Rocks._

    1. _This class occupies the lowest position as a class_,
    yet the individual rocks of this class have a general order of
    position among themselves. Granite is lowest; then Gneiss--Mica
    Slate--Clay Slate--Primitive Limestone--Porphyry--Sienite--and
    Greenstone.

    _These rocks are sometimes observed alternating with each
    other, and sometimes passing into each other._ But these
    circumstances do not effect the general order. When the
    formations are _undisturbed_, in penetrating them we should
    come to granite last; and it is universally the lowest of all
    observed rock formations.

    2. _This class is generally, indeed we may say,
    universally, crystalline in its structure._ Each integrant
    particle is not a _perfect crystal_; but throughout the mass
    there is a partial crystallization, such as would be the result
    of an effort to crystallize perfectly, under a great pressure;
    in which case the particles would mutually interfere with each
    other.

    The very fact of this crystallization implies _first_; a
    prevailing state of _unagitated solution_ of the crystallizing
    materials: _secondly_: that their crystallization was the
    effect of _chemical action_.

    3. _The primitive rocks contain no fragments, either
    angular, or rounded by attrition, imbedded in them_; simply
    because no rocks preceded them, and of course could not be
    broken up. It is, however, to be carefully observed, that
    perfect crystals of different kinds are found imbedded in
    primitive rocks. When they prevail to a great extent they
    constitute _porphyritic rocks_. It is evident that these
    crystals must have been formed before the consolidation of the
    including rock, and must have been suspended in the solution
    which formed the rock upon crystallization.

    4. _The primitive rocks contain no traces of organized
    bodies._ This is an universal characteristic, and proves
    incontestibly that they were formed _previous to the existence
    of organized beings_.

    5. _The primitive rocks are usually inclined at a high
    angle to the horizon, and frequently are vertical._ This seems
    to be the result of crystallization, as mechanical deposition
    would place them _horizontally_, having the general bearing of
    the curve of the earth.

    6. The principal primitive rocks are granite, gneiss, and
    mica slate.

    They are composed of the same materials, in different
    proportions; viz; feldspar, quartz, and mica. These three
    minerals constitute granite, when feldspar is the _base_,
    and the quartz is embedded in a crystalline state, and the
    mica interspersed generally. They constitute gneiss, when the
    feldspar _decreases_, and the mica _increases_, and is arranged
    in layers. They compose mica slate, when the feldspar almost
    _disappears_, and the mica and quartz are intimately united.

    7. Though the primitive rocks occupy the lowest position
    _in situ_, yet they sometimes form, not only the _summits_ of
    lofty mountains, but sometimes the _mountain mass_ itself, and
    appear at the surface. In these cases it is evident that they
    have been _upheaved_ by a force acting beneath, and forcing
    them through the superincumbent rocks, which were rent, and
    glided down the sides of the rising mass of primitive rocks,
    leaving them bare and visible at the summit. In this case the
    rocks which were uppermost before the mountain mass began
    to rise, would be found at the _foot_ of the mountain; and
    the rocks which were next to the uppermost, would be found
    immediately above them, reclining on the side of the mountain;
    and thus _ascending through the ages of the rocks to the summit
    of the mountain, where we find the primitive rock formations
    constituting its apex_.

    This phenomena of primitive rocks forming the apices of
    mountains may be explained differently. The primitive rocks,
    and other classes in succession, _may have been deposited in
    mountain masses_, and the upper rocks being _softer_ and more
    _exposed_, have yielded to the ravages of the elements, and
    to the demolishing force of the deluge, and thus laid the
    primitive rocks bare. The _first_ seems to be the most probable
    supposition.

    8. It is beyond a doubt, that in some instances, an
    upheaving force has operated, and elevated the granitic summits
    of mountains; and so powerful was the upheaving force that the
    blocks of granite have broke at the apex of the elevation, and
    some of them hang over perpendicularly in awful grandeur; and
    others have rolled down the sides far into the plains below.

    This theory of the formations of some of the principal
    mountains would be firmly established in every mind, if every
    one could have an opportunity of inspecting them without
    prejudice. The primitive rocks would be seen shooting up from
    the centre of the mountain, into lofty pyramidal elevations,
    resembling, sometimes, lofty spires, or cupolas; and sometimes
    the summit is rounded off as a dome. The rocks are in a
    _verticle_ position, which proves they could not have been
    _deposited there_ from a state of quiet repose.

    Sometimes two summits project from the same common base,
    having an intervening valley or depression between them. In
    this case, the rocks which lay uppermost before the mass was
    upheaved, upon upheaving, broke and glided down the sides, on
    which they depend in magnificent drapery; but the portion of
    them which was situated _between_ the uprising summits, not
    being able to escape, is found in the valley which is formed
    between the peaks.

    In some instances, as the mass is elevating itself it bears
    up upon it a large mass of the over-laying rock, which forms
    the apex of the mountain, crowning it as a stately castle
    crowns the summit of the hill on which it is built. In this
    case the crowning mass is entirely different, and perfectly
    distinct from the subjacent materials. _For some further
    remarks on the structure, and formation of mountains, and
    mountain masses, and the deluge, see Theory of the Earth, end
    of Sect. 2, chap. iv._

    9. As there was a rapid and irresistible chemical action,
    at a very high temperature, going on during this first great
    geological period, and the whole globe in almost omnipotent
    fermentation, there is no difficulty in accounting for the
    irregularities, contortions, dislocations and fractures which
    we observe in the earth. This whole process was anterior to the
    existence of organized being.


    _Transition Rocks._

    1. _This class was deposited subsequently to the primitive
    rocks, and after they had consolidated._ This is evident
    from the fact that, in their natural order, they _overlay_
    the primitive, which could not be the case, unless they were
    deposited subsequently, any more than the roof of the house
    could be put on before the foundation was laid.

    2. _Their structure is evidently the result both of
    chemical action, and mechanical deposition._ These principles
    appear to have acted sometimes conjointly; and at other times
    to have alternated. Hence the crystallization is more imperfect
    than in the primitive, and occasionally seems to disappear.

    3. _From the complex action under which they were
    deposited, they are generally, neither verticle nor horizontal,
    but inclined about between these two positions._

    4. _They were deposited as the primitive chaotic ocean
    was subsiding, and the elevations of the new-born earth had
    recently emerged._ Hence they are found next to the summits of
    the primitive mountains, _on their flanks_.

    5. _The transition rocks contain some fragments of all the
    primitive class._ This would be the natural consequence of the
    summits of primitive rock formations being exposed to the fury
    of the elements; which would rend portions of them, and thus
    deposit the fragments mechanically in the floods subsiding
    below on the flanks of the mountains.

    6. _In these rocks we meet with the first traces of
    organized being._ (SILLIMAN.) This fact is irresistible proof
    that these rocks were deposited _subsequently_ to the existence
    of the enclosed remains. The probability is, that the animals
    and vegetables found in transition rocks, were created at the
    _commencement_ of the transition period, and their remains
    deposited as the rocks were successively deposited.

    It is remarkable that these organized beings belonged to
    genera now extinct. They were of an inferior class, having
    neither the delicacy, complexity, or sensibility of those which
    we now see. They were crude, and gross, corresponding to the
    condition of the earth at the time of their existence.

    It is also evident that they lived, and died, and were
    inhumed in the same places; as they present, generally, no
    marks of violence, and their most delicate parts are well
    preserved.

    These organic remains occupy vast districts of country, and
    constitute, principally, large masses of marbles, sometimes
    many hundreds of feet in the interior of mountains. They are
    identified with the rock, and frequently impart to it its
    beauty.

    7. The reader will readily perceive that this class of
    rocks marks the _commencement_ of _sensitive_ existence. And it
    would seem, from an examination of fossil remains generally,
    that the creation of animals and vegetables was _progressive_,
    produced with structures and functions adapted to the condition
    of the globe, at the time of their creation.


    _Secondary Rocks._

    1. _These rocks are so called, because they are the second
    great deposit, after the grand foundation of the primitive
    rocks were laid._ Of course they point out the third great
    geological period.

    2. _Their position is horizontal, corresponding to the
    general curve of the earth._ This regards their natural
    position. They are found, under particular circumstances,
    inclined to the horizon. They occupy a lower position on the
    sides of mountains, resting on the transition class, which is
    immediately subjacent _in natural order_.

    3. _This class is much less chemical, indeed very little
    so, in its structure._ It is the result of mechanical
    deposition, after the chemical action had nearly ceased in the
    great primitive and retiring abyss.

    4. _These rocks abound more in fragments of other rocks,
    and in the remains of organized beings, than the preceding
    class._ This would be natural, as a greater extent of the
    earth’s surface would be exposed to the elements, and thus the
    destruction would be greater: and as the condition of the earth
    was better for sustaining sensitive beings, these would of
    course be more abundant both in _kind_ and _number_.

    It is also well ascertained, from the fossil remains found
    in this class of rocks, that during their deposition, there
    existed many species of animals and plants which do not now
    exist: that many of the animals were _monsters_ of incredible
    size and voracity; of such hugeness, grossness, and ferocity as
    were suitable to the then prevailing condition of the earth.

    The researches of the last ten or fifteen years, in
    England, have brought to light the skeletons of animals,
    approaching the _lizard genus_, from _sixty to seventy feet
    long_!! They are abundant in England, and occasionally found
    on the continent. Who can say, but that the other genera
    of animals then existing, were also as much more vast, and
    misshapen than their present existing types? A single glance
    at the _geological reminiscences_ of this ancient period must
    convince any observer, that the vegetable, and specially the
    animal genera then existing were really astonishing both in
    _size_, _shape_, and _nature_.

    It becomes a question of some interest, whether these huge
    animals ceased to exist, having found their graves in this
    secondary class of rocks, before the existence of man?

    There are many reasons which induce a supposition they did
    cease to exist. Man could scarcely have been safe in the land
    of these wonderful creatures. Moreover, it is probable their
    constitutions were adapted to the condition of the world at
    this period, which we suppose to have been more gross in its
    air, and water, and more ardent in its climate; as it had not
    yet settled, and dried; and the waters had not yet sufficiently
    subsided, to render the earth the abode of the more delicate
    land-animals, birds, and specially man. It is probable the
    earth was marshy, with numerous inland lakes, to a considerable
    extent; the waters still somewhat turbid; the air gross and
    moist; and the temperature still very high. Such a state of the
    planet would suit the constitutions of such monsters as the
    _ichthyosaurus_, and _plesiosaurus_, which would perish as the
    condition of the globe became more pure, and its temperature
    reduced.


    _Tertiary Rocks._

    1. _These rocks were deposited as the earth was actually,
    and finally redeemed from water, and became fit for the abode
    of the more delicate and gentle land-animals and birds._ Hence,
    it is very rare, if ever, the fossil remains of animals which
    live wholly on land, are found below this class of rocks. But
    man’s companion animals are found, as elephants, deer, horse,
    sheep, &c.

    2. This class is not so extensively spread as the preceding
    classes. It includes the _diluvial_ and _alluvial_ formations,
    and indicate an alternation of fresh and sea waters in its
    deposition. This class covers the low countries as they slope
    from primitive districts towards the sea. Such grand vallies
    are called _diluvial_, because deposited chiefly by the great
    primitive ocean, as it retired through its last stages to
    its resting beds. The deposites at the mouths of rivers, or
    any other deposites from causes now in operation, are called
    _alluvial_.

    3. Some of the principal members of this class are: 1.
    Argillaceous, and sandy depositions from the sea. 2. Marl,
    and gypsum, from fresh water. 3. Sand, and sandstone, with or
    without shells, from sea water. 4. Limestone, and silicious
    millstone grit, from fresh water.


    _Conclusion._

    From what has been said above we may clearly deduce the
    following particulars.

    1. The crust of the earth is constructed of four great
    general classes of rocks: the _primitive_ at the foundation;
    the _transition_, laying immediately over the primitive; the
    _secondary_ immediately above these; and the _tertiary_ at the
    surface. In this arrangement we consider the rocks in their
    natural position.

    2. The _position_, _structure_, and _organic remains_ of
    these classes, clearly point out a grand geological epoch,
    corresponding to the time of the deposition of each class,
    and thus indicate their relative ages. They indicate also the
    successive conditions of the globe as it passed from its gross
    chaotic state, to a state suitable for the habitation of man,
    and his companion animals.

    3. _The natural history of the_ PRIMITIVE WORLD, _as
    deduced from_ GEOLOGICAL FACTS, CORRESPONDS _expressly in the_
    ORDER _and_ NATURE OF THE EVENTS, WITH THE ACCOUNT GIVEN BY
    MOSES.

    4. The gradual retiring of the primitive chaotic ocean,
    would give sufficient time for the production of those immense
    beds of marine animals which are found in the most solid and
    elevated mountains. During the prevalence of the sea, these
    beds would form at the bottom, and when it retired they would
    consolidate, with the mineral deposites, into rocks.

    In this case the process is supposed to go on in a _quiet_
    ocean, peaceably retiring, and leaving the deposition in
    layers. But we must not suppose the waters were always still,
    and peacefully retiring. If so, there could not have been
    such distinct and different deposites, in which different
    substances sometimes alternate. Moreover, in this case there
    would have been but one deposition, which would have been
    regular and continuous, changing its character simply by almost
    imperceptible degrees, and extending all round the globe, as
    the globe was at first wholly immersed in water. But this is
    not the case. There is every reason to believe there were
    violent agitations, earthquakes, volcanos, tempests, deluges,
    &c, _occasionally_, during the subsidence of the primitive
    waters. Hence the _dislocations_, _contortions_, _protrusions
    of lower rocks through upper ones_, and the _upheaving
    of the bottom of the seas in various places into ridges,
    and mountains_, producing a tremendous _deflux of waters_
    frequently, which would wash out channels and vallies, and
    carry off fragments of rocks, &c, into the waters below.

    Hence it is evident that the elevations on the earth’s
    surface have been _partly_ caused by subterranean force
    upheaving them; and _partly_ by currents of water wearing away
    channels, defiles, vallies, &c.

    The natural result of upheaving, _in mass_, the bed of
    the ocean, would be to protrude a body in which were embedded
    the marine exuviæ throughout the whole depth of the marine
    deposites. Hence mountain masses are sometimes composed of
    limestone, in which are found immense quantities of sea
    shells, throughout the mass, and entering intimately into the
    composition of the rock. This, without doubt, is the true
    origin of these marine mountain remains.

    Some have been disposed to attribute them to the _deluge_
    in the days of Noah; but this is impossible for two reasons.
    1. The deluge did not continue a sufficient length of time to
    allow these animals to be produced in such quantities, or to
    bury them so deeply in the earth. 2. The _rising_ waters could
    not have carried them to their present places; because, in
    that case they would be found at the _surface_ of the earth, or
    near it _exclusively_; whereas they are found buried thousands
    of feet in mountains, and embedded in solid rocks. They could
    not have been _transported_ by the waters, because they would
    have suffered violence, and been fractured, and compressed;
    which is not generally the case. They are found perfectly
    preserved, though of such delicate structure as would seem
    to have been destroyed by the least violence. Hence it is
    evident they are buried where they lived and died in perfect
    tranquillity.

    It is true, there are instances in which the _position_ and
    _nature_ of the animals clearly prove that they were inhumed
    by some _sudden_ catastrophe. For instance: when we see the
    fossil remains of delicate, and very active fish so placed as
    to indicate they were _caught_, we are convinced they perished
    _suddenly_. But this case is always _local_, and may have been
    produced by an earthquake, or volcanic action.

    That the primitive chaotic ocean occupied the earth a
    long time, _generally_ in a state of tranquillity, though
    occasionally, strongly agitated, and rising into overwhelming
    deluges and gradually retired, is evident also, from the fact,
    that the most delicate _plants_, _leaves_, and _flowers_ are
    found inhumed, as the marine animals above, _in a state of
    perfect preservation_.

    All the above phenomena took place prior to the creation of
    man.


    _Appendix._

    There is another class of rocky substances which obey no
    settled laws, and, therefore, are noticed here in an appendix:
    _They are rocks and substances of evident igneous origin_: as
    _basalt_, _obsidium_, _lavas of all textures_, and _trap_ rocks
    _frequently_, perhaps generally. These have one common origin:
    they are also of similar composition generally; and in this
    approach the composition of primitive rocks. They have been
    evidently _ejected from the bowels of the earth in a melted
    state_. They are found in almost all countries; and in some
    cases form mountains, and cover the surfaces of large districts
    to an astonishing depth: as in the north of Ireland, more than
    500 feet thick, and over an area of 800 square miles. (URE.)

    Being _protruded_ from beneath in a melted state they are
    found injected through the superincumbent rocks in _shafts_ or
    _veins_ of various sizes, from several inches to several feet.
    Sometimes being unable to rend the solid rocks above they are
    injected _between their strata_. They are generally somewhat
    crystalline in structure, because deposited on the same
    principles as granite, when undisturbed. From their _position_,
    _superficial extent_, and _quantity_, we infer they are the
    products of all ages, and of immense igneous action, seated at
    an unknown distance beneath the surface of the earth. Hence we
    may have some idea of the vast amount of igneous action which
    operated in the early ages of our planet. It must have been
    violently shaken from the centre to the surface.]

We may well ask, in the language of a German philosopher, Who can
enumerate all the blessings which the vegetable kingdom affords? It
is at least manifest that all the arrangements of Providence, in this
respect, have for their grand object the advantage of the creatures.
God has provided for the wants of each individual. He has assigned
to each that plant, which is most proper for its nourishment and
support. There is not a plant on the earth, but what has its particular
destination and use. What sentiments of veneration and gratitude
should we feel, at the sight of lawns, gardens, fields, and meadows!
Here his beneficent care has collected all that is necessary for the
comfort and preservation of the inhabitants of the earth. Here, oh
God! thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living
creature! Here every herb, ear of corn, flower, and tree, proclaims thy
goodness! How closely might our modern geologists walk with God, if,
like a Boyle, and a Ray, every new discovery led them to an increasing
admiration of Divine wisdom and omnipotent power![103] for

            “Philosophy, baptiz’d
    In the pure fountain of eternal love,
    Has eyes indeed; and viewing all she sees
    As meant to indicate a God to man,
    Gives him his praise, and forfeits not her own.”

To meet God in the immensity of his works, and trace him in the
operations of his hand, gives expansion to intellect, opens new sources
of enjoyment, and greatly exalts the character of man. The sacred
writers conduct us to the _forest_, and, after selecting particular
trees, press on our attention their emblematical uses.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ III.--MINERALS.

    Gold -- Silver -- Platina -- Mercury -- Copper -- Iron
    -- Tin -- Lead -- Nickel -- Zinc -- Palladium -- Bismuth --
    Antimony -- Tellurium -- Arsenic -- Cobalt -- Manganese --
    Tungsten -- Molybdenum -- Uranium -- Titanium -- Chromium --
    Columbium or Tantalium -- Cerium -- Oxmium -- Rodium -- Iridium
    -- Religious Improvement.

Some parts of the earth’s surface are barren and unfruitful, yielding
no pleasant herb for cattle, nor vegetable for the service of man.
But the bowels of the earth in such places are commonly stored with
rich mines, and useful minerals. Without these what could we do in
the field, the house, the market, or crossing the seas? Surely, the
infinitely wise Architect has not made any thing in vain! It is
deserving of notice, says Mr. Parkes, that if minerals had been placed
on the _surface_ of the globe, they would have occupied the greatest
part of the earth, and prevented its cultivation. Their being deposited
_below_, is a proof of management and design worthy of that Being who
could furnish so great a variety of this class of bodies.

There are twenty-seven distinct metals, which possess properties very
different and distinct from each other. For a knowledge of most of
these, we are indebted to the more perfect modes of analysis, which
modern chemistry has afforded. The ancients were acquainted with only
seven. The properties of these were tolerably well known to the early
chemists, who acquired their knowledge from the alchemists. Metals
are divided into two classes, by modern chemists. The one contains
the malleable, and the other the brittle metals. This last class is
sometimes subdivided into those which are easily, and those which are
difficultly fused. The malleable metals are eleven, namely, Gold,
Silver, Platina, Mercury, Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, Nickel, Zinc,
and Palladium. The brittle metals are Bismuth, Antimony, Tellurium,
Arsenic, Cobalt, Manganese, Tungsten, Molybdenum, Uranium, Titanium,
Chromium, Columbium or Tantalium, Cerium, Oxmium, Rodium, and Iridium.

_Gold_ is the heaviest of all metals excepting platina; it is neither
very elastic nor hard; but so malleable and ductile, that it may be
drawn into very fine wire, or beaten into leaves so thin as to be
carried away by the slightest wind. Dr. Black has calculated, that it
would take fourteen millions of films of gold, such as is on some fine
gilt wire, to make the thickness of one inch: whereas fourteen million
leaves of common printing paper make near three quarters of a mile.
According to Fourcroy, the ductility of gold is such, that one ounce
of it is sufficient to gild a silver wire more than thirteen hundred
miles long. Such is the tenacity of gold, that a wire 1-16th of an inch
in diameter will support a weight of 500 pounds without breaking. Gold
may be known from all other metals by its bright yellow color, and its
weight. Its specific gravity is 19.3; when heavier, it must be combined
with platina; when lighter, and of a deep yellow color, it is alloyed
with copper; and if of a pale color, with silver.

Arabia had formerly its gold mines. The gold of Ophir, so often
mentioned in Scripture, must be that which was procured in Arabia,
on the coast of the Red Sea. We are assured by Sanchoniathon, and by
Herodotus, quoted by Eusebius, that the Phœnicians carried on a
considerable traffic in gold, even before the days of Job, who thus
speaks of it, “Then shall thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of
Ophir as stones of the brooks.” Gold is found in Peru, as well as in
several other parts of the world. It generally occurs in a metallic
state, and most commonly in the form of grains. It frequently is
met with in the ores of other metals, but is chiefly found in the
warmer regions of the earth. It abounds in the sands of many African
rivers, in South America, and in India. Several rivers in France
contain gold in their sands. It has also been discovered in Hungary,
Sweden, Norway and Ireland. Near Pamplona, in South America, single
laborers have collected upwards of £200 worth of wash-gold in a day.
In the province of Sonora, the Spaniards discovered a plain, fourteen
leagues in extent, in which they found wash-gold at the depth of only
16 inches; the grains were of such a size that some of them weighed
72 ounces, and in such quantities, that in a short time, with a few
laborers, they collected 1,000 marks, (equal in value to £31,219
10_s._ sterling,) even without taking time to wash the earth which
had been dug. They found one grain which weighed 132 ounces; this is
deposited in the royal cabinet at Madrid, and is worth £500.[104] The
native gold found in Ireland was in grains, from the smallest size to
upwards of two ounces. Only two grains were found of greater weight,
one of which weighed 5, and the other 22 ounces.[105] Gold mines were
formerly worked in Scotland; and indeed now, grains of this metal are
often found in brooks after a great flood. It has been said, that at
the nuptials of James V, covered dishes filled with coins of _Scotch
gold_ were presented to the guests by way of dessert. Standard gold
of Great Britain is twenty-two parts pure gold, and two parts copper;
it is therefore called gold of “twenty-two carots fine.” Some have
thought that Moses made use of sulphuret of potass to render the calf
of gold adored by the Israelites soluble in water. Stahl wrote a long
dissertation to prove that this was the case.

_Silver_ is a heavy, sonorous, brilliant, white metal; exceedingly
ductile, and of great malleability and tenacity. It possesses these
latter properties in so great a decree, that it may be beaten into
leaves much thinner than any paper, or drawn into wire as fine as a
hair without breaking. Fifty square inches of silver leaf weigh not
more than a grain. The specific gravity of silver is 10.500. When
perfectly pure, it is a very soft metal. To know when it is pure, heat
it in a common fire, or in the flame of a candle: if it be alloyed,
it will become tarnished; but if it be pure, it will remain perfectly
white. Our standard silver is formed with fifteen parts pure silver,
and one part copper.

Silver is found in various parts of the world in a metallic state; also
in the states of a sulphuret, a salt, and an oxide. Native silver is
found chiefly in the mines of Potosi. Sulphuret of silver occurs in the
silver mines of Germany, Hungary, Saxony and Siberia. Oxides of silver
are also common in some of the silver mines in Germany. Silver has
lately been found in a copper-mine in Cornwall.[106] Most of our lead
mines also afford it, particularly some in Scotland. In the county of
Antrim, in Ireland, there is a mine so rich, that every thirty pounds
of lead ore is said to produce one pound of silver. By the silver which
was produced from the lead mines in Cardiganshire, Sir Hugh Middleton
is said to have cleared two thousand pounds a month, and that this
enabled him to undertake the great work of bringing the New River from
Ware to London.

Silver was used in commerce eleven hundred years before the foundation
of Rome. Moses, says, “And Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which
he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels
of silver, current money with the merchant.” At this period silver was
not coined, but being only in bars, or ingots, in commerce was always
weighed. In the museum of the Academy of Sciences at St. Petersburgh,
is a piece of _native_ silver from China of such firmness, that
coins have been struck from it without its having passed through the
crucible.[107]

_Platina_, the heaviest of all metals, is nearly as white as silver,
and difficultly fusible, though by great labor may be rendered
malleable, so as to be wrought into utensils like other metals. It
will resist the strongest heat of our fires without melting, and, like
iron, is capable of being welded when properly heated. It is found in
grains, in a metallic state, at St. Domingo: and also at Santa Fe, in
Peru, in the language of whose inhabitants it means _little silver_. It
has recently been discovered in an ore of silver found in Estremadura,
existing in its metallic form. This metal was first introduced into
England by Charles Wood, who brought it from Jamaica in the year 1741.
It has been drawn into wire less than the two thousandth part of an
inch in diameter. The specific gravity of hammered platina is 23.66,
which is more than double that of lead.

_Mercury_, in the temperature of our atmosphere, is a fluid metal,
having the appearance of melted silver: in this state it is neither
ductile nor malleable; very volatile when heated; extremely divisible;
and is the heaviest of all metals except platina and gold. We see it
always in a fluid state, because it is so fusible that a small portion
of caloric will keep it in a state of fluidity; but when submitted
to a sufficient degree of cold, is similar to other metals, and may
be beaten into plates. It has been determined, that at 39 degrees
below zero of Fahrenheit’s thermometer is the point at which the
congelation of mercury takes place. In the winter of 1799, Mr. Pepys
froze 56 pounds of it into a solid and malleable mass. At Hudson’s Bay,
frozen mercury has lately been reduced to sheets as thin as paper, by
beating it upon an anvil that had previously been reduced to the same
temperature. It is a substance so volatile that it may be distilled
like water; and is sometimes purified in this way from mixture with
other metals, being often adulterated with lead and bismuth. It is also
so elastic when in a state of vapor, that it is capable of bursting the
strongest vessels. According to Mr. Biddle, its specific gravity at 47
degrees above zero is 13.545; but when frozen into a solid at 40 below
zero, 15.612.

This metal is brought to Europe from the East Indies and Peru; but is
found in greater abundance at Almaden in Spain, where it is extracted
from the ore by distillation. The quicksilver mine of Guanca Velica,
in Peru, is 170 fathoms in circumference, and 480 deep. In this
profound abyss are streets, squares, and a chapel where religious
mysteries on all festival occasions are celebrated. Millions of
flambeaux are continually burning to enlighten this subterranean abode.
This mine generally affects those who work in it with convulsions.
Notwithstanding this, the unfortunate victims of an insatiable avarice
are crowded all together, and plunged _naked_ into this abyss. Tyranny
has invented this refinement in cruelty, to render it impossible for
any thing to escape its restless vigilance.

    “Thus in the dark Peruvian mine confin’d,
    Lost to the cheerful commerce of mankind,
    The groaning captive wastes his life away,
    For ever exil’d from the realms of day;
    While, all forlorn and sad, he pines in vain
    For scenes he never shall possess again.”

Mercury is raised in such abundance in Spain, that in the year 1717
there remained above 1,200 tons of it in the magazines at Almaden,
after the necessary quantity had been exported to Peru for the use of
the silver mines there. The quicksilver mines of Idria, a town in the
circle of Lower Austria, have been wrought constantly for 300 years,
and are thought on the average to yield above 100 tons of quicksilver
annually. Mercury is found also in Hungary and China; it occurs most
commonly in argillaceous schistus, lime-stones, and sand-stones. It
is likewise found in Sweden, amalgamated with silver, and frequently
combined with sulphur. Running mercury is seen in globules, in some
earths and stones in America, and is collected from the clefts of
rocks. Cinnabar, or sulphuret of mercury, is also generally found in
those countries which produce the fluid metal.[108]

_Copper_ is of a red color, very sonorous and elastic, and the most
ductile of all metals, except gold. A wire 1-10th of an inch will
support near 300 pounds. Its specific gravity is 8.66. It will not
burn so easily as iron; which is evident from its not striking fire by
collision. Copper-mines have been worked in China, Japan, Sumatra, and
in the north of Africa. Native copper is generally found in Siberia,
Sweden, Hungary, and some parts of France. Copper is found in several
parts of England and Wales, particularly in Cornwall, and the Isles of
Man and Anglesea. The copper pyrites found in Cornwall are _sulphuret_
of copper. Anglesea formerly yielded more than twenty thousand tons
of copper annually: the vein of metal was originally more than seventy
feet thick. Copper mines have not been worked in England above 160
years. Before that period, whenever the workmen met with copper ore in
the tin mines of Cornwall, they threw it aside as useless, no English
miner at that time knowing how to reduce it to a metallic state. To
chemical science, therefore, we are indebted for such an ample supply
of this valuable metal. It is asserted, that a large copper mine has
been worked for some time in the state of New-Jersey in America, and
that the ore raised there is brought to this country to be smelted.
Native oxides of copper are found in Cornwall and in South America.
Carbonate of copper occurs as a natural production in two varieties,
called _malachite_ and _mountain green_. Sulphate of copper, of a very
rich quality, is also found in the state of Connecticut. The stream
in its course destroys vegetation; and where it settles in places
near the spring, large lumps of metallic salt are collected. Bishop
Watson relates, that the waters which issue from the copper mines in
the county of Wicklow, in Ireland, are so impregnated with sulphate of
copper, that one of the workmen having accidentally left a shovel in
this water, found it some weeks after so incrusted with copper, that
he imagined it was changed into copper. The proprietors of the mines,
in pursuance of this hint, made proper receptacles for the water,
and now find these streams of as much interest to them as the mines.
When miners wish to know whether an ore contains copper, they drop
a little nitric acid upon it; after a short time they dip a feather
into the acid, and then wipe it over the polished blade of a knife;
and if there be the smallest quantity of copper in it, the copper will
be precipitated on the knife.[109] A mass of _native_ copper has been
found in a valley in the Brazils, containing 2,666 pounds weight. The
description of it in the Memoirs of the Royal Academy of Sciences at
Lisbon is said to be very interesting, as the largest specimen ever
found before this weighs only ten pounds. In the museum of the Academy
of Sciences at St. Petersburgh, is a piece of native malleable copper
of extraordinary magnitude, found on the copper island lying to the
east of Kamschatka.[110] The Romans were acquainted with this metal;
for the only money used by that people, till the 485th year of their
city, was made of it, when silver began to be coined. In Sweden, houses
are covered with copper.[111]

_Iron_ is of a livid blueish color, and one of the hardest and most
elastic of all metals. When dissolved, it has a nauseous styptic taste,
and being strongly rubbed emits a peculiar smell. It is attracted by
the magnet, and has the property of becoming itself magnetic. It is
fused with great difficulty, but gives fire by collision with flint. An
iron wire only one-tenth of an inch in diameter, will carry a weight of
450 pounds without breaking; and a wire of tempered steel, of the same
size, will carry one of about 900 pounds. Iron becomes softer by heat,
and has capability of being welded to another piece of the same metal
so as to form one entire mass; and this may be done without melting
either of the pieces. No other metal, except platina, possesses this
singular properly, which renders it most suitable for every common
purpose. Its specific gravity varies from 7.6 to 7.8.

This valuable metal is plentifully diffused throughout nature,
pervading almost every thing, so as to be detected even in plants and
animal fluids, and is the chief cause of color in earths and stones.
It is found in large masses, and in various states, in the bowels of
the earth. In the museum of the Academy of Sciences at Petersburgh is a
mass of native iron twelve hundred pounds weight. In the northern parts
of the world whole mountains are formed of iron ore, and many of these
ores are magnetic. Of the English ores, the common Lancashire hematite
produces the best iron. This metal is found in solution in many natural
springs, and gives the character to all our chalybeate waters: besides
which, there are some springs which contain iron in combination with
sulphuric acid. These are called vitriolated waters. There are several
in this land; but those at Chadwell near London, and at Swansea in
Glamorganshire, are probably the most important.

As this metal possesses so many properties, exists in so many different
states, and is capable of being applied to such a variety of excellent
purposes, it is certainly the most useful of all the products of the
mineral kingdom. It was used in the time of Moses, in whose writings
Canaan is mentioned as “a land whose stones were iron.” The Greeks
understood the method of tempering it. Homer, in the ninth book of his
Odyssey, describes the fire-brand driven into the eye of Polyphemus,
as hissing like hot iron immersed in water. The advantages which we
derive from the magnetic property of iron are incalculable. To this
we are indebted for the _mariner’s compass_, by which man is enabled
to traverse the ocean, open a friendly or commercial intercourse with
every quarter of the globe, and to steer his course with the utmost
accuracy.

    “Tall navies hence their doubtful way explore,
    And ev’ry product waft from ev’ry shore;
    Hence meagre want expell’d, and sanguine strife,
    For the mild charms of cultivated life.”

Iron may be moulded by the hammer into any form, and united into as
many parts as the workman pleases, without rivets or solder. Were
it not for this peculiar quality, many works of great importance
could never have been executed. A most stupendous fabric, achieved
by means of welded iron is the Chinese bridge of chains, hung over a
dreadful precipice in the neighborhood of Kingtung, to connect two
high mountains. The chains are twenty-one in number, stretched over
the valley, and bound together by other cross chains, so as to form a
perfect road from the summit of one immense mountain to that of the
other.

Some idea of the extent and importance of the iron trade may be
conceived from the following account, abridged from Malkin’s Scenery,
&c, of South Wales. “Merthyr Tydvill was a very inconsiderable village
till the year 1755, when the late Mr. Bacon obtained a lease of the
iron and coal-mines of a district at least eight miles long, and four
wide, for 99 years. Since then these mines have been leased by him
to four distinct companies, and produce to the heirs of Mr. Bacon a
clear annual income of ten thousand pounds. The part occupied by Mr.
Crawshay contains now the largest set of iron works in the kingdom.
He constantly employs more than two thousand workmen, and pays weekly
for wages, coal, and other expenses of the works, twenty-five thousand
pounds. The number of smelting furnaces belonging to the different
companies at Merthyr is about sixteen. Around each of these furnaces
are erected forges and rolling-mills, for converting pig into plate
and bar-iron. These works have conferred so much importance on the
neighborhood, that the obscure village of Merthyr Tydvill has become
the largest town in Wales, and contains more than twelve thousand
inhabitants.”

_Tin_ is white, a little elastic, and so exceedingly soft and ductile,
that it may be beaten out into leaves thinner than paper. It is much
more combustible than many of the metals; and is soluble in all the
mineral acids. Its specific gravity is 7.291, or about 516 pounds to
the cubic foot. This metal is found in Germany, Saxony, South America,
the East Indies, and in England, chiefly in Cornwall and Devonshire.
It must have been known very early, as it is mentioned in the books of
Moses. Homer in his Iliad mentions the use of tin.

Pliny says, that the Romans learned the method of tinning their
culinary vessels from the Gauls. They used tin to alloy copper, for
making those elastic plates which they employ in shooting darts from
their warlike machines. The addition of tin to copper renders that
metal more fluid, and disposes it to assume all the impressions of the
mould. It was probably with a view to this, that it was used by the
ancient Romans in their coinage. Many of the imperial _large brass_, as
they are called, are found to consist of copper and tin alone. Antique
coins frequently occur, made by forgers in the different reigns,
in imitation of the silver currency, which contain a very large
proportion of tin. There are coins of Nero which are of a most debased
and brittle brass.

According to Aristotle, the tin mines of Cornwall were known and worked
in his time. Diodorus Siculus, who wrote about forty years before the
Christian era, gives an account of working these mines: he says, that
their produce was conveyed to Gaul, and thence to different parts of
Italy. The miners of Cornwall were so celebrated for their knowledge
of working metals, that, about the middle of the seventeenth century,
the renowned Becher, a physician of Spire, and tutor of Stahl, came
over to this country on purpose to visit them; and it is reported of
him, that, when he had seen them, he exclaimed, He who was a _teacher_
at home, was a _learner_ when he came there. About 3,000 tons of tin
are furnished annually in Cornwall, two-fifths of which are usually
exported to India by the East India Company. There are two kinds of tin
known in commerce, namely, _block_ tin, and _grain_ tin. Block tin is
procured from the common tin ore, and usually cast in blocks of about
320 pounds weight. It is taken to the proper offices to be assayed,
where it receives the impression of a lion rampant, being the arms of
the Duke of Cornwall, pays a duty of four shillings per hundred weight
to the Duke, and then becomes legally salable. Grain tin is found in
small particles, in what is called the _stream tin ore_. It appears to
have been washed from its original bed in remote ages. This kind of tin
owes its superiority, not only to the purity of the ore, but to the
care with which it is washed and refined.

_Lead_ is of a blueish white color, scarcely sonorous, unelastic,
and, being the softest of all metals, yields readily to the hammer.
It generally contains a small quantity of silver. An alloy of this
metal with tin forms pewter, and in different proportions soft solder.
Its specific gravity is 11.35. Lead ore is very abundant in Scotland,
the western parts of Northumberland and Durham, Derbyshire, and many
other parts of the world. The lead found in these counties occurs
on the estates of Colonel Beaumont, and of those of the late Lord
Derwentwater: the last of these were forfeited to Government; and are
now in the possession of Greenwich Hospital. Lead was known in the time
of Moses, and was in common use among the ancients. The Romans sheathed
the bottoms of their ships with it, fastened by nails made with bronze.
During the first century, at Rome, it was twenty-four times the price
it is now in Europe; whereas tin was only eight times its present price.

_Nickel_ is white, ductile and malleable, but of difficult fusion. It
is attracted by the magnet, and has itself the property of attracting
iron: but as the nickel of commerce always contains iron, this may
disguise its properties, and prevent its nature being exactly known,
Richter, in his Annales de Chimie, asserts, that this metal, in its
pure state, is nearly as brilliant as silver, and more attractable by
the loadstone than iron; that it is not liable to be altered by the
atmosphere; and that its specific gravity when forged is 8.666. The
ore of nickel is procured from various parts of Germany, and is often
found with cobalt. It is chiefly used in China; and it is said, that
the manufacturers of Birmingham combine it with iron, and melt it with
brass, with great advantage.

_Zinc_ possesses but a small degree of malleability and ductility,
except under certain circumstances. When broken, it appears of a
shining blueish white; and when exposed to the air, becomes covered
with a pellicle which reflects various colors. If beaten out into thin
leaves, it will take fire from the flame of a common taper. Its filings
are mixed with gunpowder, to produce those brilliant stars and spangles
which are seen in the best artificial fire-works. It is also one of the
metals employed to form Galvanic batteries. It is the most combustible
metal we have. It will decompose water without the assistance of heat.
Next to manganese, it has the strongest affinity for oxygen of all
the metals. Its specific gravity is 6.861. Its nature is such, that
it seems to form the link between brittle and malleable metals. Some
mineralogists consider zinc to be the most abundant metal in nature,
excepting iron. Calamine, or lapis calaminaris, which is a native oxide
of zinc, combined with carbonic acid, is found both in masses and in
a crystallized state, and is generally combined with a large portion
of silex. Zinc is also found in an ore called _blend_, in which state
it is mineralized by sulphur. The miners call it Black Jack--a mineral
employed till lately in Wales for mending the roads. Zinc is generally
called by our artists _spelter_; and in England and elsewhere it is
extracted from calamine, and other ores, by distillation. This metal
abounds in China, where it is used for current coin, and for that
purpose is employed in the utmost purity. These coins have frequently
Tartar characters on one side, and Chinese on the other. They have
generally a square hole in the centre, that they may be carried on
strings, and more readily counted.

_Antimony_ is of a dusky white color, brilliant, brittle, and destitute
of ductility. Though seemingly hard, it may be cut with a knife.
Its specific gravity, according to Bergman, is 6.86. It is procured
from an ore which is found chiefly in Hungary and Norway. Native
antimony, alloyed with a small portion of silver and iron, has been
found in Sweden. And it is said, that it has been found in the state
of Connecticut, in America, nearly in a pure metallic form. There are
five distinct ores of antimony, but the grey is the only one found
in sufficient quantity for the manufacturer; it is a sulphuret of
antimony. Perhaps we have no metal more valuable as a medicine than
this, or one which is applied in such various ways.

_Bismuth_ is of a yellowish white color, lamellated texture, and
moderately hard, but not malleable. It is so brittle that it breaks
readily under the hammer, and may be reduced to powder. It has the
singular property of _expanding_ as it cools. Hence, probably, its use
in the metallic composition for printers’ types; as from this expansive
property are obtained the most perfect impressions of the moulds in
which the letters are cast. In manufactories this metal is known to
the workmen by the name of _tin glass_. It is one of the metals which
will inflame when suspended in oxymuriatic acid gas. It is generally
found with cobalt in the cobaltic ores of Saxony and England. Native
bismuth, and sulphuret of bismuth, are found on the continent; and a
sulphuret of bismuth has been discovered in Cornwall; but this is not
an abundant metal. If 8 parts of bismuth, 5 of lead, and 3 of tin, be
melted together, the mixed metal will fuse at a heat no greater than
212°. Tea-spoons made of this alloy are sold in London, to surprise
those who are unacquainted with their nature. They have the appearance
of common tea-spoons, but melt as soon as they are put into hot tea.

_Arsenic_, when reduced to its pure metallic state, is a friable
brilliant metal, of a blueish white color, easily tarnishing, or
oxidizing, by exposure to the air. In all its states it is extremely
poisonous. It may be known by the smell of garlic, and by the white
fumes which it exhales when thrown upon a piece of red-hot coal. Its
specific gravity is 8.310. It is found in Bohemia, Hungary, Saxony, and
other places on the continent; and in combination with acids, sulphur,
or oxygen. The arsenic of commerce is prepared in Saxony, in the
operation of roasting the cobalt ores for the manufacture of zaffre.
The reverberatory furnace in which the ores are roasted terminates in a
long horizontal chimney; and in this chimney the arsenical vapors are
condensed, forming a crust, which at stated times is cleared off by
criminals, who are condemned to this work.

_Cobalt_ is a whitish-grey, brittle metal, nearly resembling fine
hardened steel; is difficult of fusion, but obedient to the magnet.
According to Bergman, its specific gravity is about 7.700; though
Tassaret makes it 8.538. Formerly all our cobalt came from Saxony. The
cobalt ores of Hesse produce a nett profit of £14,000 a year, as stated
in Born’s Travels; though once they were used for no other purpose than
to repair the roads. But now cobalt is found abundantly in the Mendip
hills in Somersetshire, and in a mine near Penzance in Cornwall. Zaffre
is now made from the cobalt ores found in these hills. Had it not been
for the rapid promulgation of chemical science in these kingdoms, this
important metal might have lain in the bowels of the earth undiscovered
for ages yet to come. Formerly miners not only threw cobalt aside as
useless, but they considered it so troublesome when they found it among
other ores, that, as stated in Beckmann’s History of Inventions, a
prayer was used in the German church, that God would preserve miners
from _cobalt_ and from _spirits_. It is now very valuable to the
manufacturers of porcelain.

_Manganese_ is of a dark grey color, brilliant, very brittle, of
considerable hardness, and difficult fusibility. Its specific gravity
has been estimated by Bergman at 6.850, and by Hielm 7.00. It is
never found native. It was first procured in its pure metallic form
by Kaim and Gahn between 1770 and 1775. It abounds in America, and
in various parts of the continent. The manganese which is used in
England, is obtained in a state of black oxide from Somersetshire and
Devon. It is found either in the state of an oxide or a salt. But the
discovery of mines of it in this country is a new acquisition, owing
to the spirit of chemical research. Dr. William Dyce, of Aberdeen, has
lately communicated to the Society for the Promotion of Arts, &c, the
discovery of a mine of great extent, and very fine quality, in the
vicinity of that town: for which the gold medal of the Society was
sent him. Professor Beattie, of the same place, has also discovered
manganese in his neighborhood, on the river Don, of good quality.
Scheele discovered this metal in the ashes of burnt vegetables. Proust
has lately announced the discovery of a native sulphuret of manganese.
That from the Bristol and the Mendip hills generally contains lead.

_Tungsten_ is a heavy metal, but its properties are not much known.
It is procured from a mineral found in Sweden, and from an ore called
_wolfram_, found in Cornwall, Germany, &c. It has been used in France
for making vegetable lakes; but is not used here. Though it has been
recommended as a proper basis for colors, it shows in some instances a
strange fugacious disposition. Its specific gravity is 17.60.

The same may be said of the other metals, their properties not being
much known. _Molybdenum_ was first procured in a metallic state by
Hielm, in the year 1782; and, it is believed, has been employed in
some processes of dyeing in Germany. As the ore may be had in great
plenty, it will probably, some time hence, come into general use here.
At present it is not used in any of the arts. Its specific gravity
is 8.61. _Uranium_ was discovered by Klaproth in 1789, in a mineral
called pechblend; and has since been found combined with carbonic acid,
in the common green mica. _Titanium_ was first noticed in the year
1781, by Mr. Macgregor, in a greyish black sand, found in the vale of
Menachan in Cornwall; but has since been discovered by Klaproth in
several other minerals. An ore of it occurs in Transylvania, which
very much resembles yellow sand. This metal has been used in France
for painting porcelain. _Tellurium_ was discovered by Klaproth in the
year 1798, in a particular kind of gold ore. It has hitherto been
found in quantities too small to allow of its being employed in the
arts. Its specific gravity is only 6.115. _Chromium_ received its
name from a property it has of imparting a lively color to a variety
of other bodies. The emerald is colored by an oxide of this metal.
_Columbium_ was discovered in a mineral sent from Massachusetts in
North America. _Tantalium_ was found in an ore from Swedish Lapland:
but Dr. Woollaston has lately discovered that this and columbium are
identically the same metal. _Cerium_ had not been seen in a metallic
form till Sir Humphrey Davy procured it from some oxide discovered by
Hissinger and Berzelius in 1804. Its scarcity will prevent its being
applied to any useful purpose.

The metals are simple substances, distinguishable from all other bodies
by their lustre, great specific gravity, perfect opacity, and superior
power of conducting electricity. They are the great agents by which
we are enabled to explore the bowels of the earth, and examine the
recesses of nature. Their uses are so multiplied, that they are become
of prime importance in every occupation of life.

The reason why one metal possesses such opposite and specific
differences from those of another, is not to be attributed to chance,
but must certainly be the effect of consummate wisdom and contrivance.
These metals differ so much from each other in their degrees of
hardness, lustre, color, elasticity, fusibility, weight, malleability,
ductility, and tenacity, that the Author of nature appears to have had
in view all the necessities of man coming within the range of their
operation.[112]

    [It is now generally admitted that there are FORTY
    _distinct metals_.

    Some of these metals are the _bases_ of the _alkalis_,
    _alkaline earths_, and _earths_. And as _this_ class of metals
    is but little known to the great mass of readers, some remarks
    will be acceptable: they are recommended to his special
    attention, as they form the base of the only satisfactory
    theory of _volcanos_ and _earthquakes_. The number of metals in
    this class are _twelve_.

    1. The bases of the three alkalis, _potash_, _soda_, and
    _lithia_.

    The base of _potash_ is POTASIUM. This metal was discovered
    in 1807 by Sir H. Davy. Its texture is crystalline; color
    and lustre similar to mercury. It is solid at the ordinary
    temperature of the atmosphere; somewhat fluid at 70°, melts
    at 150°. Its affinity for oxygen is so great that it oxidizes
    rapidly in the air; and decomposes water instantly upon
    contact, emitting heat, flame, and light, as it swims on the
    surface of the water, being the _lighter_ substance. In these
    cases it oxidizes and becomes potash, by abstracting oxygen
    from the air and water.

    The base of _soda_ is SODIUM. This metal was discovered
    by the same chemist the same year. It has the strong metallic
    lustre of silver. It fuses at 200°, and evaporates at a full
    red heat. It decomposes both air and water, but not so rapidly
    as potasium. When thrown on water it effervesces strongly; and
    inflames with light, when thrown on boiling water. In these
    cases soda results, which is the _oxide of sodium. This metal
    is the base of common salt._

    The base of _lithia_ is LITHIUM. This metal was discovered
    in Sweden in 1818, by Arfwedson. It is of a white color, like
    sodium; but oxidizes so rapidly as not to be kept in its pure
    metallic state. Its peculiar properties are, therefore, not so
    certainly known. Its alkaline quality is well ascertained, when
    in combination with oxygen, in which form it commonly appears.

    2. The bases of the four alkaline earths, _baryta_,
    _strontia_, _lime_ and _magnesia_.

    The base of _baryta_ is BARIUM. This metal was discovered
    by Sir H. Davy, in 1808. It is of a dark gray color, very
    heavy, and attracts oxygen very strongly from the air, and from
    water, with effervescence, caused by the escape of hydrogen
    gas, and thus becomes an oxide which is the pure earth baryta,
    of a white color, and very heavy. Its intimate properties are
    not yet well known.

    The base of _strontia_, is STRONTIUM. This metal is very
    much like barium, in color, weight, and power of decomposing
    air and water, and thus becoming an oxide, which is the earth
    strontia. Yet it is satisfactorily distinguished from barium.

    The base of _lime_ is CALCIUM. This metal was
    satisfactorily obtained first by Sir H. Davy. It is of a
    whiter color than the two last mentioned metals; and like them
    decomposes the air and water, and thus becomes lime, which is
    an _oxide of calcium_. The _base_ of common _limestone is_, of
    course, _a metal_.

    The base of _magnesia_ is MAGNESIUM. This metal was
    discovered by Sir H. Davy, but in very small quantities;
    sufficient, however, to determine its strong affinity for
    oxygen, so as to decompose water, and thus oxidize, and become
    the earth magnesia, which is a metallic oxide. The base of
    common magnesia is, of course, a metal.

    3. The bases of the five earths, _alumina_, _glucina_,
    _yttria_, _zirconia_, and _silica_.

    The base of _alumina_ is ALUMINIUM. The existence of this
    metal was pretty satisfactorily ascertained by Sir H. Davy,
    and subsequently _established_ by Wöhler. It is very difficult
    to obtain it, as the preparation is attended with intense heat
    and light. When obtained it is generally in small scales of
    a metallic lustre. It requires a great heat to fuse it; and
    when heated to redness in the open air, it burns with a bright
    light, and the product is an _oxide of aluminium_, which is
    _pure clay_, of a white color, and quite hard.

    This oxide, or pure clay, is very abundant in the
    composition of the earth, though generally very much
    adulterated. It is found in all countries and used for making
    bricks, porcelain ware, pipes, &c. When pure it sometimes
    crystallizes. Hence it is capable of forming some of the most
    beautiful _gems_: as the sapphire and ruby, which are pure
    crystallized clay. _Clay, then, has a metallic base._

    The base of _glucina_, is GLUCINIUM. Glucina was first
    discovered by Vauquelin in 1798, and by analogy its base was
    _supposed_ to be metallic, which has since been confirmed by
    Dr. Wöhler, who has obtained the base in the form of a metal.
    _An. de ch. et de ph. Sept. 1828, as quoted by Dr. Bache,
    Turner’s Chem. p. 303._

    The base of _yttria_ is YTTRIUM. This metal was obtained in
    a separate state by Dr. Wöhler, (See last quoted authority,)
    though its existence was inferred by Godolin who discovered the
    earth which is an oxide of this metal.

    The base of _zirconia_ is ZIRCONIUM. The earth was
    discovered by Klaproth in 1789, and its metallic base clearly
    established by Berzelius 1824.

    The base of _silica_ is SILICIUM. There exists some doubts
    among chemists whether this base is indeed a _metal_; but
    there is no doubt but that it is _combustible_, and that the
    earth silica, (or silex,) is an _oxide_. From _analogy_ it
    would be inferred this base is metallic, and the _evidence_
    preponderates on this side. This oxide, or earth, is very
    abundant. It is more commonly called _silex_. It is the base
    of the whole class of primitive rocks, and almost altogether
    constitutes quartz, flint, &c.

    The reader is now desired to recollect that this class of
    metals constitutes the _bases of the alkalis, and earths_;
    which are simply _metallic oxides_ or a combination of oxygen
    with the metals. Recollect also that _all these metals are
    inflammable_, and some of them simply upon exposure to air and
    water. Now as the earths at the surface of our globe are the
    results of _chemical action_, in which the oxygen combined with
    the metals, it is beyond a doubt that these substances were
    created in their elementary and uncombined state; and that
    the act of combining would produce an inconceivable amount of
    heat, so as to fuse completely the whole mass of our earth; and
    in this state of fusion the oxides would commence forming at
    the _surface chiefly_; and thus by oxidizing the metals would
    form the earths, rocks, &c, which constitute, principally,
    the _crust_ of our globe. When this crust became sufficiently
    thick it would protect the _interior_ parts of the earth from
    oxidation, by preventing the access of air and water; and they
    would of course remain in a pure metallic state. But, (as is
    most probable,) if the materials, being promiscuously mixed
    throughout the mass at the commencement of the chemical action,
    should oxidize throughout, then the indurating of the crust,
    by cooling, would inclose the _interior_ parts _in a state of
    fusion_, and in that state they remain to the present time. Nor
    is this astonishing when we recollect the _earths_ are almost
    perfect _non-conductors of caloric_: of course it could not
    escape at all through the _crust_ of the earth, formed of many
    strata of earths, in the shape of rocks, which, taken together,
    may be about eight miles thick.

    If, by any concussion, or by percolation, water, or air
    should reach these metals in the interior, or these fused
    masses of matter, the consequence would be _decomposition_,
    and the production of a great amount of gas, and heat, which
    operating conjointly, first produce earthquakes by struggling
    to escape from the caverns in which they are generated; and
    when they find a passage, they would break forth into volcanos.
    This is the only true and satisfactory theory of earthquakes
    and volcanos.

    It may be added, that this action would naturally bring to
    its aid the astonishing powers of electricity and galvanism.

    The _forty_ metals mentioned above, may be classed
    scientifically into _two_ classes.

    1. _The bases of the alkalis, alkaline earths, and earths._
    These are twelve: potasium, sodium, and lithium; bases of the
    alkalis--barium, strontium, calcium, and magnesia; bases of the
    alkaline earths--aluminium, glucinium, yttrium, zirconium, and
    silicium; bases of the earths.

    2. Metals, the oxides of which are neither alkalis, or
    earths. These are _twenty-eight_ in number, and may be set down
    in the following order: gold, silver, iron, copper, mercury,
    lead, tin, antimony, zinc, bismuth, arsenic, cobalt, platinum,
    nickel, manganese, tungsten, tellurium, molybdenum, uranium,
    titanium, chromium, columbium, palladium, rhodium, iridium,
    osmium, cereum, and cadmium.

    Not only the _first_ class of metals are _combustible_,
    but the _last_ also. _All_ the metals are now well known to
    be combustible bodies, _and may be made to burn as really as
    wood_.]

_Gems_ are of a higher order than metals, of a more refined nature, and
consist of two classes, the pellucid and semi-pellucid. Those of the
first class are bright, elegant, and beautiful fossils, naturally and
essentially compound, ever found in small detached masses, extremely
hard, and of great lustre. Those composing the second class are stones
naturally and essentially compound, not inflammable nor soluble in
water, found in detached masses, and composed of crystalline matter
debased by earth: however, they are but slightly debased, are of great
beauty and brightness, of a moderate degree of transparency, and
usually found in small masses.

The knowledge of the gems depends principally on observing their
hardness and color. Their _hardness_ is commonly allowed to stand in
the following order: the diamond, ruby, sapphire, jacinth, emerald,
amethyst, garnet, carneol, chalcedony, onyx, jasper, agate, porphyry,
and marble. This difference, however, is not regular and constant, but
frequently varies. In point of _color_, the diamond is valued for its
transparency, the ruby for its deep red, the sapphire for its blue,
the emerald for its green, the jacinth for its orange, the amethyst
for its purple, the carneol for its carnation, the onyx for its tawny,
the jasper, agate, and porphyry, for their vermillion, green, and
variegated colors, and the garnet for its transparent blood-red.

There is not a unity of opinion concerning the cause of this
difference. “Their colors,” says Cronstedt, “are commonly supposed to
depend upon metallic vapors; but may they not more justly be supposed
to arise from a phlogiston united with a metallic or some other earth?
because we find that metallic earths which are perfectly well calcined
give no color to any glass; and that the manganese, on the other hand,
gives more color than can be ascribed to the small quantity of metal
which is to be extracted from it.” M. Magellan is of opinion, that
their color is owing chiefly to the mixture of iron which enters their
composition; but approves the sentiment of Cronstedt, that phlogiston
has a share in their production, it being well known that the calces
of iron when dephlogisticated, produce the red and yellow colors of
marble, and when phlogisticated to a certain degree produce the blue or
green colors.

With regard to the texture of gems, M. Magellan observes, that all of
them are foliated or laminated, and of various degrees of hardness.
Whenever the edges of these laminæ are sensible to the eye, they have
a fibrous appearance, and reflect various shades of color, which
change successively according to their angular position to the eye.
These are called by the French _chatorantes_; and what is a blemish
in their transparency, often enhances their value on account of their
scarcity. But when the substance of a gem is composed of a broken
texture, consisting of various sets of laminæ differently inclined to
each other, it emits at the same time various irradiations of different
colors, which succeed one another according to their angle of position.
This kind of gems has obtained the name of _opals_, which are valued
in proportion to the brilliancy, beauty, and variety of their colors.
Their crystallization, no doubt, depends on the same cause which
produces that of salts, earths, and metals: but as to the particular
configuration of each species of gems, we can hardly depend upon any
individual form as a criterion to ascertain each kind; and when we
have attended with the utmost care to all that has been written on the
subject, we are at last obliged to appeal to chemical analysis, because
it very often assumes various forms.[113]

       *       *       *       *       *

The rich treasures of the earth are within it, observes a worthy
author, so that they cannot be discovered and brought to the surface
without the labor of man; yet they are not placed so deep, as to render
his exertion ineffectual. Thus nothing but what is comparatively
worthless is to be found by the indolent on the surface of life. Every
thing valuable must be obtained by diligent research and sedulous
effort. All wisdom, science, art and experience, are hidden at a proper
depth for the exercise of intellect, and they who bend their attention
to any of these objects shall not be disappointed in their pursuit.

The treasures of wisdom, which are displayed in the redemption of
mankind by Jesus Christ, and recorded in the Divine Oracles, do not lie
upon the surface of the letter, for every superficial reader to observe
them: therefore our Lord says, “Search the Scriptures.” The word
ερευνατε, compounded of ερεω, _I seek_, and ευνη, _a bed_, is, says
St. Chrysostom, “a metaphor taken from those who dig deep and search
for metals in the bowels of the earth. They look for the bed where
the metal lies, and break every clod, and sift and examine the whole,
in order to discover the ore.” In Leigh’s Critica Sacra, we meet
with these observations, illustrative of the Greek word--“_Search_;
that is, shake and sift them, as the word signifies: search narrowly,
till the true force and meaning of every sentence, yea, of every word
and syllable, nay, of every letter and yod therein, be known and
understood. Confer place with place; the scope of one place with that
of another; things going before with things coming after: compare word
with word, letter with letter, and search it thoroughly.”

The Holy Scriptures contain the most invaluable treasures, a complete
collection of doctrines, precepts, and promises, necessary to
everlasting happiness. In this respect they have a peculiar advantage
above all the writings of the most distinguished philosophers in the
heathen world. The Bible presents an exact model of religion, for the
instruction and common benefit of mankind. Here we have, in a narrow
compass, all the things necessary to be known, believed, and practised,
in order to our salvation; for it is, “a lamp to our feet, and a light
to our path.” We are taught the knowledge of the only living and
true God, his spiritual nature, adorable perfections, and endearing
relations to his rational creatures: so that the meanest Christian
who can read, may arrive at more true and just notions of him, than
the wisest heathen sages could attain, who as the Apostle intimates,
did only grope after him in the dark.--We are informed how Adam was
created, how he fell, and what is the consequence of his transgression
to all his posterity: the most celebrated heathens were not able to
account for the origin of moral evil, as affecting the human race. The
glorious plan of redemption by Jesus Christ is set before us, in its
commencement, progress, and completion; which is the highest display
of the moral perfections of God, and attended with the most beneficial
advantages to man.--The rules of duty, all the agenda of religion, or
things to be done, are plainly stated, and properly enforced. Promises,
containing pardon, adoption, sanctification, and eternal life, are
every where interspersed, and are “yea, and amen, in Christ.”

Our obligation to search the Scriptures, and by that means acquaint
ourselves with their valuable contents, appears from the _necessity_
and _design_ of committing them to writing. St. Paul says, “All
scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works.” But how can they contribute to these important
ends without being read? What effect could the mere writing of them
have on mankind, to inform the judgment and regulate the life? How
could Christian motives have proper influence, if the Sacred Volume
were neglected? Is it not an insult to common sense, to assert that
the Scriptures were written for our instruction and admonition, but
it is not necessary to peruse them to learn what they teach? To have
a Bible, and not to read it, for direction in the way of truth and
holiness, would not be attended with any peculiar advantage. Precious
metals, deposited in the earth, must be procured to be rendered
beneficial. The Holy Scriptures contain the revelation of God to
mankind, declare his will with certainty, and are the prescribed means
of salvation: the Apostle says, “they are able to make us wise unto
salvation, through faith that is in Christ Jesus.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnotes - Chapter IV

    [74] Benson on Gen. i, 9, 10.

    [75] Contemplative Philosopher, vol. ii, pp. 177-179.

    [76] M. Savary, in his instructive and entertaining Letters
    on Greece, has the following pertinent reflections: “We enjoy
    the finest weather imaginable; not a cloud obscures the sky,
    and a south-east wind wafts us directly towards the port to
    which our wishes tend. We have now entirely lost sight of land,
    and, as far as the eye can reach, only view the immense abyss
    of the waters, and the vast expanse of the heavens. How awful
    is this sight! How does it inspire the mind with great ideas!
    How adventurous is man, who trusts his fortune and his life
    to this frail vessel he has built, which a worm may pierce,
    or a single blast dash to pieces against a rock. Yet in this
    he braves the fury of the ocean! But how admirable is his
    ingenuity! He commands the winds, enchains them in the canvas,
    and forces them to conduct him where he pleases. He sails from
    one end of the world to the other, and traverses the immense
    liquid plains without any signals to direct him. He reads his
    course in the heavens. A needle, which wonderfully points
    perpetually to the pole, and the observation of the stars,
    inform him where he is. A few lines and points mark out to him
    the islands, coasts, and shoals, which his skill enables him
    to approach or avoid at pleasure. Yet has he cause to tremble,
    notwithstanding all his science and all his genius! The fire
    of the clouds is kindling over his head, and may consume his
    dwelling. Unfathomable gulfs are yawning beneath his feet,
    and he is separated from them only by a single plank. His
    confidence might make us imagine he knew himself immortal; yet
    he must die--die never to revive again, except in another state
    of being.”

    [77] As it is sometimes necessary to preserve sea water
    in casks for bathing and other purposes, it is of importance
    to know how to keep it from putrefaction. Dr. Henry from
    many experiments made by him for the preservation of sea
    water from putrefaction, has concluded, that two scruples of
    quick-lime are sufficient to preserve a quart of sea water.
    The proportions, however, may vary a little according to the
    strength of quick-lime employed.

    [78] “Frosts often occasion a scantiness of water in our
    fountains and wells. This is sometimes erroneously accounted
    for by supposing that the water freezes in the bowels of
    the earth. But this, as Dr. Robison remarks, is a great
    mistake: the most intense cold of a Siberian winter would not
    freeze the ground two feet deep; but a very moderate frost
    will consolidate the whole surface of a country, and make
    it impervious to the air; especially if the frost have been
    preceded by rain, which has soaked the surface. When this
    happens, the water which was flittering through the ground is
    all arrested, and kept suspended in its capillary tubes by the
    pressure of the air.” Haüy’s Nat. Phil. p. 198.

    [79] Dr. Black’s Lectures, vol. i. p. 69.

    [80] See Ellis’s voyage to Hudson’s Bay.

    [81] St. Pierre’s Studies, vol. i, pp. 129-132.

    [82] See 21st volume of the Philosophical Magazine.

    [83] The specific gravity of water is as follows; a
    wine-pint measure weighs one pound; consequently a cubic foot
    of water weighs about 1,000 ounces, or 62½ pounds, avoirdupois.
    It is 816 times heavier than atmospheric air.

    [84] Parkes’s Chemical Catechism, p. 108.

    [85] Haüy’s Natural Philosophy, vol. i. pp. 197, 198.

    [86] Parkes’s Chemical Catechism, pp. 94, 95.

    [87] Parkes’s Chemical Catechism, p. 92.

    [88] Driessen on the Nature of Snow.

    [89] Thomson’s Chemistry, vol. i, p. 365.

    [90] “The English word _hail_, in Latin _grando_, in Greek
    χαλαζα, gives us no information about the nature of the thing:
    but, if we take the word ברד BeReD in Hebrew, it resolves
    itself into ב..רד, which signifies _in descensu_, and so
    describes to us the physiological formation of hail: which, as
    philosophers agree, is first formed into drops of rain, and,
    _as it falls_, is frozen into hail.” Jones’s Letter on the Use
    of the Hebrew Language.

    [91] Dr. Clarke on Exod. ix, 18.

    [92] See Dr. Paley’s Natural Theology, p. 407.

    [93] There are hot spouting springs of water in Iceland, of
    which a traveller says, “Near Laugervatan, a small lake about
    two days’ journey distant from Mount Hecla, we beheld the steam
    of the hot springs rising in eight different places, one of
    which of which continually threw up into the air a column of
    water from eighteen to twenty-four feet high. The water was
    extremely hot, so that a piece of mutton and some salmon trouts
    were almost boiled to pieces in it in six minutes.

    At Gyser, not far from Skallholt, one of the Episcopal
    sees in Iceland, within the circumference of three English
    miles, forty or fifty boiling springs are seen together; and
    the largest, which is in the middle, particularly engaged our
    attention the whole of the day that we spent here. The aperture
    through which the water arose is nineteen feet in diameter; and
    round the top is a basin nine feet higher than the conduit.
    Here the water does not continually, but only by intervals
    several times a day; and, as I was informed by the Icelanders,
    in wet weather higher then at other times.

    On the day we were there the water spouted ten different
    times, between the hours of six and eleven in the morning, each
    time the height of fifty or sixty feet. Before, the water had
    not risen above the margin of the pipe; but now it began by
    degrees to fill the upper basin, and at last to run over. Our
    guides told us that the water would soon spout up much higher
    than it had done.

    Soon after four o’clock we observed that the earth began
    to tremble in three different places; as well as the top of a
    mountain which was about three hundred fathoms distant from the
    mouth of the spring. We also frequently heard a subterraneous
    noise, like the discharge of a cannon; and immediately
    afterwards a column of water spouted from the opening, which at
    a great height divided itself into several rays, and according
    to our observation was ninety-two feet high. Our great surprise
    at this uncommon force of the air and fire was increased, when
    many stones which we had flung into the aperture wore thrown up
    again with the spouting water.” _Troil._

    [94] Savary, Newcomen, Cawley, Watt, and Boulton,
    Englishmen; and Betancourt and the brothers Perrier, Frenchmen;
    are names well known in the history of steam-engines. And
    those persons who wish to acquaint themselves with the
    principles and manner of operation of this most important
    class of machines, says Dr. O. Gregory, may be referred to
    the following work:--The Repertory of Arts and Manufactures,
    the Philosophical Journal, and the Philosophical Magazine, in
    various places; the second volume of Mr. Brewster’s edition
    of Ferguson’s Select Lectures, the second volume of Gregory’s
    Mechanics, and the second volume of Prony’s treatise entitled
    Nouvelle Architecture Hydraulique.

    [95] Plymouth Chronicle.

    [96] Whitehurst’s Inquiry into the Original State and
    Formation of the Earth.

    [97] Examination of Dr. Burnet’s Theory of the Earth, pp.
    92, 93.

    [98] The substances of which vegetables are composed, now
    amount to fifteen in number; but almost the whole of vegetable
    substances are composed of four ingredients, namely, carbon,
    hydrogen, oxygen, and azote. Of these, the last, namely, azote,
    forms but a small proportion even of those vegetable substances
    of which it is a constituent part, while, into many, it does
    not enter at all.--Contemplative Philosopher, vol. i. p. 150.

    [99] Of the efficacy of water in vegetation, we have
    on record some remarkable instances. That vegetables will
    grow in woollen cloth, moss, and in other insoluble media,
    besides soils provided they be supplied with water, has been
    repeatedly shown since the days of Van Helmont and Boyle: but
    the experiments of a modern author, says Mr. Parkes, from
    their apparent correctness, seem more highly interesting and
    conclusive.

    Seeds of plants were sown in pure river-sand, in litharge,
    in flowers of sulphur, and even among metal, or common leaden
    shot; and in every instance nothing employed for their
    nourishment but distilled water. The plants throve, and
    passed through all the usual gradations of growth to perfect
    maturity. The author then proceeded to gather the entire
    produce, the roots, stems, leaves, pods, seeds, &c. These were
    accurately weighed, dried, and again weighed, then submitted to
    distillation, incineration, lixivation, and the other ordinary
    means used in a careful analysis. Thus he obtained from these
    vegetables all the materials peculiar to each individual
    species, precisely as if it had been cultivated in a natural
    soil--viz. the various earths, the alkalies, acids, metals,
    carbon, sulphur, phosphorus, nitrogen, &c. He concludes this
    very important paper nearly in these extraordinary words:
    “Oxygen and hydrogen, with the assistance of solar light,
    appear to be the only elementary substances employed in the
    constitution of the whole universe; and Nature, in her simple
    progress works the most infinitely diversified effects by
    the slightest modifications in the means she employs.”--See
    Recherches sur la Force assimilatrice dans les Végétaux, par M.
    Henri Braconnot, Annales de Chimie, Fev. et Mars, 1808.

    [100] He was born at Verona, of an illustrious family; and
    at the foot of Vesuvius, while attempting to ascertain the
    cause of an extraordinary cloud issuing therefrom, was, by the
    sulphureous exhalation from the burning lava, suffocated, A.D.
    79.

    [101] The _Tabacum_, or common Tobacco plant, was first
    discovered in America, by the Spaniards, about the year
    1560, and by them imported into Europe. It had been used
    by the inhabitants of America long before; and was called
    by the inhabitants of the islands, _yoli_, and by those of
    the continent, _pætux_. It was sent into Spain from Tabaco,
    a province of Yucatan, where it was first discovered, and
    from whence it takes its common name. Sir Walter Raleigh is
    generally said to have been the first who introduced it into
    England, about the year 1585, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
    and who taught his countrymen how to smoke it. The following
    anecdote is related of him. He having imitated the Indians in
    smoking this plant, at length so much delighted in it, that
    he was unwilling to disuse it on his return to England; and
    therefore supplied himself with several hogsheads, which he
    placed in his own study, and generally indulged himself with
    smoking secretly two or three pipes a day. He had a simple man,
    who waited at his study door, to bring him up daily a tankard
    of old ale and nutmeg, and he always laid aside his pipe when
    he heard him approaching. One day, being earnestly engaged in
    reading some book which amused him, the man abruptly entered,
    and, surprised at seeing his master enveloped in smoke, (a
    sight perfectly new to him) the smoke ascending in thick vapors
    from his mouth and the bowl of the tobacco-pipe, immediately
    threw the ale in his master’s face, ran down stairs, and
    alarmed the family with repeated exclamations, that his master
    was on fire in the inside, and that if they did not make haste,
    before they could get up stairs, he would be burned to ashes.

    [102] Taylor on remarkable Trees, Plants, and Shrubs.

    [103] Evangelical Magazine, January, 1814.

    [104] Dr. Black, ii. 694.

    [105] Phil. Trans. for 1796.

    [106] See Mr. Hitchen’s Paper, in Phil. Trans. vol. xci. p.
    159.

    [107] Storch’s Picture of Petersburgh, p. 330.

    [108] Several salts are formed by art with this metal for
    medicinal purposes. One of the most valuable is _calomel_,
    which is made by triturating fluid mercury with corrosive
    sublimate, and then submitting the mixture to sublimation. As
    this medicine is much used in private families, and as dreadful
    consequences might ensue if it were improperly prepared, it
    ought to be generally known, says Mr. Parkes, that if it be
    not perfectly insipid to the taste, and indissoluble by long
    boiling in water, it contains a portion of oxymuriate of
    mercury, or corrosive sublimate, and consequently is poisonous.

    [109] Monthly Review, Appendix, vol. xxvii. N.S. p. 551.

    [110] Storch’s Picture of Petersburgh, p. 319.

    [111] In domestic economy, the necessity of keeping copper
    vessels always clean is generally acknowledged; but it may
    not perhaps be so well known, that fat and oily substances,
    and vegetable acids, do not attack copper while _hot_; and,
    therefore, if no liquor be ever suffered to grow _cold_ in
    these utensils, they may be used for every culinary purpose
    with perfect safety.--Dr. Percival gives an account of a
    young lady who amused herself, while her hair was dressing,
    with eating samphire pickle impregnated with copper. She soon
    complained of pain in the stomach, and in five days vomiting
    commenced, which was incessant for two days. After this her
    stomach became prodigiously distended: and in nine days after
    eating the pickle, death relieved her from her sufferings.
    Medical Transactions, vol. iii, p. 80.

    [112] The materials forming nearly the whole of this
    Section have been selected and arranged from the _seventh_
    Edition of Parkes’s _Chemical Catechism_: a work of peculiar
    interest, and which was confidently recommended to the Author
    by a physician and chemist of distinguished celebrity.

    [113] See Encyclopædia Britannica.


       *       *       *       *       *




