CHAPTER VII.

SIXTH DAY.

_Section_ I.--ON QUADRUPEDS AND REPTILES.

    Quadrupeds in general -- Motion -- Habits -- Rumination --
    Proportion -- Tastes -- Clothing -- Weapons -- Proportionate
    Number -- Faculties -- Reptiles -- Religious Improvement.

On the _sixth day_ all terrestrial animals were formed. “And God said,
Let the earth bring forth the living creature after his kind, cattle,
and creeping thing, and beast of the earth after his kind, and it was
so. And God made the beast of the earth after his kind, and cattle
after their kind, and every thing that creepeth upon the earth after
his kind.” According to Dr. A. Clarke, the words נפש חיה _nephesh
chaiyah_, translated _living creature_, are a general term used to
express all creatures endued with animal life, in any of its infinitely
varied gradations; from the half-reasoning elephant down to the stupid
potto, or lower still, even to the polype,[157] which seems equally
to share the vegetable and animal life. The word חיתו _chaiyeto_,
translated _beast_, and by Mr. Parkhurst, rendered _wild beasts_, seems
to signify all wild animals, as the Lion, the Tiger, the Panther, the
Lynx, the Hyæna, &c, and especially such as are _carnivorous_, or
subsist on flesh. בהמה _behemah_, which we translate _cattle_, probably
means those of the domestic species, such as are _graminivorous_, or
live on grass and other vegetables; and are capable of being tamed, and
applied to domestic purposes. The word properly means _beasts_, and is
so understood by the Seventy, whose interpretation of the words of Job
is, “Behold the beasts with thee, they eat grass like oxen.” According
to Ab, Ezra, and the Targum, it is the “name of any great beast.” But
R. Levi says, that it is “an animal peculiarly called by that name.”

The Hebrew _behemah_, says Buxtorf, is taken in the singular number
for the Elephant, because of its vast greatness. Ainsworth says, the
word generally implies all large beasts; and of this classification the
Elephant is called Behemoth. “Behold now _Behemoth_, which I made with
thee; he eateth grass as an ox.” The word here is plural, and signifies
beasts; but in this passage one particular beast is meant, for it is
usual with the Hebrews or Jews to express great and excellent things by
words in the plural number. Though some later and very learned men take
the Leviathan to be the Crocodile, and the Behemoth to be a creature
called the Hippopotamus, or river-horse, yet says Henry, “I confess
I see no reason to depart from the opinion, that it is the Elephant
that is here described, which is a very strong, stately creature, of a
very large stature, above any other, and of wonderful sagacity, and of
such reputation in the animal kingdom, that, among so many four-footed
beasts as we have had the natural history of, Job chap. xxxviii, xxxix,
we can scarce suppose this should be omitted.”[158]

The Elephant may be thus denominated from its great bulk and strength.
He is the largest of all land animals. Pliny tells us, that the
Elephants in India are thirteen feet and a half high, and have two
teeth of such enormous size that the Indians use them for posts to
their houses: those of the male being six or seven feet long, while
those of the female do not exceed one foot.

    “Peaceful, beneath primeval trees that cast
    Their ample shade o’er Niger’s yellow stream,
    And where the Ganges rolls his sacred wave,
    Or mid the central depth of blackening woods,
    High rais’d in solemn theatre around,
    _Leans the_ HUGE ELEPHANT.”

His strength is also equal to that of many beasts. “His bones are as
strong as pieces of brass; his bones are like bars of iron.” Some
historians say, that in time of war people used to erect wooden towers
on the backs of Elephants, and from these elevated forts men combated
with their enemies. It is said that Antiochus had a great number of
these huge animals with towers constructed upon them, in each of which
were thirty-two men armed. “He is the chief of the ways of God:” that
is, a signal instance of Divine power and wisdom, the most excellent of
all mere animals, in size, strength, understanding, and sagacity. None
of the beasts is more prudent, says Strabo: none of them approaches
nearer to man in his capacity, says Pliny. “He moveth his tail like a
cedar.” As his tail is not proportional to the bulk of his body, many
understand by this term his proboscis or trunk. The original word זנב
here rendered _tail_, signifies properly the extreme part of a thing;
hence it is as applicable to his trunk, which hangs like a tail, though
placed at the opposite extremity of his body. This he “moveth” with
amazing dexterity, and, at pleasure, can stretch it out, and erect it
like a “cedar” growing out of a mountain.--“Behold, he drinketh up a
river, and hasteth not: he trusteth that he can drink up Jordan into
his mouth.” He being naturally of a hot constitution, and generally
inhabiting hot climates, requires much liquid. His “drinking up a
river,” is a hyperbolical expression implying his ardent thirst: and
“hasteth not,” signifies his reluctance to quit the stream till his
parching desire be fully satiated. His “trusting” that he can drink
the river “Jordan” dry, is also an hyperbolical term to express his
copious draughts. “He eateth grass as an ox, the mountains bring him
forth food;” which he gathers, collects, and conveys to his mouth
with his long trunk. He resides “where all the beasts of the field
play.” So harmless is this strong animal, that the inferior part of
the brute creation are not intimidated at his presence, but graze with
him upon the mountains, and sport themselves about him in the plain,
apprehending no danger from him. How wondrous are the works of God! in
which are no less evinced the effects of his power, than the displays
of his wisdom. The word _cattle_, also includes Horses, Kine, Sheep,
Dogs, &c.

Quadrupeds enjoy many advantages above the lower tribes of the animal
creation. They rank higher than the class of Birds, by bringing forth
their young alive; they are superior to that of Fishes, by respiration
through their lungs; they are exalted above the order of Insects, by a
circulation of red blood through their veins; and they differ almost
from every other description of creatures, being either wholly or in
part covered with hair.

What admirable wisdom is displayed in the _motion_ of animals, suited
to their various occasions! Reptiles, to which a clod, a plant, a
tree, or a hole, will afford the means of supporting life, and which
protracted privations of food do not materially affect, require no legs
to make extensive excursions, but their vermicular motion is adequate
to every essential purpose. Beasts, whose necessities call for a larger
sphere, possess accordingly a swifter motion; and this is imparted
in various degrees, suitable to their range for food, and adapted to
accelerate their speed in escaping from their enemies.

In the motion of animals, from the largest Elephant to the smallest
Mite, the whole body is exactly balanced. The head is not too heavy,
nor too light for its kindred parts, nor they for it. The bowels hang
not loose, nor are so placed as to over-balance, or upset the system;
but well-braced, and accurately distributed to maintain an equipoise.
The most active members also are admirably well fixed, in respect to
the centre of gravity, being placed in the very point which best serves
to support and convey the body. Every leg bears its share of the weight.

The _mouths_ of animals are nicely adapted to their different habits
of life. The Ox, the Deer, the Horse, and the Sheep, have full lips,
rough tongues, broad cutting teeth, corrugated cartilaginous palates,
which qualify them for browsing, either by gathering large mouthfuls
where the grass is long, or biting close where it is short. In those
which subsist on flesh, the teeth are sharp, and calculated to hold
and divide their food. The bore of the gullet in animals is answerable
to their necessities. In a Fox, which feeds on bones, it is very
large. But in a Squirrel it is exceedingly small, which prevents him
from disgorging his meat in his descending leaps: and it is equally
contracted in Rats and Mice, which run along walls with their heads
downward.

In all animals, the strength and size of their _stomachs_ are
proportioned to the nature and quantity of their food. Those whose
aliment is more tender and nutritive, have them smaller, thinner, and
weaker: whereas they are large and strong in those whose food is less
nutritive, and whose bodies require greater supplies. Carnivorous
beasts have their stomachs small and glandular, as flesh is the most
nutritious. Those that derive their support from fruits and roots have
them of a middle size: while on the contrary, Sheep and Oxen, which
feed on grass, have the largest stomachs; and those which ruminate
have in general no less than four; in Africa, where the plants are
nutritive, some of this class have only two. Yet the Horse, Hare, and
Rabbit, though graminivorous, have comparatively small stomachs. The
Horse is made for labor, and both he and the Hare are constructed for
quick and continued motion; for these the most easy respiration, also
the freest action of the diaphragm, is requisite. But this could not
be, did the stomach lie heavy and cumbersome upon it, as in Sheep and
Oxen.

Another very remarkable circumstance is, that those animals which have
teeth on both jaws, possess but one stomach; whereas most of those
which have no _upper teeth_, or no teeth at all, have three stomachs.
For the meat which is first chewed, is easily digested; but that which
it swallowed whole, requires a stronger concoctive power.

The Horse eats night and day, slowly, but almost continually: whereas
the Ox eats quickly, and takes, in a short time, all the food nature
requires; and then lies down to ruminate. This difference arises
from the different conformation of these animals. The Ox, of whose
stomachs the first two form but one capacious bag, can, at the same
time, receive grass into both of them, without inconvenience, which he
afterwards ruminates and digests at leisure. The Horse, whose stomach
is small, and can receive but a small quantity of grass, is filled
successively in proportion as he digests it; and it passes into the
intestines, where is performed the principal decomposition of the
food. Chewing the cud is but a vomiting without straining, occasioned
by a re-action of the first stomach on the food which it contains.
The Ox fills the first two stomachs, the paunch, and the bag, which
is but a portion of the paunch. This membrane acts with force on the
grass it contains; it is chewed but a little, and its quantity is
greatly increased by fermentation. Were the food liquid, this force of
contraction would occasion it to pass by the third stomach, which only
communicates with the other by a narrow conveyance, and cannot admit
such dry food, or, at least, can only admit the moistened parts. The
food must, therefore, necessarily pass up again into the œsophagus, the
orifice of which is larger than the orifice of the conduit, and the
animal again chews and macerates it, and moistens it afresh with its
saliva: he reduces it to a paste, sufficiently liquid to enter into
this conduit, through which it passes into the third stomach, where it
is again macerated before it goes into the fourth; and it is in this
last receptacle that the decomposition of the hay is finished, which is
reduced to a perfect mucilage. What chiefly confirms this explication
is, that as long as the animals suck, and are fed with milk and other
liquid aliments, they do not chew the cud; and that they chew the cud
much more in winter, when they are fed with dry food, than in summer,
when they eat tender grass.

All the parts of the same animal are adopted to each other. So, for
instance, the length of the neck is always proportioned to that of the
legs. Though the Elephant has a short neck, because the weight of his
head and teeth would otherwise have been insupportable; but, then, he
is provided with a trunk, which abundantly supplies the defect. In
other beasts, the neck is always commensurate to the legs; so that they
which have long legs have necks proportioned; and so vice versa, as is
observable in Lizards of all kinds, even from the Eft to the Crocodile.
And creatures that have no legs, as they want no necks, so they
have none. This equality between the length of the neck and legs is
peculiarly seen in beasts that feed on grass, in which these are very
nearly equal; because the neck must necessarily have some advantage,
for it cannot hang perpendicularly, but must incline a little.

These creatures, while feeding, bend their heads downward for a
considerable time, which would be very laborious and painful to the
muscles, were it not for a very stiff, strong cartilage, placed on each
side of the neck, capable of stretching and shrinking again as need
requires, which butchers call pax-wax. The one end of this is attached
to the head, and the next vertebræ of the neck; and the other is knit
to the middle vertebræ of the back: and by the assistance of this,
animals are able to hold the head in that inclining posture all day
long. The head being placed at the end of a long lever, in a direction
nearly perpendicular to the joints of the neck, would be in constant
danger of dislocation from its own weight, had not such a substance
been added, which, by its great strength and toughness, retains the
parts together, while, by its pliancy, it offers no obstruction to the
free motion of the neck and head.

The members of animals are exactly adapted to their manner of living.
A Swine, whose natural food is chiefly the roots of plants, is provided
with a snout; long, that he may thrust it to a convenient depth in the
ground without injuring his eyes; and strong and suitably formed, for
rooting and turning up the earth: therefore the retiring under-jaw
works after the manner of a plough-share, and makes its way to the
food: and besides, his scent is extremely acute in discovering such
roots as are fit for him. Hence in Italy, the usual way of finding
truffles, or subterraneous mushrooms, is by tying a cord to the hind
leg of a pig, and driving him into pastures. They who attend then mark
where he stops and begins to root, and digging there, are sure to find
a truffle. So in pastures where there are earth-nuts, though their
roots are deep in the ground, and the leaves are quite gone, the Swine
will find them by their scent, and root only in the places where they
grow.[159]

In some animals the head is long, in order to give room for the
olfactory nerves, as in Dogs, which hunt by scent. In others, it is
short, as in the Lion, to give him the greater strength. In beasts of
prey, as Lions, Tigers, Wolves, they have the trumpet-part or concavity
of the ear standing forward, to meet the sound of the animals before
them, which they pursue or watch. The ears of animals of flight are
turned backward, to apprize them of the approach of the pursuing
enemy, lest he should assail them unseen. Beasts of prey have their
feet armed with claws, which some can sheath and unsheath at pleasure.
The Babyrouessa, or Indian Stag, a species of Wild-Boar, found in
the East Indies, has two _bent_ teeth more than half a yard long,
growing upward, and, which is very singular, from the upper jaw. These
instruments are not wanted for defence, that service being provided
for by two tusks issuing from the under jaw, and resembling those of
the common Boar: nor does the animal thus use them. They might seem
therefore both superfluous and cumbersome: however, they have their
utility; for this animal sleeps standing, and, in order to support its
head, hooks its upper tusks upon the branches of trees.

In the Mole we find a most scrupulous attention to the habits of the
animal. It has short legs, feet armed with sharp nails, a pig-like
nose, a velvet coat, a small external ear, a sunk protracted eye, all
which are conducing to utility and safety. Its feet are like so many
shovels, placed in so peculiar a manner as to enable the animal to
remove the earth on each side, and throw it backwards. The cylindrical
figure of the Mole, as well as the compactness of its form, arising
from the terseness of its limbs, proportionably lessen its labor;
because its bulk requires the least possible quantity of earth to
facilitate its progress. The structure of its face and jaws is similar
to those of a Swine, and equally adapted to work in the ground. The
nose is sharp, slender, tendinous, and strong. The plush covering,
which, by the smoothness, closeness, and polish of the short piles that
compose it, rejects the cohesion of almost every species of earth,
defends the animal from cold and wet, and from the impediment which it
would otherwise experience by the adhesion of mould to its body. Being
subterraneous, of all animals it comes out from soils of all kinds
the brightest and cleanest. But its eyes are most to be admired. This
animal occasionally visiting the surface of the earth, self-security
required a perception of light. The Mole did not need large eyes
to compass a great range of vision; and prominent eyes would have
been less easily defended, whilst working under ground. To reconcile
these inconveniences, these eyes are scarcely larger than the head
of a corking pin; and these globules are so sunk in the skull, and
sheltered with the velvet of their covering, that any contraction of
the eye-brows, not only closes up the apertures, but offers a cushion
to prevent any sharp or protruding substance from injuring them. These
apertures in their open state, are like pin-holes in velvet, scarcely
pervious to loose pieces of earth.[160]

The different _tastes_ of animals show the wise economy of nature. Oxen
delight in low grounds, because they afford the most palatable food.
Sheep prefer barren hills, on which is produced a particular kind of
grass called festuca, which they highly relish. Goats climb up the
precipices of mountains, that they may browse on the tender shrubs; and
accordingly have their feet constructed for jumping. Horses, not in
a state of domestication, chiefly resort to woods, and feed on leafy
plants. Nay, so various are the appetites of animals, that there is
scarcely any plant which is not chosen by some, and left untouched by
others. The Horse resigns the Water-Hemlock to the Goat; the Cow gives
up the Monks-Hood to the Horse; for that on which some animals grow
fat, others abhor as poison.--Hence no plant is absolutely poisonous,
but only respectively. Thus the Spurge, that is noxious to man, is a
most wholesome nourishment to the Caterpillar. That animals may not
destroy themselves for want of knowing this law of nature, they are
guarded by such a delicacy of taste and smell, that thus they can
easily distinguish what is pernicious from what is wholesome; and when
different animals subsist on the same plants, one kind always leaves
something for the other, as the mouths of all are not equally adapted
to lay hold on the grass; hence there is sufficient food for all.[161]
The leaves and fruits of trees are intended as food for some animals,
such as the Sloth and Squirrel; the latter of which has feet adapted
for climbing. The Camel frequents the sandy and burning deserts, in
order to obtain the barren produce of those soils. How wisely has the
Creator provided for him! he is obliged to traverse those trackless
wastes where frequently no water is found for many miles. Other
animals, so circumstanced, would perish with thirst: but he can endure
it without much inconvenience; his belly being full of cells, where he
reserves water for many days.[162]

Quadrupeds are furnished with such _clothing_ as is suitable to their
various offices. To beasts, hair is a commodious covering, which,
together with the texture of their skins, fits them in all sorts of
weather to lie on the ground, and to render service to man. The thick
and warm fleeces of others are a good defence against the cold and
wet, and also a soft bed; and to many, a comfortable shelter for their
tender young. All the animals near Hudson’s Bay are covered with a
close, soft, warm fur; and, what is very surprising, and shows the
wisdom and goodness of Divine providence, the Dogs and Cats which are
taken thither from England, on the approach of winter, change their
appearance, and acquire a much longer, softer, and thicker coat of hair
than they originally had.

Many animals are armed with _weapons_ of self-defence, some of which
are used for the destruction of others. Nay, we scarcely know an
animal which has not some enemy to contend with. Wild beasts are the
most pernicious and dangerous enemies. But, that they may not, by
too atrocious a butchery, destroy a whole species, even these are
circumscribed within certain bounds. As to the most fierce of all, it
deserves to be noted, how few they are in proportion to other animals.
The number of them is not equal in all countries. These fierce animals
sometimes destroy one another. Thus the Wolf devours the Fox. The Dog
infests both the Wolf and Fox. The Tiger often kills its own male
whelps. And wild beasts seldom arrive at so great an age, as animals
which live on vegetables. For they are subject, from their alkaline
diet, to various diseases, which tend to accelerate their death: while
the Elephant, which feeds on vegetables, is fifty or sixty years
before he attains his full strength, is in the highest state of vigor
at about a hundred, and lives two or three hundred years. But, though
animals are infested by their peculiar enemies, yet they frequently
elude their violence by stratagems and force. Thus the Hare, by her
doublings, often confounds the Dog. When the Bear attacks Sheep and
Cattle, these flock together for mutual defence. Horses join heads
together, and fight with their heels. Oxen join tails, and fight with
their horns. Swine unite in herds, and boldly oppose themselves to any
attack, so that they are not easily overcome: and, what is remarkable,
all of them place their young, as less able to defend themselves, in
the middle, that they may remain safe during the battle. Some animals
consult their safety by night. When Horses sleep in woods, one by turn
remains awake, and, as it were, keeps watch. When Monkeys, in Brazil,
sleep on trees, one of them keeps awake, in order to give the sign when
the Tiger creeps toward them; and in case the guard should be caught
asleep, the rest tear him in pieces.

Divine Providence is evidently displayed in keeping a just proportion
amongst all the different species of animals: this prevents any one
of them from increasing too rapidly, to the detriment of others. For
the produce of the ground would be insufficient for the support of the
animal creation, were their increase not regulated and limited by the
over-ruling power of God. To which we may add, that, if some animals
did not feed on others, the earth would be annoyed with putrified
bodies. Therefore, when an animal dies, Bears, Wolves, Foxes, &c,
expeditiously take the whole of it away. But if a horse die near a
public road, in a few days he is swoln, burst, and at last filled with
innumerable grubs of carnivorous Flies, by which his flesh is soon
entirely consumed, and so does not become a nuisance to passengers by
his poisonous stench. Thus the earth is not only kept clean from the
putrefaction of dead carcases, but at the same time, by this economy of
nature, the necessaries of life are provided for many animals.

Though animals should not die a violent death, still their powers only
continue for a limited time: they have their determinate periods of
growth, perfection, and decay: hence it becomes necessary that one
race should succeed and replace another, and for this purpose they
are endowed with a power of procreation. The formation of the fœtus,
the manner of its existence, and the growth of its parts, are great
secrets of nature; and in all viviparous animals, the _milk_ found in
the female parent is a maintenance ready for the young animal, the
moment it enters the world. We have here, the nutritious quality of
the fluid--the organ for its reception and retention--the excretory
duct, annexed to that organ--and the determination of the milk to the
breast, at the particular juncture when it is about to be wanted. The
advanced pregnancy of the female has no intelligible tendency to fill
the breasts with milk. The lacteal system is a constant wonder: and it
adds to other causes of our admiration, that the number of the teats
or paps in each species is found to bear a proportion to the number
of the young. In the Sow, the Bitch, the Rabbit, the Cat, the Rat,
which have numerous litters, the paps are numerous, and are disposed
along the whole length of the belly: in the Cow and Mare, they are
few.[163] And the teats of animals which give suck are exactly adapted
to the mouth, particularly to the lips and tongue, of the suckling
progeny. Herodotus observes, that the most useful animals are the most
fruitful in their generation: whereas the species of those beasts
that are fierce and mischievous to mankind are but scarcely continued.
The historian instances in a Hare, which is always either breeding or
bringing forth; and a Lioness, which bears but once and then loses all
power of conception.

It is evident that animals have not only a principle of self-motion,
but are endued with a degree of understanding; and have a will,
including various passions. What then produces the disparity
between men and brutes, the line which they cannot pass? It is not
understanding: who can say that brutes have not this? We may as well
assert that they have not sight, nor hearing. But the difference
consists in this: man is capable of knowing and enjoying God; the
inferior creatures are not. This is the specific difference between the
two: the great gulf which the brute cannot pass over.

We meet with a striking instance not only of industry, but
_understanding_ in Beavers. In the northern parts of America, during
the months of June and July, they assemble, and form a society, which
generally consists of more than two hundred. They always fix their
abode by the side of a lake or river; and in order to make a stagnant
water above and below, they erect, with incredible labor, a dam or
pier, perhaps fourscore or a hundred feet long, and ten or twelve
feet thick at the base. When this dyke is completed, they build their
several apartments, which are divided into three stories. The first is
beneath the level of the mole, and is for the most part full of water.
The walls of their habitations are perpendicular, and about two feet
thick. If any wood project from them, they cut it off with their teeth,
which are more serviceable than saws: and by the help of their tails,
they plaster all their works with a kind of mortar, which they prepare
of dry grass and clay, mixed together. In August or September, they
begin to lay up their stores of food; which consist of the wood of the
birch, the plane, and of some other trees. Thus they pass the winter,
in the enjoyment of ease and plenty.[164]

In the Dog we perceive evident marks of sagacity, recollection,
affection, and revenge. _Sagacity_:--In the year 1760, whilst one
Richardson, a waterman of Hammersmith, was sleeping in his boat,
the vessel broke from her moorings, and was carried by the current
under a west country barge. Fortunately, the man’s dog happened to
be present; and the sagacious animal awaked him, by pawing his face,
and pulling the collar of his coat, at the instant when the boat
was filled with water, and on the point of sinking; by which means
he had an opportunity of saving himself from inevitable death.[165]
_Recollection_:--A Dog, which had been the favorite of an elderly
gentlewoman, some time after her death, on seeing her picture, when
taken down from the wall, and laid on the floor to be cleaned,
discovered the strongest emotions. He had never been observed, Dr.
Percival believed, to notice the picture previously to this incident.
Here was evidently a case of remembrance, or of the renewal of former
impressions. _Affection_:--A few miles from Aberdeen, as a gentleman
was walking across the Dee, when it was frozen, the ice gave way in
the middle of the river, and he sunk; but, by grasping his gun, which
had fallen athwart the opening, kept himself from being carried away
by the current. A dog, who attended him, after many fruitless attempts
to rescue his master, ran to a neighboring village, and took hold of
the first person he met. The man was alarmed, and would have disengaged
himself: but the Dog regarded him with a look so kind and significant,
and endeavored to pull him along with so gentle a violence, that he
began to think there might be something extraordinary in the case, and
suffered himself to be conducted by the animal; who brought him to his
master in time to save his life.[166] _Revenge_:--A pack of ravenous
Fox-Hounds were half starved in their kennel, to render them more
furious and eager in the chace: and were severely lashed every day by
a merciless keeper, that they might be disciplined to the strictest
observance of his looks and commands. It happened that this petty
tyrant entered the kennel without his scourge. The dogs observed his
defenceless state; and, instantly seizing him, at once satisfied their
hunger and revenge by tearing him to pieces.[167]

The Monkey tribe is very numerous, and usually divided by naturalists
into three classes. Those which have no tails are termed Apes, and
such as have very short ones, Baboons; but by far the most numerous
class consists of those which have long tails, and are known by the
general name of Monkeys. Were we to dissect and examine the several
component parts of any one creature which God has made, we should
find a perfection among its several powers, and an adaptation of its
construction to its situation in the grand scale of existence, far
surpassing human wisdom.

At the Cape of Good Hope, Baboons are under a sort of natural
discipline, and go about whatever they undertake with surprising skill
and regularity. When they undertake to rob an orchard or vineyard
(for they are extremely fond of grapes and apples,) they go in large
companies, and with preconcerted deliberation. Part of them enter the
inclosure, while one is set to watch: the rest stand without the fence,
and form a line reaching all the way from their fellows within to their
rendezvous without, which is generally in some craggy mountain. Every
thing being thus disposed, the plunderers within the orchard throw
the fruit to those that are without as fast as they can gather it;
or, if the wall or hedge be high, to those that sit on the top; and
these hand the plunder to those next them on the other side. Thus the
fruit is pitched from one to another all along the line, till it is
safely deposited at their head-quarters. They catch it with amazing
dexterity; and while the business is going forward, a profound silence
is observed. Their sentinel, during the whole time, continues on the
watch, and when he perceives any one coming, instantly sets up a loud
cry, on which signal the whole company scamper away. Nor are they
willing to go empty-handed; for if they are plundering a bed of melons,
for instance, they go off with one in their mouths, one in their hands,
and one under their arms. If the pursuit be vigorous and close, they
drop first that from under their arms, then that from their hands; and
if it be continued, they at last let fall that which they had kept
in their mouth.[168] There is another species of Monkey in the West
Indies, of the size of a Fox. These are in great numbers in the woods,
and make aloud and frightful noise. But it is common for one only to
make a noise, and the rest to form a mute assembly round him. Marcgrave
says, “I have frequently seen great numbers of them meeting about noon:
at which time they formed a large circle, and one placing himself above
the rest, began to make a loud noise. When he had sung thus by himself
for some time, the rest all remaining silent, he lifted up his hand,
and they all instantly joined in the chorus. This intolerable yell
continued, till the same Monkey, who gave the signal for the beginning,
lifted up his hand a second time. On this they were all silent again,
and so finished the business of the assembly.”

Thus we see, wherever we turn our eyes, the various species of
creatures which God has made. Every element is stocked with
inhabitants, the sea with fishes, the air with fowls, and the earth
with quadrupeds and creeping things. All these different provinces are
richly replenished with food for the support of all the innumerable
creatures that live in them. And what surprising skill and sagacity
do some in the brute creation discover; such as might make many, who
pride themselves in their reason, to blush and be confounded! Who does
not admire the exquisite contrivance of birds in building their nests?
the subtlety of several creatures in seeking their proper food? and of
others in securing and defending themselves? The art of the Spider in
weaving and spreading her nets, to ensnare and entangle her prey? the
sapience and industry of the Bee in building her combs, and filling
them with pleasant food? and the care and foresight of the Ant, in
laying up her store against winter? In the meanest reptile, the Divine
wisdom and power are conspicuously displayed.

The word רמש _remes_, translated _creeping thing_, and rendered
_reptile_ by Parkhurst, includes all the different genera of serpents,
worms, and such animals as are not pedaneous. What a disparity among
animals! While some are of an enormous size, and stalk about in the
greatness of their strength, others are of a delicate and diminutive
appearance, bordering on comparative insignificance. But Divine “skill
and power are not less displayed in the beautiful Chevrotin, or
Tragulus, a creature of the Antelope kind, and smallest of all _bifed_
or cloven-footed animals, whose delicate limbs are scarcely as large as
an ordinary goose quill; nor the Shrew Mouse, perhaps the smallest of
the many-toed quadrupeds. In the _reptile_ race we see also the same
skill and power; not only in the immense snake called Boa Constrictor,
the mortal foe and conqueror of the Royal Tiger, but also in the Cobra
de Manille, a venomous serpent, not much larger than a common sewing
needle.”

The Lizard tribe are distinguishable at first sight from other
oviparous animals. They have no shields, like the Tortoises, and are
furnished with tails, which are wanting in Toads and Frogs. They are
covered with scales, of greater or less rigidity, or with a kind of
warts or tubercles. Some of the species are scarcely more than two
inches in length, whilst others extend even the length of twenty-six
feet. The larger ones live on animals, which they seize by stratagem,
and the smaller ones on insects. The aquatic species undergo a
metamorphosis, from a tadpole to a perfect state. Most of them are
produced from eggs, but some are brought forth alive. In many of the
species the color and form are exceedingly beautiful. They principally
inhabit the warmer regions of the globe, and many of them serve mankind
for food.

As according to the economy of nature, the Lion seems appointed to
the dominion of the immense deserts of the torrid zone, the Eagle to
rule as sovereign of the air, and the Whale to have the pre-eminence
in the seas; so the Crocodile[169] and the Alligator appear to rule
over the shores of the large rivers of tropical climates. All the
rivers of Guinea are pestered with vast shoals of the former, M.
Adanson having seen in the great river Senegal more than two hundred
swimming together; and the latter are natives of the warmer parts of
America.--The Guana, which grows to the length of four or five feet,
is very common in Surinam, the woods of Guiana, Cayenne and Mexico,
and in many parts both of Africa and Asia; but is now become scarce
in the West Indies, in consequence of being much sought after for
the table.--The Nimble Lizard, measuring from the tip of the nose to
the end of the tail about six inches, is known in almost every part
of the temperate regions of Europe. The Green Lizard and the Nimble
Lizard, are considered by Dr. Shaw as varieties of the same species.
The Green Lizards are considered by the inhabitants of Carolina as
very useful animals, in consequence of destroying flies, and other
troublesome and noxious insects. They will sometimes remain motionless
for half a day, waiting for insects; and when one appears, they spring
at it with the swiftness of an arrow. They are so familiar as to enter
the houses without fear, and, in pursuit of prey, ascend the tables
whilst families are eating, and even leap on their clothes. They are so
beautiful and cleanly, as to be suffered to run across the tables, and
even the plates, without exciting the least alarm or disgust.

The Chameleon is a native of India, the Indian Islands, Africa, some of
the warmer parts of Spain and Portugal, and several of the countries
of South America. Its usual length is about ten inches, and the tail
nearly the same. All the motions of this creature are extremely slow,
so that when travelling from one branch of a tree to another in pursuit
of food, it may rather be said to lie in ambush among the leaves,
in order to catch such insects as may come within the reach of its
long adhesive tongue, than go in search of prey. When walking on the
ground, it steps forward in a cautious, groping manner, seeming never
to lift one foot till it is well assured of the firmness of the rest.
From these precautions, its motions have a singular appearance of
gravity, when contrasted with its diminutive size, and the activity
that might be expected in an animal so nearly allied to some of the
most active in the creation. Each of its eyes is covered with a rough
membrane, which is divided by a narrow horizontal slit, through which
the bright pupil, as if bordered with burnished gold, is seen. The
eyes have this singular property, of looking at the same instant in
different directions. One of them may frequently be seen to move when
the other is at rest; or one will be directed forward, whilst the other
is attending to some object behind; or in the same manner upward and
downward. The property of changing its color is singular, and has led
to various conjectures as to the cause.

Serpents are distinguishable from those already mentioned, by their
total want of feet. The banded Rattle-Snake, found both in North and
South America, is the most dreaded of all serpents. Providence has
given to man a security against its bite; for it generally warns the
passenger by the rattling of its tail, as well as by its odor, which
is extremely fetid. When it has been irritated, or the weather is very
hot, its poison being introduced into a wound, often proves fatal in a
short time. If not provoked, it is inoffensive, being so much alarmed
at the sight of men, as always, if possible, to avoid them, and never
commencing an attack. The Great Boa, which is the largest of all the
serpent tribe, is frequently from thirty to forty feet in length, and
of a proportional thickness. It is a native of Africa, India, the
largest Indian Islands, and South America, where it chiefly resides
in the most retired situations in woods and marshy retreats. We are
assured, that one of these serpents killed and devoured a buffalo, in
the island of Java. It is happy for mankind that their rapacity is
often the means of their own punishment; for whenever they have gorged
themselves in this manner, they seek a retreat where they may lurk for
several days and digest their meal, become unwieldy, stupid, helpless,
sleepy, and may be approached and destroyed with safety.[170]

The snake tribe comprises nearly two hundred species, which differ from
each other both in size and habit, and about one-fifth of the whole
have been discovered to be poisonous. “The deserts of Arabia,” says
Adanson, “are entirely barren, except where they are found to produce
serpents; and in such quantities, that some extensive plains are almost
entirely covered with them.” The apparatus of poison in the Viper is
very similar to that of the Rattle-Snake, and all the other poisonous
serpents. The _fang_ of a Viper is a wonderful instance of contrivance.
It is a perforated tooth, loose at the root: in its quiet state, lying
down flat on the jaw, but furnished with a muscle, which with a jerk,
and by the pluck, as it were, of a string, suddenly erects it. Under
the tooth, close to its root, and communicating with the perforation,
lies a small bag containing the venom. When the fang is raised, the
closing of the jaw presses its roots against the bag underneath; and
the force of this compression sends out the fluid, with a considerable
impetus, through the tube in the middle of the tooth. By this singular
apparatus, the animal is enabled to inflict on its enemies a most
deadly bite, and infuse into the wound the most deleterious liquid.
Yet, though in the mouth, this, in the quiescent state of the reptile,
does not interfere with its ordinary office in taking its food.[171]

No less curious is the clothing of Reptiles. How well adapted are the
rings of some, and the contortions of the skins of others, not only to
guard the body sufficiently, but enable them to creep, perforate the
earth, and perform all the functions of their stations, better than any
other covering! Virgil gives the following description of a Sicilian
serpent:

    “Scarce had he finish’d, when, with speckled pride,
    A serpent from the tomb began to glide;
    His hugy bulk on sev’n high volumes roll’d;
    Blue was his breadth of back, but streak’d with scaly gold;
    Thus riding on his curls, he seem’d to pass
    A rolling fire along, and singe the grass.
    More various colors through his body run,
    Than Iris, when her bow imbibes the sun.”

Even the tegument of the Earthworms is made in the completest manner,
for effecting a passage in the earth, wherever instinct directs their
motions. Their bodies are composed of small rings, and have a curious
apparatus of muscles, which enables them with great strength to extend
or contract the whole body. Each ring is likewise armed with stiff,
sharp prickles, which they can open or close at pleasure. And under
their skins is a shining juice, which they emit, as occasion requires,
to lubricate their bodies, and facilitate their passage into the
earth. By all these means they are enabled, with ease and speed, to
work themselves into the ground, which they could not do, if they were
covered with hair, feathers, scales, or such clothing as any of the
other creatures.--One of the most singular properties of the serpent
tribe is that of casting their skins from time to time. The beauty and
lustre of their colors are then highly augmented. The old skins have a
tarnished and withered appearance, and are forced off by the growth of
the new. When this takes place, so complete is the spoil or coat-skin,
that even the external coat of the eyes themselves make a part of it.

Among creeping things, the Spider engaged the attention of Solomon who
observes, that he is one of those “little things on the earth, that are
exceeding wise.” This creature subsists on flies, wasps, and similar
insects, without having wings to pursue them; a circumstance apparently
of great difficulty, yet provided for by a resource, which no stratagem
nor effort of his own could have produced, had not both the external
and internal structure of this animal been specifically adapted to the
operation. What surprising skill and sagacity does the Spider discover
in weaving and spreading her nets to ensnare and entangle her prey!
How wonderfully artificial is her web, or _house_! How astonishingly
curious its architecture! With the fine and delicate threads she spins
out of her bowels, how thin a web does she weave, constructed for
the purpose of procuring food! It is fastened according to the rules
of mathematics, for its lines are drawn exactly from the centre at
parallel distances.[172] When this net is spread, that she may the more
effectually secure her prey, she cunningly conceals herself in her
covert, to evade the discovery of flies. It is from the accuracy of
this geometrical workmanship, that this cunning artist is immediately
apprized of the approach of a fly, or any other insect of the like
nature, when she sallies forth and seizes on her prey. She is furnished
with a very sharp hooked forceps, placed near the mouth. With this
weapon she seizes and pierces the flesh of such insects as entangle
themselves in her web; and, at the same instant, by means of a small
white proboscis, she infuses a deadly juice into the wound, which,
in a moment, kills the animal. This poison must be very deleterious;
for flies, and many other insects, may be mutilated by depriving them
of their legs, wings, and even cutting their bodies through the very
middle of their abdomen, and, in that condition, will survive several
days.--The Centipeds, the Scorpion, and the Tarantula, are all provided
with poisonous weapons.


_Appendix to the Chapters on Plants, Fishes, Fowls and Quadrupeds._

    [If we will attentively examine the _fossil remains
    of fishes, animals, birds, and vegetables_, so abundantly
    preserved entombed in the crust of our earth, we shall easily
    see the necessity of looking into the sepulchres of these
    primitive creatures if we would freely describe the “Mosaic
    Creation.” Many of their genera and species are now extinct:
    and those which remain seem to have dwindled down to mere
    _dwarfs_ in comparison with their prototypes.

    It is a matter of great satisfaction, that these
    interesting remains of the primordial world are so well
    preserved. They are called by one _the medals of creation_:
    they reveal the ancient condition of our earth; the successive
    events; and the attending organic appendages of sensitive
    beings: and it is a matter of great pleasure to the Christian,
    that what they disclose so clearly on this subject agrees
    expressly with the Bible.

    The class of animated beings called _pisces_, or _fishes_,
    is not so well known in regard to their _genera_, and
    _species_, as the classes of quadrupeds and birds.

    From the fossil remains of each, and their position in the
    crust of the earth, it is well ascertained, that their genera
    were created successively, and that the most ancient genera
    are extinct. The same is true in regard to vegetables. It is
    equally true, that, connected with the successive creation,
    was a _successive improvement_ in the delicacy and complexity
    of their structure and parts. There was also a reduction in
    the _size_ of fishes, and quadrupeds, and a great reduction in
    the _amount_ of vegetation, as well as the size of many of the
    plants.

    These periodic variations in all early organized bodies,
    were evidently owing to the variations of the state of the
    surface of our earth, and the surrounding atmosphere. The
    Divine Being appears to have created the different genera
    suited in constitution to the condition of the world at the
    time. The cause of their successive extinction appears to have
    been successive catastrophes, which altered the constitution of
    our earth and atmosphere.

    All these facts taken together indicate, that, in the
    early periods of the earth, the soil, water, and air were
    better calculated to sustain the simply huge, and inconceivably
    powerful and fierce creatures of the animal kingdom, than the
    delicate and beautiful beings of the present period. The same
    is eminently true in regard to vegetables, specially their
    _quantity_. They were of trunks, and spreading branches so huge
    as to exceed belief, did we not see them well preserved in a
    fossil state. Their quantity also was immense; hence the amount
    of vegetable coal found in the earth.

    These facts clearly indicate that, in the early periods of
    our earth, the surface was moist, perhaps, marshy for a long
    time, gradually drying, and passing to a habitable state: the
    air was very moist and gross, and the temperature of the earth
    was much higher than at present. Hence the huge and abundant
    vegetable productions. These general facts shall be confirmed
    by a few remarks in regard to each class.

    _Fishes._--Under this class is included, here,
    _testaceous_, and _crustaceous_ creatures, as well as
    _fishes_ commonly so called. The most ancient of this family
    seem to be entirely extinct, and their remains are found in
    great abundance in the lower transition rocks. There are
    many localities where fossil fish, of various kinds, are
    found abundantly. They are sometimes found in the heart of
    mountains, thousands of feet above the level of the sea. Their
    localities are so numerous they need not be mentioned. They
    are found in all possible _positions_, and in every degree of
    _preservation_--some are _contorted_, and _crushed_; indicating
    sudden violence. Others are inhumed in the very act of
    swallowing their prey, and in every easy and natural position;
    indicating that they expired without violence. Some of these,
    which are thus quietly buried, are of the most active species;
    thus proving the suddenness of the catastrophe.

    So extensive are the depositions of _shell-fish_, that
    whole beds of rock, in some cases, appear to be composed of
    them; and, indeed, in some instances, mountains are composed
    principally of these rocks filled with organic remains.

    From these facts, it is allowed by all, that the sea once
    covered these localities; and when it is recollected that some
    of the rock strata, composed of the exuviæ of these marine
    creatures, are _hundreds_ of feet thick, the conclusion will
    be irresistible, that the sea covered them for a long time,
    and that these rocks which contain them _were deposited at
    the bottom of the sea_, which have since become dry, by the
    retiring of the waters, or by some subjacent force upheaving
    the bed of the sea, and of course these deposits which had
    been made at its bottom--when these fossil remains are found
    in mountain masses they have been upheaved--when in low lands,
    where the rocks lie _in situ_, the sea has exposed them by
    retiring.

    _Amphibious Creatures._--There are yet a few animals of
    this class; but they can scarcely be called the types of the
    ancient races, now extinct, whose remains have lately been
    discovered, and attracted so much attention in Europe. They
    are principally of the _crocodile_, and _saurian_ (or lizard)
    families. Their size, and indicated power, ferocity, and
    fierceness, are astonishing beyond measure. Their structure
    clearly indicates their proper element was wet, marshy, and
    reedy places, such as the crocodile delights in at this time:
    thus indicating that they were in the earth as the ancient
    chaotic seas retired, and was leaving the earth dry.

    If a _single_ skeleton only, of any one of these creatures
    had been found, naturalists would have pronounced it a _lusus
    naturæ_. But many have been found, of different genera and
    species: only two or three shall be mentioned here.

    One of the crocodile family, as is supposed, had a spine
    composed of 133 vertebræ, or joints, taken together 21½ feet in
    length. The head was nearly 4 feet. Its species are extinct;
    some refer even this huge animal to the lizard family.

    _The Megalosaurus._ The skeleton of this huge creature has
    been satisfactorily examined, and ascertained to belong to the
    _lizard family_. Its thigh bone is 32 inches long. It is said
    some have been found 4 feet. At 32 inches, the animal must
    have been 48 feet in length. Dr. Buckland, from some fossil
    remains, calculates some of them were as high as our largest
    elephants, and sixty or seventy feet in length. And yet this
    was a _lizard_ of the ancient world!

    _The Pterodactyle._ This is a species of the saurian family
    as those above. Its distinctive character is the _elongation of
    its fourth toe_, so as to support a membrane for the purpose
    of _flying_: hence its name, _wing-toed_. It is indeed a
    curiosity. Its species is extinct.

    _The Ichthyosaurus._ This is also a reptile of the lizard
    kind: but because it so much resembles a _fish_; it has this
    name, i.e. _fish-lizard_. It has a moderate tail--long pointed
    muzzel armed with sharp pointed teeth; two huge eyes; breathed
    air; swam in the water; crawled in marshy, reedy places, but
    could not walk or run on land, having flat fins, or bony
    paddles, somewhat like seals. The skeletons indicate some of
    them to have been 25 feet long.

    _The Plesiosaurus._ This animal, as its name imports,
    was rather akin to lizards, than decidedly of the genus. Its
    very peculiar characteristic is the immoderate length of its
    neck, and the unexampled number of _vertebræ_ of which it is
    composed. In other respects it approaches the ichthyosaurus.
    Its remains indicate an animal, according to Cuvier, at least
    30 feet long.

    _The Iguanodon_, was of the lizard genus, three or four
    times as large as the largest crocodile; having jaws equal in
    size to the incisors of the rhinoceros, and crested with horns.
    (DR. BUCKLAND.)

    Many more creatures of the early periods of our earth might
    be mentioned, which would come expressly under the title of
    this volume; and the knowledge of which is durably preserved
    in the fossils of the earth, all of which would confirm the
    facts stated in the commencement of this paper, viz: that
    during the first and grossest periods of our earth previously
    to the creation of man, great numbers of genera and species
    of huge and misshapen animals existed, which are now extinct.
    For instance: the skeletons of animals of the _frog and
    toad_ families, have been found so large, as to induce some
    naturalists at first to call them _human remains_. A tapir has
    been found the _size of an elephant_; and a species of the
    _sloth tribe_ as long as a _rhinoceros_!!

    These things will indeed appear incredible to the reader
    at first; but let him recollect that the evidences of these
    astonishing facts are contained in the solid crust of the
    earth, and cannot be deceptive. They may be _seen, measured,
    weighed, and put up so as to form the whole animal_, an object
    of inspection to thousands.

    There are but few fossil remains of _birds_ found in the
    earth, and these are principally in the upper tertiary strata,
    and in company with the fossil remains of such animals as are
    companionable and serviceable to man. The reason of this is
    obvious: the earth was not suitable for the habitation of birds
    until it had become comparatively dry, and the seas had retired
    in a great measure, and vegetation abundant. The aquatic genera
    appeared first, of which there are a few remains. Moreover this
    class of creatures could not be overtaken with any violent
    catastrophe, so as to bury them in a body, or in particular
    strata. It is, therefore, probable that birds, as a class, have
    preserved their genera and species from the first; and are now
    nearly the same in this respect, as well as in size, as in the
    earlier periods of the world.

    _Vegetables._--In the vegetable kingdom we are if possible,
    more astonished than in the animal, of the ancient periods
    of our earth. From their fossil remains, well and abundantly
    preserved, it is very evident that the vegetation of the first
    periods of our earth was abundant and heavy, beyond any thing
    which we can conceive at this time. It cannot be doubted but
    that the vegetative powers of the earth was very much greater
    than at this time, or within the memory of man. This is evident
    from the immense production of _vegetable coal_.

    This statement may be rendered somewhat more credible when
    it is recollected, that the earth, in its first periods, was
    of a much higher temperature than now; and of course not only
    produced more abundantly, but _all parts_ of the earth produced
    vegetation in abundance. This is evident from the fact, that
    within the arctic circle, where now reigns eternal winter, and
    no vegetation can be found, there was anciently successive
    products of heavy vegetation. (See appendix to our paper on
    volcanos.) This is proven by plants being found fossilized
    _on the spot, and in the position in which they grew; as
    also the leaves and fruits of plants, which are known now to
    be tropical, so well preserved, and in such a natural, easy
    position as to prove clearly they grew on the spot on which
    they were fossilized_.

    The _flora_ of the primordial world was expressly a part
    of the ‘Mosaic creation,’ and which is but little understood
    as yet. Some of the principal plants were of the _fern_ and
    _palm_ genera; but their size very far exceeded those now found
    growing. By closely examining these fossil plants, it will be
    found, _that they increase in size and quantity as the period
    of their growth is distant from the time in which man was
    created_: thus indicating _an increasing temperature of the
    earth as we ascend in time_. This also corresponds with the
    well known fact, _that the size of these plants now increases
    progressively from the polar regions to the equator_.

    Our author has given a concise and edifying description of
    the principal families and individuals which now exist, and are
    found in the earth. The above remarks are intended to direct
    the attention to those _which have long since passed away_.]

The propriety of the distinction between clean and unclean beasts,
mentioned in the Scripture, will appear on the first hearing of their
names; for we find amongst the clean creatures, Oxen, Sheep, Goats,
and Lambs: and on the other side, Lions, Tigers, Wolves, Foxes, Swine,
Moles, and Serpents. It is evident that there is a wide difference
between these two parties, with respect to their manners and ways of
life.

Those only are admitted among clean animals, which “divide the hoof
and chew the cud.” Animals which divide the hoof are more inoffensive
with their feet, than the several tribes of wild beasts, whose paws are
armed with sharp claws, to seize their prey. Quadrupeds with a divided
hoof tread surer than those whose hoof is entire; there being a plain
mechanical reason why a foot, which presents several angles and edges,
should take faster hold on the ground. They are not only surer footed,
but also more orderly and regular in their progress. Sheep have a
natural tendency to follow each other’s steps. They approach the fold,
or return from it, in a train; as well as traverse their pastures in
the like order. Oxen tread in the very footsteps of their predecessors:
so that a drove of them, on passing through a deep and narrow road,
leave the surface divided into a regular succession of ridges and
furrows, as if it were the work of art. If animals could reason and
dispute as men can, this plodding practice of the Ox might possibly
be ridiculed by the Ass; as the orthodox believer, who is content to
tread in the steps of his forefathers, is scoffed at by the rambling
freethinker, who uses it as the privilege of his nature, to deviate
into by-ways, untrodden by those who were much wiser than himself.
_Sure footing_ is an image not improperly applied to elementary truth
and science: whence it will not be unnatural to suppose, that this
first character of the clean animals was intended to be expressive of
rectitude and certainty of principle in moral agents. Error is various
and changeable in its nature: but truth, being uniformly the same in
all ages, will always be productive of sobriety and regularity in those
who follow it.

The other character of clean animals is that of “chewing the cud;”
a faculty expressive of that act of the mind, by which it revolves,
meditates, and discourses on what it has laid up in the memory; and
the word _ruminate_ has the same metaphorical meaning. An animal
thus employed has the appearance of abstraction in its countenance,
as if it were engaged in deep meditation; and it ruminates more
particularly when lying in an horizontal position, for then the food
is more easily recalled into the mouth from its temporary lodgment in
the stomach. This character then, is expressive of devout thought and
holy conversation: for the word of God is the food of the mind, which,
being laid up in the heart, should be frequently revolved; so that
being properly applied to the inward man, it may contribute to a daily
increase in faith, purity, and goodness.

The clean animals were also _sacred_; that is, set apart by the law
for the purpose of sacrifice. The propriety of which is evident: for
if the worshipper, who offered an animal to God, meant by that act to
devote himself, using the animal as his substitute or proxy; then
certainly it was not fit that he should represent himself by an unclean
creature, whose instincts and habits would convey an odious idea of his
own person and character, and consequently make his devotion appear
ridiculous. In order to make a sacrifice acceptable, it was requisite
that the qualifications of the offerer should correspond with those
of the offering. The innocent manners of a clean victim, were a tacit
reflection on an unclean offerer. When the worshippers of the true
God were corrupt in their principles or morals, their oblations were
no longer either proper or acceptable: which was signified to them
in those words of the prophet--“He that killeth an ox, as if he slew
a man: he that sacrificeth a lamb, as if he cut off a dog’s neck:
he that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swine’s blood.” The
reason is added: “They have chosen their own ways, and their soul
delighteth in their abominations.” But there is another sense in which
the institution of sacrifice is to be understood: for every sacrifice
had its prophetic use, and was prefigurative of the true sacrifice of
Jesus Christ; with respect to whom it was necessary that every animal,
preferred to this sacred application, should be recommended by every
possible character of innocence, purity, and perfection: therefore the
sacrifices were taken from the tribes of Sheep, Goats, and Oxen.

The diet of the Jews being thus immediately connected with the most
solemn acts of religious adoration, the daily course of their living
carried with it an exhortation to purity of mind and body, and directed
their faith to its supreme object, the vicarious sacrifice of the
Messiah. The moral necessities of man can only be supplied by the death
and benefits of a propitiatory sacrifice, the common substitute of all
mankind: whence God has mercifully ordained, as well by the present
condition of creation itself, as by the appointment of revelation, that
the life of his body should be sustained in like manner: thereby to
remind us every day, that the life of man is in a state of forfeiture;
and that there can be neither the preservation, nor the remission
of sins, without the shedding of innocent blood. Thus does mankind
conspire in offering up a daily sacrifice, and attesting the truth of
the Christian doctrine, and many persons with the same insensibility
that Caiaphas uttered a similar prophecy in its favor, “It is necessary
that one man should die, that the whole people perish not.”

These clean and unclean animals, with respect to their several ways
of life, are as opposite as their dispositions. Sheep, Oxen, Goats,
Deer, &c, are formed into societies, they herd peaceably together, and
are subject to the laws of government, as well for their own advantage
as for the service of man. But beasts of prey roam by themselves in
forests and deserts, incapable of entering into any friendly communion.
They are so many single tyrants, who acknowledge no superior, but fight
their way, and live in a state of hostility with the whole creation.
If they ever unite in gangs, it is with the spirit of thieves and
murderers, who are banded together only that they may plunder the
innocent with greater security. And, like other depredators, they are
all fond of darkness. When the sun goes down, the Lion stalks forth
from his den: at which time the Sheep, under the direction of the
shepherd, are retiring to their fold. And when the cattle are climbing
up the mountains to their pasture, invited by the reviving rays of
the rising sun, the tyrants of the night are warned back to their
hiding-places.[173]

The blindness of the Mole, the petulance and immodesty of the Dog,
the subtlety of the Fox, the poisonous teeth and double tongue of the
Serpent, afford ample scope for reflection. The Egyptian hieroglyphics
were certain visible representations of creatures, whose inclinations
and actions led to the knowledge of those truths which they intended
for instruction. A profane and voluptuous man was represented by a
Swine, whose filthy disposition caused it to be hated by all the
eastern people. A great hypocrite, or a notorious dissembler of
wicked intentions, was expressed by a Leopard, because this animal
acts craftily, concealing his head that he may with less difficulty
catch his unwary prey; for the creatures are as much alarmed at his
presence, as they are pleased with the agreeable scent of his body:
when therefore they approach him, delighted with the perfume, he will
cover his head with his paws, till they come within his reach. An
incorrigible person was also expressed by a Leopard’s skin, because its
spots no art can remove. A Chamelion likewise was the hieroglyphic of a
hypocrite, who can accommodate himself to any religion that will serve
his turn; for this animal can change its color. A stupid, ignorant
person, an enemy to religion, was signified by an Ass; and one that was
not acquainted with men and things, or knew not how to acquit himself
with decency and propriety in the world, was painted with the head
and ears of an Ass. The Egyptians were accustomed to put the heads of
animals on the bodies of men, to express the dispositions and conduct
of those persons they were intended to represent. A Tiger, being a
most fierce animal, signified a savage, cruel, revengeful disposition,
opposed to all goodness. A Fox is notorious for his craftiness;
therefore he is an emblem of a subtile person, under the influence of
wicked thoughts and intentions.[174]

Rams, and Bullocks of Bashan, Lions, or any animal of prey, are figures
frequently used by the sacred writers for cruel and oppressive tyrants
and conquerors. “Hear this word, ye kine of Bashan, which oppress
the poor.” Bashan was a very fruitful place, a fine and fattening
pasture, in which were the best fed and strongest cattle. To these,
the prophet compares the great men among the Israelites, especially
their judges and magistrates, who were proud, insolent, wanton and
mischievous, like the bulls of Bashan; who oppressed the poor, as high
fed cattle push and gore the weaker sort. “The Lion is come up from
his thicket, and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; he is
gone forth from his place to make thy land desolate: and thy cities
shall be laid waste without an inhabitant.” By this animal is meant
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, so termed on account of his great
power and fierceness; and as the Lion is commonly in the forest among
the thicket, so this terrible political ruler had his strong hold and
principal seat at Babylon, which residence he left to commit awful
desolation among the cities of Judah and Israel.

The prophet Isaiah, with a boldness and majesty becoming the herald
of the Most High, begins his prophecy with calling on the whole
creation to attend, when Jehovah speaks. “Hear, oh heavens; and give
ear, oh earth; for the Lord hath spoken; I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me.” A charge of gross
insensibility and ingratitude is then brought against the Jews; by
contrasting their conduct with that of the Ox, and the Ass, which is
the most stupid of animals. “The Ox knoweth his owner, and the Ass his
master’s crib: but Israel doth not know, my people do not consider.”
What a cutting reproof! what an indelible reproach! to have been
favored with the best means of instruction, and yet to be exceeded by
the herd of the stall! To perish for lack of knowledge, after having
had the best means to acquire it, evinces the grossest inattention, and
most censurable insensibility.

The prophet Jeremiah lamented the wickedness of the age in which he
lived, and the vice and immorality that every where abounded. He saw
with grief of heart the holy Sabbath profaned, the worship of God
neglected, and his house and ordinances defiled. While a sorrowful
witness to their gross abominations, he saw the punishments that
awaited their immorality, and then wept over what he could not amend.
He gave them faithful admonitions from God, but they disregarded them,
and drank in iniquity like water, and drew sin as with a cart-rope:
because they had been _taught_ to do evil (for so the margin reads,)
trained up in their evil ways, had learned to sin by precept and
example, and were great proficients in vicious pursuits: from their
youth their natural propensity to evil had increased by continued
practice, till sinning was become habitual, and there was little hope
left of amendment. Therefore he exclaims, “Can the Ethiopian change
his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that
are accustomed to do evil.” The Ethiopian’s skin is of so sable a
hue, that no water can wash it white. A Leopard’s skin is beautifully
spotted, which is not the result of accident, but nature, and cannot
be defaced. By these two similes the prophet designs to represent,
not only the natural impossibility without Divine aid, but also the
extreme difficulty of habitual sinners learning to do well, after they
have long accustomed themselves to do evil. The least sin is to be
avoided, the least growth of sin to be prevented; for sin indulged in
thought will beget desire, desire will break out into action, action
will grow into custom, custom will settle into habit, and then, there
is the utmost danger of both body and soul being irrecoverably lost.

When our Saviour sent forth his apostles to preach the Gospel, he
informed them of the hardships, dangers, and discouragements they
would have to encounter, in the faithful discharge of their ministry;
especially after his resurrection, when they would be deprived of
his personal presence; for we do not read of any great persecutions
they endured while he was with them. These sufferings he foretold,
that they might not be surprised at their approach; and that, by the
accomplishment of this prediction, their faith might be confirmed.
“Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Wolves.” Here we
have a prediction of their perilous condition; they were to be as Sheep
in the midst of Wolves. And what situation more dangerous! What can
sheep, that are feeble creatures, and destitute of natural armour to
defend themselves, expect, in the midst of ravenous wolves, but to be
rent and torn to pieces? So those, amongst whom the apostles were to be
sent, would have as great an inclination, arising from their malicious
dispositions, to destroy them, as wolves have from their nature to
devour sheep. Wicked men are like wolves, whose nature it is to destroy
and devour sheep; they are of a diabolical disposition towards the
ministers of the Gospel.

Our Saviour also gave his apostles advice, how to conduct themselves in
such very unpleasant and dangerous circumstances. “Be ye therefore wise
as serpents,” not cunning as foxes, whose aim is to deceive others; but
as serpents, whose policy is only to defend themselves, when they are
in danger. A serpent’s wisdom appears in a care to guard and secure its
head, that it may not be hurt; in stopping its ears against the voice
of the charmer, which it does, says a certain naturalist, by laying
one ear close to the ground, and stopping the other with its tail;
and in sheltering itself in the clefts of a rock, when in danger. So
should Christ’s ministers, in a time of peril, use all lawful means for
their own safety and preservation; they should be wary and circumspect
to keep themselves from harm, either of body or soul. “And harmless
as doves.” Ministers should be meek, do no person any harm, bear no
ill-will, be without gall, as is said of the dove; though their enemies
should be fierce and savage, like wolves, yet they must not study how
to revenge the injuries done them. It should be their continual care
to be inoffensive, in word and deed: wisdom and innocence should dwell
together. Ministers must not be altogether doves, lest they fall into
danger; nor altogether serpents, lest they injure others; but they
must be both serpents and doves, the one for wisdom, the other for
innocence.

    “That thou mayst injure no man, dove-like be,
    And serpent-like, that none may injure thee!”

Our Saviour likewise cautions his followers against false teachers.
“Beware of false prophets.” The term _prophet_ in the Scripture,
signifies one who foretells things to come; this is the most proper
signification of the word. It also means one who expounds the
predictions of the Old Testament. And sometimes we are to understand
by it, one employed in the ministry of the Gospel; in this sense a
prophet and a teacher are reciprocal terms. So that by prophet here
our Saviour means false teachers, who, pretending authority from God,
exercised themselves in the ministry, and published false doctrine,
or at least represented truth in a corrupt manner, with a fraudulent
intention, from base motives, and for vile ends; by whose doctrine
persons were in no small danger of being seduced from their simplicity,
and drawn away from the truth, sincerity, and power of godliness; into
a dead and lifeless formality, and an empty show of religion and piety.
Now against such men, Christ, in the days of his public ministry,
warned his hearers, to prevent their deception, apprising them that
they would “come in sheep’s clothing.” They disguised their dangerous
principles and base intentions, under a show of external religion, and
fair professions of love, that, thereby they might deceive others. “But
inwardly they are ravening Wolves.” They were as dangerous to the souls
of men, as ravenous Wolves are to Sheep, which watch for an opportunity
to seize their prey, silently approach the sheep-fold to see whether
the dogs be asleep, or the shepherd be absent: so false teachers with
wretched hypocrisy and sophistry, counterfeit sincerity, humility, and
sanctity; and were it not for this semblance of piety, their efforts
to injure the church of God would be ineffectual. He compares these
false teachers to Wolves, especially on account of their cruelty. These
animals are not content to satisfy their hunger, but will destroy
multitudes merely to gratify their voracious nature. So false teachers
strive to injure the whole church of God, and thus destroy souls.

Our Saviour exhorted his auditory to the exercise of Christian
prudence, in the dispensing of spiritual things. “Give not that which
is holy unto the Dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before Swine, lest
they trample them under their feet, and turn again and rend you.” The
deep things of God, relating to doctrines, are not to be divulged to
those who are wallowing in sin; neither are the great things he has
done in his people to be declared to profane, furious persecutors:
but both classes of wicked men may be reproved on proper occasions.
By Dogs, our Saviour means froward, perverse, malicious, revengeful,
boisterous, incorrigible, and irreclaimable sinners, who scorn holy
institutions, mock at every thing sacred, scoff at religion, deride
the word of God, and all serious reproofs and admonitions, whether
given by parents, masters, ministers, governors, and others; who are
ready to persecute those who preach the Gospel, and endeavor to promote
their salvation. By Swine, he means such sinners as are profane and
sensual, and like Swine wallow in the mud of sin and wickedness; to
whom it is as pleasant to live in their beastly lusts, as it is for
Swine to wallow in the mire; and to disregard, abuse, and trample on
holy things.

St. Peter, in showing what all men are in the sight of God, before
they receive his grace, and what those are who turn apostates from the
truth, alludes to two offensive actions of Dogs and Swine. “It has
befallen to them according to the true proverb, the Dog is turned to
his vomit, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire.”
Blackwall says, this proverb, with great propriety and strength, marks
out the sottishness and odious manners of persons enslaved to sensual
appetites and carnal lusts; and the extreme difficulty of reforming
vicious and inveterate habits. As a Dog, observe Bishop Patrick, when
he has vomited up his meat which made him sick, is no sooner well but
he returns to it, and eats it up again, forgetting how ill it agreed
with him; so an imprudent person commits the same error over again,
for which he formerly smarted. The evil nature remaining, and at last
gaining the ascendency, in a man, who had through grace reformed
his life, renders him like the loathsome and detestable Sow, as Dr.
Doddridge remarks; for the Sow that was washed from the filthiness she
had before contracted, having still the same unclean nature prevailing,
is returned to wallow in the mire, and so makes herself as filthy as
she had ever been before. And, adds Dr. Whitby, these two proverbs are
expressive of the folly of those men who return to those vices they had
formerly renounced.

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ II.--MAN.

    BODY: -- Its Creator -- Formation -- Vitality -- Blood
    -- Heart -- Arteries and Veins -- Digestion --Respiration --
    Glands -- Absorbents -- Nervous System -- Organs of Sense --
    Bones -- Sinovia --Muscles -- Tendons -- Cellular Membrane --
    Skin. SOUL: -- Its Immateriality -- Freedom --Immortality --
    Moral Image -- Adam’s Dominion over the Creatures -- Woman --
    Paradise.

All things necessary, convenient, and delightful, being prepared
for the accommodation of Man: light, that he might see; air, that
he might hear and breathe; dry land, on which he might walk; herbs
and fruit-trees, for his gratification and sustenance; fish, fowl,
cattle, and creeping things, for his service: then God proceeded to
make him, as the last and greatest display of his wisdom and power,
the master-piece of all sublunary creatures, whose creation alone is
represented in the sacred History, as an effect resulting from a
divine consultation. “And God said, Let us make man in our image, after
our likeness. So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him; male and female created he them.” It appears from the
ingenious Parable of Protagoras in Plato, it was a very ancient opinion
that _man_ was last created after the other living creatures.

In all the former works, God only said, Let such and such things be,
and they were; he spake the word, and it was done. But now, when Man
was to be made, God is spoken of as calling a council, “Let _us_ make
man, in _our_ image, after _our_ likeness.” This imports that Man
was to be a creature different from all that had been produced, and
far more excellent and wonderful in his constitution; a compound of
flesh and spirit, heaven and earth, put together, the visible image
of the Divine glory, and dedicated and devoted to his Creator’s
service. Man was the work of ELOHIM, the Divine Plurality, marked
here more distinctly by the plural pronouns US and OUR; all the Three
Subsistencies in the Godhead are represented as united in counsel and
effort to bring into existence this astonishing creature.

Aben Ezra, a Jewish Rabbi, imagined that the souls of all men were made
on the first day of the creation, and that God consulted them to obtain
their consent before he would assign them bodies of flesh, hereafter to
be created. This is a groundless hypothesis, derived from the Platonic
philosophy; for God says, “Let us make man in our image,” which shows
that Adam’s soul had then no existence, for in that case, it doubtless
would have been in the image of God.

Some other Jewish Doctors, as Manasseh ben Israel, ridiculously
conceived that God spake to the elements. But this is more absurd than
the former; for the expression, “Let us make man,” implies capacity of
consultation in those spoken to, and real efficiency. But the elements
are not intelligent beings, neither efficient, but only material parts
of man.

Nor does God here speak to the angels, as the authority of the
Paraphrase, which is called Jonathan’s, suggests. The words of the
Paraphrase are these: “God said to the angels, which ministered before
him, Let us make man.” It is a noted saying of the Jewish Rabbis,
that God does nothing without consulting his family above: they mean,
his holy angels. Several heretics, in the first and second centuries
of Christianity, were of opinion, that this lower world was made by
angels. This notion is likewise erroneous: God here speaks to those in
whose image man was to be formed, but he was not made in the image of
angels.

It is pretended by those who are enemies to the orthodox doctrine
of the Trinity, that this is a figurative way of speaking, only to
express the dignity of God, not to denote any plurality in him; that
he here speaks in the plural number after the manner of princes, who
say, We will and require, or, It is our pleasure. But this is only a
far-fetched invention, to evade the doctrine of the Trinity, by persons
in latter times, and no way agreeable to the first ages of the world,
or the Hebrew style. Melchizedeck, Abimelech, Pharoah, and Balak, all
speak in the singular number. The kings of Israel used the same style,
as did Saul, David, and even Solomon in all his glory. And also the
Eastern monarchs: “I (Darius) make a decree. I, even I, Artaxerxes the
king, do make a decree.” Nor is there in the Scriptures one example to
the contrary.

Beside, how absurd it is to suppose that God would borrow his mode
of speaking from a practice which did not exist! And even granting
this possible, yet the cases are not parallel. For though a King, or
Governor, may say _us_ and _we_, there is certainly no figure of speech
that will allow a single person to say, _one of us_, when he speaks of
_himself_. It is a phrase that can have no meaning, unless there be
more persons than one concerned. Yet in addition to US and OUR, this we
find is the style in which God has spoken of himself.

There are some persons who maintain, in opposition to the clear light
of revelation, that there is but one Subsistence in the Divine Nature.
This was the opinion of the Sabellians, a denomination which arose in
the third century; and, certain persons, in modern times, have embraced
the same. These contend that God here speaks to himself, as consulting
with himself, to create man, and that, though the words be plural, yet
the sense is singular, as if he had said, Let _me_ make man.

One of the Persons, or Subsistencies in the Godhead, here speaks to the
other Two, and who more likely than the Father, who is first in the
order of arrangement, as given by the sacred Writers. The Father, not
the Son, is the first; the Son, not the Holy Spirit, is the second;
and the Holy Spirit, not the Father, is the third. Hence, the Father,
when he said, “Let us make man,” addressed himself to the Son, and to
the Holy Spirit, who were therein joint and equal Creators with him.
“None saith, Where is God my Maker?” in the Hebrew, _Makers_, is the
language used in the Book of Job, implying a Plurality of Persons in
a Unity of Essence: a phraseology like that of Solomon, “Remember thy
Creator,” in the original, _Creators_. The prophet Isaiah adopts the
same style, “Thy Maker is thine husband,” in the Hebrew, _thy Makers
are thy Husbands_. Thus it evidently appears, that this consultation
was among the Persons in the Godhead; that all the Three, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, were concerned in man’s creation; and
were therein joint Creators, equal in nature, power, and efficiency.

Dr. Waterland says, that this text, _Let us make man_, has been
understood of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, or at least of Father and
Son, by the whole succession of Christian writers, from the times of
the apostles; which is a circumstance of considerable importance, and
will impress the minds of sincere and impartial men. That the Christian
Fathers were unanimous in their judgment, that these words were spoken
by the Father to the Son, or Spirit, or both, appears in their works,
from which we shall adduce a few proofs.

_Barnabas_ says:--“And for this the Lord was contented to suffer for
our souls, though he be the Lord of the world; to whom God said, the
day before the formation of the world, Let us make man after our image
and similitude.”[175]

_Hermas_:--“He was present in counsel with his Father for the forming
of the creature.”[176]

_Theophilus_ of Antioch:--“He directed these words, _Let us make man_,
to none other than his own Word and his own Wisdom.”[177]

_Irenæus_:--“His Word and Wisdom, his Son and Spirit, are always
present with him, to whom also he spake, saying, _Let us make man_,
&c.”[178] Again:--“Man was fashioned after the image and likeness of
the uncreated God, the Father willing his creation, the Son ministering
and forming him, the Holy Ghost nourishing and increasing him.”[179]

_Tertullian_:--“Nay, because his Son is ever present with him, the
second person, his Word; and the third, the Spirit in the Word;
therefore he spake in the plural, _Let us make man in our image_.”[180]

_Novatian_:--“Who does not acknowledge the Son to be the second person
after the Father, when he reads that it was said to the Son by the
Father, _Let us make man_.”[181]

_Origen_:--“To him also spake he (the Father,) _Let us make man after
our image_.”[182]

_Athanasius_:--“Who is this that God converses with here? To whom are
these notifications and determinations of his pleasure directed? Not
to any of the creatures already made; much less to those things which
were not yet created; but, undoubtedly to some person, who was then
present with the Father, to whom he communicated his councils, and of
whose agency he made use in the creation of them. And who could this
be but his eternal Word? With whom can we conceive the Father holding
his conference, but with his Son, the divine LOGOS, that Wisdom of God,
that was present with him, and acted with him, in the creation of the
world, who was in the beginning with God, and was God? and who saith of
himself, _When he prepared the heavens, I was there; when he appointed
the foundations of the earth, then was I by him, as one brought up with
him_.”

_St. Augustine_:--“Had God said no more than, Let _us make man_, it
might, with some color, be understood as spoken to the angels, whom
the Jews pretend he employed in framing the body of man, and other
creatures; but seeing it immediately follows, _after our image_, it is
highly profane to believe, that man was made after the similitude of
angels; and that the similitude of God and angels is one and the same.”

_St. Ambrose_ speaks to the same purpose:--“God would not speak thus
to his servants, because it is not to be thought, that servants were
partners with their Lord, in his works of creation; or the works with
their Author. And, supposing this should be admitted, that the work was
common to God and angels, yet the image was not common.”

Nay, the second Council of Sirmium, which was held in 351, pronounced
an anathema on all those who denied this. The words of the Council are
these:--“If any say, that the Father did not speak to the Son, when
he said, _Let us make man_, but that he spake to himself, let him be
accursed.”[183]

_Epiphanius_:--“This is the language of God to his Word, and
Only-begotten, as all the faithful believe.”[184] And again he says,
“Adam was formed by the hand of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy
Ghost.”[185]

I observe more at large from _Irenæus_, that he rejects the notion
of the Jews and Heretics, who supposed God spake to his angels.
For disputing against Heretics, who attributed the creation of the
world to angels, and powers separate from the one true God, he says
thus:--“Angels did not make us, nor did they form us; neither was it
in their power to make the image of God: none but the Logos could do
this; no powers distinct from the Father of all things: for God did not
want their assistance in making the things which he had ordained. For
his Word and his Wisdom, the Son and the Holy Ghost, are always with
him; by whom and with whom, he made all things freely, and of his own
accord; to whom also he spake in these words, _Let us make man in our
image and likeness_.”[186]

The testimony of Dr. Kennicott will be respected by those who are
lovers of the truth. “God, says he, being about to create man, is
introduced saying--_Let_ US _make man in_ OUR _image, after our
likeness_; in consequence of which the historian tells us--_so God
created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him_.
It is evident then, that God created man in his own image; this is
mentioned thrice by way of emphasis, and to prevent, if possible, all
possibility of misconstruction. Now what God did, was certainly what
he proposed to do; God created man in his own image, that is, in the
image of the Godhead, and therefore God proposed to create him in the
image of the Godhead. But if God proposed to create him in the image of
the Godhead, the proposal must have been made to the Godhead; because
the words are--_Let us make man in_ OUR _image_. And if the proposal be
here made by God to the Godhead, it is absurd to suppose it made to the
same Person that makes it; and consequently reasonable to think it made
to the other two persons in the Unity of the Godhead.”[187]

The creature now to be made is man.[188] _And God said, Let us make
man._ It is evident that God, by introducing the creation of man with
this peculiar phraseology, intends to impress the mind with a sense of
something extraordinary in his formation. The word אדם _Adam_, which
is translated _man_, is intended to designate the _species_ of animal,
which is vastly superior to all the rest. Though the same kind of
organization may be found in Man, as appears in the lower animals, yet,
as one observes, there is a variety and complication in the parts, a
delicacy of structure, a nice arrangement, a judicious adaptation of
the various members to their great offices and different functions, a
dignity of mien, and perfection of the whole, which are sought for in
vain in all other creatures.

Man is a compound creature, consisting of two distinct essential parts,
body and soul. The union of these constitutes man, for neither of
them when separated can be so denominated. The body was made before
the soul, and formed out of the earth, or, as עפר _âpher_ implies,
the _dust_. “The Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground.” He
afterwards pronounced, _Dust thou art_. This led Solomon to affirm,
“All are of the dust.” The Apostle adds, “The first man was of the
earth, dusty,” as Ainsworth renders it. And we are said to “dwell in
houses of clay,” and to have our “foundation in the dust.” Of the soul
it is said, “God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life:” רוח
חיים _ruach chayim_, the breath of LIVES; i.e. animal, intellectual, and
spiritual. While this breath of God expanded the lungs, and set them to
play, his inspiration gave both spirit, understanding, and felicity.
Thus we see that the soul and the body are not the same thing; the one
is of the earth, the other is from God. The Rabbins say, “The form of
the soul is not compounded of the elements, &c, but is of the Lord
from heaven. Therefore when the material body, which is compounded
of the elements, is separated, and the breath perishes because it is
not found, but with the body, and is needful for the body in all its
actions; this form (i.e. the soul) is not destroyed, &c, but continues
for ever. This is that which Solomon by his wisdom said, ‘Then shall
the dust return unto the earth as it was; and the spirit shall return
unto God who gave it.’”

As the formation of man’s body was effected previously to the infusion
of his soul, we shall attend to the same order, in attempting to
elucidate this important and very interesting subject. The word ייצר
_jitzer_, rendered _he formed_, observes Mr. Benson, is not used
concerning any other creature, and implies a gradual process in the
work, with great accuracy and exactness. It is properly used of potters
forming vessels on the wheel; and Rabbi D. Kimchi says, that, when
used concerning the creation of man, it signifies the formation of his
members. Bishop Patrick intimates, that the body of man was made not of
_dry_, but _moist_ dust; and that this agrees with the Hebrew JITZER,
_formed_, which is used concerning potters, who make their vessels of
_clay_, not of _dry_ earth. Diodorus Siculus says, “Man was made out of
the _slime_, or _mud_, of the Nile.” The word of the Lord once came to
Jeremiah, saying, “Arise, and go down to the potter’s house, and there
I will cause thee to hear my words. Then I went down to the potter’s
house, and, behold, he wrought a work on the wheel. And the word of
the Lord came to me, saying, Behold, as the clay is in the potter’s
hand, so are ye in mine hand!” A scene like this is presented to our
imagination by the words of Moses; the Lord God _formed_, moulded, or
modelled man, as a potter does; we see the work, observes Bishop Horne,
as it were upon the wheel, rising and growing under the hands of the
Divine Artificer!

But, to give the thing a stronger impression on the mind, we will
suppose, says Judge Hale, that this figure rises by degrees, and is
finished part by part, in some succession of time; and that, when
the whole is completed, the veins and arteries bored, the sinews and
tendons laid, the joints fitted, and liquor (transmutable in blood
and juices) lodged in the ventricles of the heart, God infuses into
it a vital principle, whereupon the liquor in the heart begins to
descend, and thrill along the veins, and a heavenly blush arises in the
countenance, such as scorns the help of art, and is above the power of
imitation. The image moves, it walks, it speaks; it moves with such
a majesty, as proclaims it the lord of the creation, and talks with
such an accent and sublimity, as makes every ear attentive, and even
its great Creator enter into converse with it: were we to see all this
transacted before our eyes, I say, we could not but stand astonished at
the thing; and yet this is the exact emblem of man’s formation.

The human body is an excellent piece of workmanship, the shape and
contexture of it admirable, evidently superior to that of all other
animals, and the brightest visible display of the wisdom of the Divine
Architect. The erect posture, figure, stature, use of every part, and
symmetry of the whole, cannot but excite admiration. The fabric of the
eye, the texture of the brain, the configuration of the muscles, the
disposition of the nerves, the construction of the bones; the veins and
arteries, spread throughout the system, the former to return the blood
to the heart, and keep that mysterious engine playing, which throws
the vital fluid through the latter with prodigious force, to animate
and invigorate every part; and many other important particulars, which
we shall now proceed to mention and illustrate, are not only manifest
proofs of the great excellence of this system, but also of the skill,
contrivance, and consummate wisdom of God.

When we take a general view of the animal world, we find the numerous
individuals which compose it, differing considerably in the phenomena
which their economy exhibits. Man, and the higher orders of animals,
are characterized by the constant performance of many complex and
active functions; as respiration, digestion, circulation, &c. Torpid
or hibernating animals display this singular peculiarity, that these
functions are performed for several months, and suspended for several
months, alternately. In another modification of animated matter, namely
the egg, the evidences of vitality would not be exhibited, were not
certain agents applied to evolve them, and, when thus called forth,
they cannot be resumed after long suspension.

Although we are ignorant of the nature of the cause which regulates
the uniform performance of this series of phenomena, thus more or less
extensively displayed in the economy of different animals, we are
nevertheless convinced that such a cause must exist, and are hence
naturally led to distinguish the phenomena by some appropriate term.
Thus observing that the human body, and the bodies of animals which
bear it resemblance, possess locomotive powers, can regulate their
actions, and are capable not only of resisting the laws which govern
inanimate substances, but are enabled to act upon these substances in
direct opposition to these laws, we employ the terms life, vitality,
and vital power, to express the phenomena which thus distinguish
animate from inanimate matter; and in order simply to determine the
import of those terms, we may take a general view of those powers which
a living animal body possesses, and which cease with its existence.

When we compare the living with the dead body, the most striking
circumstance we observe is, that the former was surrounded by the same
chemical agents which are capable of producing the decomposition and
destruction of its soft parts after death; hence it becomes evident,
that its component elements must have been sustained and preserved
by some superior power, which ceases to act at the moment of its
dissolution.

Of all the phenomena which enter into the general idea of life, this
power of self-preservation, or the capability of resisting the laws
which govern inanimate matter, appears the most essential. Without
this principle we can form no conception of life, since it evidently
exists without interruption till the moment of dissolution. It is
this principle which, communicated to an egg, enables it to resist
for a certain period the powers of heat, cold, and putrefaction; a
principle of which the addle or barren egg is entirely devoid. Thus
we find from Mr. J. Hunter’s experiments, that an impregnated egg
is longer in freezing than an addle egg, and every one knows that
the former remains sweet or free from putrefaction much longer. This
principle, which we may consider the most simple state of existence,
is limited in its duration; and for its maintenance, the performance
of no active function is necessary. Hence it continues in the egg
either quiescent for a certain time, and is gradually destroyed; or,
by the agency or stimulus of heat, it acquires the accession of the
power of action, which assimilates inanimate matter into a living
form, and, at length, exhibits in the chick all the phenomena of a
more perfect state of existence, which may be distinguished by the
term active life. In this state, many other phenomena of vitality
are exhibited. Besides the power of self-preservation, an internal
principle of support and reparation, and the power of performing the
important actions of circulation, respiration, digestion, &c, which
are subservient to this principle, is given to animals. These form the
features of what we call life, as it appears in man, and the higher
orders of animals, and certainly constitute its most useful, though not
most essential part. For how little superior is an egg, or a torpid
animal, to vegetable or inanimate matter, till the former contain a
living chick, the latter become an active animal? Thus, though life
may subsist under the quiescent form of self-preservation, it requires
the accession of certain principles, and a power of performing various
important actions, to display its chief characters. The economy then
of an egg, and of a perfect animal, such as man, may be considered
as examples of the most simple and extensive phenomena of vitality.
These, however, are more or less perfectly exhibited in the different
orders of animals. It belongs, for instance, to the economy of certain
animals, which at one time of the year perform active functions,
to become torpid at the approach of winter. In these creatures,
respiration, digestion, and every function which characterizes active
life, is suspended; as in the egg, the principle of self-preservation,
that latent spark of vitality, alone remains, by which we distinguish
torpidity from death. This condition, however, is not of long
continuance; at the approach of summer’s warmth, the power of action is
again called forth, active functions are superadded to the principle of
self-preservation, and life, before quiescent and obscure, now resumes
its most perfect form; or, in other words, the animal just now inert
and motionless, respires again; its heart beats, its blood circulates,
its muscles resume their accustomed motions, and it leaves its winter
quarters in search of food. Having now assumed the nature of an active
animal, the performance of the functions characteristic of that state
(which we shall now proceed to describe) becomes requisite; and, first,
the circulation of a fluid which we call _blood_.[189]

This fluid differs in its appearance in the different orders of
animals, though, in its essential properties there is little variety;
the appearance of the blood in man, and the more perfect animals, is
that of a red fluid, having a certain degree of viscidity, not being
limpid like common water. Though it appears to be a homogenous fluid
whilst circulating, or at the moment it escapes from its vessels, it
is composed of three parts, essentially differing from each other; of
_particles_, upon which the color of the blood depends; of _coagulating
lymph_, which has the property of becoming spontaneously solid under
certain circumstances, and from which various structures in the body
are formed; and of a limpid fluid called _serum_, which dilutes the
coagulating lymph, and fits it for circulating through blood vessels of
a very minute size. In some of the lower orders of animals, however,
the color of the particles of the blood is green, in others white,
corresponding with the color of the animal; in others there is no
color whatever in the blood, so that it is either void of particles,
or they are transparent, so as not to be seen. But this deficiency
must be considered as making no great difference in the blood itself,
as its particles do not appear to be its most essential part. Many
microscopical observations have been made to determine the size of a
single particle of the blood, and according to the observations of
several philosophers, the diameter of a single particle in man has been
computed at the 3,000th part of an inch. The size of the particles in
red blooded animals, is found not to correspond with the size of the
animal. They are as large in the mouse as the elephant, larger in some
insects than in man, smaller in the ox. They are in prodigious numbers,
so as to give color to the blood, and of all its parts appear to be
renewed the most slowly; thus when animals are frequently bled, the
flesh becomes paler and paler.[190]

The next part of the blood, or coagulating lymph, is of the greatest
importance. This constituent part becomes apparent, when blood is drawn
from a vein into a cup, from its power of spontaneously coagulating
into a solid mass, which appears red from a mixture of red particles:
the color of the lymph however is transparent. This coagulation of
the blood differs very essentially from the coagulation of inanimate
substances, and is considered by many physiologists to be the last
exertion of a living principle, which the blood is supposed to possess.
This opinion, although not capable of absolute proof, is rendered
extremely probable from a variety of facts, and by none more than the
analogy between the coagulation of the blood, and the contraction of
the muscles at death. These two actions appear to be influenced in
some degree by the same causes. Thus, sudden death from lightning,
or a blow upon the stomach, prevents the muscles from becoming rigid
after death, and prevents also the coagulation of the blood. Under
these circumstances it remains fluid. Besides violent death, several
circumstances influence its tendency to coagulate and become solid,
such as a great loss of blood--inflammation--pregnancy in females, and
other causes.[191]

The third important part of the blood is the serum. This is limpid like
water, and remains permanently fluid, unless certain substances are
employed to coagulate it, such as alcohol, alum, or a certain degree
of heat. It dilutes the other parts of the blood, so as to reduce the
whole to a proper state of fluidity. It is secreted, or naturally
separated from the blood, and poured out by exhalent vessels in various
cavities and parts of the body, as the chest, abdomen, cellular
membrane, &c. It facilitates the easy motion of the various organs upon
each other, and, when accumulated in large quantities, forms the fluid
of dropsies.

Besides these constituent parts, a quantity of water always circulates
with the blood, varying according to the quantity of fluids taken
in, and regulated in its proportion by the kidneys. Thus if a large
quantity of water is taken into the stomach, particularly if it contain
a little spirit in the form of punch, the kidneys are stimulated to
an increased action, so as to separate from the blood the redundant
quantity. A variety of other substances also are occasionally
introduced into the blood, along with the aliment, alkaline substances
producing their effect upon the nature of the urine, rhubarb on bile
giving it a yellow color, and turpentine or asparagus altering its
odor; all these substances, before passing off by urine, must have been
mixed with the blood, from whence the urine is formed, being in fact
its excrementitious part.[192]

It is necessary for the blood thus formed, to pass to every part of
the body, that it may be converted into the nature of these parts, and
thus become subservient to their growth; that fluids, serving important
purposes in animal bodies, may be separated or secreted from it; and
that the temperature of the body may be equably maintained. The blood,
however, has no power of motion in itself; if it be not propelled by
certain parts of the body, it remains quiescent like any extraneous
fluid.

In two very numerous classes of animals, insects and zoophites, the
motion of the blood is very simple; they are nourished like vegetables,
by the absorption of the fluid, which is prepared in their alimentary
canal, and have no circulation properly so called.

But in man, and the higher orders of animals, a complex apparatus for
the motion of the blood becomes necessary, consisting of an heart,
arteries, and veins. The _heart_ may be considered as the chief agent
in circulation, the general reservoir, and source from whence the blood
flows. It is composed of two principles, one a principle of reception,
the other a principle of propulsion. That cavity of the heart, which
is called its auricle, receives the blood from the veins; the cavity
called its ventricle, propels it through the arteries.

Although the heart in all animals is formed on the same general
principle, and for the same purpose, yet the economy of some animals
admits of a greater simplicity in the conformation of this organ, than
others. The most simple kind of heart is composed of one cavity, with
a tube entering into it, by which it receives the blood, and another
passing out of it, by which the blood is conveyed over the body. The
next simple heart is composed of two cavities, an auricle, which
receives the blood, and propels it into a ventricle, which diffuses it
over the body. Another kind of heart is composed of three cavities;
two auricles, and one ventricle; one auricle receiving the blood from
the lungs, the other from the body generally; the blood from these two
sources is mixed together in a single ventricle. This structure we
find in some amphibious animals, in which it is not necessary that the
blood should circulate with so much influence from the oxygenous part
of the atmosphere, as in other animals. Accordingly we find the heart
adapted to transmit only one half of the blood through the lungs at
each circulation, whilst in more perfect animals the whole mass passes
by this route. The last kind of heart is formed of four cavities, two
auricles and two ventricles, and is the most perfect apparatus as
it is found in man, and quadrupeds generally.--It must, however, be
considered as composed of two distinct parts, or two simple hearts
adhering together, and performing distinct parts of the circulation;
and one part intended to receive the blood from the body, and circulate
it through the lungs; the other part to receive the blood from the
lungs, and propel it over the rest of the body. It is better suited
to the economy of some animals, as the cuttle fish, that these parts
should be separated to a considerable distance from each other. The
reason why the heart is formed of two parts in most animals is, that
it is necessary that the blood should receive the impulse of the heart
twice, first to propel it through the lungs, next to propel it over the
rest of the body.

The blood is conveyed from the heart to every part of the body, by
means of elastic tubes, called _arteries_. These arise from the
ventricles of the heart by two large trunks, which branch out in
every part of the body, into arteries of great minuteness, conveying
the blood from the heart to its most distant parts, so that it is
impossible to wound any part of the body with the finest point,
without opening one of these vessels. This gives a good idea of their
minuteness.

From the minute termination of the arteries, begins a second set of
vessels, the _veins_, which, having a contrary course, return the blood
from every part of the body into the auricles of the heart.

The larger arteries and veins, near the heart, differ very much
from each other in their structure and action. This difference,
however, does not descend to their minute ramifications, which must
be considered as having the same structure, and performing the same
office, the one passing into the other by such imperceptible degrees,
that we cannot mark where the one terminates or the other begins.

If we consider these tubes as subservient to the circulation of the
blood, we shall see the necessity of certain principles entering into
their structure. As the blood is forcibly thrown from the heart, these
vessels must be distended; one of their properties therefore, must be a
capability of being distended, which is given to them by elastic matter
entering into their composition. As the vessels, however, are not to
remain in a distended state, a power of reaction is added, which arises
also out of their elasticity, and assists in propelling the blood
forwards.

Thus the elastic matter allows the vessels to be distended to a certain
degree, and also reduces them to a smaller size. But it is necessary
that the heart shall be assisted considerably, in the circulation
of the blood, by a contractile power of the vessels themselves; and
the same quantity of blood is not to circulate in the same body at
all times, for animals are liable to frequent injuries, by which the
quantities of blood in their bodies may be very suddenly reduced. Hence
the vessels have given to them a further power of contraction to assist
the heart, and accommodate themselves, under certain circumstances, to
a smaller quantity of blood. For this purpose, a muscular structure is
added to them, which is present in largest proportion in the smaller
arteries; by this means, they are enabled so far to withstand the
power of the heart, as to shut their cavities, and prevent the escape
of blood when divided, forming one of the means by which the effusion
of blood is spontaneously checked in living animals. And it may be
remarked, that this power, for the purpose of self-preservation, is
extended to larger arteries in the brute creation; for Mr. Hunter
found, that the flow of blood from the large artery in the neck of an
ass was checked by an exertion of this power, whilst every one knows
that its division in man is fatal.

Besides these parts, arteries have an internal lining, which is
perfectly smooth, and of considerable density, that the blood may
circulate with as little resistance, and be contained as completely as
possible within its proper channels.

The same observations will apply to the veins, though some of their
properties are less strongly marked. They possess an elastic power
capable of distension and reaction, a muscular structure endowed with
contractility, and an internal lining over which the blood circulates
with as little resistance as possible. By these powers the blood
is circulated through every part of the body with great velocity.
According to the best calculations, the heart alone exerts a power
equal to the pressure of 51½ pounds, which propels the blood through
the arteries at the velocity of 149 feet in a minute; in which time it
expels from its cavities about 160 ounces.

Thus all animals are provided with an organ for propelling the blood,
by certain channels, to the different parts of the body; but, as the
functions of these parts are various, they require to be visited by
very different proportions of blood, according to their activity or
powers of life. Some parts of the body may be said to be inert, and
merely possessed of a principle of life, to connect them with the
other organs of the body, as parts of a living system, and to enable
them to go through certain processes in their healthy and diseased
states. Other parts are formed for active functions, and possess great
sensibility. It is accordingly observed, that a smaller quantity of
blood is distributed to bones, tendons, and similar inert parts, than
to muscles and glands, whose exertions are more considerable.

This then is the general apparatus in perfect animals, by which the
blood performs its circulation through the various parts of the body,
but during its course it is subject to constant exhaustion from various
sources. It is converted in its passage into the nature of all the
component parts of the body, and has the different secreted fluids
derived from it, and these processes go on with more activity in a
young, than an adult person: hence we see the necessity of a constant
supply of materials to the blood, and this in the greatest proportion
at an early period of life.

Animals are furnished with the means of this supply, by their power of
converting animal and vegetable substances into the nature of blood, by
a process called _digestion_. Some animals are led by their nature to
live on vegetable food, others on animal food only, whilst others can
subsist on either, or any mixture of both.[193] The digestive powers
of man fit him for any proportion of animal or vegetable foods, and
are the most perfect of all animals. Other creatures may be said to be
confined to a certain district, but the curiosity of man is to lead him
over the whole world, and frequently place him in situations where only
one kind of food is attainable.

The first change which takes place in the food, in order that it shall
be converted into the nature of the blood, is its division into smaller
parts, by the teeth or gizzards of animals. It is then passed into
the stomach, where it remains for some time exposed to the action of
a fluid, formed in the stomach, which is called gastric juice. This
possesses a very strong power of coagulating and dissolving various
animal and vegetable substances. As far as we know, it acts on the
principle of any other solvent, for it produces the same change in
substances out of the body, or even within the body after death. It
frequently happens, for instance, when a person has been killed, by
accident, in full health, that, on inspection, the stomach is found
dissolved, and reduced to a gelatinous mass in several parts, arising
from the action of the gastric juice, which had been formed in it
before death. The gastric juice, however, cannot act upon living
substances: hence the stomach resists its action, and worms sometimes
reside and are even generated in the stomach. Every substance capable
of being acted upon in the stomach, is reduced, by the solvent power
of the gastric juice, into a pulpy mass, which has been called chyme,
the exact chemical properties of which have not been ascertained; in
this state it is by degrees transferred into the beginning of the small
intestines, where it is mixed with the bile and pancreatic fluid, and
undergoes a change into a milky fluid, which is called chyle. It is
then diffused by an undulating motion of the intestines over their
inner surface, that it may be absorbed, and carried into the general
mass of blood.

As far as has yet been ascertained by experiment, the chyle of animals,
most opposite to each other in their food, structure, and habits of
life, is so much alike as to have no distinguishable difference. The
chyle of a Dog, or Wolf, differs in nothing from that of a Sheep or
an Ox. This would appear surprising, were it not ascertained that
almost every alimentary matter undergoes a chemical change before it
is converted into chyle, and that the ultimate analysis of either
animal or vegetable matter presents us with the same elements as those
of the blood, which, though only three or four in number, are capable
of forming the various substances of which the body is composed, by
combining with each other, and in different proportions. There is,
however, this difference observable in the chyle, that in reptiles and
insects it is transparent like lymph.

The lacteals are the vessels by which the chyle is absorbed from the
intestines: they form small processes on the internal surface of the
intestines like the pile of velvet, which are hence called villi.
A small portion of chyle being received into their open mouths, is
propelled by successive contractions of these vessels into their large
trunk, the _thoracic duct_, from whence it is poured into a great
vein near the heart, and, by circulating through the lungs, probably
receives its final change into blood; and this change would seem to
be easily effected, as the chyle already possesses the principal
properties of blood, being formed of particles swimming in a thinner
fluid, and having a power of coagulating spontaneously.[194]

This is the apparatus by which the food is digested in man so as to
replenish the blood; but the digestive organs of different animals
exhibit considerable varieties, some being more simple, others more
complex in their structure, adapted to the kind of food with which the
animal is nourished. Ruminating animals, or animals which chew the
cud, such as the Cow, have several stomachs, and the food undergoes
mastication several times, at each time being passed into a different
stomach, before being finally acted upon by the gastric juice, after
which it is transmitted through a long tract of intestines. This is an
example of the most complex digestive organ fitted to act upon hard
and fibrous food, which must be subjected to the action of several
menstrua preparatory to its being acted upon by the gastric juice.

In birds who live on grain as has been noticed, we meet with a
different apparatus to prepare it to be acted upon by the gastric
juice. The food first passes into the crop, which forms a kind of
reservoir from whence it may pass by degrees into the gizzard, by which
the grain is ground into small particles, before it is transmitted into
the stomach: and it is surprising with how great power the gizzard acts
for this purpose. The Abbé Spallanzani introduced a garnet, which is a
very hard and angular stone, into the gizzard of a Wood-Pigeon, and, in
the course of a day, it was ground perfectly smooth, by the action of
the gizzard. He also introduced a leaden ball stuck full of tin points,
and another with fine lancets, into the gizzard of a Turkey, and in
about 18 hours, the whole of the points were rubbed down. The gizzard
also possesses an amazing power of compression. Raumeur introduced into
the gizzard of a Turkey tubes of tinned iron, seven lines in length,
and two in diameter, closed with solder at each end; some were indented
by the action of the gizzard, and others crushed flat. Similar tubes,
introduced into the teeth of a vice, required the weight of about 440
lb. to produce the same effect. The gizzard thus reduces into small
particles whatever food the animal selects, that it may be more readily
acted upon by the gastric juice in the stomach; for the gastric juice
acts like any other solvent, and therefore acts most advantageously
when the food is reduced into small parts.--The digestive organs
of some of the lower orders of animals form a striking contrast to
these. In the most simple apparatus with which we are acquainted, the
stomach and the intestines are composed of a simple bag which has but
one opening, which serves both to receive the food, and discharge the
excrement. It composes in fact the whole bulk of a fresh-water Polypus.
In these animals the chyle is absorbed by small vessels in the sides of
the bag, and is conveyed to every part of the body.

Thus we find that the supply of materials to the blood is commensurate
to its exhaustion, that in young animals where a more active process
of formation is going on, a larger proportion of food is requisite,
and more chyle formed; this, however, is not all that is necessary
to prepare the blood for its important purposes within the body. The
blood, by passing through the various parts of the body, is so changed
by the abstraction of certain properties, as to render it unfit for
circulation, which implies the necessity of an organ, which may restore
to the blood its requisite qualities. This office is performed by
_respiration_, that function in animals by which the blood receives the
influence of atmospherical air.

There is a great variety in the structure of the organ for exposing the
blood to the air, suited to the mode of life in different animals. In
man and quadrupeds generally the lungs serve this purpose; they are
composed of a number of blood vessels spread out upon minute air cells,
which communicate with and receive the air by means of the trachea
or windpipe, in consequence of the expansion of the chest by certain
muscular powers. These vessels and cells are connected together by
cellular membrane, so as to form a spongy mass called lungs, which are
commonly placed in the chests of animals.--But besides this kind of
organ, which in birds is very large, they have air bags, or appendages
to the lungs, diffused through various parts of the body; even some
of their long bones contain nothing but air, and communicate with the
lungs. It was from a knowledge of this fact that Mr. J. Hunter made
a Turkey breathe by its wings, by making an opening into their large
bones, and closing the animal’s mouth.

In Fish, the gills serve the purpose of lungs. They are composed of
a number of processes arising from cartilages, having distributed
upon them minute blood-vessels, which receive the influence of air
contained in water: and hence distilled water, which contains little
air, destroys fish, in the same manner as the exhausted receiver of an
air pump does a breathing animal.

There is another mode of conveying air for the use of the blood in many
insects, by means of a number of tubes or spiracula: these receive
the external air, and, by ramifying in the body of the animal, convey
its influence to the blood. Thus these animals may be said to respire
like vegetables, throughout the whole of their surface, by vessels
which introduce the air at different points into their bodies. In some
insects the rectum forms the principal organ of respiration, and, in
the class of animals called Zoophites, there are no visible organs of
respiration.

These different modifications, in the respiratory organs of the higher
and lower orders of animals, are all formed with the same intention,
viz. that the blood may be exposed more or less to atmospherical
air. In consequence of this the blood undergoes a process similar to
combustion, which extracts from it a part of its carbon, in the form of
carbonic acid, and by this means increases the relative proportion of
its remaining elements. The inspired air at the same time is deprived
of a part of its oxygen, which is the elastic fluid which commonly
supports respiration. All the corresponding effects produced upon
the blood are not yet fully explained. But by this means the color
of the blood is changed from a dark to a florid red, it acquires the
power of exciting the action of the heart, and is fitted for its
various purposes within the body.[195] By these organs, respiration
is performed more or less extensively in the different orders of
animals, corresponding in a great degree, to their activity, digestive
powers, and the heat maintained in their bodies. Birds, whose extensive
respiratory organs consume a larger quantity of air, are capable
of greater exertion; make more frequent meals than quadrupeds, and
maintain a superior temperature. Quadrupeds hold a middle place between
birds and reptiles. Respiration appears in the class of reptiles, as
Frogs and Toads, to be a subordinate function only; they can exist
without it nearly as long as they please; at the same time they make
very long fasts, and the heat of their bodies is more variable and
lower than quadrupeds; hence they are called cold blooded animals.
Their other habits accord well with their organs of respiration. They
generally live in impure air, their motions are languid, and they pass
a great part of their existence in a state of torpidity.

A subordinate use of respiration in most animals, is the formation of
the voice: for this purpose there are membranes stretched across the
narrow part of the windpipe, which are thrown into a state of vibration
by the current of air: the vibrations thus produced, being modified by
other accessory parts, produce the voice. In many animals, however,
it is produced by a very different mechanism. Some animals employ the
friction of certain elastic parts of the body, as Grasshoppers and
Crickets; others employ the vibration of certain parts in the air,
whilst others impress a rapid motion on portions of air inclosed in
certain parts of their bodies.

There is a particular part of the heart in man, intended merely to
propel the blood, which passes through the lungs to receive the
influence of the air; this is the right ventricle; from whence the
blood passes, by the pulmonary artery, through the minute vessels
expanded on the air cells, and is changed from a dark to a florid
color: it is then returned back to the left ventricle, by the pulmonary
veins, and is propelled over the rest of the body, where it is again
changed (by the abstraction of certain properties) to the dark color
peculiar to venous blood: the blood is lastly conveyed by the veins
to the right side of the heart from whence it set out, having passed
through two circles.

The blood thus prepared by the lungs for circulation, passes in
different quantities to different parts of the body, according to
their activity, and has various fluids formed from it, which are
called secreted fluids, as gastric juice, milk, bile, &c. The parts
of the body forming many of these fluids, are very peculiar in their
structure, and are called _glands_. They consist in an arrangement of
vessels, endowed with a mode of action, with which we are unacquainted,
by which the component parts of the blood are disposed to enter into
new combinations, and to form compounds differing from the blood
itself. Thus the vessels are arranged on the inside of the stomach, in
such a way, as by their action to form gastric juice from the blood; on
the same principle, milk is produced from the blood which circulates
in the breast, or bile in the liver. As gastric juice, milk, and bile,
differ very much from each other in their properties, we must infer,
that there is a considerable variety in the action, by which these
vessels form these fluids from the blood; and this is necessarily
connected with a variety in arrangement, which is the case in all the
glands of the body. In one gland, for example, the blood-vessels form a
minute net-work; in another, are convoluted at their extremities; in a
third, a large branch suddenly divides into a number of small branches,
like the hairs of a painter’s brush; in a fourth, they are disposed in
an arborescent form, each gland differing from every other in the mode
of distribution of its blood-vessels, and forming different products
from the blood.

The substances formed by many of the glands of the body, are applied
to useful purposes, within or without the body. An instance of the
former we have in the bile formed by the liver, or the gastric juice
formed by the stomach; and of the latter, in the milk.--Other secreted
fluids are rejected as excrementitious: the best example of this is
the urine formed by the kidneys. This gland separates from the blood
a great variety of substances, which might otherwise prove noxious by
circulating along with it; many of these have occasionally very curious
chemical properties, and under a certain state of the body, the altered
secretion of this organ is very remarkable, in as far as it produces
a large quantity of a familiar substance, which in this instance is
composed within the body. In the disease called diabetes, for example,
a patient sometimes makes four or five gallons of urine in the 24
hours, in which is dissolved a considerable quantity of matter, like
common sugar or treacle, probably to the amount of two or three pounds.

Besides these fluids formed from the blood, each by an appropriate
glandular apparatus, there are watery fluids constantly secreted in
various parts of the body; and, that these may not accumulate, or
remain after they have performed their office, it is necessary for the
body to be furnished with vessels, whose powers of removal may keep
pace with the deposition of these fluids. This introduces the system
of vessels called _absorbents_, which are distinct in their office
and nature from the blood-vessels, and are widely diffused over the
whole body. In every part of the body a limpid fluid is thrown out for
the purpose of easy motion, moistening the cellular membrane, which
connects the various parts of the body to each other, and lubricating
the contents of all the cavities of the body; this fluid is thrown out
in the form of vapor by the exhalents, which belong to the arterial
system, whilst the lymphatic absorbent vessels, by their action,
remove what is not convenient for the function of the part; and these
two actions, of deposition, by the exhalents, and absorption, by the
lymphatics, go on during health, so nicely balanced, that when we open
into any of the great cavities of the body, as the belly or chest,
the quantity of fluid we find is extremely small. When, however, the
balance between these two orders of vessels is destroyed, when the
exhalents throw out more fluid than usual, and the lymphatics only
absorb their natural quantity; or the exhalents deposit their natural
quantity, whilst the lymphatics absorb less than natural, accumulation
of water in the cellular membrane, or great cavities of the body, takes
place, and produces dropsies.

There is another set of vessels, which have been already mentioned,
a part of the same system of absorbents, which from their office of
absorbing a white fluid, the chyle, have been denominated lacteals;
these arise from the inner surface of the intestines, in great numbers,
and convey the chyle into the general mass of blood.--Whilst the
minute beginnings of the lacteal vessels, from the internal surface
of the intestines, is a matter of ocular demonstration, we have only
presumptive proof of the origin of the lymphatics, which make the
greatest part of the absorbent system. We have, however, good grounds
for concluding, that they arise from every external and internal
surface of the body. We find, for example, that certain remedies, as
mercurial ointment, or turpentine, rubbed on the skin of any part of
the body, produce effects on distant parts; the mercury by removing
affections of various parts of the body, the turpentine increasing
the flow of urine, and giving it a peculiar odor: these effects are
explained by presuming the absorption of these substances, by the
lymphatics, arising from the surface of the skin. We have further proof
of this from the occasional absorption of watery fluids, under peculiar
circumstances. Sailors at sea, in want of fresh water, have quenched
their thirst by dipping their clothes in salt water, and applying them
to the surface of the body, from which only the elementary part was
absorbed by these vessels. A jockey, after reducing himself to a great
degree has become in a short time too heavy to ride his match, merely
by drinking a glass of wine, which had stimulated the absorbents of
the skin to take up a large quantity of aqueous matter from the air.
Or a person gibbeted alive, has been observed to make a considerable
quantity of urine as long as he lived, without any liquid being taken
by the mouth. These are all considered as evidences that the lymphatic
absorbent vessels arise from every external surface of the skin, and
are capable of taking up substances applied to them.

We find next that water accumulated in the large cavities of the chest
or abdomen, or underneath the skin in the cellular membrane, of every
part of the body, is occasionally removed from these situations, by
remedies which have the power of increasing the action of the absorbent
vessels. We hence conclude, that these vessels arise from every
internal part, and are, in short, widely diffused over the whole body,
though their beginnings are too minute to be detected by any mode of
examination with which we are acquainted.

The absorbent vessels, from whatever part they arise, terminate in the
blood-vessels, principally by one vessel or trunk, which is called the
_thoracic duct_. This commences in the cavity of the abdomen, passes
through the chest on the right side of the spine, and, at length,
enters a large vein situated on the left side of the neck. Through
this vessel, besides the fluids taken up in various parts of the body,
the whole of the nourishment from digested aliment passes into the
blood; it may therefore be said to be the most important vessel in the
body,[196] and it is situated in one of the safest positions in the
body, so that an injury done to it is a very rare occurrence.

Thus the absorbent system is formed of two sets of vessels, having the
same structure, the same absorbing office, and the same termination,
but differing in the fluids they convey, and the parts of the body they
occupy. The one widely diffused over the whole body, and from their
office of usually absorbing limpid fluids, called lymphatics; the other
arising only from the intestines, and denominated lacteals, from the
milky whiteness of the chyle they absorb.

Thus far the absorbent vessels have been described, as employed in
taking up fluids only. The action of the absorbent system, however,
is not considered as confined to the fluid parts of the body; there
are a variety of instances, in which the most solid parts appear to be
removed by the absorbents. Thus when a tooth is extracted, or drops out
in old age, its bony socket is removed by the action of the absorbents.
The pressure of a pulsating tumor, called aneurism, against the ribs,
or thigh bone, has produced their removal in the same way. These are
considered as instances of solid matter being removed by the absorbent
vessels, from internal parts of the body, without any external opening.
It is, however, a matter of doubt, which we cannot at present discuss,
whether a bone is broken down by the absorbents themselves, so as to
be removed in small particles; or whether, as is more probable, its
presence or irritation (as an extraneous body) produces the secretion
of a fluid, similar in its properties to the gastric juice, by which
it is first reduced into minute particles, or entirely dissolved, so as
thus to enter the absorbent vessels.

Another important part of the office of these vessels, is to
model the shape of the body, and to concur with the action of the
blood-vessels in regulating its growth. For the human body does
not, like a marble statue, constantly contain the same identical
particles in its composition. As the stream of a river is formed of
a constant succession of aqueous particles, sometimes increasing,
sometimes diminishing its natural bulk; so the human body is constantly
undergoing an imperceptible change of parts. The absorbents, by their
action, remove exhausted particles, whilst the arteries form from the
blood an adequate supply of new parts. When these two powers are equal,
the body continues of the same bulk; when from disease or contingent
circumstances, the one or the other predominates, the body increases in
growth, becomes corpulent, or emaciated.

Thus we have seen a variety of organs necessary to carry on the
functions of perfect animals: these, however, are inert, and incapable
of motion in themselves. Hence a _nervous system_ becomes requisite,
which may excite and influence the whole. We find in man, and
quadrupeds generally, the nervous system placed principally in the
brain and spinal marrow; from these sources, the nerves are distributed
like white cords, and pass in various proportions to the different
parts of the body, conveying the excitements of the brain.

One of the most important excitements conveyed from the brain, through
the medium of the nerves, is volition; by this means the muscles become
obedient to the will, and perform the voluntary actions of animals.
If, for instance, I wish to take up a pen, I exert my volition towards
the action, and the consequence of this is, that the muscles employed
in the action, are stimulated to contract, from a peculiar excitement
being conveyed to them from the brain, through the medium of the
nerves. We are totally ignorant, however, of the state of the brain,
whilst giving out the excitement, or the change which takes place in
the nerves whilst conveying it. We know, however, that the brain may
be rendered incapable of giving rise to the excitement, and it may be
arrested in its progress down the nerves by artificial means. If a
ligature be applied upon a nerve by tying a piece of thread round it,
the nerve is rendered incapable of transmitting the excitement, so as
to produce motion in muscles. The same state is frequently produced in
the brain and nerves, by the disease called palsy, or by fractures of
the skull. There are also various excitements passing from the brain
to the vital organs of the body, whose actions are not regulated by
the will, and are therefore called involuntary, or automatic actions,
as circulation, parturition, &c. Thus if a person have ever so strong
a desire, he cannot make his heart beat more frequently; nor can he
prevent it from beating more frequently, if any one should put him in
bodily fear; although the heart is formed of muscular flesh, similar to
the muscles, which he can command in his arm. The reason of this is,
that the nerves of the heart cannot convey the influence of volition;
for the wisest reasons the heart acts without it.

It is also necessary for various influences to be communicated from
external objects to the brain, to keep up a correspondence between
animals, and the material world around them, and to communicate
those impressions from which the brain is afterwards to carry on its
functions. As the parts formed for this purpose differ from ordinary
parts of the body, in having a larger share of nervous influence given
to them, they have been called the _organs of sense_, which in an
anatomical point of view, may be said to be five in number, the eye,
the ear, the tongue, the nose, and the skin.

In the _eye_, we discover a most accurate optical instrument, adapted
to converge the rays of light at its posterior part. It is composed of
a spherical box, containing transparent media of different densities,
by which the rays of light are conveyed to a point, so as to impress
a minute image of the visible appearance of external objects upon
the retina or expansion of the optic nerve, by which the impression
is conveyed to the brain, so as to bring us acquainted with external
objects.

The _ear_ is formed to receive impressions from bodies in a state of
vibration, which are conveyed to the brain by an apparatus composed of
various substances, and eminently calculated to transmit the slightest
tremors. The vibrations of the air, for instance, first strike the drum
of the ear; are thence communicated to a delicate chain composed of
four minute bones. By these the vibration is increased, and transmitted
to a fluid, contained in several small winding canals, in which the
delicate filaments of the nerves of hearing are arranged, so as to
transmit the impressions they receive from the surrounding fluids,
and produce in the brain the perception of sound; these two senses,
by the infinitely varied modification of their impressions, convey a
prodigious supply of materials for the action of the mind.

The organ of _touch_ is next in point of importance; it has its seat
in the extremities of the nerves distributed over the skin, and is the
only sense which belongs to every class of animals. This organ gives
rise to sensations, which have no natural alliance with each other.
By this sense we compare different degrees of temperature with each
other; from this we derive our idea of distance between bodies; of
their tangible figure, of their roughness, smoothness, hardness, and
other qualities, from the relative position with respect to ourselves,
or the degree or kind of resistance they offer. And, when man has
been deprived of his communication with many external objects, by the
loss of vision, we find the organ of touch gradually encroaching upon
the function of the eye, and from attention to its finer impressions,
becoming, through the education of necessity, a much more extensive
source of information. As an instance of this, I may adduce Mr. Gough,
who can accurately distinguish the color and character of flowers, by
the nice sense of touch possessed by the tip of the tongue.

The other senses may be said to be of less importance. The _nose_
affords a passage for the air to the lungs, and is impressed by the
odorous particles of bodies diffused through it, and, whilst it thus
occasionally administers to our gratification, it gives us notice of
the presence of those aeriform fluids which are noxious to respiration.
Like the organ of _taste_, which is impressed by sapid bodies, it has
a peculiar sympathy with the stomach; thus the taste, or smell, of any
disagreeable substance, very commonly excites sickness and vomiting.

Thus each of the organs of sense are formed in a peculiar manner, and
are supplied with nerves of a peculiar structure, which are capable
of being excited by certain impressions only, so as to give rise to
sensation. The odorous particles of bodies, for instance, if applied to
the nerves of the nose, excite an impression, which, when conveyed to
the brain, gives rise to the perception of smell; but, every one knows
that they produce no such effect when applied to the nerves of the
skin. In the same way, the rays of light applied to the nerves of the
eye produce vision; but, no such effect takes place when they impinge
upon the tongue.--Each of the organs of sense then possess a peculiar
modification of nerves, which are excited by appropriate impressions.

By these organs we become acquainted with what passes around us; but
the nervous system gives us notice of many changes which take place
within our bodies. Internal pains point out to us the presence and
situation of diseases; and the disagreeable sensations of hunger,
thirst, and fatigue, incline us to give refreshment and repose to the
body. It is also by means of the nervous system, that we experience the
passions and emotions of the mind.

There are some animals so simple in their structure, that neither
brain, nor organs of sense have been detected; yet they are endowed
with motion, and are capable of selecting and swallowing their
food, and expelling their excrement; and as these acts appear to be
voluntary, we must conclude, that they possess nervous matter, though
it be so interwoven with the rest of their structure that we cannot
exhibit or detect it.

All these different structures which have been described as entering
into the formation of a perfect animal, are soft and flexible in
themselves, and, in order to the right performance of their functions,
require the support of a substance of considerable firmness, which
may preserve them in their relative situations, and give a general
shape to the body. For this purpose, _bones_ are formed in the higher
orders of animals. They consist of a certain portion of animal matter,
on which their powers of life depend, mixed with a portion of earthy
matter, which gives them a degree of solidity. The firmest substance
in the body, composed entirely of animal matter, is cartilage, which
possesses, however, too little solidity for the support of animals of
considerable size, living in so rare a medium as air. Hence it happens
that when the earthy part is, by disease, abstracted from the bones,
they become bent and deformed by the weight of the body, or the action
of its moving powers. In fishes, however, who inhabit a denser medium,
cartilage becomes a convenient structure, being sufficiently firm
for their support, and, from its lightness, better suited to their
condition.

Had the osseous system been merely intended to give shape to animals,
and preserve the relative position of their parts, it might, for any
useful purpose, have been as well formed of one piece; and accordingly,
when almost all the bones of the body have been anchylosed, or
immoveably united to each other by disease, the functions of life have
gone on uniformly to an advanced age. There is a remarkable skeleton
of this kind preserved at Trinity College, Dublin; where all the large
bones of the body are immoveably united together, except the lower jaw,
and the joints of the fingers; every joint in the body was immoveable,
and yet this person lived to an old age. In order, however, that
animals may enjoy a power of changing their situation, the osseous
system has been composed of a variety of pieces, and an apparatus added
by which this may be easily effected. This is accomplished by adapting
the ends of bones to each other so as to form joints, which vary in
different parts of the body according to the motion of the part, some
being formed for strength, others for extent and variety of motion; the
two being incompatible, and never found in the same joint.

In the formation of a joint, however, it appears that two surfaces
of bone would move with considerable attrition upon each other, not
being capable of a sufficient degree of smoothness; it is therefore
necessary, in order to diminish attrition, that a substance be
interposed having a high degree of polish; this is supplied by
cartilage, with which the ends of all bones, performing motion, are
covered; and as animals, both from the common occurrences of life, and
from accident, are liable to considerable shocks, in order to guard
the system, as much as possible, against injury from these sources,
cartilages are endowed with a considerable degree of elasticity, and
thus by their reaction are capable of evading certain degrees of
violence.

The smoothness of cartilage, however, only prevents attrition to a
certain degree; that joints therefore may move with all possible ease
and freedom, a fluid is interposed called _sinovia_. This is separated
from the blood, by the vessels distributed to the inner surface of the
joint, and is the most slippery of all fluids.

In order that bones may not be separated from each other, but preserve
their relative situations, with a certain capacity of motion, it is
requisite that they should be joined together; this is done by the
ligaments surrounding a joint, which are of two kinds. The one adapted
to the firm junction of the bones with each other, upon which the
strength of the joint depends; the other loosely attached round the
ends of contiguous bones, to secrete sinovia, and retain it in its
proper situation; and hence called capsular or purse-like ligament.

This kind of structure, endowed with a power of secreting sinovia, is
not confined to the joints alone; for in many parts of the body, where
muscles during their action rub on bones, or tendon on tendon, small
bags are formed for supplying sinovia, which are called bursæ mucosæ.

As all these parts subservient to motion are inert in themselves,
that animals may enjoy the means of changing their situations and
attitudes, a power must be applied to the bones for this purpose, which
is supplied by muscular action. Thus we find the bones clothed with
_muscles_, which give, in a great measure, the external shape to the
body, and act in considerable numbers on the joints, particularly those
which possess much motion.

All animals have a muscular structure entering into their composition,
with some variety in its appearance. Muscles are generally fibrous
to the eye, and in Man and Quadrupeds are of a red color; in some
animals, however, these circumstances are not at all obvious. Thus in
many fishes, the muscles are white, and put on a flaky appearance;
whilst in the fresh water Polypus, which possesses a great degree of
contractile power, no fibres can be seen. So that it is not necessary
that these properties should be obvious in the muscles of all animals.
Thus no person has ever seen the fibres in the muscles of a Flea, yet
no animal can exert greater muscular power. In the same way, many parts
of the body possess a contractile power, which have no apparent fibrous
structure; the best example of this, is the skin of the scrotum. The
redness of a muscle, in fact, depends in a great measure on the degree
of exertion it undergoes; thus when a limb becomes motionless from
palsy, the muscles uniformly become pale.--The function of a muscle
consists in its contracting or shortening itself, in consequence of
the application of certain stimuli or excitements; the effect of this
contraction is, that the different bones to which the muscles are
attached are moved in various directions. Thus (to give an example) a
muscle affixed to two contiguous bones, by shortening itself, brings
those points to which it is affixed nearer to each other; and, from
this mechanism, arise all the motions of the body. The greatest part
of the muscles which put the limbs in motion by their contractions,
are said to act under the excitement of volition, or, in other words,
are under the control and influence of the will, and are therefore
called voluntary muscles. There are many muscles, however, which are
not excited by volition, and are therefore called involuntary. As these
are directed by influences, and perform the actions on which life
immediately depends, they, for obvious reasons, are not only put beyond
the powers of the will, but are enabled to carry on their contractions
and motions without interruption or fatigue, entirely independent of
its direction or our consciousness. In this manner the heart performs
the circulation of the blood, and the stomach and intestines give the
requisite motion to the food.--There are many other excitements which
produce contraction in muscles, such as the passions and emotions of
the mind, and various mechanical and chemical stimuli. Some of them
occasionally excite the voluntary muscles of the body to a degree
of action, over which volition has no control. Thus a person in an
ordinary state of mind, can walk more or less quietly as suits his
convenience; but it occasionally happens, we shall say in the field of
battle, that the passion of fear is excited; this excitement frequently
disregards the power of the will, and strongly excites the muscles
employed in running away.[197]

In most animals, there is connected with the muscles another kind of
structure called _tendon_, which consists in a white substance very
different from muscles, but having a fibrous structure. Although
tendons are not necessary to the action of muscles, yet there are
several advantages derived from them; they occupy much less room than
muscles, and can be placed in greater numbers around the joints, so
as to preserve the beauty and uniformity of the limbs. They may be
considered as living cords, joining the muscle to the bone on which it
is to act, and, being more scantily supplied with blood than muscles,
make a smaller quantity of blood necessary to the system, which is
certainly a convenience. Although the different parts of the body
vary very much in their functions and degree of motion; yet, it is
convenient, that they should be all united together by a substance of
considerable elasticity. This is done by the interposition of _cellular
membrane_, which is the general connecting medium throughout the body,
attaching each organ to its neighbor, but allowing sufficient play for
the performance of its function.

It is in the cellular membrane of different parts of the body that fat
is deposited; and from the seeming caprice of nature, in overloading
some animals, and entirely denying it to others, its use has been
thought inconsiderable in the system. When, however, we remark, that
fat is taken up in some diseases where the appetite is impaired; and
that torpid animals, before hibernation, have a large quantity of it
accumulated, and come out of that state quite emaciated: and that
bees, who have no fat in their bodies, lay up a stock of food, having
the same chemical properties, against their hibernating season; it
appears very probable, that one use of fat is to form a reservoir of
nutriment, which supplies the wants of an animal when food is not
introduced by the stomach.

If we add the _skin_ to the cellular membrane, we may say, without
these the beauty and symmetry of the exterior would have been much
diminished. We should have seen the raw muscles in all their actions,
and the naked nerves exposed to the air and to injury. There would have
existed deep fissures between the muscles, cavities in almost every
part, and the body would have presented the sad appearance it now does
in consumption.[198] But the cellular substance in some places only
separates one part from another, or affords a slippery surface for one
muscle to slide over the other: in others forming membranes or fascia
to hide, to bind down and strengthen different organs; while in others
admitting into its cells an oily substance, becomes fat, and fills up
all the interstices, rounds off all prominences, softens acute lines,
and gives a graceful softness and contour to the whole. And the skin
enveloping in a close case, keeps all compact, and hides from the eye
whatever might be offensive: while, at the same time the cutis or
true skin serves for a surface for the nerves and exhalent vessels to
terminate, the cuticle or scarf skin defends them from injury, and
moderates their excessive sensibility.

As all animals are to live in media where the heat varies, it was
necessary either to form them in such a way, that their functions
should not be affected by varieties in temperature, or that they should
be enabled to keep up the heat of their bodies at a regular point.
Animals have been endowed with the latter power, and can accordingly
maintain their heat, whether exposed to a high or low degree of
temperature, with some exception as to the degree in the lower orders
of animals, in some of which the temperature varies with that of the
medium in which they are placed. This is the case with the Frog.--This
animal, when placed in warm water, has the temperature of its body
raised several degrees, and, on the other hand, may be reduced to
the freezing point, without producing death. The heat of the human
body, however, is little changed, whether it be exposed to intense
cold, or much above the heat of boiling water. In the experiments
made in heated rooms by Dr. Fordyce, and Sir Charles Blagden, these
gentlemen remained several minutes in the heat of 260 degrees, nearly
50 degrees more than boiling water. At this heat a beefsteak and eggs
were cooked near the stove, and yet the heated air produced no bad
effect upon their bodies: it raised the temperature of their bodies
only a few degrees.--The lungs are the chief agents by which heat is
introduced into animal bodies. By their means, the blood is exposed to
the air, and consumes its oxygenous part, which contains the principle
of heat in a combined state. This, during circulation, is evolved by
the minute blood vessels, so as to become sensible on every part of
the body: and it is an important fact, that the quantity of oxygen
consumed is greater in cold than warm weather; by this wise provision,
in proportion as the heat is more quickly carried off by the coldness
of the surrounding medium, the animal receives an increased internal
supply. Many experiments have been instituted to ascertain the quantity
of oxygen consumed in a given time by ordinary respiration, and,
according to the best calculations, it appears that the consumption
amounts to about 33½ ounces troy weight, in 24 hours; and it has been
computed by philosophers, that the quantity of heat, which the oxygen
consumes and will supply to the body, is nearly equal to that given out
by a common candle.[199] I have thus attempted to give a short view of
the different structures and functions of the body, and have briefly
pointed out some of their varieties in the different classes of animals.

This corporeal system, which by its uniform and harmonious action
contributes so essentially and largely to our terrestrial enjoyment,
exhibits an astonishing display of the infinite wisdom, almighty power,
and boundless goodness of its glorious Creator. Galen, an ancient Pagan
physician, on contemplating the different parts of the human body, and
the disposition of them, fell on his knees in humble adoration of the
wisdom with which the whole is contrived; and was excited to challenge
any one, after a hundred years’ study, to tell how the least fiber or
particle could have been more commodiously placed, either for use or
beauty. His seventeen books on the subject are like so many hymns of
praise to the almighty and all-wise God, the Creator. Lactantius calls
his writings on the body of man, a marvellous comment on his creation,
and Galen himself managed the subject as a full demonstration of a
Deity which every man carries about with him.

But what is still more deserving of our attention is the _soul_ of man:
for if the external structure be so admirable a piece of mechanism,
what shall we say of the immaterial and intellectual spirit resident
in it? This noble, constituent, essential part of man, is yet a more
astonishing production of infinite skill and power. Elihu says, “The
Spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty hath given
me life. There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty
giveth them understanding.” God, by his creating energy, called all
things out of nothing, but there was neither order, light, nor motion,
till the Divine Spirit moved on the lifeless chaos; so the same
all-wise and powerful Architect formed of clay the wonderful fabric
of man’s body, which remained without life and action, till the Holy
Spirit infused a vital spirit into him, thereby enduing him with sense,
motion, understanding, will, and active powers. This soul, therefore,
became a living principle of intelligence, consciousness, and activity,
in man.

The great Creator said, “Let us make man in _our image_, after _our
likeness_.” Now, as the Divine Being is infinite, he is neither
limited by parts, nor definable by passions: therefore he can have
no _corporeal image_ after which he formed the body of man. The
_image_ and _likeness_ in which he was created must necessarily be
intellectual: his soul must have been formed after the nature and
perfections of God. The Creator was now producing a spirit, formed
after himself. He is the fountain whence it issued; hence the stream
must resemble the spring which produced it.

The most perfect description of God, given to us in the Scripture,
is that by our Saviour:--“God is a Spirit.” It has been observed by
expositors, that this assertion is no where else to be found in the
sacred Writings. That passage, “Now the Lord is that Spirit,” sounds
something like it, but in meaning is different. The word _God_ here
is not to be understood personally, either for the Father, or the
Son, or the Holy Ghost, alone, but essentially for the Divine Nature,
which each of these glorious Persons possesses. The Divine Nature is
_spirit_. This shows, that, according to the popular and common use of
the word, he is a Being entirely separated from matter or body, in all
its properties and affections; that he is a pure mind, and possessed of
the most excellent powers and perfections, which belong to spiritual
beings.

It is difficult, for persons of a low understanding, who are
unaccustomed to abstract reflections, and who have imbibed their
knowledge by means of the external senses, employed on material
objects, to raise their minds to the contemplation of the existence
of immaterial, invisible beings. But that there really are such, and
particularly that God is such, admits of the clearest proof, and will
not be called in question by any who on rational grounds acknowledge
his existence. It is usually granted, that it is much more easy to say
what a spirit is not, than to define what it is. It is not in the power
of the wisest and most knowing of men, to declare its nature. Nay, who
can explain what the consistence of any piece of matter is, which we
every day see and touch!

But as, notwithstanding our ignorance of the essence of material
objects, we are not only sure of their existence, but also know many
of their properties; so in like manner, though we are ignorant of the
nature of spirits, yet from their manifest operations and effects, we
are both convinced that such beings exist, and have some notion of
several of their faculties and powers.

The powers and capacities that we observe in all the operations and
works of God, are utterly inconsistent with the properties we discern
in matter. In the works of creation we perceive evident proofs of
thought, intention, contrivance, and design; which powers, we are sure,
having no affinity with solidity, figure, and a capacity of being moved
by the impulse of another, cannot arise from the composition or mixture
of any of the known properties of matter. Not only the existence, but
many of the perfections of God, may be discerned in various parts of
the universe.

In short, we can say nothing higher of God, than that he is a Spirit.
This notion leads us to conceive of him as a most perfect Being, and
to reject concerning him whatever would argue any imperfection. It
leads us to believe him to be perfectly immaterial, free from all the
imperfections of matter, and from all the infirmities of corporeal
creatures. But though _spirit_ signifies a being of higher rank than
body or matter, yet the word is too low to express the essence of God,
any otherwise than analogically, or metaphorically. He is infinitely
more excellent than the highest created spirits, being eternal, and
immutable. But some may inquire, if God be such a Spirit, how is it
that in Scripture we read of his having bodily members, and natural
affections, like men; such as head, eyes, ears, mouth, hands, and feet;
and the affections, or passions, of anger, grief, love, joy, &c? these
are ascribed to him, or rather assumed by him. I answer; this is done
in condescension to our narrow capacities; for if God should speak
to us of himself, as he is in himself, our understandings could not
comprehend him. As the inconceivable glories of the world to come, are
explained to us by the honors and pleasures of this life; so the nature
of God, by a gracious condescension to our weakness, is signified to
us by a likeness to our own. By human members being ascribed to God,
are implied the moral excellencies of his spiritual nature, or rather
his operations, which are more sensible to us than his invisible
nature. His eyes are emblems of his knowledge, wisdom, omniscience, and
providence. His face indicates his favor, and sometimes is expressive
of his displeasure, because both these appear in the countenance of
a man. His mouth is the symbol of the revelation of his will. His
hand, or arm, is indicative of the less or greater exercises of his
power.--Such a _Spirit_ is the Creator of man, whom he made in his
_image_ or _likeness_.

Whoever reflects with attention on the human soul, may easily
perceive it to be of a nature entirely different from the body. Being
immaterial, it is not compounded of material principles, nor consists
of innumerable parts which may be separated from each other; neither
is it capable of solidity, figure, extension, and other properties
of matter; but is a simple, uncompounded substance, though possessed
of various and distinct powers; and therefore is neither visible nor
divisible, nor has it any dimensions or shape.

The soul has a power of _thought_, with which mere matter can never
be endued. If it pass through all the changes, and assume all the
shapes of which it is capable, thought will never be the result. It may
be differently modified, framed, and disposed, but cannot think. “I
find in me something that _thinks_,” says a celebrated author, “which
neither earth, water, air, fire, nor any mixture of them, can possibly
do. Something which sees, hears, smells, tastes, and feels, all which
are so many modes of thinking.” Thought is the privilege of immaterial
beings.[200]

This inward principle is capable not only of thinking, but of love,
desire, hope, joy; hatred, fear, sorrow, anger, and a whole train of
inward emotions, which are commonly called _passions_ or _affections_.
A something apprehended to be good in itself, or calculated to be
beneficial to us, is the object of love. If that good be absent,
it excites desire: if there be a probability of obtaining it, that
produces hope; and the possession of the desired object yields delight
and joy. Evil, whether real, or imaginary only, is the object of
dislike and aversion. If there be any probability of this evil coming
in contact with us, it causes fear; and if it unavoidably come upon us,
it produces sorrow or anger. These passions or affections seem to be
the only spring of action in the soul.

The soul has received from God a principle of motion, whereby
it governs at pleasure every part of the body, and directs its
operations: only with this exception, that all the vital motions,
which are absolutely necessary for the continuance of animal life,
are involuntarily going on, whether we advert to them or not; which
is a marvellous instance of the wisdom and goodness of God. With the
exception of these, I direct the motion of my whole body. By a single
act of my will, I put my head, eyes, hands, or any part into motion:
although the manner of doing this I do not comprehend. Every one feels
that he has an inherent power to move this or that part of his body or
not, and to give it a direction this way or the contrary, just as he
pleases. I can, as I choose, open or shut my eyes, speak or be silent,
rise up or sit down, stretch out my hand or draw it in, and use any of
my limbs according to my pleasure, as well as my whole body. Matter may
be moved, but it can never move itself.

The soul is free in its operations; it possesses this property, which
is capable of being exerted with regard to all its faculties, as well
as all the motions of the body. It is a power of self-determination,
which, though not affecting all our thoughts and imaginations, yet
extends to our words and actions in general, with but few exceptions.
I am certain, that I am free to speak or not to speak, to act or not
to act, to do this or to do the contrary, as I am of my own existence.
I have not only what is termed a _liberty of contradiction_, but what
is termed a _liberty of contrariety_, a power to act one way, or the
contrary: to deny this would be to contradict the uniform experience
of all human kind. The soul is not necessitated to judge or act by any
bodily impulse. Let things appear as they may to the senses, the soul
can suspend its judgment, till it has examined and considered them more
thoroughly. Let the appetites and inclinations of the body strongly
urge their own gratification, the soul can refuse their solicitations,
and maturely weigh what the consequences would be. Let all the
allurements of sensible objects, the assurance of sensual enjoyments,
or the influence of custom and example, try to corrupt the integrity
of the soul, and lead it astray from the paths of peace and purity;
unless it consent, the attempts will prove ineffectual. We can reason,
discourse, study, contrive, choose, and refuse with discretion; begin
a work, and cease again at pleasure. We can reflect on what we have
done, and either rejoice and delight in it, or be ashamed and grieved
for it. We distinguish truth from error, moral good and evil; we fear
punishment on having committed evil, and hope for reward on having done
well. And, through the grace of God assisting us, we have a power to
embrace and resolve to do good, as well as evil. We are free to choose
whom we will serve, and, if we determine in favor of the better part,
to continue therein.

_Conscience_ is not a faculty of the soul distinct from the
understanding, memory, will, and affections, but that power by which we
are conscious of our own state, reflect on our actions, and pronounce
them either good or evil. This supposes, that we are acquainted with
the law of God, either natural or written, which is the rule of our
duty. The name is derived from the Latin word _conscientia_, into which
the Greek word συνειδησις is exactly translated. Both these words for
conscience, signify, that the mind is possessed of a consciousness of
the actions and thoughts of the man, and passes a judgment on them,
according to some rule. The Jews have no proper word in their language
for conscience, and therefore use the term _heart_; which is also
used in the New Testament. Conscience is the journal or diary of the
actions of man. Its office is, 1. To call, urge, and excite us to duty.
2. To testify and bear witness either for or against us, according
as we perform or neglect our duty. 3. Either to excuse or acquit, or
accuse and condemn us, on the evidence it gives of the moral nature
and quality of our actions: if they be conformable to the Divine rule,
as to matter and manner, it acquits us; if they be contrary to it,
conscience accuses, condemns, and passes sentence upon us. 4. And if
its sentence be true and just, conformable to rule, it is ratified by
God the Supreme Judge, whose deputy and vicegerent it is in the breast
of every man.

Though the soul is not under the imperious influence of the body, yet
for many ages it has been allowed by sensible men, that “there is
nothing in the understanding which is not first perceived by some of
the senses.” The imagination is the place where the images of things
are first engendered, and from which they are transferred to the
understanding. And therefore those who want any sense, cannot have the
least knowledge or idea of the objects peculiar to that sense: as they
who never had sight, have not the least conception of light or colors.
But there is a great difference between our senses, considered as the
avenues of knowledge. Some of them have a narrow sphere of action:
others a more extensive one. By _feeling_ we discern only those objects
which touch some part of our body; and consequently this sense extends
only to a small number of objects. Our senses of _taste_ and _smell_
extend to fewer still. But, on the other hand, our nobler sense of
_hearing_ has a wide sphere of action: especially in the case of loud
sounds, as thunder, the roaring of the sea, or the discharge of cannon:
the last of which sounds has been frequently heard at the distance
of near a hundred miles. Yet the space to which the hearing itself
extends is small, compared to that through which the _sight_ extends.
This sense takes in at one view, not only the most unbounded prospects
on earth, but also the moon, and the other planets, the sun, yea, the
fixed stars, though at such an immeasurable distance.

But still none of our senses can reach beyond the bounds of this
visible world. They supply us with such knowledge of the material
world, as answers all the purposes of life. But as this was the design
for which they were given, beyond this they cannot go. They furnish
us with no information at all, concerning the _invisible world_.
But the wise and gracious Governor of the worlds, both visible and
invisible, has prepared a remedy for this defect. He has favored us
with a _revelation_, concerning himself, his existence, perfections,
and will; and another world, its nature, certainty, and duration: and
this revelation is contained in the Scriptures. And he has appointed
_faith_ to supply the defect of sense; to take us up where sense sets
us down, and help us over the great gulf. Its office begins where that
of sense ends. Sense is the evidence of things that are seen; of the
visible, the material world, and the several parts of it. Faith, on
the other hand, is the “evidence of things not seen,” of the invisible
world: of all these invisible things, which are revealed in the Oracles
of God.[201] Though eternal things come not within the reach of sense,
yet, by faith, they are as present to the mind, in their reality,
excellence, and continuance, as if they were seen with the eye of the
body. The testimony of the God of truth, is the foundation and reason
of this faith; for what he says must be true, because he cannot lie:
this is a principle concerning which all agree who own his existence.

The soul has a vast intellectual capacity; for the knowledge of God,
nature, providence, the original and present state of man, the visible
world, sublime speculations, and useful discoveries, come within its
comprehension. It can reason, infer, reflect, and carry on a chain of
thoughts, with perspicuity and close connection, concerning things. Its
powers take in objects of all dimensions; yet they are not situated
as bodies in a material place, where the greater occupy more space
than the less: for the thought of a mile, or ten thousand miles, does
no more fill or stretch the soul, than that of a foot, an inch, or a
mathematical point. And whereas all matter has its parts, and those
extended, one without another, into length, breadth, and thickness, and
so is measurable by inches, yards, or solid measures; there is nothing
of measurable extension in any thing belonging to the soul, neither
length, breadth, nor thickness; nor is it possible to form an idea of
a foot of thought, a yard of reason, a pound of wisdom, or a quart of
virtue.[202] The soul is capable of abstract notions, mathematical and
metaphysical conceptions. Its powers are so great, that we can explore
nature, span the surface of the earth, dive into its capacious seas,
and there discover the numerous inhabitants of the watery world. We
can travel to the sun, continue our journey through our own spherical
system, from planet to planet, tell their dimensions, measure their
distances, and accompany them through their various revolutions. We can
pass the boundaries of our own, and enter into other systems; and from
thence, into eternity itself: ascending from region to region, from
world to world, from the creature till we reach the abode of the great
Creator, who is the first cause of all things; and then, with ravished
eyes, gaze on that glorious Luminary of the moral world, till we are
amazed, delighted, and overpowered, with the splendor of his infinite
perfections.

The soul is _immortal_ in its duration: it once began to be, but will
never cease to exist. When the whole of time is elapsed, it will live
in the vigorous exercise of its active powers, and its existence run
parallel with eternity. The death of the soul cannot be effected by the
operation of second causes; and God, who is the first cause, will never
annihilate it. The Sadducees denied the immateriality and immortality
of the soul, saying, that, except God, there was no spirit: they were
much like the Epicureans among the Gentile philosophers. In refutation
of this Sadducean notion, our Saviour referred them to the five Books
of Moses, which they acknowledged as of Divine authority, where God
says, “I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob.” Abraham had been dead upwards of 300 years when these words
were spoken to Moses. Now, says our Saviour, “God is not the God of
the dead, but of the living.” Though the bodies of these renowned
patriarchs had been long dead, and ceased to exist among mortals, their
souls were still living, not only in a future state, but with God.
He also warned his disciples of the opposition they would meet with,
in the faithful discharge of their religious and ministerial duties,
from the prejudice, rage, and fury of men; but urged them to take
courage, and not suffer themselves to be intimidated, so as to neglect
in any degree the execution of the important commission he had given
them, saying, “Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul.” Hence the soul is a principle distinct from the body,
actually survives it, and can subsist without it, not only retaining
its vital existence, but its consciousness, reflection, and activity.
The following lines of Addison are strongly and beautifully descriptive
of the immortality of the soul:

    “The soul, secure in her existence, smiles
    At dissolution, and defies its power.
    The stars shall fade away, the sun himself
    Grow dim with age, and nature sink in years;
    But thou shalt flourish in immortal youth--
    Unhurt, amidst the war of elements,
    The wreck of matter, and the crash of worlds.”

In a word, since the soul is not material, it can have no parts; if it
have no parts, then it cannot be separated; if it cannot be separated,
then it cannot be dissolved; if it cannot be dissolved, then it is
incorruptible; and if it be incorruptible, then it is immortal.

Thus it is evident, from all the perceptions of the soul, that it
is not compounded like the body. Those powers and affections, such
as thought and reason, judgment and liberty, love and hatred, joy
and sorrow, can never be the properties or effects of matter, in any
possible variation or modification of its parts. Nor can matter ever
produce those noble and just sentiments, those sublime and generous
affections, to which the soul sometimes rises in its contemplations of
God, the phenomena of the universe, and the operation of Providence
which sustains and governs all things. All this can never be produced
by matter, which is altogether inactive of itself; and when motion
is impressed on it, the only change produced is in the situation and
contexture of its parts. Surely all attempts to account for these
things, by any laws of nature known in the corporeal world, are
absolutely ridiculous.

How strange is it then, that such a spiritual being should be united so
closely to flesh and blood, imprisoned in a tenement of clay, and use
the body as the instrument of active operations.--Several philosophers,
among whom is Socrates, have called the body της ψυχης οικητηριον, _the
habitation of the soul_; yea, φυλακη και ταφος, her moveable _prison_,
and living _sepulchre_. These two essential parts of man, which God,
at his creation, united so closely together, that both make but one
person, is a great mystery; considering the different natures that
adhere, soul and body, matter and spirit. All this is unintelligible
to the human intellect, however improved and capacious. The disputers
of this world will find themselves completely perplexed, in attempting
to explain by what ties a spirit is united to a piece of clay; and
what holds it confined to its habitation. The adhesion of the material
particles in the human body, the flame of animal life kindled and
burning clear and strong within us, and the union of spirit and matter,
so that the one is the tenement of the other, and the instrument of
its operations, are, as to their manner, mysterious, and attended with
difficulties that would perplex and confound the most penetrating and
sagacious mind.

Man then was created in the _natural_ image of God, which consisted
chiefly in the spiritual nature, amazing powers, and immortality of
his soul; like God, it is a _spirit_, immaterial, invisible, active,
intelligent, free, and immortal: and partly, in a lower sense, in the
privilege of his body, which, in his state of innocence, was, by the
promise of his Creator, entitled to a gratuitous immortality. Some
make reason or understanding to be the image in which God created man:
but, though this may be included, yet, it is not the principal thing
intended by the Divine _image_: for if rationality were the image, it
could never be lost. Sin, which defaces this beautiful image, does not
deprive man of intellect: his nature will for ever continue rational;
he can never, I presume, be deprived of his reason so as not to possess
it any more. Thought and consciousness are inseparable from the nature
of man, and therefore this _image_ of God in which Adam was created,
must be something distinct from reason. Indeed reasonable creatures
only can be the subjects of it, but reason is not the thing itself.
To suppose that mere reason is God’s image in man, is an hypothesis
unworthy of a reasonable nature; and with how much confidence soever
some assert, the assertion is reproachful to our Maker.

The chief thing intended by the Divine _image_, is moral rectitude;
man was created in the _moral image_ of God; but that image in man
was only a _likeness_, it did not equal, but resembled its high
original--a disparity which necessarily exists between a creature
and its Creator. According to any rational opinion we can form of
God, we must believe that he is a spiritual Being; which includes the
simplicity of his nature, his indivisibility, and his immortality;
possessed not only of every natural perfection, but of all moral
excellencies. He is not only an intelligent, omnipresent, omniscient,
almighty Being, but wise, holy, righteous, and good. Without moral
perfections, his character would not be very interesting to us. If he
had no radical and constitutional principle in his nature that could
move him to regard the temper of our minds, and the complexion of our
actions, or cause him to be either pleased or displeased with our
behavior, however conducted, we should have no reason to act either
from motives of love or fear of him. His natural attributes alone, are
very far from finishing his character; in conjunction with these, his
moral excellencies complete his glory, exhibit him as the most perfect
Agent, and render him in the most exalted sense our Governor. His
holiness, justice, goodness, and truth, are called moral attributes,
or communicable perfections; because we can trace some resemblance
in angels and men; though there is an infinite disproportion between
these perfections as they exist in God, and are faintly displayed in
the creatures: in him they are infinite, in the creatures finite and
limited.

These moral perfections constitute God a proper object of religious
adoration, and without which no worship would be due or could be
rendered to him. The Divine Nature is the foundation of that worship
which we, as rational beings, are under obligations to perform; and the
revelation of the will of God, with which he has graciously favored us
in the Scripture, is the constant rule of his worship. On believing his
existence, and cultivating the knowledge of his attributes, especially
those which are so astonishingly displayed and harmonized in the
redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ, it very naturally follows, to
every reflecting mind, that we owe him ourselves, and are bound by the
strongest ties to present to him the most spiritual worship of which
our intelligent nature is capable.

The moral image of God, after which man was created, was his greatest
excellence. His _understanding_ possessed a large capacity for
improvement, equal to an extensive and accurate acquaintance with
things both natural and divine, the acquisition of which would
facilitate his own happiness, by rendering him more competent to
answer the benevolent design which his Creator projected in calling
him into existence. This capacity was amply supplied by his Creator;
for all divine knowledge is given by revelation; which he must either
communicate to man, or he must remain ignorant of him. The capacity
is one thing, and its improvement is another; which, as it is not
naturally inherent in man, so it must be acquired. The knowledge of
the nature, perfections, and will of God, can, in the first instance,
only be made known by himself; for there is not a correct notion of him
in the whole intellectual and moral world, but what has been received
from either Divine revelation, or his own immediate influence. Adam,
then, as an intelligent creature, was endued with the knowledge of
God, so far as was necessary to enable him to fear, love, and serve
him. Without a perception of his existence and perfections, and the
knowledge of his will, he could not perform any acts of adoration,
reverence, reliance, regard, and delight, toward him. If therefore
man, in his primitive state, was obliged to worship his Creator (of
which certainly no one can doubt,) it must be granted that he possessed
knowledge equal to the nature and extent of his obligations. In his
state of innocence, he did not perform a blind devotion, or worship he
knew not what. Such ignorance is the consequence of sin; therefore he
could not be the unhappy subject of it before he transgressed.

Some persons have thought that Adam, in his primeval state, understood
the doctrine of a Trinity of Persons or Subsistencies in the Godhead.
Though the knowledge of this important doctrine cannot be attained by
reasoning on the operations of Divine wisdom, power, and goodness,
visibly and conspicuously displayed in the universe; yet, as Adam
received by immediate revelation some truths, why may we not suppose
that this mystery was not conveyed to him in the same way, that his
acts of devotion might comport with the honors due to each of the
Sacred Three? The Divine Nature is without multiplicity, it is one; but
the Three Subsistencies in that Essence are essential to the Godhead:
this arrangement is radical, constitutional, and eternal. Therefore why
should not God be worshipped according to his own natural distinction
of Persons in his undivided Essence, by man in his primitive state? A
Trinity in Unity is the most correct view of God; and, consequently,
the worship that accords with it, being the most accurate, must be
acceptable to him. The Christian religion has not given existence to
this doctrine of the Trinity; for independently of the mediatorial
scheme of redemption and salvation by Christ, God was from eternity the
same Triune Being, and cannot change. It is not improbable that man,
while he retained his pristine state, worshipped the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Spirit, in all his acts of religious worship. Lord Bacon,
in his Confession of Faith, says,--“I believe that nothing is without
beginning but God; no nature, no matter, no spirit, but one only, and
the same God. That God, as he is eternally almighty, only wise, only
good, in his nature; so he is eternally Father, Son, and Spirit, in
Persons.”

We cannot rationally suppose that Adam was a stranger to his _duty_,
either in its nature, manner, or extent. If he had not known what
duties his Creator required him to perform, it would have been
impossible for him to act agreeably to his will. Obedience to any
authority necessarily supposes a knowledge of what it enjoins: and,
consequently, Adam must have known what he ought to practise, in what
manner, and with what views; for, otherwise, he could not be obedient
to the will of God in what he did. Hence we must conclude, that he was
acquainted with the whole compass of his duty. As his understanding was
not blinded by contracted prejudices, so it was free from any natural
defect. His mind was furnished with correct views of God, his own
dependence upon him, relations and obligations to him, and the way to
please and enjoy him.

Adam, in his primitive state, knew wherein his _happiness_ consisted.
If he had been ignorant of that happiness to which he was entitled
so long as he preserved his integrity, how could he have enjoyed it
while in his possession; for a delight in any present good arises from
a perception of its nature and value. Neither was he ignorant of the
misery, into which an action committed against the will of his Creator
would bring him. He certainly knew that sinning against God would
inevitably be attended with fatal effects to himself. His unclouded
reason could not but discern, that rebellion against the dignity and
sovereignty of his Maker would unavoidably expose him to his righteous
displeasure.

As the judgment of Adam could not but entirely approve of the supreme
Good, in all the perfections of its nature, and revelation of the
Divine Mind; so his _will_, with great freedom following its dictates,
readily embraced what was right, and exactly harmonized with every
requisition. He had a holy disposition, such as comported with the
infinite perfection of holiness, so resplendent in the Divine Nature.
Some have asserted, that God formed man without any direction in his
will either to good or evil. But this imagination is irrational, for
it supposes that he was neither holy nor unholy. It is evident from
Scripture, that he was created good in an ethical or moral sense,
for he was made in the _image_ of God, which chiefly consisted in a
conformity to his moral perfections. He resembled these, particularly
that of holiness; so that, though in an infinitely lower degree, he was
holy as God is holy; without the least taint of sin in his nature, or
any inclination to evil, all his powers and faculties being disposed to
comply with his utmost requisition.

Adam’s _affections_ were subordinate and obedient to the higher
faculties of his soul, and moved without the least tumult or disorder.
Being pure and regular, there was no depravity or discord among them.
No temptation arose from vanity seated in any of the inferior powers:
neither was there a rebellious disposition among the passions directed
against his reason. No unlawful love, delight, or aversion had any
place in his innocent nature, and therefore the dictates of reason
did not meet with any control from corruption in the affections; and,
consequently, obedience to his Creator was not rendered difficult by
unruliness in the passions. Being thus made after the _likeness_ of
God, he had the moral law written on his heart: that hereby he might
have a perfect rule of obedience, and be easily apprised of his duty
to him. And as he was indispensably obliged to yield obedience to this
law, and the consequence of violating it would be endless ruin, God, as
a just and gracious Sovereign, gave him ability to keep it. Herein he
treated him as a rational creature, and a subject of moral government.

The inferior _appetites_ of Adam were in a state of perfect subjection,
and never indulged to the least excess. The animal structure requiring
food for its support, there was a great variety provided. But while
surrounded with plenty, he was strictly temperate; his appetite was
regular, consistent with purity, and in harmony with his devotions.
The _senses_ also corresponded to the faculties of the soul, and
were inlets to wisdom and enjoyment. Thus, as one observes, all his
faculties both of body and mind were subservient to the glory of God,
and contributed to his own felicity: a state which we are to regain by
Christ.

    “Enslav’d to sense, to pleasure prone,
        Fond of created good;
    Father, our helplessness we own,
        And trembling taste our food.

    Trembling we taste; for, ah! no more
        To thee the creatures lead;
    Chang’d, they exert a baneful power,
        And poison, while they feed.

    Curs’d for the sake of wretched man,
        They now engross him whole;
    With pleasing force on earth detain!
        And sensualize his soul.

    Groveling on earth we still must lie,
        Till Christ the curse repeal:
    Till Christ descending from on high
        Infected nature heal.

    Come then, our heavenly Adam, come,
        Thy healing influence give;
    Hallow our food, reverse our doom,
        And bid us eat, and live.

    Turn the full stream of nature’s tide:
        Let all our actions tend
    To thee their source; thy love the guide,
        Thy glory be the end.

    Earth then a scale to heaven shall be,
        Sense shall point out the road;
    The creatures all shall lead to thee,
        And all we taste be God.”

Man was _happy_ in his original state; he not only was free from pain
and misery, but enjoyed delight. His pleasure was of a pure nature, not
only such as God approved, but derived from a Divine source. If his
mind had not been possessed of correct knowledge, his will disposed
to obedience, his affections regular and holy, and his appetites and
senses subject to a rational control, what pleasure could he have taken
in the contemplation of infinite perfections, and in a compliance to
the requisitions of the moral law? Happiness necessarily supposes
delight, and delight as necessarily supposes a concordance between
the disposition of the soul, and the objects from which its pleasure
springs. Man was happy while innocent; he therefore enjoyed pleasure,
which was pure, arising from positive holiness, and the presence
and blessing of God. Surely it is reasonable to conclude, that Adam
performed devotional acts with holy reverence and supreme delight. He
could not but give the tribute of praise to his beneficent Creator, for
his superabundant goodness toward him; being favored with every thing,
not only necessary to his sustenance, in the excellent circumstances
in which he was placed, but with whatever he could desire for the
entertainment and delight of his innocent and heavenly mind. Above
all, his grateful soul most certainly adored his Creator, for the
glorious and beneficial displays of his wisdom, power, and goodness,
and rejoiced in the interest he had in his approbation, protection,
and kindness. While he retained his integrity, and enjoyed free access
to his Maker, intimate communion with him, and was free from his
displeasure, what serenity, satisfaction, and pleasure must fill his
soul! He possessed that first and greatest of blessings, mentioned by
Horace, _mens sana in corpore sano_, a sound mind in a healthy body.

Notwithstanding the excellent state in which Adam was created, and
advantageous circumstances in which he was placed, yet he was liable
to fall. By reason of the spiritual and intelligent principle in him,
he became a moral agent, and a subject of moral government. He knew
his duty, and had the power of determining his own choice and actions.
He could choose good, and refuse evil, and be influenced by the hope
of reward and the fear of punishment. He had no disposition to sin in
his nature: for God could not create him in a sinful state, since that
would render him the author of sin. He had full power to stand: but
God could not interfere with the freedom of his will; and herein he
acted toward him in a way agreeable to his condition of probation. The
mutability of his will was essential to him as a rational creature,
placed in a state of responsibility for his actions to the great
Governor of the world. Dr. Paley says, “Free agency in its very essence
contains liability to abuse. Yet, if you deprive man of his free
agency, you subvert his nature.” God answers for himself in Milton:--

                    ----“Man had of me
    All he could have: I made him just and right,
    Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.”

The sentiments of Faber are very appropriate. “When the Almighty ceased
from the work of creation, he pronounced all that he had made to be
very good. The new world was as yet free from the inroads of sin, and
from the curse of sterility.

                        ---- ‘Nature then
    Wanton’d as in her prime, and play’d at will
    Her virgin fancies.’

“The whole creation smiled upon man, and the golden age of the poets
was realized. Blessed with perfect health, both mental and corporeal,
our heaven-born progenitor was equally unconscious of the stings
of guilt and the pangs of disease. His understanding was unclouded
with the mists of vice, ignorance, and error; his will, though
absolutely free, was yet entirely devoted to the service of God; and
his affections warm, vigorous, and undivided, were ardently bent upon
the great Fountain of existence. Though vested in an earthly body,
his soul was as the soul of an angel, pure, just, and upright. He was
uncontaminated with the smallest sin, and free from even the slightest
taint of pollution. His passions perfectly under the guidance of his
reason, yielded a ready and cheerful obedience to the dictates of
his conscience; an obedience, not constrained and irksome, but full,
unreserved, and attended with sensations of unmixed delight. Such was
man when he came forth from the hand of his Creator, the image of God
stamped upon his soul and influencing all his actions.”[203]

We may add, the authority and _dominion_ with which God invested Adam.
This extended “over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over the cattle, and over the earth, and over every living thing
that creepeth upon the earth.” God constituted him the ruler, under
him, of all the inferior creatures. He probably inducted him into this
office when he caused the creatures to pass in review before him.
“And the Lord God brought every beast of the field, and every fowl
of the air, unto Adam to see what he would call them: and Adam gave
names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast
of the field: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that
was the name thereof.” Man alone, says Smellie, enjoys the power of
communicating and expressing his ideas by articulate and artificial
language. This inestimable prerogative is a great source of improvement
to the human intellect. Without artificial language, though the Author
of nature has bestowed on every animal a mode of expressing its wants
and desires, its pleasures and pains, what a humiliating figure would
the human species exhibit?

Dr. Beattie, in defining the human voice, says, it is air sent out
from the lungs, and so agitated, or modified, in its passage through
the windpipe and larynx, as to become distinctly audible. The windpipe
conveys air into the lungs for the purpose of respiration and speech;
the top or upper part of which is called the larynx, consisting of
four or five cartilages, that may be expanded or brought together,
by the agency of certain muscles which operate all at the same time.
In the middle of the larynx there is a small aperture, called the
_glottis_, through which the breath and voice are conveyed, but which,
when we swallow any thing, is covered by a lid called the _epiglottis_.
Authors have determined that the voice is produced by two semi-circular
membranes in the middle of the larynx, which form by their separation
the aperture that is termed the glottis. The space between them is not
wider than one-tenth of an inch; through which the breath transmitted
from the lungs must pass with considerable velocity. In its passage
it is supposed to give a brisk vibratory motion to the membranous
lips of the glottis, and so to form the sound which we call _voice_:
in order to the production of which, it, however, seems necessary,
that, by an energy of the will, a certain degree of tenseness should
be communicated to the larynx, or at least to the two membranes in the
middle of it. The voice, thus formed, is strengthened and mellowed by
a reverberation from the palate, and other hollow places in the inside
of the mouth and nostrils; and as these are better or worse shaped
for this reverberation, it is said to be more or less agreeable. The
glottis is found to be narrower in women and young persons than in men;
hence the voices of the latter are deeper, or more grave, than those
of the former. We can at pleasure dilate or contract this aperture,
so as to form the tones of the voice to every variety of the musical
scale. If we consider the many variations of sound, which the same
human voice is capable of uttering, together with the small diameter
of the glottis; and reflect that the same diameter must always produce
the same tone, and, consequently, that to every change of tone a
correspondent change of diameter is necessary: we must be astonished
at the mechanism of these parts and the fineness of the fibers,
producing effects so minute, various, and uniform. For it admits of
proof, that the glottis is capable of at least sixty distinct degrees
of contraction and enlargement, by each of which a different note is
produced.[204]

Concerning the origin of language, numerous conjectures have been
formed. As an instance how far the human mind, unassisted by a Divine
revelation, can go, Diodorus Siculus and Vitruvius have asserted, “that
men at first lived like beasts in woods and caves, forming only strange
and uncouth noises, till their fears caused them to associate together;
and that on growing acquainted with each other, they came to correspond
about things, first by signs, then to make names for them, and in time,
to frame and perfect a language; and that the languages of the world
are different, because different companies of men happening thus to
come together in different places, would, of course, form different
sounds or names of things; hence would arise the variety observable
even in ancient languages.” Thus we perceive the necessity of the
Scriptures relative even to this subject.

“The Mosaic History,” observes Dr. A. Clarke, “represents man as
being immediately capable of conversing with his Maker: of giving
names to the various tribes and classes of animals; and of reasoning
consecutively, and in perfectly appropriate terms, concerning his own
situation, and the relation he stood in to the creatures. As in man’s
first attempt at speech, according to this account, there appear no
crudeness of conception, no barrenness of ideas, and no inexpressive
or unappropriate terms, it is most rational to conclude, that God who
made and endued him with corporeal and mental powers, perfectly suited
to his state and condition in life, endued him also, not only with the
faculty of speech, but with speech or language itself; which latter was
as necessary to his comfort, and, indeed, to the perfection and end
of his being, as any other power or faculty which his Creator thought
proper to bestow upon him.”

Some assert that Adam _gave names_, from an intimate knowledge of the
nature and properties of each creature: that this shows the perfection
of his knowledge, for the names affixed to the different animals
in Scripture always express some prominent feature and essential
characteristic of the creatures to which they are applied; and that had
he not possessed an intuitive knowledge of the grand and distinguishing
properties of those animals, he never could have given them such names.
Dr. Leland states, that man was immediately endued with the gift of
language, which necessarily supposes that he was furnished with a stock
of ideas, a specimen of which he gave in giving names to the inferior
animals, which were brought to him for that purpose. Dr. Johnson
affirms, that the origin of language must have come by inspiration.
But Bishop Warburton conjectures, that God, in this transaction with
Adam, taught him language. Here, says he, by a common figure of speech,
the historian, instead of directly relating the fact, that God taught
man language, represents it, by showing God in the _act_ of doing it,
in a particular _mode_ of information; and that the most apposite we
can conceive in elementary instruction; namely, the giving of names
to substances; things with which Adam was to be conversant, and which
therefore had need of being distinguished each by its proper name.
And what a familiar image do these words give one of a learner of his
rudiments? _And God brought every beast to Adam to_ SEE _what he would
call them_. But though it appears that God taught man language, yet we
cannot reasonably suppose it any other than what served his present
occasions, he being now of himself able to improve and enlarge it, as
his future necessities should require. The celebrated Cowper, touching
this subject says:--

    “One man alone, the father of us all,
    Drew not his life from woman; never gaz’d,
    With mute unconsciousness of what he saw,
    On all around him: learn’d not by degrees,
    Nor aw’d articulation to his ear;
    But, moulded by his Maker into man
    At once, upstood intelligent, survey’d
    All creatures, with precision understood
    Their purport, uses, properties, assign’d
    To each his name significant, and, fill’d
    With love, and wisdom, render’d back to Heaven
    In praise harmonious the first air he drew.
    He was excus’d the penalties of dull
    Minority. No tutor charg’d his hand
    With the thought-tracing quill, or task’d his mind
    With problems.”

However, by the creatures passing before Adam, probably in pairs,
and he giving them names as they passed according to the nature and
properties of each, one thing evidently appears, namely, he was
convinced that none of these animals could be a suitable companion for
him; for, among all which he had named, “there was not a help-meet for
him:” one suitable and proper as an intimate companion and friend.

              “He views the vast creation o’er,
    Marks his own structure more than e’er before;
    Sees all the creatures with their co-mates blest,
    Himself left pensive, far unlike the rest;
    Without compeer with whom his hours to spend,
    Or jointly at the sacred altar bend.
    _Religion_--sacred to the first great Cause:
    _Philosophy_--the voice of Nature’s laws;
    And _social dictates_, all at once combine
    To teach their pupil, that the whole design
    Is not completed, while his lonely life
    Is left without a helper, friend, and wife.
    Refulgent Sol, while traversing his way,
    Has Luna shining with her lucid ray;
    And though her glory is a borrow’d light,
    She reigns sole empress of the sable night.
    Soft purling streams to rivers speed their course,
    And blend themselves with their capacious source.
    The spreading branches of uxorious vines,
    Clasp round each other with encircling twines.
    The climbing Ivy does the Oak embrace,
    And meets with verdant wreaths his bending face.
    The feather’d tribes that wing the firmament,
    By instinct led, to wedded love consent:
    They range the neighb’ring meads in quest of food,
    And guard and cherish their young callow brood.
    And shall the creatures without just pretence,
    Alone possess this high pre-eminence?
    Though with abounding earthly comforts blest,
    Shall man pre-eminent still want the best:--
    A bosom friend, than virgin rose more sweet,
    And whom he can with heart-felt rapture greet;
    Of pleasing form, equal and tender mind,
    To whom he can in closest ties be join’d?”

God did not approve of this state of solitude: he said, “It is not good
that man should be alone,” or only himself. The Creator had not yet
finished his works. He saw it necessary to relieve man in his solitary
situation; and his goodness and power were ready to concur with the
dictates of his wisdom. He said, “I will make him a _help-meet_ for
him;” i.e. his counterpart, one like himself in shape, constitution,
and disposition; exactly adapted to both his body and mind, the very
image of himself, _a second self_.

    “Must the fair creature promis’d to be giv’n,
    Be sent to earth from the abode of heav’n?
    Angelic nature could not well supply
    The craving void, remote, and far too high.
    Will God select amongst the brutal race,
    One, and refine it for his fond embrace?
    Nay, that would be too mean for his respect,
    Beneath his nature, void of intellect.
    The wise Creator, to complete his plan,
    Resolves to make a _help-meet_ from the Man,
    Procure the stamina from him alone,
    Thus constitute her “bone of his own bone.”
    From Man! but where? what part can he forego,
    From head majestic to the servile toe?
    The head imperial would be much too high,
    Lest she, perchance, should for the mast’ry try.
    The toilsome feet are base, of low renown,
    Lest he should trample the fair creature down.
    In Man’s organic structure, mark! the part
    Is that which lies contiguous to the heart;
    Main spring of life, whence all the frame looks gay,
    Centre, where all the lovely passions play;
    Under the shield of the protecting arm,
    Which can defend her from impending harm.”

Accordingly, God proceeded in his work: not as before, when he made
man, and formed his body of the dust of the earth; but he took of the
substance of man, and of that formed an associate for him. The process
is mentioned by Moses, “And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall
upon Adam, and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up
the flesh instead thereof; and the rib, which the Lord God had taken
from man, made he a woman.” The word תרדמה translated _a deep sleep_,
signifies such a sleep as renders a man insensible of any thing done to
him; which was not natural but an extraordinary sleep; not occasioned
by any act of violence done to nature, but the immediate effect of the
hand of God upon him. Sleep, says a German author, is one of the most
remarkable effects of the Divine goodness. It is certainly a proof of
the wisdom of our Creator, that we fall asleep imperceptibly. Sleep
comes unsummoned: it is the only change in our manner of existence
in which reflection bears no part; and is alike independent of the
understanding and the will. Our situation, indeed, during the time of
sleep, is wonderful. We live, but without knowing or perceiving it! The
palpitations of the heart, the circulation of the blood, the process
of digestion, and, in a word, all the animal functions continue to
be performed without interruption. The mind appears, as it were, to
suspend its activity, for a time: by degrees, it looses all sensation,
every distinct idea. The senses are deadened, and stop their wonted
operations. The muscles, by degrees, are moved more slowly, till all
voluntary motion ceases. This change begins in the forehead: then the
muscles of the eye-lids, and of the neck, arms, and feet, are so much
deprived of their activity, that the man seems to be metamorphosed
into a plant. The situation of the brain becomes such, that it cannot
transmit to the soul the same ideas as when we are awake. The soul
perceives no object, though the nerve of vision is not altered; and
it would see nothing, were the eyes to be even open. The ears are not
shut, and yet they hear nothing. In a word, we find an unceasing source
of admiration, in the wonderful preparations, and the tender care,
which the Divine Being has employed, to procure us the blessings of
sleep. The following epigram, translated from the Latin by Dr. Wolcott,
is beautiful:--

    “Come, gentle sleep, attend thy votary’s prayer,
    And, though death’s image, to my couch repair!
    How sweet, thus lifeless, yet with life to lie,
    Thus without dying, oh how sweet to die!”

The word צלע _tsela_, and in the Septuagint πλευρα, rendered a _rib_,
most probably means _bone_, and _flesh_, not a naked bone, but one
with flesh adhering to it. “And the rib which the Lord God had taken
from man, _made_ he a woman,” or, according to the Hebrew, _builded it
up_ to be a woman; signifying, that the human species was perfect when
the woman was created, which before was like an imperfect building.
This implies, an old author intimates, that as children are derived
from their parents to build up the family, so the woman was derived
from Adam to build up his great family, mankind, of his own nature and
substance; and that his posterity might spring wholly from him, both
in respect of himself, and of his wife, their common mother, who was
taken out of him. What amazing wisdom is herein displayed; not only in
producing a creature _like_ man, but out of _a part of man himself_!
God could have animated and organized the dust of the earth, and of
it formed the woman; but had he done so, she would have appeared
in the eyes of man as a distinct being, to whom he had no natural
relation.[205]

      “Her form completed, lo! she rises fair,
    Possess’d of beauties far beyond compare!
    This last production of the Artist’s skill,
    Best effort of his wisdom, might, and will,
    Gains science’ height: the high-wrought features shine,
    Her form displays a symmetry divine.
    Her pleasing gesture, as she walks along,
    Exceeds the powers of harmony and song.
    Her fine exterior, by her Maker drest,
    Is but the mansion of a brighter guest,
    To flesh superior far, howe’er refin’d;--
    A pure, reflective, comprehensive mind!
    Expression soft sits sparkling in her eyes,
    While from her bosom heavenly raptures rise;
    Intrinsic worth, comprising every grace,
    Displays its radiance in her roseate face.”

When the woman was formed, “God brought her unto the man,” i.e. he
presented her to him to be his wife. We are not to imagine, by
_bringing her to the man_, is meant, that God merely placed her before
his eyes, and thus exhibited her: but that he joined the man and the
woman together in marriage.

      “Attending angels strike the choral lay,
    And hymn your anthems on this bridal day;
    While the first Pair unite their willing hands,
    Whose hearts are join’d in love’s eternal bands.”

On receiving the woman, Adam said, “This is now bone of my bones, and
flesh of my flesh.” Adam was the common stock and root of all mankind;
not only all his posterity were wholly contained in him alone, but also
the first woman, the mother of us all, had her vital life in him, and
was part of his living flesh and bones: he saw that she was of the same
nature, the same identical flesh and blood, the same constitution in
all respects, having the same physical powers, mental faculties, and
inalienable rights. He added, “She shall be called _Woman_, because she
was taken out of man;” i.e. she shall partake of my name as she does
of my nature. A literal version of the Hebrew would appear strange,
says Dr. A. Clarke, and yet a literal version is the only proper
one. איש _Ish_, signifies _man_; and the word used to express what
we term _woman_, is the same with feminine termination, אשה _ishah_,
and literally means _she-man_. Most of the ancient versions have felt
the force of the term, and have endeavored to express it as literally
as possible. The Vulgate Latin renders the Hebrew _virago_, which is
a feminine form of _vir_, a man. Symmachus used ανδρις _andris_, a
female form of ανηρ, _aner_, a man. Our own term is equally proper,
when understood: it is a literal translation of the original; and we
may thank the discernment of our Anglo-Saxon ancestors for giving it.
Wombman, of which _woman_ is a contraction, means the _man with the
womb_. Verstegan, in his Restitution of Decayed Intelligence, justifies
this sense of the word, on the ground of antiquity and propriety, and
says it should be so written. The term _woman_ was not peculiar to
her, but common to the sex; she differing from man in sex only, not in
nature. Afterward Adam called her חוה _chavah_, which answers exactly
to ζωη of the Septuagint, both signifying _life_, because she was the
mother of all _living_.

      “Oh blest existence! (now the man exclaims,
    And higher praises of his God proclaims.)
    My cup with blessings hast thou amply fill’d,
    Consummate joys for my great portion will’d:
    No wants are left, no good hast thou denied,
    Thy lib’ral hand has all I wish’d supplied.
    Thou Fount of being! source of pure delight!
    In thee my comforts center and unite:
    Thyself I love, thy vast perfections see,
    And all thy gifts receiv’d enjoy in Thee.

      He turns to Eve, whose charms are all in view,
    The perfect form which highest wisdom drew:
    Her sweet attractions touch his yielding mind,
    As three-fold cords his willing passions bind.
    Sensations soft with quick transition roll,
    And raise the transports of his grateful soul:
    While thrilling raptures through his bosom move,
    He feels his heart the seat of GOD--and _love_.

      Their minds now glowing with celestial fire,
    They jointly bend before their gracious SIRE;
    Devotion’s flame with greater ardor burns,
    And both are vocal in his praise by turns.
    While thus their pow’rs in pleasing acts employ,
    The _social_ worship much augments their joy:
    Their warm addresses to the sacred throne,
    Ascend as incense, and bring blessings down.”

The relation between _husband_ and _wife_ is the strongest union that
results from the highest obligations of nature. “Therefore,” said Adam,
“shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his
wife: and they shall be one flesh.” Here we perceive, as Dr. Delany
intimates, that Adam had a perfect idea of father and mother, before
any existed; that he had clear ideas of the affection arising from
that relation, before any children were born into the world: and yet
perceived that the endearment arising from marriage should be stronger
than these ties, so as to attach a man with warmer affection to his
wife, than to those very parents to whom he was indebted for life. Now
if the received doctrines of philosophy be true, that the senses are
the inlets of ideas, and that we can have no ideas without objects:
then we must conclude, that as he had these ideas, and had them not
from nature, he must have received them from express revelation. Hence
our Saviour, in his answer to the Pharisees, informs us, that the
words pronounced by Adam on this occasion, were the declaration of God
himself. “Have ye not read that he which made them at the beginning,
made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall a man leave
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife: and they twain shall
be one flesh.” These two shall be considered as _one body_, having no
separate or independent interests: or, these two shall be _for the
production_ of one flesh; from their union a posterity shall spring,
as exactly resembling themselves as they do each other. The Greek word
προσκολληθησεται, translated _one flesh_, signifies shall be _glued_ to
her.

How happy must such a state be, where the parties married come up to
the design of this sacred institution! Dr. Hunter observes, “What
an important era in the life of Adam! What a new display of the
Creator’s power, skill, and goodness! How must the spirit of devotion
be heightened, now that man could join in _social_ worship! What
additional satisfaction in contemplating the frame, order, and course
of nature, now that he possessed the most exalted of human joys, that
of conveying knowledge to a beloved object! Now he could instruct
Eve in the wonders of creation, and unfold to her their Maker’s
nature, perfections, and will!” Oh happy state! They are happy in the
constitution of their nature,--being innocent, upright creatures; and
in having their pure minds perfectly united in love and kindness to
each other. They were happy in all their united acts of adoration and
praise to their Creator,--exact harmony, unmixed delight, and untainted
piety, residing in each breast! They lived in communion with God,
enjoyed a transporting sense of his favor, walked in the light of his
countenance, and were raptured in their meditations on the Divine glory!

We have here the first institution of marriage, and we see in it
several things worthy of peculiar attention and regard. 1. God
pronounces the state of celibacy _not a good one_: and the Lord God
said, “It is not good that man should be alone,” לבדו _lebaddo_ only
himself. It was neither for his comfort, who was formed for society,
nor for the accomplishment of God’s purpose in the increase of mankind.
Though he was created in the image of God, and enjoyed delightful
intercourse with him, his solitary condition required a suitable
companion. 2. God made the woman _for_ the man; he was not made _for
her_, but she was made _for him_, and derived, under God, her being
from him. The apostle says, “Neither was the man created for the woman:
but the woman for the man,” to be a suitable helper and comfort to him.
And thus God has shown us, that every son of Adam should be united to a
daughter of Eve to the end of the world. 3. God made the woman _out_ of
the man: as Adam was immediately from God, so Eve was immediately from
Adam; “the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man:” made of
a part of his body, taken out, not of his head, to show that she was
not to exercise dominion over him; nor of his foot, to indicate that
she must not be his slave; but of his side, to intimate that she needs
his counsel and direction; from under his arm, to teach him that he
must protect her; and near his heart, to tell him that he must love her
as himself. The closest union, and the most affectionate attachment,
should subsist in the matrimonial connection. The man should ever
consider and treat the woman as a _part of himself_; and as no one ever
hated his own flesh, but nourishes and supports it, so should a husband
evince the greatest tenderness and affection for his wife: and on the
other hand, considering that the woman derived her being from man, and
was made _for_ him, therefore the wife should “see that she reverence
her husband.” “For as man is the image and glory of God; so the woman
is the glory of the man.” 4. God himself instituted the marriage union,
and being appointed and established by him, it must be an honorable
state. “Marriage is honorable in all,” being a Divine institution; and
consequently suitable for persons of any rank, or employment, either
civil or sacred. The corruption of manners has strangely perverted
this original purpose and institution of God. However, he will never
accommodate his morality to the times, nor to the inclinations of men.
What was settled at the beginning, he judged most worthy of his glory,
most profitable for man, and most suitable to his nature. 5. Marriage
was instituted immediately on the creation of man and formation of
the woman; whence it is evident that God never designed that mankind
should be preserved, and the earth peopled any other way. And as the
marriage union took place while man was in a state of innocence,
upright and pure, just such as his Creator made him, it is therefore
suitable to the greatest purity both of heart and life. 6. The design
of this institution was, that man and woman might be mutually helpful
to each other, in all the necessities and uses of life partaking of the
cares and labors of each other, reciprocally sharing in each other’s
delights and pleasures, and combining together to love, serve, and
please God.

The _situation_ of Adam and Eve is worthy of our attention. The sacred
historian says, “And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden;
and there he put the man whom he had formed.” The word עדן _Eden_,
signifying _pleasure_ or _delight_, is expressive of their excellent
residence. The Septuagint render the passage thus: εφυτευσεν ὁ Θεος
παραδεισου εν Εδεμ, _God planted a Paradise in Eden_. The Fathers of
the Church; says Huet, both Latin and Greek, all the Interpreters of
Scripture, ancient and modern, and all the Orientals, do agree, that
Eden is a local name taken from the beauty of the place. The Garden
or Paradise was situated in Eden, being two different places, as the
whole from its part. “And a river went out of Eden to water the garden;
and from thence it was parted, and became into four heads. And the
name of the first is Pison; that is it which compasseth the whole land
of Havilah, where there is gold; and the gold of that land is good;
there is bdellium and the onyx stone. And the name of the second river
is Gihon: the same is it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia.
And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which goeth
toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates.” The
most probable account of the situation of the terrestrial Paradise,
says Dr. A. Clarke, is that given by Hadrian Reland. He supposes it to
have been in Armenia, near the sources of the great rivers, Euphrates,
Tigris, Phasis, and Araxes. He thinks Pison was the Phasis, a river of
Cholchis, emptying itself into the Euxine Sea, where there is a city
called Chabala, the pronunciation of which is nearly the same with that
of Havilah, or חוילה _Chavilah_, according to the Hebrew, the _vau_ ו
being changed in Greek to _beta_ β. This country was famous for gold,
whence the fable of the Golden Fleece, attempted to be carried away
from that country by the heroes of Greece. The Gihon he thinks to be
the Araxes, which runs into the Caspian Sea, both the words having
the same signification, namely, a _rapid motion_. The land of Cush,
washed by the river, he supposes to be the country of the Cussæi of
the ancients; a nation of Asia, destroyed by Alexander to appease the
manes of Hephæstion. The Hiddekel all agree to be the Tigris; and the
other river, Phrat, or פרת _Perath_, to be the Euphrates. All these
rivers rise in the same tract of mountainous country, though they do
not proceed from one head.

Man, says Faber, was placed by the Deity in the garden of Paradise. The
beauty of its scenery, the salubrity of its climate, the variety and
excellence of its fruits, all contributed to the beatitude of the first
pair, and tended to elevate their thoughts to that Being, who was the
author and contriver of such numerous blessings. Trained, says Bishop
Horne, in the school of Eden by the material elements of a visible
world, to the knowledge of one that is immaterial and invisible, Adam
found himself excited by the beauty of the picture, to aspire after the
transcendent excellence of the Divine original.

From this, says Dr. A. Clarke, the ancient heathens borrowed their
ideas of the gardens of Hesperides, where the trees bore golden
fruit; the gardens of Adonis, a word which is evidently derived from
the Hebrew עדן _Aden_; and hence the origin of sacred gardens, or
inclosures, dedicated to purposes of devotion, some comparatively
innocent, others impure. From the holiness of the garden of Eden,
says Faber, the Pagans probably borrowed their ancient custom of
consecrating groves to the worship of their various deities. The
description given by Quintus Curtius of the sacred grove of Jupiter
Hammon is singularly beautiful, and almost presents to the imagination
the deep shades and the crystal streams of Eden. “At length,” says
he, “they arrived at the consecrated habitation of the deity, which,
incredible as it may seem, was situated in the midst of a desert, and
shaded from the sun by so luxuriant a vegetation, that its beams could
scarcely penetrate through the thickness of the foliage. The groves
are watered by the meandering streams of numerous fountains; and a
wonderful temperature of climate, resembling most of all the delightful
season of spring, prevails through the whole year with an equal degree
of salubrity.”

This golden age is described by Plato, in a manner which, independently
of his confession (namely, that he gained his information from the
Phœnicians, who received it from their ancestors,) proves him to have
derived it, not from written records, but from traditional reports.
His mansion of primeval bliss was not in this dark, diminished, and
deformed, this corrupted globe, but in a pure, ethereal, and lucid orb
of unlimited extent, where men breathed, not air, but light, drank
nectar, and partook of fruits spontaneously produced. The inclement
seasons were unknown, raiment was not yet invented, and nakedness
produced no distress. When weary, the inhabitants reclined to sleep on
soft herbage, which received the influence of one eternal spring. In
these delightful regions no stormy winds interrupted their calm repose;
no evil passion disturbed their serenity of soul; and reason, guided
by benevolence, bore a universal sway. Whilst this state continued,
man conversed freely with those animals, which, now wild, avoid his
presence, and fly at his approach.

Virgil was no stranger to a golden age; and Seneca has well
described the peaceful state whilst Saturn reigned. But of all the
representations, that which we find in Ovid is the most beautiful, and,
allowing for poetic imagery, is accurately just.

    “The golden age was first; when man, yet new,
    No rule but uncorrupted reason knew,
    And with a native bent did good pursue.
    Unforc’d by punishment, unaw’d by fear,
    His words were simple, and his soul sincere.
    Needless was written law where none opprest:
    The law of man was written in his breast.
    No suppliant crowds before the judge appear’d;
    No court erected yet, nor cause was heard;
    But all was safe, for conscience was their guard.”

Such notions of the felicity enjoyed by man in a state of innocence,
were not confined to Italy and Greece, but have been discovered equally
among the Persians, Indians, and Chinese. The Brahmins say, that in the
beginning of the world, plenty was every where diffused, and milk, with
wine and honey, flowed from fountains. Similar images were used by the
Persian magi to convey a notion of primeval happiness.[206]

Thus Adam and Eve were happy in their situation, being placed
in Paradise, which was delightful for agreeable and pleasing
accommodations of every kind to regale their senses; it was stored with
the utmost profusion of Divine bounty!

    “O Jesus! at thy feet we wait,
      Till thou shalt bid us rise,
    Restor’d to our unsinning state,
      To love’s sweet paradise.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnotes - Chapter VII

    [157] The _marine_ Polypus is different in form from the
    fresh-water Polype; but is nourished, increased, and may be
    propagated after the same manner. When it produces its young,
    they issue from its sides, as branches from a tree; these young
    shoots are no sooner detached from their parents, than they
    become separate Polypuses, and fish for prey.

    It seems that every part of this animal possesses a
    principle of life. If it be cut into three pieces, it is so far
    from being destroyed, that it becomes three polypuses: the head
    produces a body and tail; the body, a head and tail; and the
    tail, a head and body. When a Polypus is cut in two lengthways,
    these close themselves, the wounds are healed in a few moments,
    and in the course of some hours they will eat greedily. If
    these Polypuses be again cut into four, or six pieces, these
    divisions of the animal will also become Polypuses; but they
    will not be matured, nor capable of eating, for some days.
    If this creature be turned like a glove, by pushing the tail
    into the body until it come out of the mouth, after such an
    operation it will still eat, and continue to produce young
    ones; so strong and vigorous is the principle of life which it
    possesses.

    There are other insects which possess similar properties;
    and it is certain that nearly all plants which are produced
    from suckers, have no part which may not become either a stem
    or branch, and which will germinate, and furnish one, or even
    many plants.]

    [158] For the contrary opinion, see Fragments appended to
    Calmet’s Dictionary, pp. 114-117.

    [159] “Some time ago, a person in the Isle of Wight,
    digging the ground for the foundation of an out-house,
    discovered the nest or magazine of a field-mouse. It was of
    large dimension, and was stored with acorns, which were laid up
    in the neatest and most compact manner imaginable. These were
    so numerous that he was induced to count them, and found, in
    the whole, no fewer than _eight hundred and two_. How wonderful
    are those faculties with which the beneficent Creator of the
    world has endowed his creatures, for the purpose of providing
    for wants which they have no power to foresee, and yet, without
    which provision, they must, during the severity of winter, be
    inevitably destroyed!”--New Monthly Magazine, July, 1814, p.
    531.

    [160] See Dr. Paley’s Natural Theology, pp. 296-299.

    [161] To this may be referred an economical experiment
    well known to the Dutch, that when eight Cows have been in a
    pasture, and can no longer get nourishment, two horses will do
    very well there for some days; and when nothing is left for the
    Horses, four Sheep will live on it.

    [162] The Arabians, when travelling, and in want of water,
    frequently kill their camels to obtain a supply, which, though
    taken out of the animal, they find perfectly good.

    [163] Dr. Paley’s Natural Theology, p. 278.

    [164] Dr. Percival’s Instructions, p. 23.

    [165] See Annual Register, vol. iii, p. 90.

    [166] Dr. Beattie’s Dissertations, Moral and Critical.

    [167] Dr. Percival’s Instructions, p. 8.

    The Chinese consider the flesh of this animal as a dainty,
    and public shambles are erected for the sale of it. In Canton
    particularly, there is a street appropriated to that purpose;
    and, what is very extraordinary, whenever a dog-butcher
    appears, all the dogs in the place pursue him in full cry.
    They know their enemy, and persecute him as far as they are
    able.--Goldsmith’s History of the Earth.

    [168] Wesley’s Philosophy, vol. i, p. 233.

    [169] For a description of the _Crocodile_, given by
    Divine inspiration, see Job chap. xli. It is a great question
    among learned men, says Mr. Benson, what creature is meant by
    לויתן, _leviathan_. Our translators were evidently uncertain
    respecting it, and therefore have given us the original term
    untranslated. The Seventy, however, have rendered it δρακων,
    _the dragon_; but that is far from being correct. The dragon is
    a genus belonging to the order of amphibia reptilia. There are
    two species, 1. The volans, or flying dragon, with the wings
    entirely distinct from the fore-legs, which is found in Africa
    and the East Indies. 2. The præpos, with the wings fixed to the
    fore-legs, which is a native of America. They are both harmless
    creatures; and feed on flies, ants, and small insects. The word
    לויתן, _leviathan_ is supposed to be derived from לוי, _levi_,
    _joined_, or _coupled_, and תן, _than_, or תנין _thannin,
    a dragon_, that is, a _large serpent_, or _fish_, the word
    _thannin_ being used both for a land-serpent, and a kind of
    fish. And “after comparing what Bochart and others have written
    on the subject, it appears to me,” says Parkhurst, “that the
    compound word לויתן, _leviathan, the coupled dragon_, denotes
    some animal, partaking of the nature both of the land serpents,
    and fishes, and, in this place, signifies the _crocodile_,
    which lives as well under water as on the shore.”

    [170] Bingley’s Animal Biography, vol. ii, p. 410, &c.

    [171] Dr. Paley’s Natural Theology, p. 286.

    [172] Aristotle asserts that _spinning_ and _weaving_ were
    first learned from the spider. Thence it has its Greek name
    αραχνης, Latin _Aranea_, French _Araignce_, from the Hebrew
    _Aragnevit_, _texuit_, or _Arach, textura_. And it is not
    improbable that our English word _Spider_ is but a corruption
    of _Spinner_, for _Spinn_ is the German word for _Spider_. With
    this agrees that poetic fancy, that _Arachne_ an excellent
    _spinster_, was by _Pallas_ turned into a _Spider_. Pallas
    was the goddess of wisdom, war, weaving, spinning, and the
    liberal arts; and she was invoked by almost every artist,
    particularly such as worked in wool, embroidery, painting, and
    sculpture.--Edward’s Demonstration, &c.

    [173] See Jones’s Disquisition concerning clean and unclean
    Animals.

    [174] See D’Assigny on the Hieroglyphics of Egypt.

    [175] Epist. cap. v.

    [176] Simil. ix, sect. 13.

    [177] Ad. Autol. lib. 2, p. 96.

    [178] Lib. iv, cap. 37, et lib. v. c. 15.

    [179] Lib. iv, cap. 75.

    [180] Adv. Prax. c. 12.

    [181] Cap. 21, 25.

    [182] Cont. Cel. lib. i, p. 63.

    [183] Socrat. lib. ii. c. 30, where the Creed may be seen
    at large.

    [184] Hæres. 23, n. 2.

    [185] Hæres. 44, n. 4. See Bibliotheca Biblica on the place.

    [186] Lib. iv, cap. 37.

    [187] Two Dissertations, &c. pp. 29, 30.

    [188] Among the numerous traditions of the New-Zealanders,
    says Nicholas, there is one which is very remarkable. It
    refers to the creation of man, and has been handed down from
    father to son, through all generations. They believe the first
    man to have been created by three gods, Mowheerangaranga, or
    Toopoonah, or grandfather, Mowheermooha, and Mowheebotakee; but
    give the greatest share in the business to the first-mentioned
    of these deities.

    [189] Moses says, “the _life_, נפש nephesh, of the flesh is
    in the _blood_.” And St. Paul affirms, “God hath made of _one
    blood_ all nations of men.” This sentence of Moses, which, in
    conjunction with that of St. Paul, contains a most important
    truth, had existed in the sacred Scriptures for 3,600 years,
    before it arrested the attention of any philosopher. This is
    more surprising, as the nations in which philosophy flourished,
    were those which especially enjoyed the Divine oracles in
    their respective languages. That the blood actually possesses
    a _living principle_, and that the life of the whole body
    is derived from it, is a doctrine of Divine revelation, and
    which the observations and experiments of the most accurate
    anatomists have served strongly to confirm. The proper
    _circulation_ of this important fluid through the _whole_ human
    system, was taught by Solomon in figurative language, Eccles.
    xii, 6; and discovered, as it is called, and demonstrated by
    Dr. Harvey in 1628; though some Italian philosophers had the
    same notion a little before. This distinguished anatomist was
    the first who fully revived the Mosaic notion of the _vitality_
    of the blood; and which correct view was afterwards adopted by
    the justly celebrated Mr. John Hunter, whose strong reasoning
    and accurate experiments have served to sanction and give
    publicity to a fact so long unknown to mankind. The doctrine of
    Moses and St. Paul proves the truth of the doctrine of Harvey
    and Hunter: and the reasonings and experiments of the latter,
    illustrate and confirm the doctrine of the former.--See Dr. A.
    Clarke on Lev. xvii, 11.

    [190] As an instance of this I may mention the case of
    a gentleman who was subject to frequent attacks of asthma,
    to such a degree, that if he were not relieved immediately
    by bleeding, he was in danger of suffocation: by being so
    frequently bled in that state, his blood at length became so
    pale as scarcely to stain a linen cloth, in consequence of the
    particles of the blood being so slowly renewed.

    [191] Two of these causes are peculiarly important and
    interesting. When an animal has lost a considerable quantity
    of blood, and faints in consequence, the power of the blood to
    coagulate quickly is greatly increased.--When, for example, a
    sheep is bled to death, if you receive a cupful of the blood
    which first issues from the throat, and a cupful of the last,
    you will find that the latter will coagulate sooner, and become
    much more solid than the first portion. By way of experiment,
    the large artery of the thigh of a dog has been divided and
    laid open; the animal bled till he fainted, and on recovering
    had no return of the bleeding. On examining the artery, its
    divided end was found plugged up by coagulated blood, and much
    contracted in its diameter; this natural means, however, of
    checking hæmorrhage, we shall afterwards find, is assisted by
    the contractile power possessed by the vessel from whence it
    is effused. Hence it appears that fainting is favorable to
    checking hæmorrhages, as far as it puts a temporary check on
    the circulation, and should always be encouraged to a certain
    degree. Another cause which influences the coagulation of the
    blood, is inflammatory diseases. Under such circumstances it
    remains much longer in a fluid state, but coagulates at length
    more firmly. This coagulation of the lymph is the first step
    towards its conversion into various parts of the body, or the
    union of divided parts. When, for example, the coagulating
    lymph is thrown out upon inflamed internal parts of the body
    which lie in contact, as the intestines or lungs, it becomes
    solid, and connects them loosely together. Blood vessels shoot
    into it, and convert it at length into cellular membrane,
    forming what are called adhesions, and in a similar way it
    is converted into the nature of various parts of the body.
    We may therefore say, that the coagulating lymph is the most
    important part of the blood, inasmuch as it is subservient
    to the formation of various organs in the body. Many parts,
    particularly the muscles, very nearly resemble it in their
    nature.

    [192] Substances may even be introduced into the blood
    directly. By way of experiment, Ipecacuanha, or a small
    portion of Emetic Tartar, or Jalap, have been infused into the
    veins: the result of this has been found to be, that they have
    produced the same effect as if introduced by the stomach; the
    former produced vomiting, the latter purging.

    [193] Mr. Hunter, however, found that this natural
    inclination might be changed by education, for he taught
    an Eagle, which is a carnivorous animal, to subsist on
    farinaceous food alone. The plan he adopted was this: he began
    by abstracting the flesh meat, and substituting bread and
    butter, till at length the meat was entirely taken away; he
    then by degrees diminished the quantity of butter, till at
    length the animal fed on bread alone. It appears, however, from
    experiment, that this transition cannot be made suddenly, as
    the gastric juice of the animal is not adapted to act upon an
    opposite kind of food. It has been found that a quantity of
    pear or apple introduced into the stomach of a Buzzard Hawk
    was not digested, but remained unacted upon when the fowl was
    killed for inspection many hours afterwards; yet the stomach of
    this animal habitually digested bone.

    [194] Dr. A. Hunter says, “When we consider the delicacy
    of the internal structure of the stomach, and the high and
    essential consequence of its office, we may truly say, it is
    treated with too little tenderness and respect on our parts.
    The stomach is the chief organ of the human system, upon the
    state of which all the powers and feelings of the individual
    depend.

    “The stomach is the kitchen that prepares our discordant
    food, and which, after due maceration, it delivers over by
    a certain undulatory motion, to the intestines, where it
    receives a further concoction. Being now reduced into a white
    balmy fluid, it is sucked up by a set of small vessels, called
    lacteals, and carried to the thoracic duct. This duct runs up
    the back-bone, and is in length about sixteen inches, but in
    diameter it hardly exceeds a crow quill. Through this small
    tube, the greatest part of what is taken in at the mouth
    passes, and when it has arrived at its greatest height, it is
    discharged into the left subclavian vein; when mixing with the
    general mass of blood, it becomes, very soon, blood itself.”

    [195] Dr. O. Gregory observes, “Animal heat is preserved
    _entirely_ by the inspiration of atmospheric air! The lungs
    which imbibe the oxygen gas from the air, impart it to the
    blood; and the blood, in its circulation, gives out the
    caloric to every part of the body. Nothing can afford a more
    striking proof of creative wisdom, than this provision for
    the preservation of an equable animal temperature. By the
    decomposition of atmospheric air, caloric is evolved, and
    this caloric is taken up by the arterial blood, without its
    temperature being at all raised by the addition. When it passes
    to the veins, its capacity for caloric is diminished, as much
    as it had been before increased in the lungs: the caloric,
    therefore, which had been absorbed, is again given out; and
    this slow and constant evolution of the caloric in the extreme
    vessels over the whole body, is the source of that uniform
    temperature which we have so much occasion to admire. Dr.
    Crawford ascertained, that whenever an animal is placed in a
    medium the temperature of which is considerably high, the usual
    change of arterial venous blood does not go on; consequently,
    no evolution of caloric will take place, and the animal heat
    will not rise much above the natural standard. How pleasing it
    is to contemplate the arrangements which the Deity has made for
    the preservation and felicity of his creatures, and to observe
    that he has provided for every possible exigency!”--Lessons,
    Astronomical and Philosophical, 4th edit. p. 87.

    [196] A London Alderman, who had accidentally heard of the
    thoracic duct, was so struck with the importance and delicacy
    of the vessel, that he became very apprehensive lest it should
    be in the least obstructed; and, being one day caught in a
    crowd, from whence he could not extricate himself, he most
    earnestly entreated those who pressed on him, to take care of
    his thoracic duct.

    [197] This is a good example of muscles, which, under
    ordinary circumstances, are directed by the will, becoming
    involuntary from an altered excitement.

    [198] Dr. A. Hunter remarks, “Were it possible for us to
    view through the skin and integuments, the mechanism of our
    bodies, after the manner of a watch-maker when he examines
    a watch, we should be struck with an awful astonishment!
    Were we to see the stomach and intestines busily employed in
    the concoction of our food by a certain undulatory motion;
    the heart working, day and night, like a forcing pump; the
    lungs blowing alternate blasts; the humors filtrating through
    innumerable strainers; together with an incomprehensible
    assemblage of tubes, valves, and currents, all actively and
    unceasingly employed in support of our existence, we could
    hardly be induced to stir from our places!”

    [199] Mr. Cruikshank, late Professor of Chemistry at
    Woolwich, judiciously observes, says Dr. Olinthus Gregory, that
    the size of the body, the quantity of food taken in, the vigor
    with which the system is acting, the passions of the mind,
    and external heat or cold, are circumstances which will ever
    occasion considerable variety in the quantity of the insensible
    perspiration. This gentleman, assuming that the surface of the
    hand is to that of the rest of the body as one to sixty (an
    assumption which Mr. Abernethy thinks much too small for the
    body,) and that every part of that surface perspired equally
    with his hand, concluded that he lost during an hour, by
    insensible perspiration from the skin, 3 ounces, 6 drams; and
    in 24 hours, at that rate, would have lost 7 pounds, 6 ounces.
    Also, that he lost 124 grains of vapor by respiration, in an
    hour; or 6 ounces, 1 dram, and 36 grains, in 24 hours; which,
    added to the former cutaneous exhalation, would make the whole
    insensible perspiration, in 24 hours, equal to 8 pounds, 1
    dram, and 36 grains: the evaporation from the lungs will be
    little more than one-fifteenth of the whole.

    Mr. Cruikshank has not the smallest doubt, but that
    _electric fluid_ is also perspired from the pores of the skin:
    it appearing to him impossible that an enraged Lion, or Cat,
    should erect the hairs of the tail on any other principle:
    indeed he strongly suspects that, as electric fire is now known
    to be the prime conductor of the variation in the atmosphere,
    so it is also the grand conductor of insensible perspiration.
    He likewise states it as a matter beyond doubt, that,
    independent of aqueous vapor (of fixed air and phlogiston,)
    emitted from the skin in insensible perspiration, there is
    an odorous effluvia, which, though generally insensible
    to ourselves and the by standers, is perceptible to other
    animals.--Hence it happens, that a Dog follows the footsteps of
    his master by the smell; and, in like manner, with regard to
    other animals: the Fox-Hound knows _afar_ the smell of the Fox;
    the Pointer that of the Partridge, the Snipe, or the Pheasant;
    and every carnivorous animal that of its prey.--Haüy’s Natural
    Philosophy, vol. i, p. 27.

    [200] Dr. Priestley has positively asserted, that the
    doctrine of the soul has no foundation in reason or the
    Scriptures. But Dr. Jortin, in his sermon on John xi, 25, vol.
    vi, and Dean Sherlock, in his discourse on the immortality of
    the soul, completely refute the Doctor’s arguments. In the
    fourth volume of the Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical
    Society of Manchester, there is a very valuable paper, by Dr.
    Ferriar, proving, by evidence apparently complete, that every
    part of the brain has been injured without affecting the act of
    thought; the reasoning of which memoir, being built on matters
    of fact and experience, appears to have shaken the modern
    theory of the materialists from its very foundation.

    [201] See Wesley’s Sermon on Heb. xi, 1.

    [202] Dr. Scott’s Christian Life, vol. v, p. 14.

    [203] Practical Treaties on the Holy Spirit, pp. 7, 8.

    [204] See Dr. Beattie’s Theory of Language, chap. ii.

    [205] It is very singular, says Nicholas, in his very
    interesting history of New-Zealand, that the natives believe
    that the first woman was made of one of man’s ribs; and, what
    adds still more to this strange coincidence, their general
    term for bone is _hevee_, which, for ought we know, may be
    a corruption of the name of our first parent, communicated
    to them, perhaps, originally, by some means or other, and
    preserved, without being much disfigured, among the records of
    ignorance.


    [206] See Townsend’s Character of Moses, pp. 66-68.

       *       *       *       *       *




