CHAPTER VI.

FIFTH DAY.

_Section_ I.--FISHES.

    Of Fishes in general -- The Cetaceous kind -- Cartilaginous
    -- Spinous -- Crustaceous -- and Testaceous -- Animalcules --
    Religious Improvement.                              p. 279-296.


_Section_ II.--ON FOWLS.

    Number of Species -- Superiority and peculiar construction
    -- Skill in building their Nests -- Power and Season of
    Propagation -- Dexterity in providing Food -- Instinct --
    Migrations -- Insects -- Religious Improvement.     p. 296-317.


CHAPTER VII.

SIXTH DAY.

_Section_ I.--ON QUADRUPEDS AND REPTILES.

    Quadrupeds in general -- Motion -- Habits -- Rumination --
    Proportion -- Tastes -- Clothing -- Weapons -- Proportionate
    Number -- Faculties -- Reptiles -- Religious Improvement.
                                                        p. 318-344.


_Section_ II.--MAN.

    _Body_: -- Its Creator -- Formation -- Vitality -- Blood
    -- Heart -- Arteries and Veins -- Digestion -- Respiration --
    Glands -- Absorbents -- Nervous System -- Organs of Sense --
    Bones -- Sinovia -- Muscles -- Tendons -- Cellular Membrane --
    Skin. _Soul_: Its Immateriality -- Freedom -- Immortality --
    Moral Image -- Adam’s dominion over the Creatures -- Woman --
    Paradise.                                           p. 344-398.


CHAPTER VIII.

SEVENTH DAY.

ON THE SABBATH.

    Sabbath instituted -- Blessed and sanctified -- Given to
    Adam as a General Precept for his Posterity -- Renewed before
    and at the giving of the Law -- A sign between God and his
    people -- Worldly Business prohibited -- Works of Necessity
    and Mercy excepted --Advantages resulting from observing it
    -- A Seventh Day regarded by the Heathens -- The Sabbath of
    universal and perpetual obligation -- The Lord’s Day.
                                                        p. 399-410.




THE

MOSAIC HISTORY, &c.




CHAPTER I.

ON THE CREATOR OF THE WORLD.

    Distinguished by his name JEHOVAH -- His essence and
    self-existence expressed by the words I AM -- His attribute
    of goodness the glory of all his other perfections -- Elohim
    signifying a Trinity of Persons in a Unity of Essence -- The
    Creation ascribed to one God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
    Spirit -- The first production of matter -- The creatures made
    for the manifesting of God’s attributes, and that he might
    impart happiness to them.


As it is proposed, in the following pages to give the Mosaic account
of the creation of the world, it is very natural that the mind should
come to the meditation of this interesting subject, by contemplating
the character of the Great Creator, according to his own revelations.

It is evident that God made himself gradually known, as the state and
condition of mankind required. In the earlier ages of the world, while
revelation was but dawning on the human race, he was but little known,
in comparison of the subsequent diffusion of his glory and perfections.
When he, according to his promise, came to deliver the children of
Israel out of Egypt, he revealed himself to them by his name JEHOVAH.
He had before declared himself by this name to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; but not as it imports the performance of his promises; in
which sense, their posterity afterwards, in the time of Moses, well
understood it.

Of all the names which the Divine Being has been pleased to designate
himself by, that of JEHOVAH is the greatest. It comes from a root
which imports his eternity, independency, efficacy, and truth. In the
Hebrew it is written with four letters, י _yod_, ה _he_, ו _vau_,
ה _he_, thus יהוה i.e. JHVH:[1] the points used in that language,
make our English word consist of seven letters, J_e_H_o_V_a_H. God
himself gives the interpretation of this name. “And the Lord passed
by before him, and proclaimed יהוה YEHOVAH, the LORD GOD, merciful
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth,
keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and transgression,
and sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty.” These different
names have been considered as so many attributes of the Divine
Nature. Commentators divide them into eleven, thus: 1. יהוה JEHOVAH.
2. אל EL, the strong or mighty God. 3. רחום RACHUM, the merciful
Being, who is full of tenderness and compassion. 4. חנין CHANUN, the
gracious One: He, whose nature is goodness itself--the loving God.
5. ארך פיםא EREC APAYIM, long-suffering, the Being who, because of
his goodness and tenderness, is not easily irritated, but suffers
long and is kind. 6. רב RAB, the great or mighty One. 7. חסד CHESED,
the bountiful Being: He who is exuberant in his beneficence. 8. אמת
EMETH, the Truth, or true One: He alone who can neither deceive nor
be deceived--who is the Fountain of truth, and from whom all wisdom
and knowledge must be derived. 9. חסד נצר NOTSER CHESED the preserver
of bountifulness: He whose beneficence never ends, keeping mercy for
thousands of generations--showing compassion and mercy while the
world endures. 10. נשא עון ופשע וחטאה NOSE _âvon vapeshâ vechataah_:
He who bears away iniquity and transgression and sin; properly the
REDEEMER, the Pardoner, the Forgiver, the Being whose prerogative
alone it is to forgive sin, and save the soul. נקה (לו) לא ינקה NAKEH
_lo yinnakeh_, the righteous Judge, who distributes justice with an
impartial hand; with whom no innocent person can ever be condemned. 11.
And פקד עון PAKED _âvon_, &c. He who visits iniquity; he who punishes
transgressors, and from whose justice no sinner can escape. The God of
retributive and vindictive justice. These eleven attributes, as they
have been termed, are all included in the name _Jehovah_; and are the
proper interpretation of it.[2]

The Jews had a superstitious respect for this name; and, after the
Babylonian captivity, discontinued the use of it, which caused
them soon to forget its true pronunciation. They called it the
_Tetragrammaton_, or four-lettered name of God, which, to the present
day, the Jews will neither write nor pronounce. They deemed it to be
ineffable; and therefore when it occurred in reading the Scriptures;
substituted אדני _Adonai_.

The Jews tell us that the woman’s son, mentioned in Lev. xxxiv, 11, was
accused of blasphemy and stoned to death, because he pronounced the
name _Jehovah_. But I conceive, that he had spoken contemptuously of
God. We read, verse 10, that he and a man of Israel strove together,
and it is probable that the Israelite, in the heat of contention, would
deny his being a member of the church of God, because he was the son of
an Egyptian father who was an idolater; whereupon, no doubt, the son
of the Israelitish woman spoke scornfully and opprobriously of the God
of Israel, despising the privilege of being one of his people. This, I
imagine, was the blasphemy of which he was accused, and for which he
was condemned and stoned to death; and not for pronouncing the name of
_Jehovah_ only.

The Seventy who translated the Old Testament into Greek, at the desire
of Ptolemy Philadelphus, King of Egypt, about the 124th Olympiad, were
also very sparing in the use of this name _Jehovah_; and therefore did
not render it according to the sacred import of the Hebrew, but changed
it into the word Κυριος, _Lord_, which is of the same signification
with _Adonai_ in the Hebrew. Origen, Jerome, and Eusebius, testify,
that, in their time, the Jews left the name _Jehovah_ written in their
copies with Samaritan characters, instead of the common Chaldee or
Hebrew characters. And those divines, who at the command of King James
translated the Scriptures anew into English, have very rarely used the
word _Jehovah_, but rendered it _Lord_. Yet we may observe, that when
this word _Lord_ is substituted for _Jehovah_, it is printed in large
Roman letters. It is to be wished, that the name _Jehovah_ had been
preserved in the English translation of the Scriptures, and especially
in those passages whose sense entirely depends on the meaning of the
word.

After the appointment of Moses, by Jehovah, to deliver the children of
Israel from the tyranny and oppression under which they groaned, and
to conduct them from Egypt to worship God at Horeb, he was anxious to
obtain a particular revelation of the Divine nature and attributes,
that he might be able to regulate, direct, and superintend their
worship; and this he deemed necessary on account of the Israelites
having been long conversant among the Egyptians, who were idolaters
and polytheists, and called their gods by a variety of names. Hereupon
he said to God, “Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, and
shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you;
and they shall say unto me, What is his name? what shall I say unto
them?” Intimating, that it was expedient God should call himself by
an appropriate name, to distinguish himself from all the gods of the
heathen. For men did not, at this time, as Dr. Shuckford observes,
know the works of creation well enough to demonstrate from them the
attributes of God; nor could they, by speculation, form proper and
just notions of his nature. Though he had revealed himself to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, by the name אני אל שדי _Ani El shaday_, “I am God
all-sufficient,” and likewise that of יהוה _Jehovah_; yet a further
knowledge of him was sincerely desired and earnestly requested.[3]

Whereupon, says God to Moses, I AM _that_ I AM, אהיה אשר אהיה EHEYEH
_asher_ EHEYEH. The Vulgate translates these words--EGO SUM QUI SUM,
_I am who am_. The Septuagint--Εγω ειμι ὁ Ων, _I am he who exists_.
The Arabic paraphrases them--_The Eternal, who passes not away_. Not
_I was_, but I AM and WILL BE: a name that expresses his own essence,
and signifies independency, immutability, and necessary existence. As
if he had said, You may inquire who I am, and by what name I would
be distinguished: know then that I AM HE who has being from himself,
and has no dependence on any other.[4] This contains in it the whole
plenitude and possibility of being, all that is, or can be, or, as the
Apostle expresses it, παν το πληρωμα της Θεοτητος “all the fulness of
the Godhead.” By this name he is distinguished not only from all false
gods, but from all other beings whatsoever; implying, that he exists
after some very eminent and peculiar manner, and that nothing else
besides him truly and essentially is.[5]

The self-existence of God proves that he always was, and evidently
shows that he cannot cease to be. “He is, and was, and is to come.” His
necessary existence comprehends a duration which has neither beginning,
succession, nor end. He can have no succession in his duration, because
wherever this is there must be priority, and wherever there is a
priority there must be a beginning. He is in the complete possession
of an endless life, all at once. He exists in one eternal _now_. He
is unchangeable in his essence or manner of existence, so that no
perfection can be added to him, nor any excellency taken from him, but
he remains invariably the same.

All natural perfections are essential to him as an infinite being, such
as eternity, omnipotence, immensity, omniscience, spirituality, and
immutability; and all moral perfections belong to him as a good Being,
such as wisdom, holiness, justice, goodness, truth, faithfulness.
These latter are communicable, because there are some rays of them
in his creatures, but none of them in that transcendent degree that
are in him, nor ever can be. The former we call his _natural_ and
_incommunicable_ perfections, for the sake of distinction; though it is
certain the latter are equally as natural to him, and incommunicable,
in that infinite degree possessed by himself.

God being unchangeable in his essence, must also be so in all his
perfections, because they are no other than his essence, and are not
distinguished in him, either from his essence, or from one another;
but are one and the same Being, revealed and manifested to us, under
various notions, which we call _attributes_, to help us the better to
conceive of him, who are not able to apprehend what may be known of
him, under any one name, or by any one act of our understanding.

The combination of all his perfections renders him a glorious Being;
and that fixed and invariable state of contentment and satisfaction,
complacency and delight, which result from the secure possession and
enjoyment of all that is good and desirable, or, in other words, of
all possible excellencies and perfections in the highest degree,
constitutes him infinitely blessed.

Moses was favored with another remarkable and interesting manifestation
of the Divine Being; for perceiving God’s merciful condescension in
answer to his prayers offered up for his people, he persevered in the
holy exercise, and even asked him for a manifestation of his glory:
“Show me,” said he, “I beseech thee, thy glory,” or, according to the
original, “make me see it.” He could not mean an open view of the
unclouded majesty of God, but only such a display of the Divine glory
as a mortal is capable of beholding. God answered, “I will make all
my _goodness_ to pass before thee:” intimating, that his _goodness_
is his glory, and that he could not bear the infinite splendor of his
holiness and justice. _Goodness_ is the true and genuine character of
God, and the glory of all his other perfections, and by it they are
all rendered engaging. Without this they would be terrible: for wisdom
without goodness degenerates into insidious cunning; and power without
it is the character of a tyrant. Were God destitute of this amiable
perfection, he would have such a defect in his nature, as infinite
perfection itself, in every other attribute, could not sufficiently
compensate.

All nations have acknowledged this perfection of the Divine Being.
Plato calls him the ιδεα του αγαθου, the idea or essence of goodness.
In the three principles of the Platonic Trinity--το αγαθον _goodness_,
νους _intelligence_, and ψυχη _vitality_.--The first place is assigned
to the το αγαθον _goodness_, which the Platonists conceive to be like
an immense and most pure light, continually diffusing and communicating
its invigorating beams. To this the Platonist Boctius alludes, in that
celebrated description of God, where he calls him _Fons Boni Lucidus_,
the lucid fountain of goodness.--There is an ancient cabalistical
table, supposed to be borrowed from the Pythagoreans, which represents,
in a visible scheme, the order of the Divine perfections: wherein it is
observable that _goodness_ presides over, and gives laws and measures
to all the other attributes of God.

Philo says, God is the name of _goodness_; and our English word, adds
a late author, seems to be a contraction of the word _good_; or,
however, is the same with the German _Got_, or _Godt_, which came, as
is thought, from the Arabic word _Gada_, of the same signification. So
that the German and the English name of the Supreme Being, in common
use, is taken from the attribute of his _goodness_. “The word itself
is pure Anglo-saxon,” says Dr. Adam Clarke, “and, among our ancestors,
signified not only the Divine Being, now commonly designated by the
word, but also _good_; as in their apprehension it appears, that _God_
and _Good_ were correlative terms; and when they thought or spoke of
him, they were ever led from the word itself to consider him as THE
GOOD BEING a fountain of infinite benevolence and beneficence towards
his creatures.” The word GOD, expressed in the old Saxon, is _bona
res_, a good thing.

That God is _good_, is the constant language of Divine revelation;
for this attribute is every where celebrated, both in the Old and
New Testament. It may be distinguished as _natural_, _moral_, and
_communicative_. The first of these is the absolute perfection of his
nature, which is goodness itself in its very essence. He is originally
good, and that of himself; which is a property peculiar to no other
creature, for all the goodness of the creature is derived from God. He
is infinitely and therefore incomprehensively good to men and angels;
hence his goodness knows no limits. We read of the “riches of his
goodness,” which are as “unsearchable,” as is his “greatness.” He is
immutably good, for “the goodness of God endureth continually.” And as
his dependence on no one admits not of his being changed by others,
so neither does his immutability admit of it by himself; for if he
alter for the better he was not God before, and if for the worse, he
then would not be God. Thus he is essentially, originally, infinitely,
incomprehensibly, and unchangeably good.

The _moral_ goodness of God is his perfect purity or holiness;
therefore his goodness and holiness are united--“good and upright is
the Lord.” According to any rational opinion we can form of him, he
is a Being possessed, not only of every natural power and perfection,
but of every moral excellence. The holiness of his nature removes
him to the greatest possible distance from all moral evil, and makes
him necessarily approve of moral good. All his designs are pure and
upright, and worthy of himself: he always acts according to the perfect
rectitude of his own nature. Though he is not under the direction of
any superior, yet his own rectitude always determines him to pursue
what is right to be done towards his creatures. This property of
the Divine Being greatly heightens our idea of his excellence, and
naturally points him out as the Governor of mankind. And as he adheres
to it in his own conduct and administration, and likewise approves and
loves it in his rational creatures, whom he governs; so he disapproves
and hates the reverse in them, and will most certainly animadvert
upon the temper and behavior of those who act contrary to his divine
admonitions, and make them most sensibly feel the effects of their
wickedness.

The _communicative_, or relative goodness of God, or his goodness to
his creatures, is his inclination or self-propension to deal well and
bountifully with them. As the notion of God includes goodness, so
the idea of goodness implies holy diffusiveness. Therefore, says the
Psalmist, “Thou art good, and doest good.” All that we are, have, or
hope for, that is good, proceeds from God as its fountain; hence he is
called, “the fountain of living waters.” This communicative goodness
implies, that, from his all-sufficiency, he is ready to impart to
his creatures whatever their necessities require. This attribute is
universal: “he is good to all” his creatures from the highest angel
to the meanest reptile; especially, to his people, “Truly,” says the
Psalmist, “God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean
heart.” But, though God is good to all his creatures, yet he is not
equally so in the same kind and degree of blessings. His munificence is
regulated by his wisdom, and the different capacities with which he has
formed his creatures makes this inequality necessary.

    [There is one vast and awful question which must occur to
    every reflecting mind--_What is God?_

    As it regards his _Nature_, the Scriptures say, He is a
    _Spirit_. We must therefore, conceive the Creator to be, a
    _Living_, _Rational_, _Benevolent_, and _Spiritual_ ESSENCE;
    absolutely, necessarily, and naturally _perfect_, and,
    therefore, _immaterial_, _uncompounded_, _indivisible_, and
    _eternal_.

    It is necessarily understood that this essence is
    _peculiar_: that there is nothing in its nature which has
    any resemblance to _created_ substances, whether material
    or spiritual; and that it is _underived_, and consequently,
    _independent_.

    This Divine Essence being immaterial, impalpable, simple
    and indivisible, cannot have _body_ or _parts_: nor can it be
    said to be a _whole_, for this would imply an _aggregation_ of
    parts: but is itself a perfect, absolute, single, and eternal
    INDIVIDUALITY, incapable of self-multiplication, or increase;
    or of diminishing itself, or endangering its existence.

    This essence is a _living_ essence; and, therefore, has
    inherently the power and principles of _action_: It is a
    _rational_ essence, and therefore, must act according to
    the eternal principles of _reason_ and _right_: It is a
    _benevolent_ essence, and therefore, all its actions must
    be infinitely _good_ and _kind_. Absolute _perfection_,
    _infinitude_, and _sovereignty_ in all these respects,
    constitute the Being we call God.

    As God is a single, indivisible, independent, and eternal
    UNIT, we cannot ascribe _different_ perfections, or attributes
    to him, so as to suppose one attribute _separate from, and
    independent of_ another, capable of acting _per se_, or
    participating _conjunctively_ with other attributes _as an
    integer_. Nor can we suppose this eternal, and independent Unit
    to act by being _operated upon_ in any degree, by other agents,
    nor can he operate on himself. All his actions, therefore,
    spring from himself, and are performed _without excitement,
    effort, means, or previous ratiocination_.

    It will follow from the preceding reasoning, that every
    action of the Divine Being, in regard to himself, is precisely
    the same in _nature_: so that we cannot say of one act it is
    an effort of his _power_ to the _exclusion_ of his wisdom: nor
    of his wisdom to the exclusion of his goodness: nor of his
    goodness to the exclusion of his holiness: and so of the rest.
    Strictly speaking we cannot say the power _of_ God; the wisdom
    _of_ God; the goodness _of_ God, &c.; because the power of God
    _is_ God; the wisdom of God _is_ God; the goodness of God _is_
    God.

    In contemplating this awful subject _abstractly_, we should
    say there are no such things as _attributes_ in the Divine
    Being, _as they are commonly understood_. What we call his
    attributes, are only different modes of the operations of the
    same eternal, undivided, and independent Unit. Indeed, God is
    one entire perfection which exerts itself in different ways and
    actions.

    But as we cannot comprehend this single entire perfection;
    nor understand _how_ it exerts the whole of itself, as a single
    indivisible agent, _in each particular act_, as it really
    does, mankind have always been in the habit of assisting their
    contemplations by regarding the _nature_ of the acts of this
    single, indivisible, and eternal agent, and thus _infering_
    the nature of the Divine Being. And as these acts appear
    to differ in _quality_, we infer a quality in the agent,
    corresponding with the quality of the actions which we see: we
    call this quality by a _name_, and _thus derive the doctrine of
    attributes_.

    For example: When we see this single, indivisible agent
    manifesting himself in such a manner as to give us the idea
    of _unlimited power_, we ascribe _omnipotence_ to him, as an
    attribute. When we see a manifestation indicating _infinite
    wisdom_, we ascribe _omniscience_ to him as an attribute.
    In the same manner in reference to the manifestations
    which indicate justice, goodness, mercy, truth, holiness,
    faithfulness, righteousness, kindness, &c, all of which we
    ascribe to him upon such indications.

    Although _this rationale_, in contemplating the Divine
    Being, is necessary to _creatures_, yet it is calculated to
    lead the mind into error. We am insensibly inclined to ascribe
    the divine actions to those attributes _exclusively_ which
    we suppose they indicate. This, probably, has been the most
    fatal error of mankind, and, doubtless, laid the foundation
    of darkness and idolatry. We must never conceive that any act
    of the Divine Being proceeds from _one_ or more attributes to
    the _exclusion_ of others; or that one attribute participates
    _more_ in one act than another. This is the fatal mistake.
    Hence theologians have become blind and foolish, bewildering
    the multitude by building up theories on the consideration of
    a single attribute; thus making the Divine Being to consist
    of parts, and these parts independent too. Instances of this
    awful mistake might be given, but it scarcely comes within the
    design of this paper. It is sufficient to say; if we conceive
    correctly of the divine acts, _we will ascribe each equally to
    all the Divine Attributes_.

    As we conceive this single, indivisible, underived,
    independent, and eternal agent, or perfection to be absolutely
    infinite, and illimitable in all possible ways, or manner, of
    exerting Himself, we, of course, conceive all the qualities,
    indicated by the divine acts, which we call attributes, to be
    absolutely infinite, perfect, and eternal: and thus we derive
    the doctrine of the absolute perfection, and infinitude of all,
    and each of the Divine Attributes.

    From the foregoing reflections, the reader will readily
    conceive of the Divine Being, as a Living, Rational,
    Benevolent, and Spiritual Essence, existing as a single,
    underived, independent, Unit: a Unit, not in reality consisting
    of attributes, or perfections, but itself one single, entire
    perfection: exerting itself not by attributes, but as an
    individual Unit or Agent, in such a manner that each action
    is the action of the Divine Being, and not of one or more of
    his attributes: that the existence of this single, underived,
    independent, and eternal Agent, was, and is _necessary_, and,
    therefore, he could not but have existed, and cannot cease to
    be; that He is absolute, and infinite in all possible ways and
    manner of acting, and consequently we conceive Him possessed of
    all possible perfections in an infinite degree.]

By the assistance of Divine revelation we are enabled further to pursue
our inquiries concerning this very important subject; and without
which, we should be involved in great darkness and uncertainty, not
only respecting his moral perfections, but the _mode_ of his existence.
And this must be a matter of superior interest to mankind, or our
adorable Creator would not have communicated it, which he evidently
has done through the medium of the Scriptures, written by Divine
inspiration.

Moses, having received by Divine revelation instruction concerning the
origin and formation of the world, conducts us at once to its great
and adorable Architect. “In the beginning GOD created the heavens and
the earth.” Here he adopts a phraseology to express the supreme Being,
which is generally used in the Old Testament for the same purpose,
and is very important and necessary to be understood, as it gives us
information after what _manner_ he exists. ‘The original word אלהימ
_Elohim_, God,’ says a great linguist, ‘is certainly the plural form
of אל _el_, or אלה _eloah_, and has long been supposed, by the most
eminently learned and pious men, to imply a _plurality_ of persons in
the divine nature.’ As this plurality appears in so many parts of the
sacred writings to be confined to _three_ Persons, namely, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit, hence the doctrine of the TRINITY.

It is very remarkable that we no sooner open the Bible, than this
doctrine is presented to our view. The laws and ordinances established
among the Jews were designed to guard that people from idolatry, which
in Abraham’s time had become very general. On the recollection of this
circumstance it appears extraordinary that Moses, when he is describing
the creation of the world, should, in order to express his conceptions
of the Divine Being, introduce a term which implies _plurality_; and,
frequently connecting it with verbs and persons singular, should use
that term _thirty_ times in the short account of the creation, when the
language afforded other words in the singular number that would have
answered his purpose equally well; nay, if he did not wish to express
a _plurality_, that grammatical accuracy should have led him to adopt.
When he made use of a plural noun for the name of God, which he has
done, perhaps, _five hundred_ times more in one form or other in the
five books of his writings, this _plurality_, I apprehend, was the idea
he meant to convey to mankind. He, or rather the HOLY SPIRIT, by whom
he was inspired to write his history, meant to give some hints and
intimations of a doctrine more clearly to be revealed in future ages.[6]

The ancient Jews understood _Elohim_ as conveying the idea of a
plurality in the Godhead. “Come,” says one of them, “and see the
mystery of the word _Elohim_: there are _three degrees_, and each
degree by itself _alone_, and yet notwithstanding they are all _one_,
and joined together in one, and are not _divided_ from each other.”[7]

R. Bechai, a celebrated author among the Jews, discoursing of the
word _Elohim_, and of the import and signification of it, adds these
words:--“According to the cabalistical way, this name _Elohim_ is two
words, namely, _El him_, that is, _they are God_. But the explanation
of the Yod is to be fetched from Eccles. xii, 1, _Remember thy_
CREATORS. He that is prudent will understand it.” These words do
sufficiently prove the Cabala among the Jews, says Bishop Kidder, that
though the Divine Nature was but _one_, yet there was some kind of
_plurality_ in this Divine Nature; and this is fairly insinuated in the
_Bara Elohim_, which we find in the beginning of Genesis.[8]

John Xeres, a Jew converted in England some years ago, published a
sensible and affectionate address to his unbelieving brethren, wherein
he says, that “the word _Elohim_, which we render GOD in Gen. i, 1, is
of the plural number, though annexed to a verb of the singular number;
which,” says he, “demonstrates as evidently as may be, that there are
several persons partaking of the same Divine nature and essence.”[9]

It is clear too, how sensible the Jews have been that there is a
notion of _plurality_ plainly imported in the Hebrew text, since they
have forbidden their common people the reading of the history of the
creation, lest, understanding it literally, they should be led unto
heresy.[10] When the Scriptures are suppressed, or the common people
denied the use of them, it may with propriety be presumed that their
superiors, who act in an arbitrary and unjust manner, have embraced
anti-scriptural notions, and, in order to prevent detection, lay
aside the only infallible _test_ of truth; and, to conceal their base
motives, and make their deleterious conduct appear not only plausible,
but necessary and proper, they boldly assert the incompetency of
the people to judge of scripture doctrines for themselves, and wish
to be considered compassionate and friendly in judging and deciding
for them. The fact is, the common people are denied the use of the
Scripture, lest understanding it in a certain sense, which their
superiors call heresy, it should lead them into the understanding of
plain and unequivocal facts stated therein, and which are of the utmost
importance for them to know.

It may be observed here likewise, that the Hebrew doctors always
supposed the first verse of Genesis to contain some latent mystery. The
Rabbi Ibba indeed expressly says it does, and adds, “This mystery is
not to be revealed, till the coming of the Messiah.”

Mr. Parkhurst, who has greatly distinguished himself in Hebrew
literature, and to whose pious and learned labors most Biblical
students are indebted, says, “Let those who have any doubt whether
אלהימ _Elohim_, when meaning the true God, Jehovah, be _plural_ or not,
consult the following passages, where they will find it joined with
adjectives, pronouns, and verbs _plural_:” he refers to twenty-five
texts in the Old Testament on this occasion.[11]

If Moses and the Jews held the doctrine of the Trinity, and the word
_Elohim_ imports _plurality_, it is natural to ask, How comes it to
pass that the Septuagint version renders the plural name Elohim, when
used for the true God, by the singular one Θεος, and never by the
plural Θεοι? The learned Ridley,[12] after Allix, has answered this
question. He says, “The Talmudists own that the LXXII Interpreters
did purposely change the notion of _plurality_ implied in the
Hebrew _Elohim_ into the Greek singular, lest Ptolemy Philadelphus
should conclude that the Jews, as well as himself, had a belief
of Polytheism.” And Bishop Huntingford adds, “Of all the Greek
appellations of Divinity, Θεος was the only simple and direct term
which they could adopt, to counteract idolatrous misconceptions.”

This phraseology, as to its signification, is not peculiar to Moses,
but is used by the other sacred writers also, and exactly accords
with the whole tenor of Divine revelation. The creation of the world
is ascribed to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, as joint,
concurring, equal, and efficient causes thereof, in the Scriptures. It
will not surely be presuming too much, says Bishop Huntingford, if we
suppose Joshua and Solomon to be more deeply instructed in the Jewish
Religion, than to be capable of using improper language respecting the
Deity. Yet the former says, “Ye cannot serve the Lord: for he is the
Holy Gods;” and the latter says, “The fear of Jehovah is the beginning
of wisdom; and the knowledge of the Holies is understanding.”[13]
Such is the phraseology of the Hebrew text. In these passages, and
others that might be produced, the word in the Hebrew is in the plural
number, because of the _plurality_ of persons in the Godhead; but in
our translation it is in the _singular_ number, because of the unity of
their essence.

But more particularly. The creation of the world is ascribed to
JEHOVAH: “I have made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even
my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host have
I commanded. I am the Lord that maketh all things, that stretcheth
forth the heavens alone, that spreadeth abroad the earth by myself.”
He had no _moving causes_ exciting him to create matter and produce a
universe, but his own will, goodness, wisdom, and power. He created
all things himself, without the assistance of _any instruments_. The
prophet ascribes to God alone the framing and stretching out of the
heavens and the earth without the counsel, direction, or ministry of
any subordinate agency. “Who hath measured the waters in the hollow
of his hand, and meted out heaven with a span, and comprehended the
dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales,
and the hills in a balance? With whom took he counsel, and who
instructed him, and taught him in the path of judgment, and taught him
knowledge, and showed to him the way of understanding?” He created
all things without any _toil_, _labor_, _change_, or _alteration_ in
himself. There was not in him any transition from rest to labor, from
idleness to business, from strength to weariness. Though “every good
and perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of
lights,” yet “with him there is no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.” The Prophet says, “Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard,
that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the
earth, fainteth not, neither is weary?” And he proceeded in the work
of creation without _any delay_: it was not a successive forming of
things by alteration, which required much time to render them perfect,
but was as in a moment, as quickly and readily as a word is spoken,
produced in the rapid succession as recorded by Moses. This work then
God is said to have done _alone_, to the exclusion, not of the Son and
the Spirit, but of all that are not God by nature; and by himself, to
the exclusion of all second causes or inferior agents.

It is ascribed also to the SON of God. The evangelist John asserts
in very express terms the Divinity of Jesus Christ, of the truth
of which he designed his whole Gospel should be a proof. “In the
beginning was the Λογος Word.” By the εν αρχη _beginning_, here, we
are to understand the beginning of the creation, not the beginning
of the gospel state, as the Socinians say. We have the authority of
Grotius, that εν αρχη is taken from בראשית _Bereshith_, Gen. i, 1,
translated by the Septuagint εν αρχη, and consequently must signify,
from _the beginning of the creation of God_. It is not said, that
_he_ was _made_ in the beginning, but that he _was_ in the beginning,
did exist when the world began, which is of the same import as if he
said, he was from eternity; for he that did exist in the beginning,
never did himself begin to be. The personal Wisdom of God says, “The
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of
old.”--“And the Logos,” or “Word, was with God.” He could be with no
creature, because there was no creature in being; and therefore it
is very properly said, that he “was with God,” the Father; and his
being with him shows, that he is a distinct person or subsistence
from the Father.--“And the Logos,” or “Word was God.” Though he is a
person distinct from that of the Father, yet he is of the very same
essence with him. He that was with God, was God; and if he was God in
the beginning, that is from eternity, he is the same still, he cannot
cease to be what he was. Here then the evangelist asserts the eternal
existence of Christ, his personal co-existence with the Father, and
that he is of the very same undivided nature and essence with him.
Though he is a person distinct from the Father, yet he is of the same
substance, equal with him in all divine perfections; not a _secondary_
God, inferior to the Father, as the Arians assert. “All things were
made by him.” All things, from the highest angel to the meanest worm,
were made by him, not as a subordinate instrument, but as a co-ordinate
agent, as a joint efficient cause, co-operating with the Father in this
work. ‘To say that Christ made all things by a delegated power from
God, is _absurd_; because the thing is impossible. Creation means,
causing that to exist that had no previous being: this is evidently
a work which can be effected only by _omnipotence_. Now God cannot
delegate his _omnipotence_ to another: were this possible, he _to_ whom
this omnipotence was delegated, would, in consequence, become God; and
he _from_ whom it was delegated, would _cease to be such_: for it is
impossible that there should be _two_ omnipotent beings.’ “And without
him was not any thing made that was made.” This is added for the more
certainty, it being usual with the Hebrews, when they would affirm that
a thing is so indeed, to confirm by a particular negative what they
had before affirmed. Our Lord said to the Jews, “My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work.” The phrase ὡς αρτι signifies “to this time,” “to
the present,” that is, in all works whatever. Hence he is no creature,
or he must have created himself; and if he created himself, he must
have been in existence and not in existence at the very same time,
which is both contradictory and absurd. And if every work performed
by the Father was equally performed by the Son, the Son must, in all
respects, be equal to the Father, in nature and perfections. This our
Lord’s words signify and imply, and in this sense the Jews understood
him--as “making himself equal with God.”[14] “He is the image of God,”
the πρωτοτοχος “FIRST PRODUCER of every creature: for by him were all
things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and
invisible, whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities,
or powers:” all the angels, however diversified in rank or employment
in the heavenly world; and all the rational, animal, vegetable, and
inanimate creatures, belonging to this terrestrial abode: “all things
were made by him,” as the efficient cause, “and for him,” as the last
end.--“God hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he
hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds,”
i.e. the heavens and the earth. The Father does all by the Son, and the
Son does all from the Father. Whatsoever the Father does, that also
does the Son likewise. “Unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, oh God, is
for ever and ever; a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy
kingdom. Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the
earth; and the heavens are the works of thy hands.” In these passages
the _Divinity_ of Christ is plainly asserted, and the operations of his
power are proofs of his Godhead. He that is the Creator of all things
is God: but Christ is the Creator of all things; therefore Christ is
God. He calls himself “the Beginning of the creation of God,” where the
word αρχη means the Creator, the efficient Cause of all things, he by
whose power the creation had its beginning and perfection. And “he that
built all things is God.”

The learned Jacob Bryant wrote a very valuable Tract entitled, _The
sentiments of Philo Judæus concerning the ΛΟΓΟΣ, or Word of God_;
from which the following are quotations. “Philo Judæus speaks at large
in many places of the Word of God, the second person, which he mentions
as _the second Divinity_, the _great Cause_ of all things, and styles
him as Plato, as well as the Jews, had done before, the LOGOS. Of the
Divine Logos or Word he speaks in many places, and maintains at large
the Divinity of the second Person, and describes his attributes in a
very precise and copious manner, styling him _the second Deity, who
is the Word of the supreme God, his first-begotten Son; and the image
of God_. In his treatise upon _creation_, he speaks of the Word as
_the Divine operator by whom all things were disposed_: and mentions
him as _superior to the angels and all created beings, and the image
and likeness of God_, and says, that _this image of the true God was
esteemed the same as God_. _This_ LOGOS, _the_ WORD _of_ GOD, says he,
_is superior to all the world, and more ancient; being the productor of
all that was produced. The eternal Word of the everlasting God is the
sure and fixed foundation upon which all things depend_.”

Creation is moreover ascribed to the HOLY SPIRIT. That the Holy Spirit
has a _personality_ distinct from that of the Father, and also that
of the Son, and a real and proper _Divinity_, is a doctrine of Divine
revelation. In his personal capacity, he is not the Father, nor the
Son. He neither is nor can be divided either from the Divine essence,
nor from the other two persons, but yet is personally distinct from
them. His relation to, and mission by, the Father and the Son, clearly
evince his personal distinction. He is called the Spirit of the
_Father_, and the Spirit of the _Son_. He is represented as _sent_ by
the Father, and also as _sent_ by the Son. These things show that he is
a Divine person, and has a distinct personality. The Holy Spirit is the
last in the order of subsistence: the Father is the first, the Son is
the second, and the Holy Spirit is the third. Yet we should know, that
the Father is not before the Son, nor the Son before the Holy Spirit,
by a priority of time, nor of dignity and perfections; for the three
persons in the Divine essence are _co-eternal_.

The Holy Spirit was equally concerned with the Father and the Son in
the work of Creation. “By the Word of the Lord were the heavens made,
and all the host of them by the breath (Heb. Spirit) of his mouth.” The
_breath_ or spirit of the Lord’s _mouth_, says an excellent author,
does undoubtedly mean the third person of the Trinity; who is called,
“The Spirit of God, and the Breath of the Almighty.”--“They lift up
their voice to God with one accord, and said, LORD, thou art GOD, which
hast made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that therein is. WHO,
by the mouth of thy servant David, hast said,” &c. The terms LORD and
GOD are here used to express the Divinity of _him_, says the same able
writer, who spake _by the mouth_ of his servant David. But it was the
HOLY GHOST who _spake by the mouth_ of his servant David--for, saith
St. Peter, “This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the
HOLY GHOST,” by the mouth of David, “spake,” &c. Therefore the terms
LORD and GOD are certainly used to _express the Divinity of the_ HOLY
GHOST.[15] In the work of creation, the “SPIRIT of GOD moved upon the
face of the waters,” by an infinite vitality infusing life, and with
a formative energy giving form. “By his SPIRIT he hath garnished the
heavens” with an incalculable number of luminous stars; all those
glittering worlds, which serve for use as well as beauty, were formed
by the Spirit of God.

As none but the _third_ Person in the Godhead is ever so much as once
in the Scriptures called the _Spirit of God_; so the Holy Spirit’s
agency in the work of creation evinces his distinct personality, and
is a confirmation of his proper Divinity. A cause must be equal to the
effect it produces: but no finite spirit could be a joint, concurring,
efficient cause in the work of the creation: therefore the Holy Spirit
is God. Supposing the matter of which the worlds were made to be called
into being out of nothing by the Almighty power of the Father, or by
the fiat of the Son; yet the animating of the whole lifeless mass, the
putting of every part into motion, the assortment of all the particles,
the assigning of them their proper places, and the completing of the
whole with such astonishing beauty and harmony, which was the peculiar
work of the Holy Spirit, required no less than an almighty power, which
clearly demonstrates that he is God.

Thus we see that the creation of the world is ascribed to one God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Son and the Holy Spirit were
joint Creators, of equal power, and equal efficiency with the Father.
There is no where to be found in the Scriptures the least hint of
different degrees of creating energy, nor of sole efficiency in one of
the Persons in the Godhead, and a bare instrumental compliance in the
other. The creation was the common effect of their joint acting: nor
is it ever said, nor so much as hinted or implied, that the distinct
Persons in the Godhead had different provinces, nor that one creature
was made by one, and another creature was the workmanship of another.
The Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, are never represented as acting
separately, but always in conjunction.

The sacred historian assures us, that, at the commencement of time,
אלהימ _Elohim_, the triune God, caused matter to exist, which, previous
to this astonishing display of his creating energy, had no being.
Moses, as an inspired author, is the only one who could instruct us in
the formation and unfolding of the world. He is not an Epicurus, who
has recourse to atoms; a Lucretius, who believes matter to be eternal;
a Spinoza, who admits a material God; a Descartes, who prates about
the laws of motion; but a legislator, who announces to all men without
hesitation, without fear of being mistaken, how the world was created.
Nothing can be more simple, nor more sublime than his opening: “In the
beginning God created the heaven and the earth.” He could not have
spoken more assuredly, if he had been a spectator; and by these words,
mythology, systems, and absurdities, shrink to nought, and are mere
chimeras in the eyes of reason.[16]

Had Moses been a fictitious writer, how natural and how easy would it
have been for him to have filled up the first part of his history with
marvellous relations about the creation? With what pomp of language,
with what waste of rhetoric, could he probably have embellished that
surprising scene? With what a grand _apparatus_ of celestial machinery
might he have made the omnipotent Architect come forth to build a
universe? How many sub-agents and subalterns would a fabulous poet
or historian have employed in this stupendous and multifarious work?
With what solemnity would every part have been gone about, and with
how many episodes, digressions, and reflections, would the story have
been filled, in order to give it an air of the marvellous? But read
the beginning of Genesis, and observe how differently Moses writes. No
scope is given to fancy or invention. All is narrated with an ease,
plainness, and simplicity, which evidently shows that he kept close
to truth, and laid down the facts just as they were presented to his
mind; a manner of writing rarely, if at all, to be found in any other
historians, but such as had the honor of being the _amanuensis_ of the
SPIRIT of truth.[17]

The description which Moses furnishes concerning the creation, as
relating to circumstances previous to the existence of mankind, could
be derived only from immediate revelation. It was received by the
Jews with full conviction of its truth, on the authority of that
_inspiration_ under which Moses was known to act.[18] And when the
creation of the world began, by the lapse of time, to be removed to
a remote distance, God was pleased thus to provide a contemporary
historian, and appoint a whole nation to be the guardians of his
history; as well that this register might be the most authentic, as
that all mankind might hence be instructed in the knowledge of a fact,
which was so necessary for them to know, and yet so impossible to be
otherwise ascertained.[19]

It may be proper to notice, that some futile objections have been made
to the period which is assigned by Moses to the creation, as though it
were too recent to be reconciled with reason and philosophical inquiry.
How long matter remained in a quiescent state after its creation, we
have no data to enable us to determine: but, as its resting in an
animate state, so far as we know, could answer no valuable purpose,
we may reasonably conjecture the time would not be long. The creation
of the world began, according to Usher, before the Christian era 4004
years, if we follow the Hebrew text. The Septuagint version places it
5872, and the Samaritan 4700 before the vulgar era.--Sanchoniathon,
the first Phenician historian, according to the most extended accounts
of Porphyry, flourished long after Moses, probably not less than
two hundred years. Manetho, high-priest of Heliopolis, wrote the
Egyptian history only in the time of Ptolemy Philadelphus, not more
than 300 years before Christ, and professes to have transcribed his
Dynasties from some pillars of Hermes Trismegistus, written in the
Hebrew dialect.--Berosus was the first noted Chaldean historian, and
he was contemporary with Manetho.--The Chinese have not any work in
an intelligible character above 2200 years old. One of the Chinese
emperors, about 213 years before the Christian era, ordered all their
historical records to be destroyed.--The Greeks could produce no dates
beyond 550 years before Christ, and but little historical information
prior to the Olympiads, which began 775 years before the Christian era.
Orpheus and Museus, fabulous poets, were not so remote as Moses; for
it is supposed they lived about 200 years after him, in the days of
Gideon. Daries Phrygius and Dystys Cretensis, fabulous poets, wrote the
history of the Trojan war, about 400 years after Moses. Homer wrote his
poems after David’s time, and about 550 years after Moses. Herodotus,
called the father of history, who flourished about 450 years before
the Christian era, was the first Grecian historian that deserves the
name; yet he begins with fable. Thucydides rejects, as uncertain, all
that preceded the Peloponnesian war; and Plutarch, not one of the least
historians among the Grecians, ventured not beyond the time of Theseus,
who lived a little before the ministry of Samuel.[20] So that all these
poets and historians flourished long after the time of Moses, some of
them nearly a thousand years; for he wrote about A. M. 2460. The works
of the Jewish lawgiver are not only the most ancient, but also the most
authentic, of all the monuments of antiquity.

If the world were some thousands of years older, it must be much better
peopled than it is at present. Population has always increased since
the deluge, and yet there might be three times as many more inhabitants
on the earth than it at present contains. It has been computed that at
least 5000 millions of men might live at once on our globe: and yet it
does not appear that there are really more than 1080 millions. In Asia
are reckoned 650 millions; in Africa and America, 300 millions; and in
Europe, 130 millions.

If we consider the arts invented by men, we shall find that few or none
of them have been discovered more than two or three thousand years.
Man owes not only to his nature and reason the aptitude he has for
acquiring arts and sciences, but he is also led to this by necessity;
by the desire he has to procure himself conveniences and pleasures;
by vanity and ambition; and by luxury, the child of abundance, which
creates new wants. This propensity is evident among all men, in all
ages. History carries us back to the time when men had scarcely
invented the most necessary arts; when those arts which were known were
but very imperfectly understood; and in which they scarcely knew any
thing of the first principles of the sciences.

About four thousand years ago, men were still in a state of great
ignorance concerning most subjects; and if we calculate according to
the progress which they made since that time, and afterwards go back
to the remotest periods, we may with tolerable exactness fix the era
when men knew nothing; which is, in other words, that of the infancy
of the human race. Were their existence to be carried higher, it is
utterly improbable that the most useful and necessary arts should
have continued unknown to them through such a long series of ages. On
the contrary, all that can be discovered by the human mind must have
been known a long time ago. From this circumstance therefore we must
conclude, that the origin of the human race can have no other era than
that which Moses has assigned it in his history of the creation.[21]

If it be asked, What! was God a _solitary_ Being? Did he exist alone,
before this exertion of his glorious power? Formed as we are for
society, we have no conception of any satisfaction arising from a state
of absolute loneliness; nor can we conceive that the Deity should rest
_inactive_ from eternity, and not exert those amazing powers of which
the stupendous creation proves he is amply possessed? There are some
particulars naturally deducible from questions like these, which we
cannot solve. We have no adequate apprehension of eternity; we are
lost in the idea. And when we attempt to contemplate God existing from
eternity without _cause_ or as _beginning_ to exist, we are utterly
lost in the speculation; for among all the objects that come within
the reach of our senses, we see nothing existing that has not had
a cause to produce it. We frequently smile at children, when they
ask their little simple questions, as we deem them; but we are mere
children ourselves, in this profound ocean of wonder. But something
very observable strikes an attentive reader in the Mosaic account
of the creation, which suggests that the Deity is not a solitary
Being, existing in such an absolute _unity_ as to exclude all degree
of personality or communion. For אלהימ _Elohim_, as we have already
observed, the very first name by which Moses calls God, being plural,
shows that though he exists in an undivided unity of nature, yet in a
Trinity of Persons. And this notion of a plurality, so far from being
contrary to reason, is more agreeable to it than any opinion of the
absolute _unity_ of the Divine nature. For conceive we only three
Divine persons mutually to partake of the Divine essence or nature, to
be united by the same perfect will, and to possess the same infinite
powers and perfections; and all our apprehensions of the loneliness of
solitary existence immediately subside; the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost, consummately happy in each other, have been from eternity
reciprocal objects of complacence, and will remain such for ever. Let
this argument be fairly and impartially considered, and the notion of
a Trinity of Subsistences in a Unity of the Divine Nature, will appear
far more consonant to reason, and liable to less objections, than that
of mere solitary and absolute unity.[22]

    [_A further consideration of the suggestion in the close of
    the last paragraph._

    Although nothing can be clearer than that the Divine
    Essence is _one_, simple, and indivisible; _yet_ this does
    not prevent it from subsisting in _personality_, i.e. _in a
    plurality of persons_.

    It must be carefully observed, that the plurality has
    regard to the _persons_, not to the Essence. We cannot say
    there is a plurality of Essences; but we can say, the Living,
    Rational, Benevolent, and Spiritual Essence _subsists in three
    persons_. This then is the MODUS EXISTENDI of the Divine Being.

    Although we are assured this is his _mode of existence_,
    we do not pretend to comprehend the _nature_ of it. We may,
    without any injury to the proposition, affirm, the _nature_ of
    the fact is incomprehensible by _created intellect_. Yet the
    fact itself is sufficiently well attested, and is not repugnant
    to reason, though it is above the comprehension of reason.

    It is believed by many very learned, pious, and eminent
    men, that the doctrine of a _plurality of persons in the
    Godhead_, can be established by an argumentation founded solely
    on the acknowledged nature of the Divine Being.

    The Rev. JAMES KIDD, Prof. of Oriental Languages, Marischal
    College and University, Aberdeen, with the approbation of many
    learned men in England, among whom is Dr. Adam Clarke, in
    whose house he delivered private lectures on his manuscript,
    has published a very able and satisfactory essay on this plan,
    of which a brief clue to the mode of argumentation is here
    attempted.

    A. _The Divine Being is a necessarily existent, and an
    eternally, immensely, and immutably Living, Intelligent,
    Rational, Moral, Benevolent, and Spiritual Essence._

    B. _The very_ LAW _of the nature of such a being, is
    eternal, immense, and immutable_ ACTIVITY, ENERGY, _and_
    EFFICIENCY, _exercised eternally, immensely, and immutably_,
    ACCORDING TO HIS OWN NATURE.

    C. _That such a being_ WAS _as necessarily existent,
    perfect, and happy,_ BEFORE _creation, and providence as since;
    and would forever continue as necessarily existent, perfect,
    and happy, if creation and providence should cease to be_.

    These three propositions are so obviously true, every
    reader will readily and cordially grant them. It is proposed,
    therefore, to show, from the nature of the Divine Being, _that
    his Essence_ MUST _subsist in a plurality of persons_.

    The proposition does not contemplate an explanation of the
    _manner_ of this subsistence; nor, at present, the _number_
    of persons; but the simple fact, _That_ FROM THE VERY NATURE
    OF THE DIVINE BEING, HIS ESSENCE MUST SUBSIST IN PLURAL
    PERSONALITY.

    The existence of a being, or the possession, or exercise of
    any principle, passion or attribute, _implies personality_, or
    individual identity, which is the same thing. The mind cannot
    conceive of existence, passion, principle, or action, without
    conceiving of them inhering in actually existing Essence, which
    _must_ assume in the mind the idea of personality. Therefore,
    _personality_ is strictly, and properly applicable to the
    Divine Essence. But the doctrine of a _plural_ personality is
    to be established at present.

    It will be easily conceived, and readily granted, that
    a being which exists necessarily, eternally, immensely,
    and immutably, as a Living, Intelligent, Rational, Moral,
    Benevolent, and Spiritual Essence, _must have exercised
    Himself, and his perfections, necessarily, eternally,
    immensely, and immutably_. This then is granted. But the mind
    will readily and easily perceive, that the Divine Being could
    not have exercised Himself THUS, _in the works of Creation
    and Providence_. Because, it is readily admitted, there _was_
    a time when Creation and Providence _began_: during a whole
    eternity _beyond_ this period, there was no existence except
    God Himself. Consequently, He _cannot_ have been exercised
    according to his own nature and perfections, _eternally_, in
    reference to Creation and Providence.

    Again: He cannot have exercised his perfections
    _immensely_, in reference to Creation and Providence: because,
    however extensive we may conceive the empire of Creation and
    Providence to be, it is not _immense_; it is actually limited,
    and, therefore, could not admit of an _immense exercise of his
    nature and perfections_.

    It is readily granted, that the Divine Being was as
    necessarily, and perfectly happy _before_ Creation and
    Providence as since; and if Creation and Providence should
    cease, his happiness would continue the same: hence, it
    follows, necessarily, that the happiness of the Divine Being
    was, is, and ever will be entirely _independent_ of Creation
    and Providence.

    But the happiness of any being consists, essentially,
    _in the exercise of its powers and perfections according
    to the law of its own nature_. And as it has been shown,
    that the happiness of the Divine Being is eternal, immense,
    and immutable, it follows, _He must have exercised Himself
    eternally, immensely, and immutably_.

    As it has been _granted_, That from the very nature of
    the Divine Being, He must have been eternally, immensely,
    and immutably active and happy, according to the law of his
    own nature: and it has been _proven_, That He could not have
    been eternally, immensely, and immutably active and happy, in
    reference to Creation and Providence, it follows, necessarily,
    that the _means_ and _principles_ of these eternal, immense,
    and immutable activity and happiness, _must exist_ IN HIS OWN
    CONSTITUTION, _and be exercised entirely_ WITHIN _Himself_.

    This conclusion cannot be denied, granting the premises in
    the propositions A. B. C. in reference to the Divine Being.
    It remains to be proven, That such principles, and means
    of eternal, immense and immutable activity and happiness
    _cannot_ be conceived of in the constitution of the Divine
    Being, _without conceiving his essence to subsist in plural
    personality_.

    The consideration simply of the nature and eternal activity
    of the Divine Being would establish the idea of _plural
    personality_ in his Essence: because the mind cannot conceive,
    that the same single being can be both _agent_ and _object,
    in reference to the same action_. And as it has been proven,
    that _previous_ to the existence of Creation and Providence,
    God existed eternally _alone_, consequently, no possible form
    of existence but Himself, and yet he was eternally, immensely,
    and immutably active and happy; it will follow irresistibly,
    that _there must be a plurality in his single Essence_; and the
    mind naturally assumes, this plurality is _personal_; as it
    cannot conceive of activity, and happiness without conceiving
    them to belong to person, or persons. And as action implies
    both _agent_, and an _object_ distinct from the agent; and
    there being no such agent, or object existing _without_ the
    Divine Being, it must be infered, that these agent and object,
    concerned in the eternal activity and happiness of his nature,
    must exist _inherently, eternally, immensely, and immutably_
    WITHIN _Himself_.

    Thus we are COMPELLED to admit a plurality of persons in
    the Divine Essence.

    It will be recollected, the Divine Being has not only
    exercised Himself eternally, but also _immensely_, according
    to the law of his own nature and perfections: i.e. He has
    necessarily, and eternally exercised Himself to the extent of
    his nature and perfections. This will be readily admitted when
    we reflect, that unless we admit the exercise of the nature
    and perfections of God _to their full extent_, we must admit
    a _redundancy_ in the Divine Nature, and perfections, which
    would be manifestly absurd, as it would _imply imperfection_.
    For it would imply (if we may dare say so) that there is an
    _efficiency_, or _ability_ in the Divine Being, which He
    has never exercised to its full extent; and in proportion
    to the _deficiency_ in the exercise, we must conclude this
    _efficiency_ or ability is _useless_, which would be repugnant
    to the true idea of the Divine Being.

    It is therefore, _proven_, That the Divine Being
    necessarily exercised Himself _immensely_, because his nature,
    and perfections are immense. But it will be readily perceived,
    this could not be done in the works of Creation and Providence:
    because, however vast they may be, they are not _immense_:
    and, therefore, could not admit of the immense exercise of his
    nature and perfections to their full extent: from which it
    must follow, inevitably, _That the immense exercise of his own
    nature and perfections must be_ WITHIN _Himself_.

    As it has already been proven above, that this internal
    exercise in the Divine Essence necessarily implies _plurality_
    in the Godhead; so now also, is it proven, that the admission
    of such plurality is the only view competent to show _HOW_
    the Divine Being could have exercised his own nature and
    perfections _immensely_, as the attribute of immensity
    appertains to God only.

    As it is granted, that the Divine Being was necessarily as
    happy _before_ Creation and Providence as since, and would
    continue so, should Creation and Providence cease; of course
    his happiness consists in the exercise of his own nature and
    perfections according to their own law. But, in order that the
    Divine Being should be eternally, immensely, and immutably
    happy, the WHOLE of the Divine Nature and perfections must
    be exercised eternally, immensely, and immutably. But if we
    divest the Divine Essence of its plural personality, we cannot
    conceive that some of the divine perfections can be exercised
    at all. For example: the divine goodness, love, wisdom,
    intelligence, and all his _moral_ perfections. We surely cannot
    say, He manifests his goodness to Himself; or exercises his
    love towards Himself; or employs his wisdom in understanding
    Himself; all of which ideas are obviously absurd. But so
    soon as we admit the idea of a plural personality, or the
    subsistence of the Divine Essence in a plurality of persons,
    we can conceive the moral perfections exercised in Himself,
    between the persons of the Godhead. This is the only ground on
    which we can conceive of his eternal, immense, and immutable
    happiness. For we can readily conceive of the distinct persons
    in the Divine Essence, _communicating mutually_ to each other
    the _whole_ of the divine moral perfections; and thus conceive
    of the perfect and independent happiness of God.

    The only remaining view of this subject would be this:
    the activity, energy, and influence of the Divine Being can
    only regard Creation and Providence. But as there was a _past
    eternity before_ Creation and Providence began, in which the
    Divine Being existed, He must be considered as having been
    _inactive_, _solitary_, and _unconscious_; (because there
    cannot be consciousness where there is not action,) the whole
    and every part of which view is derogatory to the acknowledged
    character of God. How much more reasonable is it to conceive
    the Divine Essence to subsist in a plurality of persons, and
    thus to conceive, _consistently_, of the eternal, immense, and
    immutable activity and happiness of the Divine Being?

    _Thus we see, that what the Scriptures declare concerning
    the plurality of persons in the Divine Essence_, CANNOT BE
    OTHERWISE, AS IS DEMONSTRATED ABOVE, FROM THE NECESSARY NATURE
    OF THE GLORIOUS DIVINITY.

    The demonstration might be extended to each of the divine
    perfections, and the same result would be obtained. The above
    remarks are a mere clue to the argument which is possible, and
    satisfactory; founded on the necessary nature of Jehovah.

    The key to the whole demonstration is this:

    1. The Divine Being, from his very and necessary nature,
    must be eternally, immensely, and immutably active.

    2. He must be eternally, immensely, and immutably happy.

    3. In order to be eternally, immensely, and immutably
    active and happy, He must be exercised to the whole extent of
    his nature and perfections, eternally, immensely, and immutably.

    4. That such an exercise of his nature and perfections, in
    an eternal, immense, and immutable manner, cannot be, in regard
    to Creation and Providence; because, Creation and Providence
    are not eternal, immense, and immutable.

    5. As there was not any thing _before_ Creation and
    Providence, but God Himself, it must follow, necessarily, that
    the eternal, immense, and immutable activity and happiness of
    the Divine Being were WITHIN _Himself entirely_.

    6. As it is impossible for the human intellect to conceive,
    that a being can be both _agent_ and _object, in the same
    action_, and the activity of the Divine Being has been shown to
    have been within Himself entirely; it follows, THAT THE DIVINE
    ESSENCE MUST HAVE SUBSISTED ETERNALLY, IMMENSELY, AND IMMUTABLY
    IN A PLURALITY.

    7. And as the mind is _forced_ to admit a _plurality_ in
    the Divine Essence, it naturally, and necessarily assumes
    PERSONS for this plurality; and thus concludes, _There must
    be a plurality of persons in the Godhead as the Scriptures
    declare._

    From the foregoing elements of the argument, it will be
    very easy to observe, if a _plurality_ must be admitted, there
    is no objection in the mind to admit it is _triple_; and
    hence, as the substance of the Divine Essence has been shown
    to exist necessarily in a plurality, the mind conceives a
    _triple plurality_, as easy as any other, and thus conceives
    the reasonableness of the doctrine of the _Trinity in Unity_.

    The most successful argument against this conclusion is
    this: _It is impossible to conceive how three can be one_.
    This is admitted, _when the objects designated by_ “three”
    _are the same as the object designated by_ “one.” But this is
    not the case in the doctrine of the Trinity in Unity. The term
    _Trinity_ applies to the _persons_ in which the Divine Essence
    subsists, and _not_ to the essence itself. So the term _Unity_
    applies to the _Essence only_, and _not_ to the persons. This
    simple distinction removes the whole force of the objection.

    The Unitarians, therefore, do us wrong when they say, _we
    believe three are one_. And Trinitarians do themselves wrong
    when they say, _to the three one God_: because, it is not true
    that there is a “three one God.” But it is a glorious truth,
    THAT THE DIVINE ESSENCE SUBSISTS IN THREE PERSONS, ETERNALLY,
    IMMENSELY, AND IMMUTABLY.

    It is very natural to suppose, that God imparted a
    knowledge of Himself to our first parents in Paradise. The
    Scriptures clearly support this supposition. This knowledge
    would, of course, include the doctrine of the Trinity; and we
    cannot admit for a moment, that so important a doctrine as the
    plurality of persons in the Godhead, could have been wholly
    lost by mankind, though it might become obscured. Accordingly
    we find the traditionary remains of this doctrine throughout
    the Old World.

    “The Hindoos” says M. Sonerat, “adore _three_ principal
    Deities, Brouma, Schiven, and Vichenou, who are still but
    _one_; which kind of Trinity is there called Trimurti, and
    signifies the re-union of those powers. The generality of
    Indians at present, adore only one of these three divinities;
    but some learned men, beside this worship, also address their
    prayers to the three united. The representation of them is to
    be seen in many pagodas, under that of human figures with three
    heads, which on the coast of Orissa, they call Sariharabrama,
    on the Coromandel coast, Trimourti,” &c.

    This account of M. Sonerat is very pertinent, and is
    confirmed by Dr. Buchanan who made extensive researches in that
    country. See his _Star in the East_.

    The same tradition is found in China. “Among the ancient
    Chinese characters” says Dr. A. Clarke, “which have been
    preserved, we find the following Δ like the Greek _delta_.
    According to the Chinese dictionary _Kang-hi_, this character
    signifies _union_. According to _Choueouen_, a celebrated work,
    Δ is _three united in one_. The Lieou-chou-tsing-hoen, which is
    a rational and learned explanation of ancient characters, says;
    “Δ signifies intimate union, harmony, the chief good of man, of
    the heaven, and of the earth; it is the union of three.”

    Lao-tse says; “He who is as visible, and yet cannot be
    seen, is denominated _lieou_; he who can be heard, and yet
    speaks not to the ears, _hi_; he who is tangible, and yet
    cannot be felt, is named _ouei_: in vain do you consult your
    senses about these _three_; your reason alone can discourse of
    them, and it will tell you they are but one,” &c.

    One of the missionaries at Peking, who wrote the letters from
    which I have made the above extracts, takes it for granted,
    “that the mystery of the _Trinity_ was known among the ancient
    Chinese, and that the character Δ was its symbol.” _Dr. A.
    Clarke, on the 1st chap. John’s Gospel._

    The existence of this same tradition in China is conveyed
    to us through another channel. “It was the leading feature in
    _Lao-Kiun’s_ system of philosophical theology, and a sentence
    which he continually repeated as the foundation of all true
    wisdom, that TAO, the eternal reason, produced ONE; _one_
    produced TWO; _two_ produced THREE; and THREE produced all
    things.” _Le Compt’s Memoirs of China_.

    Traditions of this doctrine are found also in Chaldea
    and Persia indeed throughout the East; from whence all agree
    they were imported, through Phœnicia, into Egypt, and thence
    into Greece. The great and original sources of information
    being in the neighborhood of the Euphrates, where the _first
    post-diluvian_ families resided; and the mighty intellects
    which were to influence the world, by the materials which
    were drawn from thence, being in Greece, the consequence
    was, we find the Grecian philosophers travelling _up_ the
    streams of knowledge to the fountains, and thence returning to
    enlighten the world by the results of their researches. For
    example: Pythagoras, Plato, and others visited Egypt first,
    thence to Phœnicia, and thence to Chaldea, and the East, from
    whence they undoubtedly drew their theology. (Nor should it
    be forgotten that _their_ philosophy was _theological_.) The
    concurrent testimony of history establishes this fact. The
    consequence of all this is, the doctrine of the Trinity was
    known to the Greek philosophers, who preserved it to the world
    in their incomparable writings, a collateral testimony of the
    authenticity of the Scripture doctrine. For this opinion we
    have the highest authority in the republic of letters.

    “It is said that the first Christians borrowed their notion
    of a Triune God from the later Platonists; and that we hear not
    of a Trinity in the church till converts were made from the
    school of Alexandria. But if this be the case we may properly
    ask, _Whence had those Platonists the doctrine?_

    “It is not surely so simple, or so obvious as to have
    occurred to the reasoning mind of a pagan philosopher;
    or if it be, _why do Unitarians suppose it to involve a
    contradiction?_--The Platonic and Pythagorean Trinities
    never could have occurred to the mind of him, who, merely
    from the works of creation, endeavored to discover the being
    and attributes of God; and therefore as those philosophers
    travelled into Egypt and the East in quest of knowledge, it
    appears to us in the highest degree probable, that they picked
    up this mysterious and sublime doctrine in those regions where
    it had been handed down as a dogma from the remotest ages,
    and where we know science was not taught systematically, but
    detailed in collections of sententious maxims, and traditionary
    opinions. If this be so we cannot doubt but that the pagan
    trinities had their origin in some primeval revelation. Nothing
    else indeed can account for a doctrine so remote from human
    imagination, and of which we find vestiges in the sacred books
    of almost every civilized people of antiquity. The corrupt
    state in which it is viewed in the writings of Plato and
    others, is the natural consequence of its descent through
    a long course of oral tradition. The Trinity of Platonism
    therefore, instead of being an objection, lends, in our
    opinion, no feeble support to the Christian doctrine, since it
    affords almost a complete proof of that doctrine having made
    a part of the first revelation to man.” _Ency. Brit. Art._
    THEOLOGY.

    “Some have indeed pretended, that the _Trinity_, which
    is commonly called _Platonic_, was a fiction of the later
    Platonists, unknown to the founder of the school: but any
    person who will take the trouble to study the writings of Plato
    will find _abundant evidence that he really asserted_ A TRIAD
    OF DIVINE HYPOSTASES, _all concerned in the formation, and
    government of the world_.” _Ency. Brit. Art._ PLATONISM.

    “Pythagoras, though inferior to Plato in reputation, and
    lived before him, held the same doctrine, and derived it from
    the same sources. He visited Egypt, Persia, Chaldea, &c, and
    thence returned to Greece.” _Ency. Brit. Art._ PYTHAGORAS.

    These quotations are directly from the Encyclopedia
    Britannica, than which no authority can be better. I might
    increase the quotations to the same effect from Dr. Oglevie,
    the learned Cudworth and others, were it necessary. The above
    is thought sufficient to establish the fact, _That the doctrine
    of a Trinity in Unity was once prevalent in the Pagan world,
    and that remains and traditions of it are yet abundant through
    all the East, where the revelations of God were made to
    mankind_.]

If it be asked, “Why did God conceal himself from eternity till within
six thousand years; for, according to Divine revelation, it is not
yet so long since the world was made?” I answer, God is at perfect
liberty to do what he pleases, to do it when he pleases, and to give
no account of the reasons of his conduct. If he had pleased to create
the world as many millions of years sooner, as there have been days
since its creation, the same question might have been asked, Why did
he not create the world sooner, and thereby discover himself? For the
longest time that can be imagined is just as nothing in comparison with
eternity. If God had pleased, he might have concealed his existence
and perfections to all eternity, or, in other words, never have made
any thing. Seeing therefore it was only of his sovereign pleasure that
he made creatures, to whom he might manifest himself, surely he had a
right to fix on the time for doing it. We are sure he is infinitely
wise, and consequently all his works are done in the fittest time, and
best manner.

God made the world, not because he needed the praise or service of
creatures to add to his blessedness; for he who is self-existent
must necessarily be infinitely perfect and absolutely independent;
and would always have remained the same happy Being, enjoying his
own excellencies and perfections, had no creature ever been made.
But it was for the manifesting of his own glorious attributes, and
communicating happiness to creatures capable of it, that he, in
the beginning, created this magnificent fabric of the heavens and
the earth, with all things therein, whether visible or invisible,
animate or inanimate, material substances or immaterial spirits. For
he created beings of different ranks and powers, to whom he might
manifest himself, or communicate his goodness. Some of these were pure
intellectual spirits, fit for the felicity and employments of the
heavenly state, to stand in his immediate presence, and execute his
righteous commands: but these were created before the solar system;
for the angels, those “sons of God,” called “morning stars,” were
present, and sung together for joy, when “the foundations” of this
world were laid. Others he formed out of the earth, with life, sense,
and instinct, but destitute of reason, designing them to be subservient
to the necessities or conveniences of a higher order of beings. Besides
these he created other beings of a middle rank, partaking of an earthly
part, fashioned with infinite skill and art, of exquisite symmetry, and
adorned with great external beauty; and of a spiritual part akin to
angels, and but little inferior to them, being in their constitution a
compound of the animal and angelic natures.

It is not by reason alone then, or the light of heathen philosophy,
but “through faith,” in the infallible testimony of Divine revelation,
“we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that
things which are seen were not made of things which do appear.” The
sun, moon, stars, and earth, which we see, were not made of matter
which had existed from eternity, as some of the heathen philosophers
supposed, but of what God created anterior to the formation of those
wonderful orbs. The word κατηρτισθαι, _framed_, signifies not only to
_make_ or _produce_ simply, but properly _to place_ or _set in joint_
the parts of any body or machine in their right order. Accordingly
Plato says, that in making the world, God proceeded with the exactness
of a geometrician, arranging every thing in complete symmetry. All this
was done by the _word_ of God, which is not to be understood of any
articulate sound, but of the simple act of his own will; he willed the
universe, with all its variety of furniture, into existence. And this
is a matter of _faith_, to be believed; not to be known by mere reason;
for reason, without faith, can apprehend a formation of things from
matter previously made ready.

A pious expositor very justly observes, By faith assenting to Divine
revelation, and not by reason we understand the truth and wonders,
the reasons and causes, the manner and end, of the creation of the
world. Reason indeed tells us that there was a creation, consequently
a Creator; but reason without Divine revelation could never have
discovered the circumstances and manner of the creation, which wholly
depended upon the will of God. Reason could never have known them,
if God had not in his word first revealed them. Reason may propound
the question, How was the world made, and all things therein? But
revelation must resolve it.

“Oh Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honor
and majesty. Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment: who
stretchest out the heavens like a curtain: who layeth the beams of
his chambers in the waters: who maketh the clouds his chariot: who
walketh upon the wings of the wind: who maketh his angels spirits; his
ministers a flaming fire: who laid the foundations of the earth, that
it should not be moved for ever. Thou coveredst it with a garment:
the waters stood above the mountains. At thy rebuke they fled; at the
voice of thy thunder they hasted away. They go up by the mountains;
they go down by the valleys unto the place which thou hast founded for
them. Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they turn
not again to cover the earth.” Such is the sublime language of Divine
revelation!

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnotes - Chapter I

    [1] As the name _Jehovah_, in the Hebrew consists of four
    letters, so for the most part the name of the supreme Being
    does in all languages. Thus among the Persians, the name is
    Σορυ; among the Arabians, _Alla_; among the Assyrians, _Adad_;
    among the Egyptians, Θωυθ or Θευθ with the Grecians, Θεος; the
    Latins, _Deus_; the French, _Dieu_; the Spaniards, _Dios_; the
    Italians, _Idio_; and with the Germans, _Gott_.

    The name _Jehovah_ is written differently. Sanchoniathon
    writes it _Jevo_; Diodorus the Sicilian, Macrobius, Clemens
    Alexandrinus, Jerome, and Origen, _Jao_; Epiphanius, Theodoret,
    and the Samaritans, _Jabé_ or _Jave_: we find likewise _Jahoh_,
    _Javo_, _Jaou_, _Jaod_. Lewis Capellus is for _Javo_; Drusius
    for _Javé_; Mercer for _Jehevah_: Hottinger _Jehra_. The Moors
    call their God _Juba_, whom some believe to be _Jehovah_.
    The Latins probably took their _Juvis_ or _Jovis Pater_ from
    _Jehovah_. It is certain that these four letters may likewise
    be expressed by _Javo_, _Jaho_, _Jaon_, _Jevo_, _Javé_,
    _Jehvah_, &c. Mussulmen frequently use the name _Hu_, or
    _Hou_, which has almost the same signification as _Jehovah_,
    i.e. _He who is_. But the great name of God is _Allah_, which
    they pronounce often, and have great confidence in. Among the
    Arabians, and all Mahometans the name _Allah_ corresponds with
    the _Elohim_ and _Adonai_ of the Hebrews, and even that of
    _Jehovah_. See Calmet’s Dictionary.

    [2] Dr. A. Clarke on Exod. xxxiv, 6, 7.

    [3] Philo-Biblius seems to intimate, that the God of the
    Phœnicians was anciently called by the name _Jehovah_; and that
    _Jevo_, _Javo_, more recently used by them, is a corruption of
    it; for it is said, that Jerombalus who supplied Sanchoniathon
    with materials for his Phœnician history, was a priest of the
    God Jevo. Euseb. Præp. Evang. lib. i. c. 9.

    [4] “On the front of the famous temple of Apollo, at
    Delphos, was graven the Greek word Ει (which signifies _thou
    art_, being the second person singular of the verb εἰμὶ.) The
    learned among the Philosophers labored long to discover its
    meaning, each giving his own opinion; but could not find it
    out, until Plutarch (who travelled into Egypt and Greece for
    instruction in ancient sciences and other things) meeting with
    that passage in the writings of Moses, where God manifested
    himself by saying, I AM THAT I AM; he was struck with it, and
    having it explained to him, he then conceived the true and
    exalted sense of the word Ει, engraved on the front of the
    temple. It implied, as it were, an admonition to those who were
    about to enter the temple, to worship God, who is the only
    self-existent Being in the universe.” Creighton’s Enquiry into
    the Origin of True Religion, p. 21. Second Edition.

    On a temple dedicated to Neitha, at Sais, the chief town
    in Lower Egypt, was this inscription: “I am whatever is, or
    has been, or will be, and no mortal has hitherto drawn aside
    my veil; my offspring is the sun.” It appears highly probable
    that the ancient Egyptians acknowledged an active as well
    as a passive principle in nature, and, as Plutarch asserts,
    worshipped τῳ πρώτῳ Θεῳ, the supreme Deity. Enfield’s History
    of Philosophy, vol. i. p. 76, 77.

    [5] Norris on Reason and Religion. Contemp. i.

    [6] Allix’s Judgment of the Jewish Church against the
    Unitarians, p. 116. Edit. 1699. See also p. 119. Simpson’s
    Apology for the Doctrine of the Trinity, p. 379, 380.

    [7] Rabbi Simeon Ben Jochai, in Zoar, on the sixth section
    of Leviticus. See Ainsworth’s Annotations on the place.

    [8] Demonstration of the Messias, Part iii. p, 170, 171.
    Edit. 1700.

    [9] Jones on the Trinity, chap. iii. sect. 1.

    [10] Allix. p. 132.

    [11] Gen. i, 26; iii, 22; xi, 7; xx, 13; xxxi, 53; xxxv,
    7; Deut. iv, 7; v, 23; Josh. xxiv, 19; 1 Sam. iv, 8; 2 Sam.
    vii, 23; Psal. lviii, 12; Isai. vi, 8; Jer. x, 10; xxiii, 36;
    See Prov. ix, 10; xxx, 3; Psal. cxlix, 2; Eccl. v, 7; xii, 1:
    Job v, 1; Isai. vi, 3; liv, 5; Hos. xi, 12, or xii, 1; Mal.
    i,6; Dan. vii, 18, 22, 25; Hebrew Lexicon, p. 19. Edit. 1811.
    See also Mr. Parkhurst’s pamphlet against Dr. Priestly and Mr.
    Wakefield, p. 3-9, and p. 148, &c.

    [12] Ridley’s Eight Discourses, p. 79.

    [13] See Allix’s Judgment of the Jewish Church, p. 118.

    [14] Professor Kidd’s Essay on the Doctrine of the Trinity,
    p. 452.

    [15] Jones on the Trinity.

    [16] Ganganelli’s Letters.

    [17] Rev. Hugh Knox’s Sermons.

    [18] Gray’s Key to the Old Testament.

    [19] M. Pascal’s Thoughts.

    [20] See Gray’s Key, Notes, p. 82-83.

    [21] See Sturm. vol. iv. p. 266.

    [22] Christian’s Magazine, vol. ii, p. 97, 98.

       *       *       *       *       *




