CHAPTER II.

FIRST DAY.

_Section_ I.--CHAOS.

    Inquiry into the origin of things natural to man --
    Character of Moses as a sacred historian important --
    Explanation of the term Created -- Chaotic state of the
    elementary principles of matter -- Influence of the Spirit
    of God upon the chaotic mass -- Opinions of the ancients --
    Similitude between the first and second creation -- Agency of
    the Holy Spirit in the work of regeneration asserted and proved.


As creatures possessed of conscious existence, and furnished with both
intellectual and moral powers, it is very natural for us to inquire
into the origin and first state of things; and, when difficulties
present themselves, to meet with clear and satisfactory solutions of
them, removing the darkness in which they were enveloped, affords
to reflecting minds a high gratification. Without the aid of divine
revelation, the creation of the world would have been involved in
uncertainty, and our unassisted reason left to speculate in fields
of wide conjecture. But in following the luminous torch of sacred
communication, we are safely conducted to the first great Cause, by
whose almighty _fiat_ matter was called into existence, and afterwards
disposed and modified according to the plan devised by the eternal Mind.

Moses, considered as a man of scientific habits, being well versed in
all the “wisdom of the Egyptians”--mathematical, physical, moral, and
divine; could not but know that his cosmogony would have to pass the
ordeal of critical investigation, and undergo the best of philosophical
inquiry: that contemporaries, as well as future and remote nations
and generations, would minutely examine his historical record; and
science, in its progressive state of improvement, try the validity
of his system: that it would meet the inquisitive eye of genius and
learning, and fall into the hands of both sincere friends and insidious
enemies to religious truth: that candor would patiently search into its
pretensions, impartially weigh its evidence, and sober inquiry respect
its claims: while narrow prejudice, blind bigotry, or superstitious
enthusiasm, would dispute its authority, deny its veracity, and
disdainfully reject its aid. But listening to an all-wise Instructor,
following a Guide that could not deceive him; and disregarding the
envenomed tongue of calumny, the lampooning pen of the satirist, the
surly frown of literary pride, and the imperious authority of exalted
rank; he committed to writing a true account of the creation of the
world, for the information and religious improvement of mankind to the
latest generation.

Viewed as the ground-work of all future revelations, if any defect or
false position were discovered in his relation of things, that would
deprive his history of credibility, and decisively prove him to have
been led by the sallies of a vain and heated imagination, and not the
Spirit of the living God. But of this there was no danger; and, as a
distinguished author pertinently observes, “from the book of Genesis,
almost all the ancient philosophers, astronomers, chronologists, and
historians, have taken their respective _data_: and all the modern
improvements and accurate discoveries in different arts and sciences
have only served to confirm the facts detailed by Moses, and to show,
that all the ancient writers on these subjects, have approached to,
or receded from truth, and the phenomena of nature, in the exact
proportion as they have followed the Mosaic history.” As a writer,
Moses does not attack other systems, formed on this or that hypothesis;
but in a simple and incontrovertible narrative, acquaints us with the
origin of matter, and the progressive formation and completion of the
solar system.

The Scriptures inform us, that Moses was privileged to converse with
God “face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend,” and from him
received clear and manifest revelations, not by visions, ecstasies,
dreams, inward inspirations, or the mediation of angels, but familiarly
and with confidence, by articulate sounds, in his own language. The
Lord said, “With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently,
and not in dark speeches; and the similitude of the Lord shall he
behold.” God being a Spirit, has neither shape nor parts, consequently
is invisible, and cannot be seen by eyes of flesh: he is the most
simple essence. When he speaks of himself as having a face, mouth,
eyes, hands, &c, he adapts his language to our capacities, designing
to express by these figures the perfections of his nature; but he
is really one undivided essence. That which Moses saw, was only the
_Shekinah_, a glorious brightness, the symbol of the Divine presence,
and not the essence, which is invisible.

In giving an account of the true origin of things, he attends
particularly to the _mode_, _agent_, and _time_ of their being
produced. His history commences with the creation of matter, “In
the beginning.” Before the creative acts mentioned by him, all was
eternity. _Time_ signifies _duration_ measured by the revolutions of
the heavenly bodies; but prior to the creation of these bodies, there
could be no measurement of duration, and consequently no _time_;
therefore, “In the beginning,” must necessarily mean the commencement
of time which followed, or rather was produced by God’s creative acts,
as an effect follows, or is produced by a cause.

    [From several expressions in this chapter, it is obvious
    that Mr. Wood considered the account given by Moses, in the
    first chapter of Genesis, to apply to _universal creation_,
    and not to be restricted to our _Solar System_. It is also
    plainly inferable, that he considered this the _first exercise
    of God’s creative energy in any way_. This view is entirely too
    contracted, is not clearly warranted by the text of the sacred
    historian, and is unnecessary.

    There are no passages of Scripture which say distinctly,
    the Mosaic creation is the first or only acts of creative
    energy: but there are several which intimate the _previous
    existence of creatures_, and of course imply a previous
    exercise of creative power.

    It is sufficiently clear that there were intelligent beings
    existing at the creation of this world. Hence it is said, “the
    morning stars sang together, and the sons of God shouted for
    joy,” in view of the rising creation.

    Since, therefore, the previous existence of intelligent
    beings is established, we must, of course, assign to them some
    _mode_ of subsistence; and this will compel us to assign at
    least what must be _necessary_ to every creature, a _place of
    abode_, suited to his wants and conditions, without which he
    cannot subsist. Thus we establish even a _material_ creation,
    _anterior_ to the creation mentioned by Moses.

    After weighing the account which Moses gives in the first
    chapter of Genesis, together with the facts and analogies in
    Nature, the conclusion seems irresistible, _that he describes
    only our Solar System_; which includes the seven primary
    planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and
    Herschel: the four asteroides, Vesta, Juno, Ceres, and Pallas:
    and the eighteen moons which attend the primary planets.
    Because,

    1. As this account forms the introduction to a revelation
    designed for the _human family only_, it is reasonable to
    conclude it would have reference to those bodies only which
    operate materially to their benefit or injury. But there are no
    such bodies except in the Solar System.

    2. Moses in describing the formation of the heavenly
    bodies, mentions only the _sun_ and _moon_ in a conspicuous
    manner: because, these are the only luminaries which contribute
    _essentially_ to our comfort: and then, lest a beholder might
    imagine God did not also make the other suns and stars, says
    incidentally, “He made the stars also.”

    3. The conclusion is clear from the fact, that _the Solar
    System is complete in itself_: forming a perfect whole, which
    could exist were all other stars and suns destroyed, and vice
    versâ, all other systems could exist were the Solar System
    destroyed.

    4. It does not well comport with the character of the
    Divine Being, when we consider his eternal power, infinite
    wisdom, and boundless goodness, to suppose He never exercised
    his creative energies but _once_, and that not until a few
    thousand years since. Yet we are compelled to this conclusion,
    however reluctantly, unless we restrict the Mosaic account of
    the creation to our Solar System.

    This argument will derive additional weight, when we
    recollect the _immensity_ of God’s works taken together, and
    the _illimitable space_ in which he has, and may, exercise his
    creative energy. We may _approximate towards_ a very faint idea
    of their immensity, by calling to mind the immense number of
    _fixed stars_. All astronomers admit their number to be very
    great indeed, but how many cannot be correctly known. There
    may be millions whose light has not reached us yet. Of those
    which may be detected, Professor _Vince_, says, there are at
    least _seventy-five millions_; and each the centre of a system
    as large, possibly much larger than our own. Indeed we can
    scarcely approach towards a competent idea of _illimitable
    space_. The nearest _fixed star_ is supposed to be Sirius, or
    the dog-star, at the lowest calculation _twenty-two billions
    of miles distant_. If we compute according to this analogy,
    and say there are seventy-five millions of fixed stars, each
    the _centre_ of a system, perfect, and independent: what mind
    can conceive the illimitable space through which these worlds
    must lie? Yet this would scarcely be an approximation towards
    the true extent. Beyond this there is still _unoccupied space_,
    “where existence sleeps in the wide abyss of possibility.”

    It may, therefore, be asked with justice, whether a being
    capable of creating, even in this limited view, would have
    exercised his creative powers _but once_, and that not until
    a few thousands years since? _Credat qui posset, non ego._
    Who can tell what may have been the _successive_ creations,
    durations, and, possibly, destructions of those worlds which we
    see, and of others, of which the inhabitants of this earth have
    never heard, whose light has not yet reached us since their
    creation, though coming at the rate of nearly _twelve millions
    of miles in a minute_?

    Finally: A _succession_ of creative acts, whose
    commencement runs back _almost_ parallel with eternity, and
    will extend forward _almost ad infinitum_, seems to comport
    best with the eternal, immense, and immutable activity, energy,
    and goodness of the Divine Being.]

The word _created_ means, that God caused that to exist which,
previously to this moment, had no being. The Rabbins, who are
legitimate judges in a case of verbal criticism on their own
language, are unanimous in asserting, that the word ברא
_bara_ expresses the commencement of the existence of a thing,
or its egression from nonentity to entity. It does not, in its
primary meaning, denote the _preserving_ or _new forming_ things
that had previously existed, as some imagine; but _creation_, in
the proper sense of the term, though it has some other acceptations
in other places. The supposition that God formed all things out of
a pre-existing eternal nature, is certainly absurd: for, if there
was an eternal nature besides an eternal God, there must have been
two self-existing, independent, and eternal Beings, which is a most
palpable contradiction. _Ex nihilo nihil fit_, “That out of nothing,
nothing is produced” is a maxim that applies itself in every case where
Deity is not concerned; it was the main argument used by Aristotle and
his followers, but is completely refuted by the authority of Divine
revelation. God created את השמים ואת הארץ _eth hashamayim
veet haarets_, “the heavens and the earth.” The word את
_eth_, which is generally considered as a particle, simply denoting
that the word following is in the accusative or oblique case, is often
understood by the Rabbins in a much more extensive sense, “The particle
את _eth_,” says Aben Ezra, “signifies the _substance_ of the
thing.” The like definition is given by Kimchi in his _Book of Roots_.
“This particle,” says Mr. Ainsworth, “having the _first_ and _last_
letters of the Hebrew alphabet in it, is supposed to comprise the _sum_
and _substance_ of _all things_.” “The particle את _eth_,”
says Buxtorf, Talmudic Lexicon sub voce, “with the Cabalists, is often
mystically put for the _beginning_ and the _end_, as Α
alpha and Ω omega are in the Apocalypse.” On this ground,
these words should be translated, “God in the beginning created the
_substance_ of the heavens, and the substance of the earth: i.e. the
_prima materia_, or first elements, out of which the heavens and the
earth were successively formed.”[23]

During the first state of things, Moses informs us, that “the earth was
without form and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep.” The
original terms תהו _tohoo_, and בהו _bohoo_, translated, “without form
and void,” convey the idea of confusion and disorder. The translation
by Paginus, is _desert and emptiness_; in the Vulgate, it is _empty and
void_; in the Septuagint, _invisible and incomposed_; from the Syriac,
_desert and uncultivated_; the Samaritan is the same as the Vulgate;
the Arabic, _covered with abysses_: these translations are allowed
by the learned Walton. There is but little difference in their real
meaning, and all the Versions express the first state of things.[24]
The whole collection of matter, created in a fluid state, was a crude,
indigested chaos: all belonging to our system, as the sun, moon, stars,
earth, and seas, lay blended together in one vast, confused mass,
without any arrangement of their constituent particles, heavy and
light, dense and rare, fluid and solid, being all mixed together; air,
water, and earth, (which have since obtained the name of elements,)
were promiscuously scattered throughout.

The chaotic mass remained in this primitive state, till God was pleased
to assimilate, assort, and arrange the materials,--out of which he
built up, in the space of six days, the whole of creation.[25] _The
Spirit of God_, represented us sitting upon the vast abyss, like a
bird, while either in the act of incubation or fostering its young,
_moved_ or brooded _upon the face of the waters_, communicating, by his
vital energy, life and motion to the unformed chaos.

Some writers understand by  רוח אלהימ _the Spirit of God_, a “mighty
sweeping wind,” a “tremendous tempest,” separating diversified
particles of the elementary principles of matter, and combining those
of the same kind together. But this is making an effect to be produced
by a cause, which, as yet, had no existence; nor, as a cause, is it
sufficient to produce so great an effect. To make an effect superior to
its cause, is as absurd and contradictory as to say, a long line and a
short one are equal. That the single Hebrew word רוח _ruach_, the Greek
πνευμα _pneuma_, the Latin _spiritus_, and the ancient Saxon _ghost_
or _gast_, signifies _wind_, as well as the vital breath, the soul of
man, a created spirit good or evil, is readily admitted. But concerning
the phrase רוח אלהימ, _the Spirit of God_, so frequently used in the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, there is not one instance that it
signifies _wind_, and to attempt to force such meaning upon it, is a
most manifest violation done to the text. By _the Spirit of God_, is
meant the third subsistence in the Divine essence, distinguished from
the person of the Father, and that of the Son; he is called a _Spirit_,
to signify his spiritual and immaterial nature, as well as to express
his mighty agency; and the works of which he is the author can only be
effected by an omnipotent power.

Milton, who was well versed in the Hebrew language, in his address to
the Holy Spirit, says,

                            “Thou from the first
    Wast present, and with mighty wings outspread,
    Dove-like, sat’st brooding on the vast abyss,
    And mad’st it pregnant.”

The Holy Spirit, by his vital influence, infused that efficient power
into the great mass of matter, which was necessary for the assumption
of different forms, and the discharge of the assigned functions of
selecting and arranging the materials out of which the world is
formed. By brooding over the mingled earth and water, says Dr. Owen,
“he communicated a prolific virtue; and inlaid them with the seeds of
animal life; and therefore the earth and the water brought forth all
sorts of creatures in abundance, according to the seeds and principles
communicated to them by the cherishing motion of the _Spirit of God_.”

As several of the ancients have described the elementary principles
of all things to be a gloomy chaos, consisting of _darkness_ and
_water_, we may easily infer from what source they derived this notion.
Aristotle observes, the theologists and natural philosophers agreed,
that all things were produced, as the former said, “out of night;” or,
as the latter, “out of a confused mixture.” Whatever knowledge the
inhabitants of Chaldea had of the creation of the world, they ascribe
to the teaching of an amphibious monster denominated Oannes. He taught
his auditors, that there was a time when all things were darkness
and water, in the midst of which various monsters of horrible forms
received life and light. Over this chaotic mass presided the demon
Omoroca, a mythological personification of the ocean. At length arrived
the destined hour of the creation. The monster Omoroca fell subdued
beneath the victorious arm of Belus; the animals which composed her
empire were annihilated; and the world was formed out of her substance.
Oannes, however, taught, that this physiological description was to be
taken merely in an allegorical sense, and that the whole fable alluded
to the aqueous origin of the universe. Matter having been thus created,
Belus divided the darkness from the light, separated the earth from the
heavens, disposed the world in order, and called the starry host into
existence.

According to the Phœnician system, the principle of the universe was
a _dark air_, and a _turbulent evening chaos_; an opinion not very
dissimilar to that given by Moses. Sanchoniathon afterward ascribes to
material operation the origin of that which may be denominated the will
or desire of God, when in his great wisdom he thought fit to create
the world out of nothing. From this personification of Divine love,
a chaotic mixture was produced, and within it were comprehended the
rudiments of all things.

The cosmogony of the ancient Egyptians, though more obscure, is
given by Diodorus Siculus. “Damascius having inquired about what was
the first principle in the world, gives this as an ancient Egyptian
doctrine. The Egyptians have chosen to celebrate the first cause
as _unspeakable_. They accordingly style it _darkness unknown_ and
mention it with a three-fold acclamation. Again. In this manner the
Egyptians styled the first principle _an inconceivable darkness; night
and darkness past all imagination_.” This is perfectly consonant
to passages from the same author, quoted by Dr. Cudworth. “There
is one origin of all things, celebrated by the name of _unknown_
(incomprehensible) _darkness_.” Again. “They hold, that the first
beginning or cause of things was _darkness beyond all conception; an
unknown darkness_.”

Hesiod mentions, “A chaos as first existing. Next was produced the
spacious earth, the seat of the immortals; Tartarus hid within the
recesses of the ample globe; and divine love, the most beautiful of the
deities. From chaos sprung Erebus, and black night; and from the union
of night and Erebus were born ether and the day.”[26] Zeno, of Cittium,
the founder of the Stoics, said, Hesiod meant by the chaos, “Water, out
of which all things were formed, which by concretion became firm earth.”

In the work of Aristophanes, we meet with a similar passage. “Chaos,
and night, and black Erebus, and wide Tartarus, first existed; at that
time, there was neither earth, air, nor heaven. But in the bosom of
Erebus, black-winged night produced an aërial egg; from which, in due
season, beautiful Love, decked with golden wings, was born. Out of dark
chaos, in the midst of wide-spreading Tartarus, he begot our race, and
called us forth into the light.”[27]

It is unnecessary to multiply quotations to prove, that the ancients
were not only acquainted with the cosmogony of Moses, but received it
as true; to which they added their own coloring.

    [It is now generally agreed by cosmogonists, commentators,
    biblical critics, and natural philosophers, that the
    _substance_ of the earth certainly, and probably the materials
    of the Solar System, was first created in a chaotic state, and
    subsequently arranged in order. This opinion is very ancient
    and almost universal, found in all nations. Ovid, an ancient
    heathen poet, has well described this chaos:

        Ante mare et terras, et, quod teget omnia, Cœlum,
        Unus erat toto naturæ vultus in orbe,
        Quem dixére Chaos; rudis indigestaque moles,
        Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners; congestaque eodem.
        Non bene junctarum discordia semina rerum.

        Before the seas, and this terrestrial ball,
        And heaven’s high canopy that covers all:
        _One_ was the face of nature if a face:
        _Rather a rude and indigested mass:
        A lifeless lump, unfashioned and unframed,
        Of jarring seeds, and justly_ CHAOS _named_.--Dryden.

    Notwithstanding the general prevalence of this opinion,
    and the high authorities which support it, the reader must not
    imagine it is absolutely _universal_. Some eminent men have
    suggested, that the earth, and matter generally, was created in
    a _solid_ state at first. This is the view taken by Mr. Ure, of
    the Andersonian University. He supposes _the earth was created
    a solid ball, or spheroid, regular on its surface, without
    hills and vallies, and immersed in a crust of ice, which
    completely and uniformly surrounded it: that it was a cold
    lifeless lump; heat not yet having pervaded it_. The first, and
    all quickening operation of heat he supposes to be indicated
    by these words of Moses: “And the Spirit of God moved on the
    face of the waters.” He supposes, all the matter of our earth
    is in the same relative position, in which it was when it first
    existed at the command of God; _except such cases in which some
    subsequent force has disarranged it_. These cases he supposes
    to have been many, and to have operated to the _upheaving_
    the mountains, and hollowing out the beds of the sea, &c. He
    says of the earth: “The central mass composed, most probably,
    of the metallic bases of the earths and alkalies, as volcanic
    phenomena seem to attest, would fuse, when first the calorific
    energy was made to actuate the body of the earth, and the
    exterior parts would oxydize into the crust of mineral strata,
    and the outermost coat of all, the fixed ice, would melt into
    the moveable _waters_.” _New Syst. of Geol. B. 1. chap. 1. p.
    7._

    Perhaps Mr. Ure’s view might be improved, and made
    to approximate much nearer the common opinion, possibly
    identified with it, by supposing the mass of matter composing
    our earth, was confusedly mixed,--and of course chaotic--but
    was in a frozen, hard, inactive state: that the quickening
    energy, which softened and fused it, was simultaneous with its
    revolution on its axis. The consequence then would be precisely
    what we find it to be; viz: an enlargement of the equatorial
    diameter, and a flattening of the poles. This I conceive to be
    the true theory in this case.

    Mr. Ure confirms his view by a quotation from Sir Isaac
    Newton; Optics, Book 3. towards the conclusion. “It seems
    probable to me that God in the beginning formed matter in
    solid, massy, hard, impenetrable, movable particles, of such
    sizes and figures, and with such other properties, and in such
    proportions to space, as most conduced to the end for which he
    formed them. All material things seem to have been composed
    of the hard and solid particles above mentioned, variously
    associated in the _first creation_ by the counsels of an
    intelligent agent. For it became him who created them to set
    them in order; and if he did so, it is unphilosophical to seek
    for any other origin of this world, or to pretend that it might
    rise out of chaos by the mere laws of Nature; though being once
    formed, it may continue by those laws for many ages.”

    I have given this quotation precisely as I found it in
    Mr. Ure’s New System of _Geology_, B. 1. chap. 1. p. 10.
    Considering the well founded reputation of Newton, it adds very
    much to the probability of the above theory: yet it seems to
    me to be at variance with the commonly received impression of
    Newton’s opinion on this subject. I have not his work at hand
    to examine it.

    The Encyclopedia Britannica, Article _Earth_, seems to
    favor this view. It says, “The common notion of the earth’s
    being originally a chaos, seems neither to have a foundation in
    reason, nor in the Mosaic account of the creation.”

    The reader will here perceive high authorities on both
    sides, and all claiming to agree with Moses. The weight of
    evidence seems to be in favor of a chaotic creation, which
    does _not_ necessarily imply that the mass was created in a
    _soft_ state. But the configuration, and internal structure of
    the earth abundantly prove it was in a soft, or compressible
    state when it was assuming its present form and structure.
    This condition was the effect of the quickening energy of the
    Spirit of God. The difference between the _equatorial_ and
    _polar_ diameters of the earth, which is now well established,
    and is about twenty-seven miles, can scarcely be accounted for,
    without supposing the substance of the earth, at least to a
    great depth, to have been partially or wholly fluid; in which
    case, by turning round rapidly on its own axis, it would assume
    the shape it is known to possess. It may, indeed, be said, the
    Almighty could give it any shape and qualities he pleased, and
    we cannot well object to it.

    As it regards the interior, or central parts of our planet,
    our author has said nothing, and possibly he would give
    this very good reason for his silence--_we can know nothing
    certainly_. Still, however, we may subjoin the conjectures of
    some eminent philosophers.

    Some suppose the central parts of our globe to be
    _cavernous_ or _hollow_. The principal argument for this
    theory is the transmission of _sound_ and _motion_ through vast
    extents of country, in case of volcanoes and earthquakes. It is
    supposed this could not be done so perfectly and extensively,
    unless we suppose some _aëriform_, or _gaseous_ body within the
    earth, by means of which it might be transmitted: which would
    be to suppose it _cavernous_ or _hollow_.

    Dr. Halley supposes the earth is a hollow sphere, in
    which there is inclosed a central magnetic globe, and by the
    motions of this globe the variations of the magnetic needle are
    produced.

    Our own ingenious, but unfortunate countryman, _Symms_,
    supposed the earth to be hollow, and inhabited within, and its
    interior accessible to us. He argues, there is no necessity,
    for the purposes of gravitation, or for any other purposes, to
    suppose the earth solid to the centre: And it is inconsistent
    with the divine beneficence to suppose such an amount of matter
    as this globe would be, if solid, should have been created to
    afford so small a portion, _scarcely one-fourth_, fit for the
    actual habitation of man, for whom principally it was created.
    He, therefore, supported, that the interior of the earth was an
    immense cavern blessed with changes of season, succession of
    day and night, cold and heat, and inhabited by human beings,
    and other animals. He supposed the poles of the earth were
    hollow, and this hollow entrance gradually verged round towards
    the equator; and ships have, without knowing it, been within
    the verge, from whence they found no difficulty of returning.

    Others have supposed the central parts of our globe are
    solid. This is the common supposition, and is principally
    supported by these two arguments:--As the attraction of
    gravitation depends on the _quantity_ of matter, as well as
    the distance; unless we suppose the earth a _solid_ body it
    will not be able to exert a sufficient attractive influence on
    the moon to keep her in her orbit. Again: it is ascertained
    by actual experiment, that the _mean_ density of the earth is
    about _five_ times that of water: from which it is infered it
    is solid, and must increase in density from the surface to the
    centre, in order to give this high mean proportion over the
    bodies at its surface.

    The increasing density of the earth, from the surface to
    the centre is owing to _compression_ in part, and partly to the
    supposed fact, that the heavier substances are placed nearer
    the centre. Thus we find the different strata of rocks indicate
    the same. Granite is the heaviest and lowest rock _in situ_.

    Some have supposed that _iron_, probably nearly in a
    metallic state, constitutes the nucleus of our earth. This idea
    seems to have been suggested to account for the influence of
    the earth on a magnetic needle.

    But the most splendid, and very probable conjecture is
    founded on the experiments of Berzelius, and Sir H. Davy, on
    the earths, which experiments prove them to have _metallic
    bases_ universally: hence all our earths are _metallic oxides_.
    From these circumstances it is conjectured, that the nucleus
    of our globe is constituted of the metals in a pure, or nearly
    pure state, which are the bases of our earths, alkalis, and
    alkaline earths.

    It would almost seem a legitimate conjecture to suppose the
    substances of our globe were, at _first, metals_ and _gases_:
    that the oxygen, combining with the metals formed earths, and
    alkalis; and the gases combining among themselves formed air,
    water, &c. This would be a chemical process, and necessarily
    _fuse_ and soften the earth, and introduce the process of
    cooling, which would proceed from the surface towards the
    centre. Hence some eminent philosophers have conjectured that
    there is a great degree of heat in the interior of the earth
    yet: probably the central parts are in a state of igneous
    fusion. Some recent researches of Cordier tend to establish
    this opinion. The amount of evidence in favor of this
    conjecture is increasing annually, and probably will prevail.
    See the _additional_ paper on _volcanos_ in this volume.]

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ II.--_Fire._

    Omnific word -- Moving principles in Nature -- Criticism
    on the original word אור aur -- Creation of fire -- Its nature
    -- Friction exciting the action of fire -- Fire attracted by
    bodies -- Fire conducted -- Fire in a state of combination --
    Fire elastic -- Expansive force of fire -- Subterraneous fires
    -- Earthquakes and Volcanic Eruptions -- Air a storehouse of
    fire -- General and final Dissolution of Nature by fire --
    Fire a symbol of the Deity, in his gracious presence, vital
    influence, transforming energy, and destructive operation.


The sacred historian here informs us of the first regular production
reduced from the chaotic mass. With an astonishing majesty of
expression, God said, יהי אור ויהי אור YEHI AUR, _vayehi aur_, _Let
there be light: and there was light_. Or, more literally, _Be light:
and light was_. Pagninus translates the words יהי אור YEHI AUR,
literally, _Sit lux, Be light_. In the Greek it is γενεθητω φῶς, _Be
light made_, or _generated_. In the Vulgate, _Fiat lux_, which is much
the same as the Greek. The celebrated Dionysius Longinus, meeting
with this passage in the Septuagint, considered it as a specimen of
the _true sublime_. Though a heathen, he thus expresses himself:
“So likewise the Jewish lawgiver, (who was no ordinary man) having
conceived a just idea of the divine power, he expressed it in a
dignified manner; for at the beginning of his laws he thus speaks: GOD
SAID--_What?_ LET THERE BE LIGHT! _and there was light_. LET THERE BE
EARTH! _and there was earth_.”[28]

Here we may inquire, Whether this was a word uttered with a sound, like
that which God spake from mount Sinai in giving the Law; or only the
exercise of the inward faculty of reason or understanding? It could not
be a word spoken with a sound, for that requires air as its _medium_,
and none as yet existed; neither was there any ear to hear, nor any
use of such words. Nor could it be any exercise of the Divine Mind,
now beginning to think of the creation and formation of things; for
this purpose was in his thoughts from eternity. The meaning therefore
is, that God did, without any instruments, toil, labor, alteration,
or delay, for the manifestation of his own infinite goodness, wisdom,
power, and will, actually working like a powerful word or command,
instantaneously produce _light_.[29] Thus

    “Dark Chaos heard his voice.”

The Psalmist, touching on the subject of creation, says, “He spake, and
it was done: he commanded, and it stood fast”--יעמד _jagnamad, it stood
forth_, as a servant at his master’s command, prepared to do his will,
and to execute his pleasure.[30]

The divine commandment which produced light, says an intelligent
writer, must be considered as operating on the properties of matter
already created; and as light is found to proceed from the motion of
luminous particles, we must conceive some central force, or attracting
power, to be the instrument of producing this phenomenon of light,
by its attractive or propelling properties. There seem to be moving
principles in all nature, which, when put in action by the first
Cause, produce natural effects according to established laws, which
cannot be altered unless by the first Mover. As the Hebrew word תהומ
_tehom, abyss_, translated _deep_, signifies also to move with a sort
of confused motion; we may justly conclude that the chaotic mass had
some gravitating powers in it, before the forming of the system; and
that attracting and repelling force was naturally and originally in
the universe; and that the first Mover gave them in a regular course,
the specifical direction, and systematical attractions. What our
distinguished philosopher, Sir Isaac Newton, has suggested concerning
attraction and gravitation, even in point of philosophy, appears to
agree with the Principia of Moses.

Another author writes, Whether Moses intended a philosophical account
of light in this place, I will not pretend to say; but one thing is
certain, that he makes use of a word which points out some of the
principal properties of light. The original word אור _aur_ signifies
that body which renders objects visible, which we call _light_; it
also signifies _fire_, and perhaps Moses intended to point out in one
word, what in our language requires two, _light_ and _fire_. When we
consider the words of Moses, it appears evident that what is in our
version called _light_, is in the Hebrew rather something that sends
forth light. The original word אור _aur_ may signify any thing that
makes things visible by emitting particles of light. When the Almighty
said, “Let there be אור _aur, light_,” it is not certain that he meant
elementary fire, or original unpropagated light. It is more probable
that he intended by that word, a body that sent forth light by means of
the motion of similar particles of luminous and igneous matter.

Whatever may be the philosophic differences between these two, _light_
and _fire_, continues the same author, we are certain that they are
seldom separated. The origin of that light which now renders bodies
visible to us, seems chiefly to be _fire_, though light and fire are
not inseparably connected; for light may be propagated where there is
no fire, as from putrid bodies, &c, and fire may be where there is no
light, as in iron, sulphur, &c.

The Hebrew word אור _aur_, signifies not only light, but
_fire_. God created this powerful agent on the first day, and diffused
it through every part of nature; because without it no operation could
be carried on and perfected. T. Bartholine quotes Aristotle as saying,
“That fire is the efficient cause of all things.” Robison says, “Heat
is susceptible of fixation--of being accumulated in bodies, and, as
it were, laid up till we have occasion for it; and we are as certain
of getting the stored-up heat, as we are sure of obtaining from our
drawers the things we put in them.”[31] It pervades all bodies: this is
not the case with any other substance we know of--not even light. It
lies hid in every thing around us. It is a substance which we are ever
in want of; it is therefore deposited on every side, and is ready for
every exigency.

_Caloric_ is the name given by modern chemists, to that substance by
whose influence the phenomena of heat are produced, and which had
before been distinguished by the terms _igneous fluid_, _matter of
heat_, and other analogous denominations. In order to give precision
to chemical language, it was necessary to adopt a word by which to
distinguish between the substance which produces the sensation we call
heat, and the sensation itself; these being connected as cause and
effect; for whenever caloric becomes fixed in a body, it loses its
property of affording heat. Whatever is the nature of that quality in
bodies called heat, we are assured it does resemble the sensation of
heat. A man whose mind is destitute of the cultivation of science, if
endued with common sense, never imagines the sensation of heat to be
in the fire; he only imagines that there is something in fire which
occasions this sensation.

Though we are well acquainted with the effects of fire, we know but
little of its nature. It is so active, as well as powerful a principle,
that it eludes all our researches. We may, however, define it to be the
phlogiston or inflammable principle, which pervades in a greater or
less degree all substances. Boerhaave thinks it is a fluid of a nature
peculiar to itself; that it was created such as it is, and cannot be
altered in its nature or its properties; that it naturally exists in
equal quantities in all places; and that it is wholly imperceptible to
our senses, being only discoverable by such effects as in its operation
it produces.[32]

That fire is really a substance, and not a quality, appears from its
acting upon other substances, the reality of which has never been
doubted. Charcoal, in its natural state, contains within its pores a
large quantity of air; but if charcoal is heated, this air is expelled
by the fire, which assumes its place, and occupies the pores of the
charcoal. The burning of lime also, which deprives it of a great part
of its weight by expelling the fixable air, demonstrates that fire, as
a substance, enters into the pores of the lime, and forces out those
other substances which are least intimately combined with it.

Collision or friction of solid bodies, is the means most generally
used for exciting the action of fire. The vacuities of all solid
bodies are replete with fire, so that it is impossible to agitate or
separate their parts swiftly, without giving the same rapid motion to
the element contained within them. When a piece of hardened steel is
struck with a flint, some particles of the metal are scraped away from
the mass, and so violent is the fire which follows the stroke, that it
melts and vitrifies them. If the fragments of steel are catched upon
paper, and viewed with a microscope, you will find most of them perfect
spherules, and very highly polished. Their sphericity demonstrates that
they have been in a fluid state, and the polish upon their surface
shows them to be vitrified; the fire being disengaged with violence,
disposes the particles of the substance to combine with the vital
air, while this air accelerates the combustion. The whole of the heat
produced is not afforded by the body itself, because in proportion as
the interior fire is disengaged, the external air acts upon the body
and gives out fire.

If the irons at the axis of a coach-wheel are applied to each other,
without the interposition of some unctuous matter to keep them from
immediate contact, they will become so hot when the carriage runs
swiftly along, as to set the wood on fire; and the fore wheels being
smallest, and making more revolutions, will be most in danger. The same
will happen to mill-work, or any other machinery, if the necessary
precautions are neglected. It is no uncommon practice with a blacksmith
to use a plate of iron as an extemporaneous tinder-box; for it may be
hammered on an anvil till it becomes red hot, and will fire a match of
brimstone. A strong man who strikes quick, and keeps turning the iron,
so that both sides may be equally exposed to the force of the hammer,
will perform this in less time than would be expected. If in the
coldest season you lay one dense iron plate upon another, and press the
upper one, by a weight, on the lower one, and then rub the one over the
other; by reciprocal motions, they will first grow warm, and at length
so hot, as in a short time to emit sparks, and at last grow red hot, as
if taken out of a vehement fire.

It is not necessary that the substance should be very hard; a cord
rubbed backwards and forwards swiftly against a post or a tree will
take fire; a stick of wood pressed against another which is turned
swiftly about in a lathe, will soon make it turn black and emit smoke.
Even the palms of your hands, if you rub them briskly together, when
they are dry, will smell as if they were scorched. The method of
exciting fire by rubbing two sticks of wood together, was anciently
practised by country people, and is still retained in some parts of
the world. The manner is exactly described in Captain Cook’s voyage.
The inhabitants of New-Holland are there said to produce fire with
great facility, and spread it in a wonderful manner. To produce it,
they take two pieces of _soft_ dry wood; one is a stick about eight or
nine inches long, the other piece is flat. The stick they shape into an
obtuse point at one end, and pressing it upon the other, turn it nimbly
by holding it between both their hands, as we do a chocolate mill,
often shifting their hands up and down, and then moving them down upon
it to increase the pressure as much as possible. By this method they
get fire in less than two minutes, and from the smallest spark they
increase it with speed and dexterity.

The matter of fire is attracted more or less by all bodies. When any
heated body comes in contact with a cold one, the former loses a part
of its heat, and both of them become equally warm. If heated iron is
laid upon a stone, its heat will flow into the stone; if thrown into
the water, the heat will be diffused through the water. If a number of
different substances, as metals, wood, wool, &c, are brought together
into a place where there is not a fire, if they are of different
temperatures, that is of different degrees of heat, the fire will be
attracted from the hottest to those that are colder, till a perfect
equilibrium is produced, or till they have all acquired the same
temperature, as may be proved by applying the thermometer successively
to each of them.

It does not appear, however, that all bodies have an equal attraction
for the matter of fire. If a rod of iron is put into the fire for a
short time, the end which is at a moderate distance from the fire will
almost burn the hand; but a rod of wood, of the same length will be
consumed to ashes at the end which is in the fire, before the other end
is sufficiently heated to burn the hand. A ball of lead, and a ball of
wool, may be of exactly the same temperature by the thermometer, but
they will not appear of the same degree of heat on applying the hand.
If they are of a temperature below that of our bodies, the lead will
appear much colder than the wool, because it attracts the heat more
rapidly from the hand; if they are of a higher temperature, the lead
will appear much hotter, from the facility with which it parts with its
heat. This property in bodies is called their _conducting_ power; and
those bodies through which the element of fire most rapidly circulates,
are called good conductors.

The power of conducting the matter of fire seems to depend upon the
texture of bodies, that is, upon the contact of their parts; hence the
excessive slowness with which heat is communicated to bodies of a rare
and spongy texture. Thus flannel, wool, and feathers, are considered as
warm coverings, not because they possess more heat in themselves--for
they serve to preserve any cold body in a cool state better than other
substances--but because they prevent the escape of the animal heat from
our bodies.

The matter of fire will exist in a state of combination, in a _latent_
state, so as not to be perceptible to our senses. It will be found by
observation, that every body which exists contains a quantity of the
matter of fire in a fixed or neutralized state, disarmed of all its
active, penetrating, and destructive qualities, like an acid and an
alkali in combination.

Fluids, from their very nature and constitution, contain a greater
quantity of caloric in a latent state than solid bodies: indeed it is
now universally admitted, and may be easily proved, that the fluidity
of all bodies is altogether owing to the quantity of fire which they
retain in this latent or combined state, the elasticity of which keeps
their particles remote from each other, and prevents their fixing into
a solid mass. All bodies, therefore, in passing from a fluid to a solid
state, emit a quantity of fire or heat. When water is thrown upon quick
lime, it is absorbed by the lime, and in this state it is capable of
retaining a much smaller quantity of caloric than in its natural state;
on the slacking of lime, therefore, a very intense heat is produced,
the matter of fire which preserved the water fluid being disengaged and
detached. If spirit of vitriol is added to strong oil of turpentine,
they will condense into a solid mass, and a great quantity of heat will
be sensibly emitted. Upon the same principle it will be found, on the
other hand, that when any body passes from a solid to a fluid state,
the adjacent bodies will be deprived of a quantity of their natural
heat.

    [This theory of what is called _burning lime_, is not
    sufficiently clear. Fire does not enter into the pores of the
    lime by burning. The mineral commonly used for procuring _quick
    lime_ is the _carbonate_ of lime, or common _limestone_, which
    is composed of carbonic acid with a small quantity of water,
    43, and lime 57, in 100 parts. By submiting it to a strong
    heat, the carbonic acid is driven off, and the quick or pure
    lime remains, which is an _oxide of calcium_. The loss in
    weight is owing to the expulsion of the carbonic acid, with
    the small portion of water. By adding water to the quick lime,
    it is dissolved, and falls into a powder. This process is
    called _slacking lime_, and the product, _slack-lime_. During
    the process a large quantity of heat is disengaged; and if
    the slacking be done in the dark, _light_ is also observed to
    be thrown out. This heat is given out by the _water_, not the
    lime. The lime having a _greater affinity_ for the _hydrogen_
    of the water than exists between the hydrogen and oxygen in
    water, seizes upon it, and the _oxygen passes off_, together
    with the _latent caloric_ of the water, and thus the heat is
    produced which is observed in slacking lime. The hydrogen of
    the water combines with the lime and becomes solid, forming
    an _hydrate of lime_, which is the common slacked lime used in
    mortar.]

The matter of fire is _elastic_, as is proved evidently from all its
effects. There is indeed reason to believe, that caloric is the only
fluid in nature which is permanently elastic, and that it is the
cause of the elasticity of all fluids which are esteemed so. From the
elasticity of this element it results, that all natural bodies can only
retain a certain quantity of it, without undergoing an alteration in
their state and form. Thus a moderate quantity of fire admitted into a
solid body expands it; a still larger quantity renders it fluid; and if
the quantity is still increased, it will be converted into vapor.

Caloric expands all bodies which it penetrates, more or less, in
proportion to its quantity, and to the nature of those bodies. The
expansion of water, even previous to its assuming the form of vapor,
may be seen in an easy experiment. If a quantity of cold water,
contained in a clear flask, is immersed in a vessel of boiling water;
as the heat enters, the water in the flask will be seen to rise in the
neck till it overflows.

An iron rod a foot long being heated red hot, became 1-60 longer
than before; and a glass cylinder, a fathom long, under the same
circumstances, gained 1-50 in length. A metalline ring thus heated was
increased 9-100 in its diameter; and a glass globe became extended
1-100 part by the heat of the hand only applied to its surface.[33]

The _general_ effects of caloric are to increase the bulk of the
substances with which it unites, and to render them specifically
lighter than they were before; but in whatever quantity it is
accumulated in bodies, it never adds to their absolute weight.
Caloric favors the solution of salts, and promotes the union of many
substances. In other cases it serves to separate bodies already united;
so that in the hands of chemists it is the most useful and powerful
agent with which they are acquainted. It is the cause of fluidity in
all substances which are capable of becoming fluid, from the heaviest
metal to the lightest gas. Let it be remembered that _all_ fluids are
formed from solids by an addition of caloric; and that, by abstracting
this caloric, solids would be reproduced. It insinuates itself among
their particles, and invariably separates them in some measure from
each other. We have reason to believe that every solid substance on
the face of the earth might be converted to a fluid, or even a gas,
were it submitted to the action of a very high temperature in peculiar
circumstances.[34]

    [The general and aggregate bearing of the facts and
    experiments which are now known, render the statement here
    made by Mr. Wood extremely probable, viz; That caloric is a
    very subtle fluid which pervades in large quantities every
    particle of matter in the universe--that it is the agent which
    regulates the _densities_ of all bodies, and by consequence,
    regulates in some measure their _weight_ and _dimensions_. It
    is considered as an almost settled question, _that a stratum
    of caloric surrounds each ultimate particle of every body, so
    that the ultimate particles of bodies do not, and cannot be
    made to touch each other_. Their inherent inclination to come
    into actual contact is called their _attraction of cohesion_:
    the power of this attraction is in proportion to the distance
    at which they are kept from each other by the atmosphere of
    caloric which intervenes between them. This atmosphere of
    caloric is _idio-repulsive_: of course the particles of caloric
    have an inherent _repulsion_ among themselves, and are ever
    struggling to get further asunder.

    This idio-repulsive nature of caloric is the great, and
    constant antagonist power to the attraction of cohesion.
    Caloric has a tendency to drive the particles of matter further
    from each other, and these particles have a mutual tendency
    to approach. Hence these two principles are ever in conflict.
    As a general rule we may say, when the attraction of cohesion
    prevails greatly, the body becomes _solid_: when the two forces
    are pretty nearly balanced, the body becomes _liquid_: when the
    caloric prevails greatly, the body becomes _gaseous_.

    There is sufficient reason to believe, that _every_ body
    in nature might be raised to a _gaseous_ state by the addition
    or action of a sufficient quantity of caloric: and there is,
    probably, a sufficient quantity in nature, to render the whole
    _universe_ gaseous, were it sufficiently excited to a state
    of freedom. It is a well known fact, that _all the metals are
    fusible by heat_, and many of them have been _volatalized_, and
    it is extremely probable all of them may be.

    As caloric regulates the density of bodies, by resisting
    and modifying the influence of the attraction of cohesion: if
    it were entirely withdrawn from nature, or the whole of it
    rendered perfectly latent, _all matter would become perfectly_
    SOLID and FIXED: even _water_ and _air_ would assume the
    _solidity of the diamond_.

    We must, therefore, regard caloric as the great
    conservative principle of the Universe, and yet capable, if
    called into action, of destroying it instantly.

    These views strongly corroborate _our_ paper on _chaos_.]

From the experiments of General Roy, in the 75th volume of the
Philosophical Transactions, it appears that the expansion of a steel
pendulum of a clock is such, that every four degrees of the thermometer
will cause a variation of a second per day; and that the difference
between the going of a clock in summer and winter will be about six
seconds per day, or one minute in ten days, owing to the metallic
pendulum varying in length with every change of temperature. A
knowledge of this circumstance gave rise to Harrison’s self-regulating
time-piece, which, by the different expansion of _different_ metals,
accommodates its movements to every change of seasons or climate.

The fire deposited below the surface of the earth is peculiarly
important, having produced earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Dr.
Watson, late Bishop of Llandaff, in his Chemical Essays, says, The most
remarkable changes which have taken place in the form and constitution
of the earth, since the deluge, have probably been produced by
subterraneous fires; for it is to their agency that philosophers
ascribe volcanos and earthquakes; those tremendous instruments of
nature, by which she converts plains into mountains, the ocean into
islands, and dry land into stagnant pools. Mr. Lemery, as far as I have
been able to learn, adds the learned Bishop, was the first person who
illustrated, by actual experiment, the origin of subterraneous fires.
He mixed twenty-five pounds of powdered sulphur with an equal weight of
iron filings; and having kneaded the mixture together, by means of a
little water, into the consistency of a paste, he put it into an iron
pot, covered it with a cloth, and buried the whole a foot under ground.
In about eight or nine hours time the earth swelled, grew warm, and
cracked: hot sulphureous vapors were perceived: a flame which dilated
the cracks was observed; the superincumbent earth was covered with a
yellow and black powder: in short, a subterraneous fire, producing a
volcano in miniature, was spontaneously lighted up from the reciprocal
actions of sulphur, iron, and water.

Volcanic eruptions are awfully terrific, and sometimes extensively
destructive. The violent eruption of Vesuvius, in 1767, is reckoned the
27th since that which destroyed the cities of Herculaneum and Pompeii,
in the reign of the Emperor Titus; and this eruption of 1767, has been
succeeded by several others. Of the eruptions of Ætna, Mr. Oldenburg
has given a historical account in the Philosophical Transactions, No.
xlviii. p. 967. A very great eruption of this mountain was in the year
1669. The progress of the lava, or fiery deluge, was at the rate of a
furlong a day. It advanced into the sea 600 yards, and was then a mile
in breadth. It had destroyed, in forty days, the habitations of 27,000
persons; and of 20,000 inhabitants of the city of Catanea, only 3,000
escaped. This inundation of liquid fire, in its progress, met with a
lake four miles in compass, and not only filled it up, although it was
four fathoms deep, but raised it into a mountain. Borelli, an ingenious
Neapolitan, has calculated, that the matter discharged at this eruption
was sufficient to fill a space of 93,838,750 cubic spaces. The lava
which ran from it is fourteen miles in length, and, in many parts, six
in breadth. There have been no such eruptions since, although there
have been signs of many, more terrible, that preceded it.[35]

The principal volcanos in Europe are Mount Vesuvius, near Naples, in
Italy; Mount Ætna, in Sicily; Mount Hecla, in Iceland; and Stromboli,
the most northern of the Lipari islands, north of Sicily. Of all the
volcanos recorded in history, Stromboli seems to be the only one that
burns incessantly. Ætna and Vesuvius are sometimes many months, and
even years, without the least emission of fire; but this is ever at
work, and, for ages past, has been considered as the light-house of
the Mediterranean Sea. It is very probable, that Mount Vesuvius and
Mount Ætna form but different portions of _one_ chain of mountains that
passes under the sea, and the isle of Lipari; for whenever one of the
volcanos has a great eruption, it is observed that the other, and the
volcano in the isle of Lipari, throw out more flames than ordinary.
This remark was made by Huet, Bishop of Avranches, in France, a
celebrated philosophical, historical, and commercial writer. The force
of volcanos is supposed to be the greatest of any thing yet known in
nature. In the great eruption of Vesuvius, in 1779, a stream of lava,
of an immense magnitude, is said to have been projected to the height
of at least 10,000 feet above the top of the mountain.

    [The present state of chemical science, and the
    geological discoveries of the last ten or fifteen years,
    seem to discountenance the theory, that volcanic action, and
    earthquakes result from _sulphur_, _iron_, and _water_, as Mr.
    Lemery’s experiment seems to indicate.

    The vast extent of volcanic action, as indicated by extinct
    and active volcanos, would require a greater amount of these
    materials, than can be supposed to exist in the composition of
    the earth. Thus, according to the Newtonian test of a correct
    theory, the means, if true, would not be sufficient.

    Again: If sulphur and iron were the principal agents in
    producing volcanic action, and earthquakes, _volcanic products
    would give evidence of it_, by being, principally, _sulphate
    of iron_. So far is this from being the fact, that in 100
    parts, volcanic product, Dr. Kennedy found, in reference to two
    volcanos, not exceeding 14.25 oxide of iron, and no sulphur at
    all.

    Volcanic products are generally, “mixtures of the earth in
    an oxidated and fused state, under intense ignition; water and
    saline substances, such as might be furnished by the sea and
    air, altered as might be expected from the formation of fixed
    oxidated matter.” URE.

    These two simple considerations must set aside the theory
    mentioned in the text. Other valid objections might be urged.

    As this theory is inadmissible, because, neither true in
    application to volcanic action and product, nor sufficient in
    force, it is proper to supply the deficiency.

    By a careful inspection of the phenomena attending volcanic
    action, as well as an examination of its products, we are
    clearly convinced, the _agents are aëriform_; chiefly _steam_
    and the _gases_, and they act with an _expansive force from
    beneath_.

    Mouna Roa, in the island Owhyhee, rises 15,000 feet,
    and has on its top a crater _eight miles_ in circumference,
    containing a vast lake of molten lava. Mr. Goodrich visited it
    in 1824. He says, “exhalations escape from all the fissures of
    the lava crust, producing here and there a blast _like strong
    vapor blowing out of a steam boiler_.”

    Subsequently, a party from the Blonde frigate visited it,
    and the Rev. Charles Stewart, who accompanied the party, has
    given a description of the crater. He says, “its surface had
    all the agitation of the ocean. Billow after billow tossed
    its monstrous bosom into the air, and occasionally the waves
    from apposite directions met with such violence, as to dash
    the fiery spray, in the concussion, forty or fifty feet high.”
    _Ure’s New Syst. Geol._ pp. 381-2.

    In both these accounts we clearly see aëriform agents
    acting from beneath. The _hissing_ noise of steam escaping from
    a boiler, convinces of the _nature_ of the body escaping. The
    _upheaving_ of the melted lava proves, not only, that the agent
    acts from _beneath_ by expansion, but also, by its resemblance
    to the common phenomenon observed in boiling liquids, that
    the agent is formed below, and rises through the melted lava,
    heaving it up in swells and waves, until it escapes in a
    gaseous state, like vapor from boiling liquids.

    We must come to the same conclusion from the experiments,
    observations, and reports of the celebrated, and intrepid
    Spallanzani, who visited and examined the crater of the
    ever-burning Stromboli. His words are nearly these: Fluid lava,
    resembling melted brass red-hot, and liquid filled the crater
    to a certain height, and this matter appeared to be influenced
    by two distinct impelling powers; the one whirling and
    agitated; and the other upwards, terminating in an explosion
    like a short clap of thunder. Immediately before the explosion
    occurred, the lava appeared _inflated_, and _large bubbles_,
    some several feet in diameter, rose and burst, the detonation
    followed and the lava sunk. During the rising, _a sound
    issued from the crater like that produced by a liquid boiling
    violently in a caldron_. In this case we have every evidence of
    an _aëriform agent acting from beneath_.

    An aëriform agent is detected also by examining the
    _structure_ of volcanic products, which have been ejected in
    a melted state. They are found to be _vesicular_, _cellular_,
    and _porous_. This structure proves, incontestibly, that these
    cavities and cells were filled with an aëriform body, which
    escaped upon cooling.

    This position might be sustained by other proofs, but it
    is unnecessary. It remains only to ask, _whether these elastic
    agents are sufficient to produce the astonishing amount and
    products of volcanic action and earthquakes_?

    The force which elastic agents are known to possess, when
    generated suddenly, and raised to a high temperature, answers
    this question promptly in the _affirmative_. A very few grains
    of gunpowder, when converted into gas by sudden ignition in
    a gun-barrel, by their expansive force drive a bullet with
    astonishing power and velocity. A few cubic feet of water
    converted into steam, will burst the strongest metallic barrier
    which man can construct, unless it find vent.

    As we have seen sufficiently clearly that aëriform bodies,
    as steam and gases, are the elastic agents in producing
    earthquakes and volcanos, it remains to inquire into the
    _production_ and _action_ of those agents.

    As it regards their production, the present state of
    geological and chemical science suggests _three_ theories,
    each of which would be adequate to the object.

    It is necessary to premise that _water_ is a common agent
    in each of the three theories.

    1. The splendid discoveries of Sir H. Davy, in regard to
    the _bases_ of the earths, demonstrating them to be _metallic_,
    and the earths merely _oxides_ of those metals, have led to the
    conjecture, _that these metals exist in nearly a pure state in
    the interior of the earth_; of course the _crust_ of the earth
    is composed of the various metallic oxides.

    It is well known that many of these metals _take fire on
    coming into contact with water, as potassium, sodium, &c_; and
    _all of them oxidize rapidly on meeting with water and air_,
    and thus _large quantities of hydrogen gas would be evolved_.

    This theory is so reasonable, in view of the
    _combustibility_ of metals, and so conformable to science, that
    we almost decide it is true, without further examination.

    But, in order that its demonstration should be clear, it
    must first be shown, _that the metals do exist in nearly a pure
    state in the interior of the earth_: and then, _that they are
    accessible by water, or air, or both_.

    The first point can only be rendered _probable by analogy_.
    We _know_ that the earths which are found in the crust of our
    planet are _metallic oxides_. It is very natural to suppose
    these metals existed in a pure _metallic state at the creation,
    as well at the surface as at the centre_; as all other bodies
    most probably existed in an elementary and uncombined state
    when God first produced them. From this supposition it is
    easy to see, that when water and air came into action, which
    would be at the earth’s surface, these metals would be rapidly
    oxidized, thus forming the earths. But as this process would
    commence at the _surface_ of the earth, and _tend towards the
    centre_, it is evident its _progress would be arrested by its
    own action_.

    For the _accumulation of the earths_, by the oxidation of
    the metals, would gradually form the _superincumbent crust_,
    which would act as a _barrier_ to the water and air, preventing
    their contact with the metals in the interior, _which_, of
    course, _would not be oxidized_.

    In this state they would remain buried deep under the
    superincumbent oxidated crust of the earth, until water and
    air should find access to them. When this should take place
    a rapid, and extensive _chemical action_ would commence,
    generating immense quantities of hydrogen gas, the metals
    _decomposing_ the air and water, in the process of oxidation,
    and setting the _hydrogen_ of the water, and _nitrogen_ of the
    air _free_. Thus a large amount of the most inflammable of all
    gases would be disengaged. The rapid chemical action would
    _raise the temperature_ of these gases, and thus _increase
    their bulk_ immensely, which would produce an irresistible
    _expansive force_, which would _increase the pressure_ against
    the sides of the cavern in which the gases were generated,
    _and the_ IGNITION _of the hydrogen would be a necessary
    consequence_. Such an immense volume of gas being ignited, and
    confined, would produce such a degree of heat, as rapidly to
    _decompose_ or _melt_ the substances in its neighborhood, and
    set at liberty a vast quantity of other gases; all of which
    being _ignited_, and of course _expanded_ immeasurably, would
    not only shake a given section of the earth, but, if placed
    in its centre, would shake the solid globe throughout, and
    rend it into ten thousand pieces, if it did not find means to
    escape. If it found means of escape by some opening forced from
    its seat to the surface of the earth, _that opening would_
    CONSTITUTE A VOLCANO; from which the gases would escape, and
    throw out before them the vast amount of volcanic products
    which are known to come forth of the craters.

    It now remains to inquire, _whether a sufficient quantity
    of water can be supposed to have access to these metals_?

    From what we know of the distribution of water generally
    in the bowels of the earth, we should have no difficulty in
    admitting the _affirmative_. But this question may be clearly
    answered by two circumstances.

    First: Large quantities of boiling water and mud, are
    frequently ejected from volcanos. This proves an _excess_
    of water at, or near the seat of action, which could not be
    decomposed, before the amount of gases generated, and acting
    with incredible force, drove it out of the crater. This fact is
    true in some measure of all volcanos, but eminently so of those
    in South America. “Bouguer and Condamine saw these formidable
    torrents tear up the surface of a whole country. Six hours
    after an explosion of Cotopaxi, a village nearly eighty miles
    distant in a straight line, and probably one hundred and forty
    by the winding channel, was entirely swept away by the flood.”
    _Ure’s New Sys. Geol._ p. 386.

    Secondly: The position of volcanos, _always near the
    sea_, together with the _agitations of the sea_, previous to,
    and during an eruption, as well as the _saline_ matter in
    the ejected substances, render it very clear, _that the sea,
    by subterranean communication, supplies water at the seat
    of volcanic action_. “The sea seems to sympathise with the
    agitations of the adjoining volcanos, rising and falling with
    rapid alternation--_caused by the sudden deflux of a great body
    of water into the vast volcanic caverns_.” _Ure’s New Sys.
    Geol._ p. 388.

    This fact is so well known in the history of volcanos,
    that it needs no further proof. It has, however, led to the
    remark, that volcanos are generally situated in islands, or
    near the sea coast. Indeed many of them are _submarine_, and
    have actually been seen in operation, throwing up vast columns
    of water to an immense height, until the edge of the crater
    appeared above the surface of the sea, and increased into
    islands, which have become permanent. At such times the water
    of the sea for a great distance round became _hot_, fishes
    died; and even the pitch melted from the hulks of the vessels
    in the neighborhood.

    2. Another theory has been proposed which does not differ
    from the first, in regard to the _materials_ employed at the
    seat of volcanic action, nor in the _manner_ of the process;
    but in regard to the _condition_ of those materials when they
    _begin_ to operate in the production of the elastic agents.
    These materials may be in a state of _igneous fusion_ in the
    interior of the earth. This state is supposed to have resulted
    thus:

    When God created the substances of the earth, they were
    in an _elementary_ and _uncombined_ state, promiscuously
    mixed through each other from the surface to the centre. By
    his _Spirit brooding over the great deep_, caloric and light,
    which were in a _latent_ state, were called into action,
    which gave impulse and motion to every particle of matter,
    thus quickening the whole mass by producing _intense heat_.
    This would cause the _aqueous_ and _gaseous_ particles to
    rise through the mass, and collect at the surface. This would
    bring them in contact with the metals in a pure state, which
    would of course _oxidize_, and become _earths_. This action
    would go on until it arrested its own progress, by forming and
    consolidating the oxidated crust of the earth inclosing all
    the interior substances in a state of igneous fusion, which
    have been gradually cooling ever since. The _primitive_ rocks,
    which have a crystalline structure, are supposed to have been
    deposited during this process, as it is evident they could not
    have crystallized under any other circumstances, and they are
    well known to be composed of the earths which are only metals
    in a state of oxidation. It is now only necessary to introduce
    the water to this mass of melted matter, or any part of it, as
    in the first theory to the metals in their pure state, _and we
    have the same results in all respects_.

    This theory has two advantages over the first. It agrees
    best with the crystalline structure which primitive rocks are
    known to possess, and which must result from chemical action on
    the materials in a state of solution. It also seems to accord
    best with the Mosaic account of the action of heat and light,
    in assimilating, arranging and settling the materials of the
    earth.

    Moreover, it is confirmed by experiments made on the
    _temperature_ of the earth at different depths. The following
    tables are extracted from Mr. Ure’s New System of Geology, pp.
    426-7. They accord, in their tendency, with the opinions of
    other eminent philosophers than those whose names appear in the
    tables.

    _Observations on the temperature of the earth._

        In the mines of Giro-Magny, three leagues from Befort,
        M. Gensanne found:

            At 333 feet, 54½ Fahr.
               680   “   62
              1016   “   66½
              1429   “   73

        In the mines of Freyberg, M. D’Aubuisson found

            External air           41
            In the galleries       50
            528 feet, water pool   52
            858 water of a spring  57

        At Junghohebirke,

            external thermometer   32
            1040 feet, water was   63

        Observations by Captain Lean in the mines of
        Cornwall.

            At surface, in June,   59
               118 feet deep       64½
               480  “              68
               840  “              69½
              1144  “              79

        _December._

            At the surface air     50
               120 feet air        57
               600  “   air        66
              ----  “   water      64
               962  “   air        70
              ----  “   water      74
              1200  “   air        78
              ----  “   water      78

    M. Humboldt obtained analogous results in many mines
    in South America. The evidence in favor of a _perpetually
    increasing temperature as you descend into the earth_, and a
    _higher temperature formerly at the surface of the earth_, is
    increasing daily. _See the conclusion of this paper._

    3. There is yet a third theory, founded on _voltaic
    energy_, or _galvanism_ and _electricity_.

    The application of these agents to the production of
    volcanic action, had occurred to me, before I met with the
    “Outline of the course of Geological Lectures, given in Yale
    College,” by Professor Silliman, from which the following
    extract is made. I had not regarded their application in
    the same manner as he has explained it. Indeed, my thoughts
    on the subject had not assumed any definite direction. I
    shall transcribe from his “Outline,” pp. 118-19, inserted in
    “Bakewell’s Introduction to Geology, first American Edition.”

    “Whatever we may think of the hypothesis now detailed, may
    we not suppose, with sufficient probability, that those voltaic
    powers which we _know_ to exist--whose action we can command,
    and whose effects having been first observed within the memory
    of the present generation, now fill us with astonishment, are
    constantly active in producing the phenomena of earthquakes and
    volcanos?

    “Arrangements of metals and fluids are the common means
    by which we evolve this wonderful power, in our laboratories;
    and it would seem that nothing more than juxta-position, in
    a certain order, is necessary to the effect. Even substances
    apparently dry and inert, with respect to each other, will
    produce a permanent, and in proportion to the means employed,
    a powerful effect, as in the columns of De Luc and Zamboui. It
    would seem indeed that metals and fluids are not _necessary_
    to the effect. Arrangements of almost any substances that are
    of different natures, will cause the evolution of this power.
    Whoever has witnessed the overwhelming brilliancy and intense
    energy of the great galvanic combinations, especially the
    deflagrator of Dr. Hare, and considers how very trifling, in
    extent, are our largest combinations of apparatus, compared
    with those natural arrangements of earths, salts, metals, and
    fluids, which we know to exist in the earth, in circumstances
    similar to those which, in our laboratories, are effectual in
    causing this power to appear, will not be slow to believe that
    it may be in the earth perpetually evolved, and perpetually
    renewed; and now mitigated, suppressed, or revived, according
    to circumstances influencing the particular state of things at
    particular places.

    “In our laboratories we see emanating from this source,
    intense light, irresistible heat, magnetism in great energy,
    and above all, a decomposing power, which commands equally
    all the elements, and the proximate principles in all their
    combinations.

    “Sir Humphrey Davy, after discovering that the supporters
    of combustion and the acids, were all evolved at the
    positive pole, and the combustibles and metals, and their
    oxidated products, at the negative--proved that even the
    firmest rocks and stones could not resist this power; their
    immediate principles and elements being separated by its
    energy. The decomposition of the alkalies, earths, and other
    metallic oxides being a direct and now familiar effect of
    voltaic energy--their metals being set at liberty, and being
    combustible both in air and water--elastic agents produced
    by this power, and rarified by heat, being also attendant on
    these decompositions, it would seem that the first principles
    are fully established by experiment, and that nothing is
    hypothetical, but the application to the phenomena of
    earthquakes and volcanos.”

    The reader will perceive that all of the above theories
    agree in one respect, viz; in the agency of _elastic bodies_,
    as steam and gases, produced by the decomposition of
    substances; and that the same substances are supposed to be
    employed, though not precisely in the same manner, nor in the
    same condition. Further Geological and Chemical experiments
    may, hereafter, settle the question between these theories.
    They are all scientific in their principles, and fully
    competent to the object, and it is not impossible but that they
    may all be true in part or in whole, acting separately in some
    instances, and combined in others.

    Under the agency of either of them the products would be
    the same. Dr. Kennedy has made experiments on the composition
    of volcanic products, and found, Silex, 51--Alumina, 19--Lime,
    9.5--Oxide of iron, 14.5--Soda, 4--Muriatic acid, 1--in 100
    parts.

    As it regards the extent of volcanic action and
    earthquakes, the two first theories agree best with actual
    appearances. They would lead us to conclude that volcanic
    action was necessarily more extensive in the earlier ages of
    the world than now. Because, every action would oxidize the
    crust of the earth deeper, and increase the superincumbent
    strata, and render the access of water and air more difficult.
    _This is found to be the fact by observation in different
    countries._

    In some parts of France, in which kingdom there is not,
    and has not been for the last two thousand years, any active
    volcano, _there are ranges of extinct volcanos, in which may
    be counted from seventy to one hundred craters_. They are so
    close their bases touch in many instances. The same fact is
    observed along the Rhine, and in Hungary, and other countries.
    _See Ure’s New Syst. Geol. and Bakewell’s Geology._

    Mr. Ure reckons up two hundred and five _active_
    volcanos at this time. One hundred and seven in islands, and
    ninety-eight on continents.

    It is very evident that the _seat_ of volcanic action is
    vastly below the surface of the earth. The _extent_ of country
    which is shaken by the effort of the gases to escape, will
    prove this. The agitations have been felt over all Europe, and
    even _across the Atlantic_!

    Again: If the action were not situated far below the
    surface of the earth, the mountains, which only serve as
    _chimnies_, and which have been formed by the action of the
    volcanos, _would sink in_. This has been the case in a few
    instances. This will appear more clearly if we consider
    the _amount_ of matter ejected. Did it not come from an
    immeasurable distance beneath, the accumulated mass at the
    surface of the earth would break down the _substrata_ which
    lie over the immense caverns formed by the ejection. The
    _dimensions_ of those caverns, situated under the volcanic
    mountains, are far greater than one would suppose at first
    consideration. _The internal caverns must be as large as the
    ejected masses, which came out of them._ Ætna is known to have
    thrown out matter sufficient to form twenty such mountains as
    it is. It is strongly probable that the whole island of Sicily
    is of volcanic origin. Humboldt says the dome-shaped craters
    of volcanos rise from six hundred to eighteen thousand feet in
    height. He considers the _whole mountainous district of Quito
    as one immense volcano_.

    Indeed, from a close survey of the geological features of
    the earth, there is reason to believe, that at very remote
    periods almost the whole surface of our globe has been the
    theatre of volcanic action. It is a matter of gratitude
    that its amount is growing less every year, of course the
    destructions by earthquakes are more limited. In process
    of time, it may be hoped, the earth may become permanently
    tranquil, nor flame, nor shake, until the final catastrophe,
    which God has ordained to destroy our planet, by a general and
    simultaneous action of all the fires of the earth.

    P.S. It may be of advantage to recollect, that the
    _expansive force of steam is to that of gunpowder as 140 to
    5_. According to Vauban, 140 pounds of water converted into
    vapor would produce an explosion capable of blowing up 77,000
    pounds, while 140 pounds of gunpowder could only blow up a mass
    of 30,000. _See the text under the head_, “SALUTARY EFFECTS OF
    WATER.”


    APPENDIX.

    _On the temperature of the earth anciently._

    That the temperature of the earth’s surface was much higher
    in the first ages of its existence, than since the period of
    authentic history, seems now to be nearly established, in the
    opinion of the learned, and only requires time to have the
    weight of evidence produce its proper effect on the great mass
    of community.

    Though this fact would be apprehended from what is said
    above, it may be desirable to the reader to see a concise view
    of the reasons which induce this opinion.

    1. _It may be inferred from the original constitution of
    the globe, and the chemical action consequent upon it._ It
    has been seen above that the _natural_ condition of matter
    is _cold_, _frozen_, _inactive_, and _solid_: and that the
    elements of this globe were created in a _simple, uncombined
    state_. If this mass of elements received a quickening impulse,
    the chemical laws of _affinity_ and _attraction_, and also the
    natural law of _gravitation_, would commence exerting their
    influence. This we know would create a rise in the temperature
    of the whole mass, in proportion to the _amount_ of matter
    acted on, and the _force_ of the different principles and
    agents which were in operation. Upon consideration of these
    points in regard to our earth, no one can doubt but that they
    would raise the temperature to an inconceivable height.

    _Refrigeration_ would commence at the surface as soon
    as the first violent action was abated, and the water and
    air began to assume their relative places, through which the
    heat would escape into celestial space. This refrigeration
    would be increased by the oxidation of the metals forming the
    crust of the earth, which would confine the interior heat
    more effectually, because, the earths are almost complete
    _non-conductors_ of caloric. Thus the crust of the earth would
    continue to cool, and the oxidation would thicken it, and, of
    course, contribute to the reduction of its temperature.

    From this natural process it is very evident that the earth
    was much warmer during its first periods; earthquakes, and
    volcanos much more common than now, and a general instability
    in the condition of our globe. The deluge was the climax of its
    alternations, and settled, in some measure, its constitution by
    a sudden and great reduction of temperature.

    2. _It may be inferred from the vast extent of volcanic
    action, as indicated by the remains of extinct volcanos, and
    their effects on the earth._ This argument is merely _called up
    here_, not to be discussed at length, but to be _referred_ to,
    as it has been mentioned in a preceding part of this paper.

    It is almost impossible for the ordinary reader, who has
    not closely studied the geological phenomena which present
    themselves to the close observer, to conceive of the extent
    to which volcanic action operated anciently. It would not be
    exaggeration to say, there was a remote period _when our globe
    was a single volcano_: the whole surface of it being subject to
    its action.

    Though we may ascribe something of the formation of hills
    and vallies to the action of water, yet, doubtless, the
    most effectual agent in upheaving the mountains, and even
    continents, possibly, was volcanic force.

    “Those ranges of volcanos,” says the celebrated Humboldt,
    “those eruptions through vast chasms, those subterranean
    thunders, that roll under the transition rocks of porphyry and
    slate in the new world, remind us of the present activity of
    subterranean fire, of the power, which in remote ages, _has
    raised up chains of mountains, broke the surface of the globe,
    and poured torrents of liquid earth in the midst of the most
    ancient strata_.”

    From this constant and extensive volcanic action we may
    safely infer the high temperature of our earth anciently.

    3. _It may be inferred from the origin of primitive,
    trapean, and basaltic rocks._ The primitive rocks, as granite,
    gneiss, mica slate, &c, give evidence on this consideration;
    they must have been deposited when their substance was in
    solution, admitting of _chemical mobility_, in order that they
    might assume a crystalline form which they are known to have.

    It is not easy to conceive _how_ the substances of the
    primitive rocks could be solved, except by _heat_, as a
    _principal solvent_. The acids, and water also, may have
    contributed to their solution, but would not be competent of
    themselves. This consideration would give a high temperature
    for the earth anciently.

    It is now generally admitted that the trap, and basaltic
    rocks are of _igneous_ origin. When we consider the _magnitude_
    of the trap and basalt formations, the extent of surface which
    they cover, the hills, and even elevated and lofty mountains
    which they form, we shall not hesitate to assign a higher
    temperature to our earth at the period when fires, so immense
    as to effect the upheaving and ejection of all these, actually
    burned in the bowels of the earth.

    4. _It may be inferred from the well preserved remains of
    vegetables and animals of warm equatorial climates, in high
    northern latitudes where they have not been found since the
    memory of man._ This is a conclusive argument if its _data_
    be well established. Because, if _tropical_ and _equatorial_
    animals and fruits are _now_ found buried and fossilized
    in Siberia, and the islands of the _arctic sea_, in such a
    state of preservation as to forbid the supposition they were
    transported thither, it will follow inevitably, that they _grew
    there_, and there flourished, died, and were buried.

    Moreover, if _herbivorous_ animals are found fossilized
    in those high northern latitudes, under such circumstances as
    forbid the supposition, that they were transported thither, it
    will doubtless, follow, that not only _they_ lived there, but
    also _luxuriant vegetation_ must at the same time have covered
    the plains where their remains are entombed.

    The inference which we are forced to draw from these
    _data_, is this: _As no such tropical and equatorial animals or
    plants have been known to exist there, nor even herbage of any
    kind, on which such animals might subsist, since the memory of
    man, there was a time anciently when the climate suited their
    growth, and of course was very much warmer than it is known to
    be now, its temperature then corresponding to the temperature
    of the present equatorial regions, as it produced and subsisted
    anciently the animals and plants which the tropical regions
    produce and subsist at the present time, and which cannot
    subsist in any other climates._

    In proof of the above position, it is well known that
    animals and plants have their peculiar climates, in which they
    are _indigenous_, and out of which they cannot thrive, or even
    live, if too far removed. It is also well known, that the
    warmer, and more moist the climate is, the more luxuriant the
    vegetation, and the more huge the animals.

    Hence we are in the habit of denominating animals and
    plants by the climates in which they are indigenous, as
    _arctic_, or northern; _tropical_, or southern. Let us now see
    if the tropical animals and plants once lived and flourished in
    high northern latitudes. The best authorities follow.

    “We proceed now to examine the remains of quadrupeds:
    _these are found accumulated in regions where similar animals
    do not_ NOW _exist_. Some are buried deep in gypsum.--Some
    present themselves to view, accumulated in vast caverns, and
    destitute of any envelope. The islands of Lachof, situated
    to the NORTH _of Siberia_, are, according to a modern
    traveller, _only heaps of sand, ice, and bones of elephants and
    rhinoceros_, mixed with those of great cetaceous animals, and
    even, agreeably to the latest accounts, with the remains of
    gigantic birds.

    “There have been found in _Siberia, whole carcases of the
    elephant, covered with their_ FLESH and SKIN, preserved by the
    frosts which prevail in those regions.--Germany has furnished
    the greatest number (of bones:)--In France a great many bones
    of the elephant have been met with.

    “These discoveries, though as yet scarcely commenced, have
    thrown already _a new light upon the revolutions which our
    globe must have undergone, and upon the_ STATES WHICH MUST HAVE
    PRECEDED THE PRESENT COURSE AND CONSTITUTION OF NATURE.

    “These bones, presenting no trace of having been rolled
    up and down, occurring only fractured as we find those of
    our domestic animals, and sometimes joined together in the
    form of skeletons, often even as it were heaped up in common
    cemeteries, clearly demonstrate, _that the catastrophe which
    has destroyed the living beings to which they belonged must
    have overtaken them in the_ SAME CLIMATES WHERE WE MEET WITH
    THESE RECORDS OF THEIR FORMER EXISTENCE.

    “The quantity of nourishment which such huge animated
    masses required, and their numbers, proved by the existence of
    the carnivorous kinds, _render it probable that the countries
    where we find their remains_ ONCE _enjoyed a temperature, if
    not warmer, at least more favorable to vegetation_.” MALTE
    BRUN, _Physical Geography, Book 12_.

    In the above quotations, the data on which our argument
    rests are so clearly sustained there needs no comment. The
    authority given is unquestionable, and could be corroborated by
    scores of weighty names, and in reference to all the _northern_
    countries of Asia, Europe, and America.

    It is impossible to read the above extracts without being
    convinced that those tropical and equatorial animals lived,
    flourished, and died _where_ their remains are _now_ found. And
    it is equally impossible to avoid another conclusion; viz: that
    there must have been a heavy vegetation on those plains, where
    _now_ the rein-deer can scarcely pick up a blade of grass.

    From these convictions no other inference can be drawn, but
    that the temperature of the _frigid zones_, was anciently much
    higher than at present; and of course the general temperature
    of the earth also.

    From the perfect preservation of these fossil remains; from
    the fact that they are found in their relative position, bone
    to bone, and, in some instances, with their _hair_, _skin_,
    and _flesh undecayed_, it is obvious, _the animals must have
    perished by a catastrophe which overwhelmed them suddenly, and
    was, instantaneously followed by a freezing of the overwhelming
    waters_. Such was the catastrophe of the _scripture deluge_,
    which _physically_ was competent to perform the phenomena, as
    shall be shown presently.

    Let us now see if we do not arrive at the same conclusion
    by examining the _fossil_ VEGETABLES.

    At Portland, England, the Rev. Dr. Buckland finds fossil
    plants _akin to the cycas family of Malabar_, from which he
    concludes, “it is probable that the climate of these regions,
    _at the time when the oolites_ (a series of rocky strata) _were
    deposited, was of the same warm temperature with that_ (the
    tropical) _which produces a large proportion of the existing
    cycadeæ_.” URE, _New Syst. Geol._ p. 433.

    “The remarkable development of these vegetables
    (equisetums) during the first (or coal measure) period of
    vegetation, and their size in the second (or oolitic) period,
    _smaller_ than before, but still far greater than our existing
    equisetums, accord with many other facts, furnished by fossil
    vegetables of many other families, to lead us to regard the
    _climate of the earth, at these remote epochs, to have been
    hotter than the hottest of modern climates_.” _Ibid_, p. 443.

    “There is no doubt, however, that _palms with fan-shaped
    leaves covered Europe with their lofty vegetation at this
    remote period, in regions where no species of these plants
    could_ NOW _grow_!” _Ibid_, p. 452.

    The palm is well known to be a _tropical_ plant, and cannot
    thrive, except in a warm climate. The climate of Europe, when
    it grew in the north, must have been tropical. Indeed, in
    all parts of northern Europe _tropical flowers_, _leaves_,
    and _fruits_ are found in such a state of preservation as to
    convince the most incredulous, _that they must have grown
    on the spot_; which would be to convince him of the high
    temperature, anciently, of those regions.

    “Professor Kounizin describes in the Isis for 1821, immense
    beds of fossil wood in several localities of the governments
    of Novogorod and Twer in the _north_ of Russia, _where no such
    trees are now found to grow_.

    “Near Constand on the river Necker, M. Autenrieth found an
    entire forest of the trunks of _palm trees_, buried along with
    the remains of elephants.” _Ure, Ibid_, p. 455.

    “The fossil shells found in the strata of England, and
    France, and the contiguous countries, having for the most part,
    no _antitypes alive except in equatorial regions_, harmonize
    with the preceding details.” _Ibid_, p. 456.

    To the above testimony might be added the _caves_ in
    Germany, England, and France, in which great quantities of
    bones are found in such a state of preservation, and under such
    circumstances as to show that the animals whose bones are found
    were in the habit of frequenting these caves, and perished
    in them suddenly, as their remains are found mixed with sand
    and gravel, _but not water-worn_. Of these bones, the great
    majority are those of the hyæna; hence these dens, specially in
    England, are called _hyæna dens_. In them are also found the
    bones of other animals _gnawed_ by the hyænas.

    From these facts there can be no doubt but the hyæna
    inhabited England, France, and Germany, and dwelt in these
    caves, and here perished when the sudden catastrophe of the
    flood overtook him. This argues beyond doubt that these
    countries were once _warm_, _when these tropical animals lived
    in them_.

    5. _The same fact may be inferred from the immense amount
    of vegetable matter which was necessary to supply the materials
    for the coal measures._ This is an irresistible argument in
    view of the _immense amount_ of coal in the bowels of the
    earth, which must be of _vegetable origin_. Because at the
    ratio of vegetable product of _our age_, the earth would not
    produce a sufficient amount to form the coalbeds, short of
    millions of years.

    The _vegetative power_ of the earth, therefore, must have
    been anciently very much greater than at present, which could
    only be on the supposition of a _warmer_ and more moist climate.

    Moreover, the fact that tropical plants are known to have
    contributed almost entirely to the formation of coal measures
    in the _northern latitudes_, is proof direct. This is clear
    from the fact that their roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and
    fruits are found impressed on the coal, in such a manner that
    there can be no mistake; and the _perfection_ of the impression
    forbids the supposition that they were _transported_ thither
    from tropical climates.

    “Brown coal and black coal, the former sometimes called
    wood coal, is found chiefly in diluvial or alluvial ground.
    It contains, besides charcoal and bitumen, _various vegetable
    principles, and the branches or trunks of trees_ partially
    decomposed, _which mark the origin of this kind of coal_.”
    _Bakewell’s Geology_, p. 111.

    “Wood coal, or brown coal, is found in low situations
    and appears to have been _formed of heaps of trees_ buried
    by inundations under beds of clay, sand, or gravel.--In some
    specimens of this coal the _vegetable fibre, or grain_, is
    perceptible in one part, and the other part is reduced to
    coal.” _Ibid_, p. 121.

    “In wood coal we may almost seize nature in the fact of
    making coal, before the process is completed. These formations
    of coal are of far more recent date than that of common coal,
    though their origin must be referred to a former condition
    of our globe, _when the vegetable productions of tropical
    climates flourished in northern latitudes_. The _vegetable
    origin_ of common mineral coal appears to be established by its
    association with strata _abounding in vegetable impressions_,
    by its close similarity to wood coal, (which is undoubtedly a
    _vegetable product_) and lastly by the decisive fact, that some
    mineral coal in the Dudley coal-field is _entirely composed of
    the layers of mineralized plants_.” _Ibid_, p. 122.

    “When we see the multitude of reeds filled and surrounded
    with sandstone, having their thin scaly bark _converted into
    a true coal_, it is _impossible to doubt of its vegetable
    origin_.” _Ure’s New System Geol._ p. 166.

    Quotations from the best authorities might be multiplied
    to the same effect, but it is deemed unnecessary. It remains
    to repeat the question, _Could such an amount of vegetable
    matter have been accumulated, short of millions of years, at
    the ratio of the present vegetative powers of the earth?_ It is
    impossible. The only remaining conclusion is, the vegetative
    power of the earth anciently was much greater than at present,
    which could not have been except its temperature was much
    higher also.

    In conclusion on this question, it is necessary to say,
    that the reduction of the earth’s temperature would be gradual,
    in a natural way, by the heat flying off into celestial spaces,
    until the crust became so thick and compact as to prove a
    perfect non-conductor of caloric. Then the surface of the earth
    would depend on the heating power of the sun altogether.
    The thickening of the crust of the earth would be attended
    with earthquakes, volcanos, and partial deluges, the natural
    and necessary results of the oxidations of the metals. Hence
    we would have different strata of rocks, sand, gravel, &c,
    deposited at different times, and over different sections of
    the country. Hence also forests would be overthrown, and the
    vegetation of years be thrown together in the nearest lakes
    or seas; which explains the origin of _coal-basins_. This
    state of things also well explains the alternations of strata
    of different kinds, as sand, gravel, chalk, fresh and salt
    water deposites, &c, as well as the dislocations, fractures,
    contortions, and confusions observable in the structure of the
    earth’s crust.

    There are however various phenomena which indicate
    clearly that there was _a general and sudden reduction of
    temperature_. The state of preservation, in which those animals
    in Siberia are found, proves this. The vestigia of the _last_
    great revolution in our globe clearly indicate the DELUGE
    to have been the cause of this general and sudden reduction
    of temperature. This would be the natural consequence of
    _submerging_ the earth in water: and the suddenness of the
    event is well attested both by the scriptures, and the physical
    history of our earth.

    The action of the deluge does not come within the
    contemplation of this volume, and therefore will not be noticed
    here.]

The air is another storehouse of fire. When lucid igneous particles
are strongly attracted to one another in great quantities, their heat
becomes intolerable, and is capable of destroying the most solid
bodies. It is well known, that when converged in the focus of one of
Hartsocker’s burning-glasses, they will produce wonderful effects: tin,
lead, or any soft metal, will dissolve at the first touch; and iron,
which requires a very strong fire for liquefaction, will melt before
one of these glasses almost as soon as applied. They will consume
wood, though wet, in a moment; vitrify bricks and pumice stones, and
dissolve earthen vessels full of water; and plume-allum, which will
resist the fire of the hottest glass-houses, without alteration, is
instantly melted. Even gold, that resists the force of common fire, is
soon liquefied by their powerful agency. This plainly shows us that,
provided there were not a wise and almighty Providence, superintending
all his works, those materials which are of the greatest utility to the
harmony and order of things, would have a direct tendency to destroy
the whole. If lucid igneous particles were to form solid bodies, and
depart from their state of fluidity, they would, in an instant, reduce
this globe to ashes, or render it liquid fire. Were they all of one
kind, it is probable they might unite in solid bodies; but the wisdom
of Providence has formed them of various colors, and of different
reflections and refrangibility. This prevents them from associating in
such a manner as to do harm, which can only be produced by converging
them with some instrument which prevents their flying off. As all
these have not the same degree of reflexibility and refrangibility, but
as some are capable of greater reflections and refractions than others,
they cannot, without force, be united in one solid body, yet they are
all serviceable for important purposes, contributing to the happiness
of man, and the welfare of all living creatures.

Considering the extent of fire, and that its property is, when put into
motion, to consume all combustible substances within its reach, it is
astonishing that the world has not long since been destroyed! This
terrible element is at present restrained and directed by its almighty
Creator; but divine revelation informs us, that a period will arrive
when its utmost energies shall be called into action. The apostle Peter
asserts, that “the heavens and earth, which are now, by the same word
are kept in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and
perdition of ungodly men;--in the which the heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the
earth also, and the works that are therein shall be burnt up.” Again
he says, “looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God,
wherein the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements
shall melt with fervent heat.” The _passing away of the heavens_
means the same as their being _dissolved by fire_. The word Ῥοιζηδὸν
signifies with a _very loud_ and _terrible noise_: with a sound
resembling that of a great _storm_. In this place it more particularly
denotes the horrid crackling noise of a wide-spreading fire.

    “The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,
    The solemn temples, the great globe itself
    Yea, all which it inherit, shall _dissolve_;
    And, like the baseless fabric of a vision,
    Leave not a wreck behind.”

The word rendered _melt_, is a metaphor taken from _metals_,
dissolving in the fire, or _wax_ before the flame; so will the fierce
and spreading fire of the last day _melt down_ this globe, and its
surrounding atmosphere.[36] That the world was to be dissolved by fire
was the opinion of Anaximander, Anaxiphanes, Anaxagoras, Archelaus,
Diogenes, and Leucippus.[37] The inference which the apostle deduces
from this view of the general and final conflagration of the world,
is highly impressive. “Seeing then that all these things shall
be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy
conversation and godliness.”

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ III.--LIGHT.

    Motion of luminous and fiery particles the first cause
    of light -- Light the most simple body --Velocity of light
    -- Light diffusive -- Light the medium through which objects
    become visible -- Light beautiful, or its rays of different
    colors -- Light a visible resemblance of its Divine Author,
    in his spirituality, simplicity, purity, energy, goodness,
    manifestation, glory.


Moses, in the original word אור _aur_, seems plainly to hint at the
operation of a principle in the universe which, as a second cause,
produced the phenomenon of _light_. This, most probably, was the motion
of the luminous and fiery particles in the chaotic mass which, at the
Divine command, separated themselves from the other gross materials of
the miscellaneous composition, and by an attractive sympathy associated
in one body.

It is conjectured, that light was at first impressed on some part of
the heavens, or collected in some lucid body. Dr. Wall says, Though the
sun was not yet formed into a compact body, yet the most subtile and
active particles had already begun to fly together to the centre of the
solar system, which gave some light; though probably not so great as
when afterward they made the compact body of the sun. And the earth,
which was then only a round lump of mud, or muddy salt-water, being
turned, as it has been ever since, upon its own axis, receiving that
light on its several hemispheres successively, made night and day, or
evening and morning. Milton gives his opinion in the following lines:

    “Let there be light! said GOD; and forthwith light
    Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure,
    Sprung from the deep; and from her native east
    To journey through the aery gloom began,
    Spher’d in a radiant cloud; (for yet the sun
    Was not;) she in a cloudy tabernacle
    Sojourn’d the while.”

Light, after a short progression, concentrated in the sun, the common
centre of our system; the various parts of this system, by his central
light or fire, are balanced, and, by mutual attraction, move in the
expanse, according to fixed laws, or determined distances.[38]

Light was once considered to be a property or quality of matter only;
but more recently it has been discovered to be a _body_, a very subtile
fluid, consisting of minute particles. We have no certain knowledge of
its nature; though a collection of its rays make other things visible,
yet its constituent parts themselves are most exquisitely small, and
quite imperceptible; and therefore it approaches the nearest to the
nature of spirit.[39]

Of all material bodies, light is the most _simple_. Most others are
compounded of several parts, not only of different, but sometimes of
contrary natures: but light is an unmixed body. It is also a most
pure matter; It has no defilement in itself, neither is it capable
of contracting pollution from other objects. When it shines upon a
dunghill or sepulchre, which sends forth the most offensive effluvia,
it still remains uncontaminated.

    [The author is undoubtedly mistaken when he considers light
    “of all material bodies--the most simple,” and “an unmixed
    body.”

    It is well known that a beam, or pencil, of light, as
    emitted from the sun, is _not_ a simple body, but is capable of
    being divided into seven prismatic colors. The image which is
    formed by the refraction of the pencil, by means of a prism, is
    called a _Spectrum_, and clearly exhibits the compound nature
    of light. The refracted rays of the Spectrum may be collected
    and made to constitute a pencil of light again, which will be
    white, or colorless as before.

    If this prismatic Spectrum be examined closely, it will
    be found that the different colored rays differ very much
    in their _heating_, _illuminating_, and _chemical_ powers.
    Dr. Herschell, and other experimenters, have found that the
    _orange_ rays possess a greater illuminating power than the
    red; and the _yellow_ more than the orange: but the _maximums_
    of illumination lies in the _brightest yellow_ or _palest
    green_.

    There is also a very sensible difference in the _heating_
    power of these colored rays. By passing the bulb of a
    delicate air thermometer through the different colored rays,
    it indicates the greatest heat in the _red_ rays; next in
    the _green_, and so on diminishing to the _violet_. But
    the maximum of heat has been ascertained to be immediately
    _beyond_ the red rays, and of course _out_ of the Spectrum,
    in an _unilluminated_ spot: thus indicating that there are
    _invisible_ rays possessing a greater heating power than any of
    the seven colored rays. These are called _calorific rays_.

    By the experiments of Ritter and Wallaston it is now
    satisfactorily ascertained that there are also _chemical rays
    which excite neither heat nor light_, and lie on the _other
    side_ of the Spectrum from the invisible calorific rays, just
    without the violet. It is true, the chemical effect can be
    distinguished even to the green rays, but this seems to be by
    _diffusion_, or a species of sympathy. The sensible chemical
    power is exerted just without the violet rays.

    This fact is established more clearly by Berard. He
    concentrated, by a lens, all the portion of the Spectrum from
    the green to the red rays, and made them act on muriate of
    silver _two hours_ without effect. He then concentrated all
    the portion of the Spectrum from the green to the violet rays,
    and made them act on muriate of silver, and _they blackened it
    in less than six minutes_. Thus, evidently, are detected very
    different properties in the different portions of the prismatic
    Spectrum.

    Instead, therefore, of light being a “simple substance,”
    and “unmixed” it is found to be decidedly _compound_. It is
    capable of being divided into seven differently colored rays,
    and these rays, according to their natural properties, into
    three classes: the _illuminating_ rays, _calorific_ rays, and
    _chemical_ rays.]

The rays of light always proceed in _straight lines_, unless diverted
by some intervening body. They are subject to the laws of attraction
like other small bodies. If a stream of light be admitted through a
small hole into a dark room, and the edge of a knife be applied, it
will be diverted from its natural course, and _inflected_ towards it.
When the rays of light are thrown back by any opposing body, they are
said to be _reflected_. When in passing from one medium to another,
they are inflected or diverted from their rectilineal course, they
are said to be _refracted_; and this property of light is called its
_refrangibility_. Refraction arises from this, that the rays are more
attracted by a dense, than by a rare medium.

The _velocity_ of light is prodigious, and almost incredible; it moves
at the rate of near 200,000 miles in _a second_ of time! Roemer, a
Danish philosopher, was the first who found the means of determining
the velocity of light, by the difference of time in the eclipses
of Jupiter’s satellites, when the earth was on the same, or on the
contrary side of the sun, with that planet. This point may be easily
proved; for when the earth is between the sun and this planet, those
eclipses will happen about 8¼ minutes sooner, than according to the
tables; but when the earth is in the contrary position, the eclipses
happen about 8¼ minutes later than they are predicted by the tables.
Hence, therefore, light takes up about 8¼ minutes in passing from the
sun to the earth, a distance of 95,513,794 miles; and it takes about
16½ minutes of time to go through a space equal to the diameter of the
earth’s orbit, which is at least 190 millions of miles in length; which
is near a million of miles swifter than the motion of a cannon-ball,
which flies with the velocity of about a mile in eight seconds.[40]
In comparing this velocity of light with that of a cannon-ball, it
has been observed, that light passes through a space in about eight
minutes, which a cannon-ball with its ordinary velocity, could not
traverse in less than thirty-two years! The velocity of sound bears a
very small proportion to that of light. Light travels, in the space of
eight minutes, a distance in which sound could not be communicated in
seventeen years; and even our senses may convince us, if we attend to
the explosion of gunpowder, &c, of the almost infinite velocity of the
one compared with that of the other.[41] Were the propagation of the
rays of light less rapid, the darkness would be very slowly dissipated,
and great inconveniences would result to the inhabitants of the earth.

The _divisibility_ of the parts of matter is no where more apparent
than in the minuteness of the particles of light. The unobstructed rays
of light which proceed from a candle, will, almost instantaneously,
fill a space of two miles; and it has been computed, says Dr. O.
Gregory, that there fly out of the end of the flame of a burning
candle, in a second of time, ten thousand millions of times more such
particles than there are visible grains of sand in the whole earth.
Dr. Nieuwentyt has computed, that an inch of candle, when converted to
light, becomes divided into 269,617,040 parts, with 40 ciphers annexed;
at which rate there must issue out of it, when burning, 418,660, with
39 ciphers more, particles in the second of a minute; vastly more than
a thousand times a thousand million of times the number of sands the
whole earth can contain; reckoning ten inches to one foot, and that 100
sands are equal to one inch.[42] As sound is propagated only at the
rate of 1,142 feet in a second, a particle of light must be 786,000
times more subtile than a particle of air. If the particles of light
were not extremely small, their velocity would be highly destructive.
Indeed, were they equal in bulk to the two millionth part of a grain of
sand, this impulse would not be less than sand shot from the mouth of a
cannon. If the particles of light had more density, they would not only
dazzle us by their splendor, but injure us by their heat.

There is no creature of God that _diffuses_ itself, and whose influence
reaches so far and wide, and fills so large a vacuum, as light. All
that inconceivable space between this globe and the fixed stars, a
distance which numbers cannot reach, is replete with light. Nay, the
space in which it is diffused is not less than the universe itself; the
immensity of which exceeds the conception of human understanding. It is
from this almost unlimited diffusion of light that the very remotest of
the heavenly bodies in the solar system become discernible, either by
the naked eye or by telescopes. And had we instruments that could carry
our sight as far as the light is extended, we should discover those
bodies which are placed at the very extremity of the universe.[43]

Light is the _medium_ through which objects become _visible_ to us.
It is owing to it, that we are enabled to behold and contemplate the
wonderful works of the great Creator; to discover unexplored systems
in the trackless regions of unbounded space, to imbibe knowledge from
things created, to hold intercourse with each other, to steer the
hollow bark to distant climes, and to investigate the records of all
science. Without its aid, the world would have been an inhospitable
wilderness, involved in sable shades of perpetual night. “Truly the
light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold it.”

Light _beautifies_ every delightful object which comes within the reach
of its rays.

            “Nature’s resplendent robe!
    Without whose vesting beauty all were wrapt
    In unessential gloom.”

All colors are rays of light differently reflected. The cause of their
diversity was first rationally accounted for by Sir Isaac Newton. He
has shown that color is not a specific property of bodies, but is
caused by the different rays of light being reflected from the surface
of the body; the rest of the rays passing into or through the body. He
discovered that in the rays of light are all the colors in nature; and
the primary colors he considered to be seven in number, namely, red,
orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet; and that bodies appear
of different colors, as they have the property of reflecting some rays
more powerfully than others. These colors are poetically enumerated by
Thomson.

                “First the flaming _red_
    Sprung vivid forth; the tawny _orange_ next;
    And next delicious _yellow_; by whose side
    Fell the kind beams of all-refreshing _green_:
    Then the pure _blue_, that swells autumnal skies,
    Ethereal play’d; and then, of sadder hue,
    Emerg’d the deepen’d _indigo_, as when
    The heavy-skirted evening droops with frost;
    While the last gleamings of refracted light
    Dy’d in the fainting _violet_ away.”

Since the time of this justly celebrated philosopher, it has been
objected, that the seven colors above mentioned are not primitive.
It seems very obvious that there can be only three primitive colors,
namely, red, yellow, and blue; since all the colors can be made by
means of these. It has lately been advanced by Prieur, that the
primitive colors are violet, green, and red; that the yellow is formed
with red and green, the latter being in excess; and that when the red
is in excess, they form orange; the green and violet form blue. The
colors excited by the different refrangible rays do not appear to
determine what are the primitive colors, since we find that different
rays are capable of producing the same color, as a mixture of the
yellow with the red produces orange. And it must be admitted, that the
violet rays excite, in some degree, the idea of red along with the
blue; as in the green, the yellow and blue may be discerned, but none
of the red. When the different colored rays are mixed together, either
by recomposition, or by getting each color by a separate Spectrum, the
result will be white light. Hence Sir Isaac Newton concluded, that
when the rays are promiscuously reflected from any surface it will
appear white. He also found, and the discovery has since been confirmed
by the experiments of Dr. Herschell, that the different colored rays
have not by any means the same illuminating power. The violet rays
appear to have the least luminous effect, the indigo more, the blue a
little more, the green very great, between the green and the yellow the
greatest of all, the yellow the same as the green, and the red less
than the yellow.[44] From experiments it is found, that those rays of
light are of the largest quantity that paint the brightest colors;
and of all these, the red rays have the least refrangibility. Without
light vegetables would have no color, but would appear white; this has
been remarkably illustrated by Professor Robison. Some bodies absorb
one colored ray, others another, while they reflect the rest. This is
the cause of color in bodies. A red body, for instance, reflects the
red rays and absorbs the rest. A white body reflects all the rays, and
absorbs none; while a black body, on the contrary, absorbs all the
rays, and reflects none:[45] this shows, that black colored apparel is
very improper during the heat of summer, or in tropical climates.

    [There is one difficulty scarcely mentioned, and surely
    not accounted for, in the preceding chapter: i.e. _How are we
    to reconcile the creation of light on the first day, and the
    creation of the sun not until the fourth?_

    This has been a standing proposition since the revival
    of learning. There can be no doubt but the account of the
    creation, arrangement and nature of the world, as given
    by Moses, is correct; and would so appear to the most
    philosophically scientific, could we ascertain certainly
    the meaning of the sacred historian, and did we understand
    perfectly the phenomena of nature.

    It is reasonable to suppose that the discoveries in natural
    philosophy would tend to influence the explanations of Moses’
    account. This is the fact. These discoveries have produced two
    theories in regard to light: The _vibratory_, or Cartesian; and
    the _corpuscular_, or Newtonian.

    The Newtonian theory supposes the sun to be the original
    and principal source of light; and that light is emitted
    from the sun’s surface in inconceivably small _corpuscles_,
    in such rapid succession, and in straight lines, as to seem
    a continuous ray, though, in reality, the particles are a
    thousand miles apart in their approach to the earth.

    This is the most popular of modern theories, and the only
    one, as I recollect, employed by commentators in illustrating
    the account of Moses; or rather in solving the difficulty by
    reconciling this theory with his account.

    Some have supposed the sun was created long before, our
    earth, and that his beams took effect on our earth, as now, on
    the fourth day from his creation. Others have supposed that
    the sun and earth were created _simultaneously_, but that the
    sun’s beams did not fully penetrate our atmosphere, so as to
    make himself distinctly visible as now, until the fourth day.
    In both these cases it is supposed that the words of Moses,
    in regard to the creation of the sun on the fourth day, are
    to be interpreted of his _appearance_, and _influence_ on the
    earth, by dispensing light. But this does not account for the
    _existence_ of light _from the first to the fourth day_. This
    is an insuperable objection here.

    Finding the foregoing theories pressed with this
    insurmountable difficulty, other commentators have supposed,
    Light was a real substance, created _simultaneously_, and in
    conjunction with the original chaotic mass of our earth; and
    when God said “Let there be light, and there was light,” He,
    by his divine power, caused the chaotic light to separate
    itself from the earth, and, departing, _to condense_ in the
    body of the sun; or, as some would probably say, in view of Dr.
    Herschell’s solar discoveries, in the phosphoric clouds which
    surround the real body of the sun. In this case, if the light
    concentrated in the body of the sun, then that luminary must be
    a body of _condensed light_: if in the solar phosphoric clouds
    of Dr. Herschell, then those clouds would be _condensed light_.
    This body of condensed light is considered the source of our
    solar light, which flies off from it in the form of rays or
    beams.

    DR. URE, in his Chemical Dictionary, article LIGHT, takes
    this view. He says, “We learn from scripture, that light
    pre-existed before this luminary (the sun) and that its
    _subsequent condensation_ in his orb was a particular act of
    Almighty Power. The phosphorescence of minerals, buried since
    the origin of things in the bowels of the earth, coincides
    strictly with the Mosaic account of the creation. We shall
    therefore regard light as the first born element of chaos,
    as an independent essence, universally distributed through
    the mineral, vegetable, and animal world, capable of being
    disengaged from its latent state by various natural and
    artificial operations.”

    This theory, as I understand Dr. Ure’s view, has _two_
    advantages, and _three_ disadvantages. It accounts for the
    production of light on the _first_ day, as Moses says. It
    also accounts for the _artificial production_ of light by
    friction between bodies which have never been exposed to solar
    light, by combustion, compression, &c. For though it supposes
    light “subsequently condensed” in the sun, I presume it does
    not suppose _all_ the light thus transferred from the earth,
    and condensed: much of it is latent, and combined with other
    substances, from which it is evolved by friction, combustion,
    compression, &c.

    But this ingenious theory, which is mentioned by our
    author, and attributed to Dr. Wall, is pressed with _three_
    difficulties:

    1. It does not suppose the existence of the sun until the
    _fourth_ day, and of course no common centre of attraction to
    the earth and other planets. But it is impossible to conceive
    of the _safe existence_ of the planets _previous_ to the
    existence of their common center, which now regulates their
    order and motion. This is an insuperable difficulty, unless we
    resort to a “particular act of Almighty Power.”

    2. If the body of the sun be “condensed light,”
    _abstracted_ from the earth, the scene of its creation, then
    we must suppose that _a body more than a million times
    greater than the earth was drawn off from it_, which indeed
    would require an “act of Almighty Power,” and is utterly
    irreconcilable to the laws of attraction.

    3. This view also destroys the idea of the sun’s being
    an opake and habitable globe, unless we could conceive the
    inhabitants capable of dwelling in “condensed light;” which
    supposition is at variance with all our ideas of rational
    existence. Hence it robs the mind of the pleasing and almost
    intuitively correct idea of the sun’s being a habitable globe.

    These difficulties appeared so great that others, and
    particularly Dr. Adam Clarke, have offered a new mode of
    interpretation, founded on the Newtonian theory as improved by
    Dr. Herschell. Dr. Clarke supposes that _caloric_, or latent
    heat, was produced on the first day, when God said, “let there
    be light; and there was light.” In this case he considers that
    latent heat and latent light are, probably, the same: or that
    it is the same subtile substance diffused throughout creation,
    which is capable of producing heat and light, when properly
    excited.

    Yet, in his remarks on the sun, he embraces Dr. Herschell’s
    ideas of the sun’s real body being opake and habitable,
    surrounded by phosphoric clouds which are the source of our
    solar light. Of course the Doctor only transfers the source
    of light from the real body of the sun to these phosphoric
    clouds with which he is invested. Our solar light then comes by
    _impulsion_ from these clouds, and not from the sun’s real body.

    These clouds are supposed to give light to the _Solar_
    inhabitants also, the intensity of which is regulated by a
    stratum of clouds placed _below_ the _outer_ phosphoric clouds,
    and which defends the sun’s real body from too great degree of
    light.

    This is Dr. Herschell’s supposition, and seems to be pretty
    well established.

    This ingenious theory solves the difficulty under notice,
    by supposing that _caloric_, and not light, is intended in
    the third verse, where God said, “Let there be light.” And by
    supposing latent light, as well as latent heat, it seems to
    provide for the well known existence of light in combination
    with many, if not all, terrestrial substances; and yet it
    refers to the sun as the principal source of light, which
    according to this interpretation, was not necessary to the
    existence of the substance intended in the third verse--“Let
    there be light, and there was light.”

    This theory has another most excellent suggestion, viz:
    that the heat excited by the sun at the earth’s surface, is
    produced by the luminous rays of the sun combining with the
    caloric in the atmosphere, and other substances at the surface
    of the earth. This suggestion supposes a very close affinity,
    if not identity in the matter of light and heat.

    Although this explanation approaches much nearer a
    satisfactory solution of the difficulty in question, yet it is
    by no means unembarrassed.

    In the first place it is built upon a singular translation
    of a word. The text, according to this theory, should be, “And
    God said let there be _caloric_, and there was caloric.”
    This may be the text; but I cannot help thinking, that a bias
    to a system of philosophy, and a strong desire to _cut_ the
    difficulty rather than _solve_ it, suggested this translation.
    The text seems to have been so generally and uniformly
    understood of light, it would be difficult to alter it. It
    would be better to suspect a defect in our knowledge of the
    source and nature of light.

    Again: this view seems to suppose a _consecutive_ creation,
    which is at variance with a seemingly well settled opinion,
    in regard to the _Solar System_, and even at variance with
    Dr. Clarke’s own remarks on Gen. chap. i, v. 2. On this verse
    he says: “God seems at _first_ to have created the elementary
    principles of _all things_.”

    Finally: as his view is Newtonian, it is liable to all
    the objections to which that theory is liable: such as the
    _diminution_ which would take place at the source from whence
    the light came; and the _destructive force_ with which it would
    fall at the surface of the earth.

    These considerations, with others, have influenced many of
    the most learned and acute philosophers to look for another
    theory. Our own countryman, Dr. Franklin, felt them. He says,
    in a letter dated April 23, 1752, in reference to the theory,
    of light being _particles of matter driven off from the sun’s
    surface_; “Must not the smallest portion conceivable have, with
    such a motion, a force exceeding that of a twenty-four pounder
    discharged from a cannon? Must not the sun diminish exceedingly
    by such a waste of matter, and the planets, instead of drawing
    near to him, as some have feared, recede to greater distances,
    through the lessoned attraction? Yet these particles with this
    amazing motion, will not drive before them, or remove the
    least, and slightest dust they meet with, and the sun appears
    to continue of his ancient dimensions, and his attendants move
    in their ancient orbits.”

    He then supposes the phenomena of light may be more
    satisfactorily solved by supposing a subtle fluid, universally
    diffused, which is invisible _when at rest_, but _becomes
    visible when put in motion_, by affecting the nerves of the
    eye, as the vibrations of the air affect the ear, and produce
    the sensation of sound; and that the different degrees of
    intensity in the vibrations, will account for the different
    colors. _See Nicholson’s Encyclopedia_, LIGHT.

    This is the _vibratory_ or Cartesian system of light. As
    already suggested, it supposes the existence of a subtle,
    luminiferous ether, diffused throughout the universe, pervading
    every particle of matter, and is capable of being put in
    motion, so as to become visible, by the sun, as the grand
    natural _excitant_, friction, combustion, compression, &c.
    The _laws_ of the vibrations of this luminiferous fluid, are
    precisely the same with those ascertained, and determined, in
    regard to light as commonly understood. This luminiferous fluid
    is to be considered an elementary substance, and was created
    when the different substances composing the chaotic mass were
    created. At its first creation, like caloric, it was in a
    _latent_ state, as no excitant as yet had put it in motion.

    It is to be understood, therefore, that the substances of
    each planet in the _Solar System_, as well as the sun himself,
    were created _simultaneously_ in a chaotic state, at their
    proper relative distances from each other: that the requisite
    quantity of each elementary substance was present in each mass:
    but as caloric, and this luminiferous ether were _latent_,
    these masses were solid, frozen lumps; inactive and lifeless;
    and darkness necessarily prevailed. This then was the original
    condition of the elements of our Solar System, according to
    the scriptures. “And the earth was without form and void; and
    darkness was upon the face of the deep.” Gen. i, 2.

    In order, therefore, to produce a quickening in these
    masses, which rendered them _soft_, it was only necessary to
    call the latent caloric, and this luminiferous ether into
    action, which would agitate, and bring to light the whole
    mass, and thus commence the arrangement and organization of
    the Solar System. However, as there was no exciting cause
    _then_ in operation, it is evident the Almighty must have given
    the _first_ impulse to these elements. This he did, and the
    important fact is recorded by Moses in these words: “AND THE
    SPIRIT OF GOD MOVED UPON THE FACE OF THE GREAT DEEP,” Jehovah
    saying at the same time, “LET THERE BE LIGHT.”

    Here is the Mosaic account of the production of light,
    and possibly heat also, which took place on the _first_ day.
    The same process went on _simultaneously_ in the sun and
    planets, and the continued action cleared up their respective
    atmospheres, and the _sun_ became visible at the earth’s
    surface on the _fourth_ day. Hence, the sun was said to have
    been _made_ on the fourth day.

    This solution of the difficulty is consistent with the
    account of Moses; and also all the well ascertained phenomena
    of light can be satisfactorily explained by it. It will
    naturally lead the mind to observe the resemblance between the
    phenomena of light and heat, and impel us to the conclusion,
    that light, or vision, is the _effect_ of a material cause, as
    heat is of caloric: and it is natural to suppose this cause
    is in the same relation to light, that caloric is to heat. Of
    course we should conclude that light, or the luminiferous ether
    in a latent state, enters into combination with all substances,
    as does caloric; and at the same time a large proportion of it
    is _free_, or in motion, and of course sensible to the eye, as
    _free_ caloric is to the sense of feeling. Moreover we must
    conclude that this latent light is capable of being set free
    or evolved by the exciting influence of the sun, as also by
    friction, compression, combustion, chemical action, &c. It
    will be of advantage, therefore, to establish the fact of the
    existence of _latent_ light, in combination with terrestrial
    substances.

    That this is the fact may be proven by a single reflection
    on the process of _combustion_. It is a daily observation that
    light is produced by _burning_ bodies. Let us suppose these
    bodies burnt at midnight in a close room; still light will
    be given out copiously and constantly. _Whence_ this light?
    The natural and obvious answer is, it was in combination in
    a _latent state_ with the burning bodies, and by combustion
    it was set free, and thrown out, and thus put the surrounding
    luminiferous ether in motion.

    It is said by some, the light evolved in this case is not
    from the burning bodies, but from the oxygen which is supplied
    by the air to support the combustion. This does not alter the
    case at all: for then the light was in combination with the
    oxygen, and was invisible, being in a latent state, until it
    was set free from the oxygen by combustion.

    The same conclusion is obtained in the process of
    _compression_ and _expansion_. If atmospheric air, or oxygen
    be suddenly compressed in a glass syringe; or if a glass ball,
    filled with the latter, be suddenly broke _in vacuo_, a _flash
    of light_ is instantly perceived. In this case the light
    suddenly becomes visible, which was invisible before, being
    latent in combination with the air. (URE.)

    We arrive at the same conclusion in case of _friction_. It
    is well known that pieces of wood can be made to _blaze_ by
    rubbing them together. But it is not so well known, that two
    pieces of rock crystal, or quartz, taken from any depth in the
    earth, and which cannot be supposed to have ever been in the
    light of the sun, when rubbed quickly together, even _under
    water, will give out volumes of light_. _Whence_ this light?
    from the quartz doubtless. Of course it must have been in a
    latent state, and was set free by friction. Let it be strictly
    observed, the crystals _never were exposed to the light of the
    sun, of course could not have derived this light from that
    luminary_.

    We must come to the same conclusion, in regard to the light
    given out by _animal_ substances. Many _insects_ are known to
    have the power of evolving light, or putting the surrounding
    luminiferous ether in motion, which is the same. Putrescent
    animal matter has been observed to possess it, in some cases,
    in a very great degree; sufficiently to illuminate a room, or
    pantry, for hours together. In some instances the fingers of
    those who touched the luminous flesh, became luminous.

    This is eminently the case in regard to some fishes. A
    species of fish called PHOLAS, has the power of evolving a
    large quantity of light. This power is greater when the fish is
    sound and fresh. Pliny mentions this fish, and says it rendered
    the hands and clothes of persons luminous. When put in water,
    under proper circumstances, it renders the water luminous. But
    when put in milk, a single _pholas_ made seven ounces of it so
    luminous as to enable one to distinguish the faces of persons
    present. _Ency. Brit. Art._ LIGHT.

    The evolution of light from the sea in the night, is a fact
    of common observation, and is sometimes so great as to enable
    one to read large print on a ship’s deck. _Ency. Brit. Art._
    LIGHT.

    In all the above instances, and many more might be added,
    the light evolved, or, (which is the same thing in this
    investigation,) the luminiferous ether put in motion, must have
    been in a state of combination with the substances from which
    it was evolved. The only question which remains is this: _Was
    all this light transmitted from the sun, and become latent and
    combined at the earth’s surface by absorption?_

    It would certainly be hazardous to answer this question in
    the affirmative. For how could we account for the evolution of
    light from those bodies which have never been subject to the
    sun’s influence?

    Again: If all this light had been transmitted from the
    sun, it will inevitably follow, that there was a time when
    the quantity of light at the surface of the earth, and in
    combination with terrestrial bodies, _was very small_, and of
    course combustion, friction, and compression of bodies produced
    anciently a much smaller quantity of light than now; because
    there was a smaller quantity in combination.

    It is evident that this supposition would come to this
    conclusion: _The quantity of light, in combination at the
    earth’s surface, has increased in the same ratio as the
    increase of the duration of the influence of the sun on the
    earth: and, by consequence, the quantity of light produced by
    artificial means has increased in the same proportion._ Of
    course, fires and candles burn more brightly now than they did
    five thousand years since.

    Though this conclusion is legitimate from the foregoing
    supposition, yet it is at war with common sense, and the
    current observations of the world.

    We are therefore compelled to conclude that the MATTER _of
    light_ is diffused throughout the universe, as is caloric, and
    that it is evolved, or put in motion by the influence of the
    sun; as also by artificial and chemical means; as combustion,
    compression, friction, chemical action, &c.

    This conclusion is much strengthened by the fact, that the
    _existence of caloric_ is well ascertained, _not as proceeding
    from the sun_, but in combination with all terrestrial
    substances; and also by the fact of the constant _analogy_
    between the phenomena of light and heat. This analogy is so
    strong and striking that we are compelled to conclude, _if
    heat be the effect of a real substance, light must be also_.
    Indeed the analogy is so strong that it almost convinces us of
    the _identity_ of the matter of heat, light, electricity, and
    galvanism.

    Notwithstanding the amount of evidence is against this
    supposition at present, yet there is a strong tendency in
    recent philosophical experiments to confirm it; and I am
    inclined to believe that future discoveries will confirm this
    identity. Some of the most obvious evidences in favor of it may
    be introduced here.

    1. Almost all the celebrated authors and experimenters have
    occasionally _suggested_ the probability of this identity.
    Mr. Turner, Elements of Chemistry, p. 67, says, in reference
    to heat and light: “It has been supposed that _they are
    modifications of the_ SAME AGENT; and though most persons
    regard them as independent principles, yet they are certainly
    allied in a way which at present is inexplicable.” Again,
    p. 71. “Mr. Leslie conceives that light when absorbed, _is
    converted into heat_.” Dr. Henry (Art. Light,) says, “A new
    fact has been lately ascertained by Dr. Delaroche, which seems
    to point out _a close connection_ between heat and light,
    _and a gradual passage of the one into the other_. The rays
    of _invisible_ heat pass through glass with difficulty at a
    temperature below that of boiling water; but they traverse
    it with a facility always increasing with the temperature,
    as it approaches the point at which bodies become luminous.”
    “The general facts, says Sir H. Davy, of the refraction and
    effects of the solar beam, offer an analogy to the agencies
    of electricity.” (_Ure, Chemical Dictionary, Article Light._)
    It is well known that this view pressed itself strongly on
    the attention of Sir Isaac Newton, during his philosophical
    investigation. _See Ure, Chem. Dic. Art. Light._

    2. This identity is strongly suggested by the constant and
    striking analogy between the laws of heat and light.

    _First:_ The color of surfaces has an influence on the
    passage of light and heat.

    _Secondly:_ The power of light, heat, and electricity
    diminishes as the squares of their distances.

    _Thirdly:_ The particles of heat, light, and electricity,
    are _idio-repulsive_.

    _Fourthly:_ The passage of the electric spark is generally
    attended with the production of light and heat.

    _Fifthly:_ Heat is emitted in all directions from the
    surface of an ignited body: so is light from the surface of a
    burning body.

    _Sixthly:_ The laws of reflection are the same in light and
    heat.

    Other coincidences might be established, and other
    celebrated names added.

    If this identity should be established finally, it would
    not effect the doctrine of the foregoing pages in the least. It
    would only be necessary to say, the luminiferous fluid of this
    essay is the well established substance now called caloric.


    _Addenda on Light._

    1. It is now generally admitted that the real body
    of the sun is surrounded with a peculiar set of clouds,
    _phosphorescent_ in their nature. It is also allowed that these
    clouds do not emit heat. And as it is well known that no one of
    the _planets_ has such clouds, but receive their light from the
    sun, _it is extremely probable that these phosphorescent clouds
    are intended by the Creator, to be the great dispenser of light
    to the solar system, by operating as the exciting cause to put
    the luminiferous ether in motion throughout the solar system_.

    By a parity of reasoning, each centre of a system may be
    invested with similar clouds, which operate in the same way in
    reference to the planets which belong to it.

    2. If light were a real substance, _as commonly
    understood_, solar light must proceed from the sun by
    _impulsion_, and artificial light from burning bodies by
    _evolution_. Take the case of burning bodies. A single candle
    placed two miles above the surface of the earth in the air, and
    lighted up in that position, will _instantly illuminate a space
    of two miles in every direction from itself, or a spherical
    space four miles in diameter_. In this case a sufficient
    quantity of light is instantly evolved to fill this space,
    and the evolution continues as long as the candle burns. The
    question upon this fact is this: Can it be supposed that there
    is a sufficient quantity of light, in combination with a single
    candle, or the oxygen necessary to keep up its combustion, to
    fill a spherical space four miles in diameter for several hours
    together? This would indeed be almost incredible in view of the
    space filled by light evolved from a single candle.

    But this difficulty would be satisfactorily solved upon
    the supposition that light is the _effect_, produced by a
    luminiferous ether, universally diffused, and put in motion,
    by which it becomes visible, by the sun, burning bodies,
    &c. Because, the motion which renders the luminiferous
    ether visible, commences instantly upon the commencement of
    combustion, and is propagated from the point of combustion _in
    right lines_, under the appearance of rays of light: but the
    motion ceases instantly on the cessation of combustion, and of
    course darkness instantly ensues.]

After having attended to the production of _light_, and noticed some
of its properties, it is a paramount duty to contemplate its glorious
Author; especially as by this mysterious production he himself has
chosen to be represented. If creatures be excellent, what must be
the Creator? and to admire the former without adoring the latter,
would be profane and atheistical. “The Deity,” says Sir Isaac Newton,
“in infinite space, as in his own _sensorium_, has an intimate
perception of all things:” so we, possessing intellect, should “look
through nature up to nature’s GOD.” Then matter, however rarefied or
diversified, would serve as his minister to introduce us into his
presence. A pious ancient, on being asked by a profane philosopher, How
he could contemplate high things, since he had no books? answered, That
he had the whole world for his book, ready open at all times, and in
all places, and that he could therein read things heavenly and divine.
As the visible creation is the outward expression of the existence of
God, and displays several of his infinite perfections; so we should
study him in the works of nature, and trace him in the operation of his
hands.

The late excellent and pious Bishop Horne very beautifully
observes,--“When the angels beheld the dark and disordered state of
created nature upon its first production, they were, doubtless, thrown
into some perplexity to conceive how it should ever be made a means of
manifesting forth the glory of the Creator. But when they saw the light
spring up, at the Divine command, from that blackness of darkness, and
fix its residence in its tabernacle the sun, illuminating and adorning
the firmament of heaven with its glorious show, and the earth with its
beautiful furniture, all formed out of rudeness and confusion, then
they confessed that the difficulty of the work served only to display
the skill of the workmaster, which is proportionally estimated by the
unpromising nature of the materials.

In like manner, whoever views the chaos to which the infinite wisdom of
a presiding Providence sometimes permits the moral world to be reduced
by the prevailing power of the prince of darkness, and the agency of
his instruments, will scarce be able, at first, to discern any traces
of the Divine counsels in a mirror so sullied and clouded over by the
enormities of sinful men. Yet let him wait with patience for a little
season, and those clouds shall pass away; a light shall shine, and some
great end present itself to sight, so worthy of God, so beneficial to
man, that standing amazed at a power able to bring the greatest good
out of the greatest evil, he will be forced to cry out concerning the
economy of the spiritual system, as David did concerning the operations
of the natural--‘Oh Lord, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom hast
thou made them all.’”[46]

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ IV.--DAY AND NIGHT.

    Original terms of Day and Night -- Motion the effect of
    a Divine power -- Commencement of Time -- Utility of Day and
    Night -- Religious improvement of Time -- Sin moral darkness --
    The Gospel a Light to dispel it -- A Christian the subject of
    a transition from the one state to the other.

The separation of _light_ from the _darkness_, was the work of the
_first day_. This was an arrangement made by infinite Wisdom, as
well as a display of almighty power. When this took place, it is
highly probable that God gave to the earth its rotation upon its own
axis, to produce the necessary succession of _day_ and _night_. “The
word ערב _éreb_, which we translate _evening_, comes from the root
ערב _ârab_, to _mingle_, and properly signifies that state in which
neither absolute darkness, nor full light, prevails. It has nearly
the same grammatical signification with our _twilight_, the time that
elapses from the setting of the sun till he is eighteen degrees below
the horizon, and eighteen degrees before he arises. Thus we have the
morning and evening twilight, or _mixture_ of light and darkness, in
which neither prevails; because, while the sun is within eighteen
degrees of the horizon, either after his setting, or before his rising,
the atmosphere has power to refract the rays of light, and send them
back to the earth. The Hebrews extended the meaning of this term to the
whole duration of night, because it was ever a _mingled_ state; the
moon, the planets, or the stars, tempering the darkness with some rays
of light. From the _ereb_ of Moses came the Ερεβος _Erebus_ of Hesiod,
Aristophanes, and other heathens, which they _deified_, and made with
_nox_, or night, the parent of all things. The word בקר _boquer_,
which we translate _morning_, from בקר _boquar_, he _looked out_, is a
beautiful figure, which represents the morning as _looking out_ at the
east, and illuminating the whole of the upper hemisphere.”[47]

All bodies continue in a state of rest, till they are put into motion
by some external force impressed on them. Motion is the removal of a
body from one place to another, or a continual change of place.[48]
Any force acting on a body to move it, is called a _power_. The
_momentum_, or quantity of motion, is in proportion to the force
impressed. The heavier any body is, the greater is the power required
to move it.

There are but three possible ways of accounting for motion:--either
by supposing that there has been an infinite succession of impulses
communicated from one body to another from eternity, without any active
principle either in matter or without it: or, that there is an active
principle in matter that renders it self-active, and motion essential
to it: or, else, that there is a Being distinct from matter, and is the
cause of its motion.

An infinite succession of impulses, without an active or moving
principle, will never give birth to motion, because this would be to
produce an effect without the assistance of a cause. This absurdity
was asserted by Spinosa; yet when urged by his friends to explain how
matter could ever come into motion, if motion was neither essential to
matter, nor proceeded from any external cause, he always avoided giving
a direct answer. This conduct makes it reasonable to believe, that he
himself would have given up his account of motion, if he could have
saved his atheistical scheme and his reputation.

That motion is essential to all matter, and action as much an attribute
of matter, as extension or solidity; and, consequently, every atom of
matter is necessarily self-moving, or active from the necessity of its
own nature, is asserted by Toland. Though he thought fit to reject the
hypothesis of Spinosa as indefensible, yet he believed in the atheistic
notion, that motion is essential to matter, and thinks it will be
sufficient without troubling the Supreme Being. The reason which has
always determined mankind to look out for a cause of motion extrinsical
to matter, was this: though they could easily conceive it capable of
being moved and divided; yet the conceiving of it to be undivided, and
unmoved, was a more simple notion of matter, than the conceiving it
divided and moved. This being first in order of nature, and an adequate
conception of it too, they thought it necessary to inquire, how it
came out of this state, and by what causes motion, from whence this
diversity in matter arose, could come into the world?

Descartes, though he allowed the infinity of matter, as well as Toland,
was yet sensible that even this would not alter the nature of matter,
nor the idea that every person had of its inactivity, and therefore
could see no way of altering its primitive idea, and reconciling it
with the motion of matter, but by introducing an infinite Being, who
had sufficient power to rouse matter out of that sleepy state in which
its original idea had represented it.[49]

That such a circumstance exists, and what it is, a French author very
clearly states. He says, The universe is composed of matter, and, as a
system, is sustained by motion. Motion is not a property of matter,
and without this motion the solar system could not exist. Were motion a
property of matter, that undiscovered and undiscoverable thing, called
perpetual motion, would establish itself. It is because motion is not
a property of matter, that perpetual motion is an impossibility in
the hand of every being but that of the Creator of motion. When the
pretenders to atheism can produce perpetual motion, and not till then,
they may expect to be credited.

The natural state of matter, as to place, is a state of rest. Motion,
or change of place, is the effect of an external cause acting upon
matter. As to that faculty of matter called _gravitation_, it is the
influence which two or more bodies have reciprocally on each other to
unite and be at rest. Every thing which has hitherto been discovered
with respect to the motion of the planets in the system, relates only
to the laws by which motion acts, and not to the cause of motion.
Gravitation, so far from being the cause of motion to the planets that
compose the solar system, would be the destruction of the solar system,
were revolutionary motion to cease; for as the action of spinning
upholds a top, the revolutionary motion upholds the planets in their
orbits, and prevents them from gravitating and forming one mass with
the sun.

    “By ceaseless action all that is subsists;
    Constant rotation of the unwearied wheel
    That nature rides upon, maintains her health,
    Her beauty, her fertility. She dreads
    An instant’s pause, and lives but while she moves.
    Its own revolvency upholds the world.”

In one sense of the word, philosophy knows, and atheism says, that
matter is in perpetual motion. But the motion here meant refers to
the state of matter, and that only on the surface of the earth. It
is either decomposition, which is continually destroying the form of
the bodies of matter, or recomposition, which renews that matter in
the same or another form, as the decomposition of animal or vegetable
substances enter into the composition of other bodies. But the motion
that upholds the solar system is of an entirely different kind, and is
not a property of matter. It operates also to an entirely different
effect. It operates also to perpetual preservation, and to prevent any
change in the state of the system.

Giving then to matter all the properties which philosophy knows it
has, or all that atheism ascribes to it, and can prove, and even
supposing matter to be eternal, it will not account for the system
of the universe, or of the solar system, because it will not account
for motion, and it is motion that preserves it. When, therefore, we
discover a circumstance of such immense importance, that without it the
universe could not exist, and for which neither matter, nor any, nor
all, the properties of matter can account, we are by necessity forced
into the rational and comfortable belief of the existence of a cause
superior to matter, and that cause is GOD.

The motion of the earth, therefore, is an effect of Divine power,
because there is none other equal to it; and the constant operation of
the same cause is requisite to perpetuate its progress. How amazing
it is that this globe, so large in circumference, should move at all!
Plato attributes motion to the power of God, “How is it possible,” he
argues, “for so prodigious a mass to be carried round for so long a
time, by any natural cause? For which reason,” he says, “I assert God
to be the cause, and that it is impossible it should be otherwise.”[50]
“Every thing that is moved,” adds Aristotle, “must of necessity be
moved by some other thing; and that thing must be moved, either by
another, or not by another thing. If it be moved by that which is moved
by another, we must of necessity come to some Prime Mover that is not
moved by another. For it is impossible that what moves, and is moved by
another, shall proceed _ad infinitum_.”[51] Since motion then is not
a property of matter, but an effect produced by the power of a Divine
agent, what a constant display we have of this efficient energy, in
moving this earth, and with such a surprising, swiftness! Surely all
men should fear and reverence a Being, who possesses and exercises
such a power! He who created all things out of nothing, could, if he
pleased, extinguish the light, and shake the solid earth into atoms!

When the ponderous wheel of nature first began to move, _time_,
consisting of days, months, years, and ages, and measured by the
duration and revolutions of the heavenly bodies, commenced.

    _Time_ (in eternity parenthesis)
    Is measur’d by successive days and months,
    Seasons and years; which closely like the links
    Of an extended chain progressive join:
    Or as a clock, with all its hidden springs
    And constant motions, wound up to the top,
    Begins its course, revolving until down.

The distinction between _day_ and _night_ is a wise and gracious
provision for man. In the morning, after the weary limbs have repaired
their exhausted vigor by the indulgence of soft repose, we are pleased
with the blessing of light; and, after a few fleeting hours engaged
in our diversified pursuits of the day, we begin to court the evening
shades, pleased again to enjoy that balmy retreat which alone refits
us for the fatigues of the ensuing day. When a few fleeting hours
are spent, the day is no longer gratifying; but its light becomes
burdensome, and we wish for the shadows of the evening to be stretched
over us. This sable period is scarcely gone, when we welcome the
dawning day, and leave the place of our rest with gladness.

_Day_ and _night_, and their alternate changes, are adapted to suggest
useful thoughts, and calculated to employ our serious meditation.

      “From night to day, from day to night,
    The _dawning_ and the _dying_ light
      Lectures of heavenly wisdom read;
    With silent eloquence they raise
    Our thoughts to the Creator’s praise.
      And neither sound nor language need.”

A force continually impressed by the supreme Being produces and
preserves these different and useful motions, which measure out that
portion of time assigned us, for the performance of his work, and
the securing of our own salvation. We are directed in his word how
to employ this important _talent_ lent to us; also warned to guard
against a misapplication of it, and told that a day will come when we
shall have to give an account of our stewardship. As _day_ is afforded
for the management of those employments which could not be done in
the night, how unwise would it be to postpone such concerns till the
approach of darkness? So the short period of life is given us that we
may “work out our own salvation.” We are favored with the light of
Divine truth to illuminate our understandings; the operation of the
Holy Spirit to influence our wills; and our pressing necessities should
impel us to perform what God requires.

The Greeks have two words for _time_, χρονος and καιρος: the former
signifies time in general; and the latter that part of it which is
proper for doing a thing--the present season in which any thing to be
done may be done fitly and to advantage. Accordingly Solomon says,
“To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under
heaven.”

What the apostle says to the Christians at Ephesus is equally
applicable and interesting to persons in succeeding ages of the world;
giving a view of the importance of time, and directing to a right
improvement of it. “See that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil.”

_Walking_, in the Scripture style, is a word frequently used to denote
the whole course of a man’s life and conversation, including all
his thoughts, words and actions. Walking _circumspectly_, ακριβως,
signifies correctly, accurately, consistently, or perfectly. In
another place the same word is rendered _diligently_. Herod said to
the wise men come from the east, Go to Bethlehem, and search ακριβως,
_diligently_, narrowly, for the young child Jesus. But the word
_circumspect_ is from the Latin _circumspicio_, and signifies to
look round about, on all hands, to be every way watchful, wary, and
cautious, in order to avoid danger, discern enemies before they come
too nigh, and secure a man’s interest by every possible and lawful
means.[52]

The necessity of this duty is suggested in the Greek text, βλεπετε ουν
_see then_ or _therefore_, take care of this as a matter of the highest
concern and greatest importance; it is that on which your all depends.
He adduces a cogent reason for this--“Not as fools, but as wise.” As if
he should say, It is your _wisdom_ to walk circumspectly, and not to
walk so would be your _folly_: to walk circumspectly is the wisdom that
God recommends to you, and which is adapted to make you truly wise,
both in this world and in that which is to come.

The word _redeeming_, εξαγοραζομενοι, literally signifies _buying
time_. The term _buying_ is proper in reference to civil contracts,
but it is here applied morally. Properly speaking, time cannot be
bought: it is a commodity for which all the treasures in the world
would not be an equivalent. Its price is above rubies. But the
term imports the great value of time, and intimates that we should
be willing to suffer any privation or inconveniences, rather than
lose it. _Redeeming_ properly implies the laying down a price for
re-purchasing or recovering that which was ours, but which has fallen
into the possession of another. A captive sometimes is redeemed out
of the hand of an enemy. Now, in this sense, to redeem time already
past is impossible, for when once gone it is irrecoverable. So that
by _redeeming_ time, nothing else can be understood but a diligent
and prudent improvement of it, which is the only way in our power
to counterbalance the loss we have sustained by our former neglect.
The effects of our past negligence should be counteracted by double
diligence in future: we should do much work in a little time. This is
to redeem that time, concerning which we have allowed worldly business,
unprofitable visits, sensual indulgence, carnal recreations, and vain
thoughts, to rob us, and, as it were, to take and keep us captive. To
redeem time then is to be diligent in future, wisely improving it so as
may make amends for our very culpable remissness. Future diligence is,
as it were, the price of redemption paid down for what we had mortgaged
into the hands of those things which we have suffered to deprive us of
it.

The argument used to enforce the practice of this duty is, “because the
days are evil.” Time, in itself, properly speaking, is neither good nor
evil; but in regard to the moral state of mankind may be so called.
The days here primarily intended by the apostle, denominated _evil_,
were those of his own time, in which he himself and his contemporaries
lived, and which abounded with trouble and danger, by reason of the
opposition made by unbelieving Jews and Gentiles against Christianity.
But all our days, as well as those, may be called evil, because of
the prevalence of sin, Satanic delusion, and hostility of the ungodly
against real religion. Many persons can adopt the language of the
patriarch Jacob, “Few and evil have the days of the years of my life
been.” Job gives a similar testimony, “Man that is born of a woman, is
of few days, and full of evil.”

The whole argument runs thus: seeing that you cannot enjoy true quiet
and substantial comfort in this terrestrial abode, and are in danger
of being quickly deprived of all opportunity of getting and doing
good, fail not to improve the present time to the best advantage, in
reference to the future state, that you may secure for yourselves a
happy and glorious eternity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnotes - Chapter II

    [23] See Dr. A. Clarke on Gen. i. 1.

    [24] Barington’s Dissertations, &c, p. 82.

    [25] An eminent chemist and philosopher, Dr. Priestley,
    has very properly observed, that it seems plain that Moses
    considered the whole terraqueous globe as being created in
    a _fluid_ state, the earthly and other particles of matter
    being mingled with the water. The present form of the earth
    demonstrates the truth of the Mosaic account, for it is well
    known, that, if a soft or elastic globular body be rapidly
    whirled round on its axis, the parts at the poles will be
    flattened, and the parts on the equator, midway between the
    north and the south poles will be raised up. This is precisely
    the shape of our earth; it has the figure of an _oblate
    spheroid_, a figure pretty much resembling the shape of an
    _orange_. It has been demonstrated by admeasurement, that the
    earth is flatted at the poles, and raised at the equator. This
    was first conjectured by Sir Isaac Newton, and afterwards
    confirmed by M. Cassini, and others, who measured several
    degrees of latitude at the equator and near the north pole,
    and found that the difference perfectly justified Sir Isaac
    Newton’s conjecture, and consequently confirmed the Mosaic
    account. The result of the experiments instituted to determine
    this point, proved, that the diameter of the earth at the
    equator is greater by more than _twenty-three_ and _a half_
    miles than it is at the poles, allowing the polar diameter to
    be 1-334 part shorter than the _equatorial_, according to the
    recent admeasurements of several degrees of latitude made by
    Messrs. Mechain and Delambre. L’Histoire des Mathem. par M. de
    la Lande, tom. iv, part v, liv. vi: and Dr. Adam Clarke, on
    Gen. i. 10.

    [26] Hesiod. Theog. 116.

    [27] Aristoph. Aves, 694.

    [28] Longin, sect. ix, Edit. Pearce.

    [29] Walker’s History of the Creation, p. 8, 9.

    [30] Benson on the Text.

    [31] Preface to Dr. Black’s Lectures, by Robison.

    [32] Carpenter’s Lectures on the Works of Creation, vol. i.
    p. 87.

    [33] Boerhaave’s Chem. by Shaw, vol. i. p. 299.

    [34] Parkes’s Chemical Catechism, or Rudiments of
    Chemistry, chap. ii.

    [35] Contemplative Philosopher, vol. ii. p. 149, 150.

    [36] See Dr. Burnet’s Theory, vol. ii, p. 30.

    [37] Apud Stob. Eclog. Phys. p. 44.

    [38] That light is a fluid which encompasses the earth,
    and requires only to be agitated by some other inflamed body,
    in order to render it perceptible, is an hypothesis, says a
    celebrated German divine, that has been adopted by the most
    eminent philosophers. “It is certain, at least, that there is
    a great difference between _fire_ and _light_. The latter is
    incomparably more subtile than the former. It penetrates glass,
    and other transparent bodies, in a moment; whereas fire does it
    very slowly. The pores of glass are consequently large enough
    to give a free passage to the light, while the fire meets with
    more resistance, because it is less subtile. Fire moves more
    slowly than light. Let burning coals be brought into a room,
    the heat diffuses itself very slowly, and the air becomes
    warm by degrees; but the moment a candle is brought into an
    apartment, the whole is suddenly illuminated; and wherever
    the rays can reach the parts become more visible. From these
    facts, and some others, it is concluded, that fire and light
    are different substances; although we generally see them both
    together, and find that one may produce the other. But the
    consequence drawn from this is possibly false.”

    [39] A new material has recently been introduced in
    this country, for the purpose of lighting houses, streets,
    manufactories, &c, namely, the inflammable gas of coals.
    When coals are burning in a common fire-place, a flame more
    or less luminous, according as it is more or less encumbered
    with incombustible smoke and vapor, issues from them; and
    very frequently emit some very beautiful streams of a flame
    remarkably bright. All this arises from the gases which are
    extricated from the coal by the heat. It was natural to imagine
    that such gas might be received in proper reservoirs, and, on
    being forced out of small apertures, and lighted, would serve,
    as the flames of candles, to illuminate rooms or other places.
    The trial was easily made, and has been attended with the
    desired effect.

    [40] Dr. Rees’s New Cyclopædia, Art. Light; and Dr. O.
    Gregory’s Lessons, Astronomical and Philosophical p. 157.

    [41] Gregory’s Economy of Nature, vol. i, p. 173.

    [42] See Relig. Philos. vol. iii, pp. 869, 870, Fourth
    Edition.

    [43] Sturm’s Reflections, vol. iii, p. 184.

    [44] Dr. Rees’s Cyclopædia, Art. Light.

    [45] Parkes’s Rudiments of Chemistry, chap. xii.

    [46] Sermon on 1 Pet. ii, 21.

    [47] Dr. Adam Clarke on Gen. i, 31.

    [48] When Zeno, the Prince of the Stoics, was endeavoring
    to prove, by a sophistical argument, that there was no
    motion, Diogenes, the cynic, who had come into his school to
    hear him, quickly started up and walked: which was an ocular
    demonstration of motion, and sufficient to refute all his
    sophisms adduced to the contrary.

    [49] See Gurdon’s Sixth Sermon at Boyle’s Lecture.

    [50] Plato in Epinom.

    [51] Aristot. Physic. lib. vii, c. 5.

    [52] Dr A. Clarke on Eph. v, 15.

       *       *       *       *       *




