
THE

MOSAIC HISTORY

OF THE

CREATION OF THE WORLD;

ILLUSTRATED BY DISCOVERIES AND EXPERIMENTS DERIVED FROM THE PRESENT
ENLIGHTENED STATE OF SCIENCE; WITH REFLECTIONS, INTENDED TO PROMOTE
VITAL AND PRACTICAL RELIGION.

BY THOMAS WOOD, A. M.

REVISED AND IMPROVED

BY THE REV. J. P. DURBIN, A. M.

PROFESSOR OF LANGUAGES, AUGUSTA COLLEGE, KENTUCKY.

“Every man has a particular train of thought into which his mind falls,
when at leisure, from the impressions and ideas which occasionally
excite it; and if one train of thinking be more desirable than another,
it is surely that which regards the phenomena of nature with a constant
reference to a supreme intelligent author.”--_Bacon._

FIRST AMERICAN, FROM THE SECOND LONDON EDITION.

NEW-YORK.--M^{C}ELRATH & BANGS.

1831.




[_Entered, according to the Act of Congress, July 27, in the year 1831,
by M^{c}Elrath & Bangs, in the Office of the Clerk of the Southern
District of New-York._]




JOHN T. WEST & CO., PRINTERS.




PREFACE

TO THE SECOND LONDON EDITION.


As God made man with a capacity susceptible of knowledge, so has he
furnished him with the means of acquiring it. The Divine Being is
incomprehensible to all but himself: for a finite capacity can never
fully grasp an infinite object. Neither can he be perceived at all,
only so far as he is pleased to reveal himself. He has given us a
revelation of his nature, perfections, and will; which could never have
been discovered by reasoning and conjecture. He has also favored us
with a revelation of his works, without which the origin, constitution,
and nature of the universe, could never have been adequately known. The
origin, duty, and interest of man, are matters in which we are greatly
concerned. How valuable then are the Sacred Scriptures!

The heathen world by wisdom knew not God. On theological subjects,
the greatest Philosophers and Poets of whom antiquity could boast,
were puerile in their opinions, and absurd and contradictory in their
literary productions. Their progress in many of the sciences, and
the polite arts, was considerable; but in religion they made none:
not because they neglected to investigate the nature of it, as one
observes; for there was not a subject they thought on, nor discoursed
about, more than the nature and existence of the gods; neither was
it for want of natural abilities, nor of learning; for persons who
formed the brightest constellation of geniuses that ever illuminated
the republic of letters, were devoted to the investigation of the
principles and causes of things. Moses, the sacred historian, had
access to the Fountain of knowledge, and has revealed the mystery
that lay hid for ages, because he was taught it by the inspiration of
the Almighty. By the Hebrew Lawgiver we are instructed concerning the
Creation of the World; an illustration of whose account is attempted in
the following pages.

The attention of the reader is called to that era when the elementary
principles of matter were first produced, and the formation of
creatures took place; when vitality was given to a vast variety of
animals, and mind was infused into Man as the peculiar offspring of
God: when motion was impressed on the universe, and the various Planets
began their orbicular revolutions: when Time commenced, and

                    “History, not wanted yet,
    Lean’d on her elbow watching Time, whose course
    Eventful should supply her with a theme.”

What a stupendous fabric is Creation! a marvellous display of
omnipotence! It is infinitely diversified, and magnificently grand. Ten
thousand objects strike the attentive eye, and afford inexpressible
delight to a contemplative mind. The blue ethereal arch is highly
illuminated, and richly adorned with sparkling globes of light--whose
number, distances, magnitudes, motions, and influences, elude the most
diligent research: these millions of suns, the glory of other worlds,
are equally the works of the Creator, and, with rays of dazzling
splendor, irradiate the peculiar systems to which they belong: and,
while they celebrate his wisdom and power, form a brilliant canopy
over our heads. That golden globe of light, which is the center of
our planetary system, shines forth in his glory, and spreads abroad
the lucid day: he does not only emit his cheering rays to surrounding
orbs, some of which revolve at immense distances, but, in running his
prescribed course, measures out our time, renders our hours joyful, and
without whose reviving beams we should dwell in perpetual darkness. The
pale silver Moon gilds the shadows of the evening, and directs the feet
of the benighted and lonely traveller in safety to his abode.

In the lower walks of Nature, we perceive numerous assemblages of
creatures, which, calling forth the exercise of our understanding,
raise our admiration. The vapors arise, unite in the aerial regions,
and descend in rain, snow, or hail, according to the different
temperature of the climates; and thus the valleys are watered, the
green carpet is spread under our feet, delightfully adorned with
fruitful trees and variegated flowers. The vast collections of water,
called seas, are stored with innumerable finny inhabitants, both small
and great, which are amply supplied with necessary food. On earth,
there are the wild beasts of the forest, the roaming cattle of the
desert, the domestic animals of the field, the feathered tribes with
their glossy plumage and delightful notes, beside an incredible number
of living creatures that escape the utmost vigilance of the unassisted
eye: which are all effects of infinite skill, omnipotent energy, Divine
munificence, and conspire to utter his praise. The sultry regions are
fanned with cooling breezes, which revive the numerous classes of
creatures, and without which they would otherwise faint. But of all
the visible effects of omnific power and uncreated goodness, Man has a
claim to the first rank, for in his composition are mysteriously joined
both matter and spirit.

How wonderfully has God displayed his wisdom, power, and goodness, in
the creation of the Universe! What are the most labored and diversified
works of Art, when compared with the majestic grandeur and sublimity
of those of Nature! The things on which the fertile imagination of man
has long been employed, when considered in a detached point of view,
gratify our curiosity, raise our admiration, and gain our applause;
but when compared with the productions of the Divine Hand, they sink
and are deprived of their lustre, like the sparkling glow-worm in the
copse, when the Sun shines forth with the refulgence of his meridian
splendor.

Religious instruction is here mixed with philosophical discoveries. The
works of Nature conduct an enlightened mind to the great Creator. The
celebrated Dr. Watts, with this point in view, says,

    “Part of thy name divinely stands,
      On all thy creatures writ,
    They show the labor of thy hands,
      Or impress of thy feet.”

Mr. Adams, in his Lectures, says, “The two kingdoms of nature and
grace, as two parallel lines, correspond to each other, follow a like
course, but can never be made to touch. An adequate understanding
of this distinction in all its branches, would be the consummation
of knowledge.” Stephens, in his Human Nature Delineated, says, “The
man who would seek after knowledge in this world, and happiness in
the world of spirits, I would advise to pursue his studies without
any other guides than the Word and the Works of God.” And Dr. A.
Clarke, on John iv, 3, affirms, that, “properly understood, earthly
_substances_ are the types, representatives, and shadows of heavenly
things.” St. Paul appears to inculcate this idea where he says, “Now
we see as through a glass, darkly: but then face to face.” The word
αινιγματι, rendered _darkly_, is peculiarly important, and the right
knowledge of which will assist us to understand his meaning. Parkhurst
gives the following definition of the _term_ and the _thing_. “Αινιγμα
from ηνιγμαι, the _perfect passive_, of αινιττω, to _hint, intimate,
signify with some degree of obscurity_; an _enigma_, in which one thing
_answers_ or stands in _correspondence to_, or as the _representative_
of another; which is, in _some respects, similar_ to it, occurs 1 Cor.
xiii, 12. _Now_, in this life, _we see by means of a mirror_ reflecting
the images of heavenly and spiritual things, εν αινιγματι, _in an
enigmatical manner_, invisible things being represented by visible;
spiritual, by natural; eternal, by temporal; _but then_, in the eternal
world, _face to face_; every thing being seen in itself, and not by
means of a representative or similitude.”

The idea thus suggested, induced the author to engage in the following
work: he thought that if the Mosaic account of the Creation were given
in detail, each day apart, using the aid afforded by the present
enlightened state of science, and directing the reader to look

    “Through Nature, up to Nature’s God.”

the work would be instructive, and might tend to cultivate the mind
and amend the heart. And he is happy that he has it in his power to
say, that the plan has obtained not only the general approbation of
orthodox and pious Christians, but the warm encomiums of many Ministers
of the Gospel, both of the Establishment and among the Dissenters. He
has received very flattering Epistolary Communications from persons of
piety, literature, and science.

The author has availed himself of various sources of information: some
of the best works published on different illustrative subjects have
been consulted: and those on Natural History and Chemical Science
were found of considerable service. That part which treats on the
Anatomical structure of Man, the reader will perceive is written
by a gentleman deeply versed in Physiological science. It is from
the pen of the late Benjamin Gibson, Esq. who filled the important
situations of _Vice-President of the Literary and Philosophical Society
of Manchester, and Surgeon to the Infirmary of that town_: and who,
unexpectedly, and in the most obliging manner, offered to prepare a
Manuscript for this work, which gives it a peculiar excellence it
otherwise would not have had.

The favorable reception which the former large edition has met with
from the public, and the consequent demand there was upon the author to
prepare a new one, produced a considerable excitement in his mind; and,
under these circumstances, it was not less his wish, than it has been
his endeavor, to make the second edition more worthy to meet the public
eye, as well as more extensively useful. The _whole_ of the work, with
the exception of that part by Mr. Gibson, therefore, has been written
anew, and such important additions and arrangements made, as will, he
trusts, meet the approbation of his readers. He has received assistance
from a writer of eminence, whose name, were he at liberty to mention
it, would do honor to his work, and whose corrections have increased
its value. The Religious Improvements he believes to be natural and
scriptural, and hopes they may be read with advantage by all Christians
who have received the truth as it is in Christ. He can say, that he
has endeavored to make the whole work both instructive and useful, so
far as his leisure from arduous ministerial duties would allow him: by
directing the attention of the reader to God, through the medium of
his visible works, and by that means to inculcate true religion and
genuine piety. May the Divine blessing render this additional effort
successful!




PREFACE

TO THE AMERICAN EDITION.


This work, which is now presented to the public, has not been reprinted
in America heretofore, notwithstanding it passed through _two_ editions
in England, with honorable approbation, in a short space of time. This
first American edition, it is confidently believed, will be received
with approbation; because the work will be found, on perusal, to answer
to its title; and surely no subject can interest the Christian and
intelligent reader more deeply, than the _illustration of the creation
of the world, as recorded by Moses, the servant of God_.

This volume inspires a deeper interest when the reader is promised that
the illustration of this splendid subject shall be _by means of the
discoveries drawn from the present enlightened state of science_. Thus
the reader will see clearly confirmed this glorious truth: _Religion
and Literature are mutual helpmates to the knowledge, love, and glory
of God._

This important truth has been strangely obscured for several ages; but
is now emerging to light with increased splendor. Nor is it important
to inquire, at this stage of mental improvement throughout the
civilized world, the cause of its obscuration, but rather to rejoice,
that it is now assuming its place as a fundamental principle in sound
philosophy. It is the duty of every benevolent individual to contribute
according to his ability, to an inseparable union of sound literature
and vital religion. The one will secure the interests and success of
the other, and both combined, the glory of God.

Our author, in this respect, has been very happily successful. He has,
generally, illustrated the various parts of the Mosaic Creation, with
perspicuity and precision, and then applied the whole to the production
and support of vital piety in the heart of the reader. So that while
the astonishing magnificence, glory, and wisdom of creation, fills the
contemplative mind with admiration, the heart also is fired with an
ardent and rational devotion.

The character of this volume is, therefore, neither _purely_
scientific, nor _purely_ devotional; but both wisely and happily
combined, under the high and direct sanction of revelation.

It will be apparent to every person, by a mere glance at the size
of the volume, that it is not intended to contain all the _minutiæ_
connected with the Mosaic Creation, but the principal, and most
important facts, so as to make the work suitable to the great mass of
intelligent and thoughtful readers. This object it will be found to
have well accomplished.

The _improvements_, which are mentioned in the title-page, have been
added to the American edition, with design to adapt the work more
nearly to the wants of the American public. They are found incorporated
in the body of the volume, in smaller type, and enclosed in brackets;
which was judged to be the best method.

These additional papers are written at some length, principally on
topics which have become more prominent since our author finished his
work, and which are now exciting intense interest in this country. They
are, therefore, considered to be real and interesting improvements to
the American edition.

Finally, the author of these additional papers, would respectfully
commend this American edition of the Mosaic Creation, illustrated by
means of the present enlightened state of science, _to the friends of_
LITERATURE AND RELIGION COMBINED _for the instruction and salvation of
mankind, and for the glory of God_.

                                                          J. P. DURBIN.




CONTENTS.


CHAPTER I.

ON THE CREATOR OF THE WORLD.

    Distinguished by his name _Jehovah_ -- His essence and
    self-existence expressed by the words I AM --His attribute
    of goodness the glory of all his other perfections -- Elohim
    signifying a Trinity of Persons in a Unity of Essence -- The
    Creation ascribed to one God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
    Spirit -- The first production of matter -- The creatures made
    for the manifesting of God’s attributes, that he might impart
    happiness to them.                                    p. 13-40.


