CHAPTER V.

FOURTH DAY.

_Section_ I.--THE SUN.

    Signs -- Names -- Nature -- Motions -- Form -- Magnitude --
    Distance -- Suspension -- Idolatrous worship of the Sun -- The
    Sun an Emblem of Christ.


On the _fourth day_, “God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of
the heaven to divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs,
and for seasons, and for days, and years: and let them be for lights in
the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was
so. And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night: he made the stars also. And God
set them in the firmament of the heaven, to give light upon the earth,
and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light
from the darkness.” The light which had hitherto been scattered and
confused, was now collected and formed into several luminaries, and so
rendered more glorious and of greater utility.

A sensible and pious author observes, that not only the two great
lights, which were made after a special manner to rule the day and
the night, but, in general, all the lights in the firmament of the
heaven, are said to be for signs and for seasons; or, as some render
the words, “for signs of the seasons.” And indeed this seems to be the
meaning of the inspired writer. As for the manner of expression, “for
signs and for seasons,” it is very common in the Hebrew, as well as in
many other languages, and is a figurative way of speech, expressing
those things disjunctively, which must by the understanding be joined
together. First, these lights are said to be _for signs_, and then the
things are mentioned which they are to signify, namely, the _seasons_,
the _days_, and the _years_: whereas, if we understand the word _signs_
in an indefinite sense, and not confined to what follows, we are
through the whole text left in great uncertainty; seeing that there are
_signs_ appointed _in the heaven_ for some purpose or other, but not
knowing for what. Besides, if we must take all the parts of the text
disjunctively, then “the lights in the firmament” must be taken for
_seasons_, and for _days_, and for _years_, as well as for _signs_.
But we know, that the celestial bodies are not themselves _seasons_,
and _days_, and _years_, but only _signs_ of them, by such particular
motions and aspects, as God, according to the laws of nature, has
ordained them. Neither can I see reason to believe, that every motion
or position of the heavenly bodies has a special signification in it:
though serving in general to display the wisdom and power of God, in
their regular courses. The sun, indeed, which is called the _greater
light_, is said _to rule the day_, as it is by the appearance of
his light, increasing and decreasing, that we measure the length of
the day; and the moon likewise _to rule the night_, partly on the
like account. Thus likewise the sun’s course (if we may so call it)
is a determining sign of the beginning and ending of the year, and
of its various seasons. And in general, the sun, the moon, and the
other lights, are necessary signs of the seasons of sowing, reaping,
planting, and are useful in navigation, as well as other arts.

Costard, in his History of Astronomy, makes some critical remarks on
the name of this greater light. He says, The sun is, by the Greeks,
called Ἡλιος: which is nothing more than the Hebrew word אל _El_,
modelled after the Greek manner of pronunciation, and signifies _Lord_;
the first idolatrous worship being paid to this planet. In the Hebrew
language it is called שמש _Shemesh_, and in the Chaldee שמשא _Shimsha_,
from שמש _Shamesh_, to _minister_, on account of its administering
light and heat to this world. From this property of communicating heat,
it is also called המה _Hammah_. By the Phœnician idolaters it seems
to have been called בעל _Baal_, or בעל שמים _Baal-Shamim_, the _Lord
of Heaven_. And on account of the supposed swiftness of its diurnal
motion from east to west, it had a chariot dedicated to it at Sidon, an
ancient town of Phœnicia. Such a chariot is still seen on the coins of
that place. This superstition was likewise imitated by the idolatrous
Jews: for we read of _the horses which the kings of_ Judah _had given_,
or dedicated, _to the sun_. By the Chaldeans it seems to have been
called בל _Bel_, and by the Assyrians פל _Pul_; and, with the addition,
sometimes of אב _ab_, or אף _ap_, i.e. _father_, אף-פל _Ap-Pul_, or
_Father-Lord_; from whence the Greeks formed their Απολλων, another
name given by them to the sun. The name of this luminary, among the
Romans, was _sol_; given more probably, on account of his scorching
heat in the summer, or from his determining the length of the year by
his course, than because he appeared _solus, alone_, according to the
derivation given by Macrobius.

The _nature_ of the sun is a subject which has not only excited the
most diligent inquiry among men of scientific knowledge, but the
opinions concerning it have passed through a variety of vicissitudes.
The sun being evidently the source of light and heat, was by the
ancients considered to be a globe of fire. But Dr. Herschell’s
discoveries, by means of his immensely large telescopes, tend to prove,
that what we call the _sun_ is only the _atmosphere_ of that luminary:
“that this atmosphere consists of various _elastic fluids_, which are
more or less transparent; that as the clouds surrounding our earth are
probably decompositions of some of the elastic fluids belonging to the
atmosphere itself, so we may suppose that in the vast atmosphere of the
sun similar decompositions may take place, but with this difference,
that the decompositions of the elastic fluids of the sun are of a
_phosphoric_ nature, and are attended by lucid appearances, by giving
out light.” The body of the sun this celebrated astronomer considers as
hidden generally from us, by means of this luminous atmosphere; that
what are called _maculæ_, or _spots_ on the sun, are real openings in
this atmosphere, through which the _opaque body_ of the sun becomes
visible; that this atmosphere itself is not _fiery_ nor _hot_, but
is the instrument which God designed to act on the caloric or latent
heat; and that heat is only produced by the solar light acting on and
combining with the caloric or matter of fire contained in the air, and
other substances which are heated by it.

This indefatigable investigator of the heavenly phenomena shows, by
many substantial proofs, drawn from natural philosophy, that _heat_ is
produced by the sun’s rays only when they act on a calorific medium;
and that they cause the production of heat by uniting with the matter
of fire which is contained in the substances that are heated,--as the
collision of flint and steel will inflame a magazine of gunpowder,
by uniting with its latent fire, and bring the whole into action.
This point is capable of a very clear elucidation. “On the tops of
mountains, and at heights to which the clouds seldom reach to shelter
them from the direct rays of the sun, we always find regions of ice and
snow. Now if the sun’s rays themselves conveyed all the heat we find
on the earth, it would of course be hottest in situations similar to
the tops of mountains, where their course is least interrupted. But
all those who have ascended in balloons confirm the coldness of the
upper regions of the atmosphere; and, therefore, since even on the
earth the heat of the situation depends on the facility with which the
medium yields to the impression of the sun’s rays, we have only to
admit, that, on the sun itself, the fluids composing its atmosphere,
and the matter on its surface, are of such a nature as not to be
capable of any excessive heat from its own rays. It is also a well
known fact, that the focus of the largest burning lens thrown into
the air, will occasion no heat in the place where it has been kept
for a considerable time, although its powers of exciting heat, when
proper bodies are exposed to it, should be sufficient to melt or fuse
the most refractory metals.” That the sun is a luminous, and not an
igneous body, has met with the general consent of modern philosophers;
an opinion to which every new discovery in philosophy gives additional
support.

The telescope, said to have been invented by the children of a
spectacle-maker at Middleburgh, in the year 1590, but first brought
to such a degree of perfection by Galileo as to make any considerable
discoveries in the celestial regions, has led to the most important
results in the science of astronomy. Among which are the _spots_ in
the sun’s disk, by whose motion from west to east the sun is perceived
to revolve upon his own axis in 25 days, 14 hours, 8 minutes. This
revolution of the sun round his own axis is probably not the only
motion which this luminary experiences. There is great reason to
believe that he has another motion, either rectilinear, or round some
indefinitely remote centre of attraction. In this last course, he
carries along with him, through space, the entire system of planets,
satellites, and comets; in the same manner in which each planet
draws his satellites along with him in his motion round the sun. He
communicates light and heat to at least twenty opaque bodies, which
revolve round him, at different distances, in ellipses that differ but
little from circles.

From the motion of the spots, which is sometimes straight and sometimes
curved, we learn that the sun’s axis is not perpendicular to the plane
of his ecliptic, but inclined to it, or the plane of the earth’s
annual orbit, so as to form an angle of about 83 degrees. Christopher
Scheiner, a most diligent observer of these spot’s in the sun’s disk,
published a treatise concerning them in A.D. 1626. These spots are
sometimes seen to increase to a very large size, and to continue for
a considerable time. In the year 1779, there was a spot on the sun’s
disk which was large enough to be seen with the naked eye: it was
divided into two parts, and must have been 50,000 miles in diameter:
this, and other phenomena of the same kind, may be accounted for from
some natural change of the atmosphere. For if some of the fluids which
enter into its composition be of a shining brilliancy, while others are
merely transparent, then any temporary cause removing the lucid fluid,
will permit us to see the body of the sun through the transparent ones.
Dr. Herschell supposes that the spots in the sun are mountains on
its surface, which, considering the great attraction exerted by this
luminary upon bodies placed at its surface, and the slow revolution it
has about its axis, he thinks may be more than 300 miles in height, and
yet not be rendered unstable by the centrifugal force.

    [There appears to be a _discrepancy_ between this last
    statement--“Dr. Herschell supposes that the spots in the sun
    are _mountains_ on his surface;”--and the statement made a
    few paragraphs preceding--“that what are called _maculæ_,
    or _spots_ on the sun, Dr. Herschell thought to be _real
    openings_ in his atmosphere, through which the opake body
    of the sun becomes visible.” These statements must have been
    made at different periods of his observations on the sun,
    which continued about fifteen years. The last statement was,
    doubtless, Dr. Herschell’s mature opinion.

    As this seems to be a settled question among philosophers;
    and as it has induced the enlightened world to regard the sun
    as a _habitable globe_, it will not be out of place to enlarge
    a little on this point.

    The spots on the sun’s surface has led to the conclusion
    above, and also to a determination of the motion of the sun
    around his own axis. They appear to have been observed, for
    the first time, in A.D. 1610, by Fabricius and Harriot; the
    first in Germany, the second in England. It is uncertain
    which noticed them first; but it is certain the discovery was
    _original with both_.

    After the observations of these two fortunate persons
    were known, the attention of the scientific was directed to
    this phenomenon. Scheiner supposed the spots to be _planets_
    which revolved very near the sun. In process of unwearied
    observations, it was ascertained that these spots changed their
    positions. Sometimes two would blend together, and thus run
    into each other. Sometimes one large one would divide into
    two or three smaller ones. They were observed to dilate, and
    contract; and to have umbræ, or shades attending them.

    From these phenomena Galileo and others supposed the solar
    spots were _schoria floating on the burning liquid matter_, of
    which they supposed the sun composed. M. de la Hire, and La
    Lande supposed them to be eminences which occasionally rose
    above the rolling tides of fire, as islands rise above the sea.
    All these theories were on the supposition that the sun was an
    igneous body, in a high state of combustion, by which means he
    dispenses heat and light to the surrounding planets.

    Dr. WILSON, Professor of practical astronomy in the
    University of Glasgow, was the first to conjecture that these
    spots were _depressions_ rather than elevations. This was
    about the year 1769. The Doctor rendered this conjecture very
    probable, by his close and lucid observations and illustrations.

    These spots attracted the attention of the celebrated
    Dr. Herschell in 1779, who continued to observe them closely
    until 1794, and by means of his immensely large and powerful
    telescopes, he clearly established Dr. Wilson’s conjectures,
    _that these spots are openings in the luminous surface of the
    sun, through which his opake body appears_.

    Dr. Herschell regards the real body of the sun to be
    an _opake nucleus_, fit for the habitation of intellectual
    creatures: that he has an atmosphere suited in density and
    height to his own magnitude: that in the higher regions of
    this atmosphere there are _two_ sets of clouds surrounding the
    sun, which are permanently and essentially luminous, being
    _phosphoric_ in their nature. The lower set of these clouds,
    which are _next_ the sun, are less bright, and more dense than
    the upper set. They are designed to serve as a _curtain_ to the
    sun’s body, to prevent a too great intensity of light at his
    real surface; the higher set of clouds, which are visible to
    us, being the principal source, or rather _agent_, of light.

    It is plain from the foregoing theory, that _we_ never see
    the real body of the sun, except when we see the spots on his
    surface: that what we commonly call the sun, are only those
    bright, luminous phosphorescent clouds, which permanently
    surround his body, and which give light _outwards_ to the
    planets, and also _inwards_ to his own inhabitants.

    It will be obvious also to any one, that the inhabitants
    of the sun _cannot see_ any heavenly body, as the stars, and
    planets; because they are inclosed by those clouds, which are
    impenetrable to vision. They may catch a glimpse of a passing
    star through these openings as we do of the sun’s body.

    It is highly probable (see _our_ paper on light, attached
    to our author’s chapter on the same,) that these luminous
    phosphoric clouds _do not actually emit light, or heat_; but
    only _excite_ them at the surfaces of the different planets.
    That is: it is very probable there is a _matter of light_ or
    a _luminiferous ether_, diffused through all existing matter,
    as caloric is, which is _excited by these clouds_, and _thus_
    becomes _visible_, which is light, as latent caloric is
    excited, and becomes sensible, by becoming _free_. Indeed it is
    very probable _that the matter of heat and light is the same_,
    and that heat and light are only _different modifications_ of
    the action of the same substance, excited in a different, or
    higher degree.]

The sun has two _apparent_ motions, namely, the diurnal and annual.
By the _former_ he appears to move round the earth in twenty-four
hours: and by the latter he appears to traverse that circle in the
heavens, called the ecliptic, in the course of a year. These motions,
are, however, only apparent: the sun does not travel round the earth
in twenty four hours: he does not change his place in the heavens at
different seasons of the year. His apparent motions are occasioned
by the earth’s real motions. The sun’s apparent diurnal motion is
occasioned by the earth’s real rotation about its axis: and the sun’s
apparent annual motion is caused by the earth’s real motion in her
orbit, through the whole of which she travels in a little less than 365
days, and 6 hours.

The fixed stars appear every twenty-four hours to make an entire
revolution about the earth. The sun makes the same apparent circuit;
but the apparent diurnal motion of the sun is evidently slower than
that of the fixed stars. This appearance is occasioned by the daily
rotation of the earth on its axis; for while it is turning once on its
axis it advances in its orbit a whole degree; therefore it must make
more than a complete rotation before it can come into the same position
with the sun that it had the preceding day. In the same way, as when
both hands of a watch set off together at any hour, as twelve o’clock,
the minute hand must travel more than the whole circle before it can
overtake the hour hand: hence the difference between solar and sidereal
days, which it is important to understand in explaining the equation of
time.

Though the sun appears to us merely as a circular disk, yet he is
a _spheroid_, higher under his equator than about his poles. The
deception arises from this; that all the parts of his surface are
equally luminous, and consequently there is nothing which can suggest
to us, at the great distance he is from the earth, that the central
parts are more prominent than the sides, although in reality, they are
nearer by half a million of miles.

This luminous body is supposed to be 886,473 English miles in diameter,
about 2,700,000 in circumference, in solid bulk 24,000,000 times as
big as the moon, and 1,384,462 times as big as the earth, and its
superficies in square miles, about 2,236,603,000,000. This _magnitude_
of the sun may appear exaggerated; for our eyes can discover nothing so
large as the earth which we inhabit; and as to this alone we compare
the sun, so we are tempted to believe the testimony of sense rather
than our reason. But what confirms this prodigious size, is his visible
magnitude, notwithstanding the vastly remote point which he occupies
in space. And, concerning this subject, no doubt can remain, if we
admit the calculations of astronomers, which are made on principles
indubitably correct.

The sun does not appear large; but this is owing to his _distance_
from the earth, which is 95,513,794 miles: this is so prodigious, that
a cannon-ball, which is known to move at the rate of eight miles in a
minute, would be something more than twenty-two years in going from
the earth to the sun. If a spectator were placed as near to any of the
fixed stars as we are to our sun, he would see our sun as small as
we see a common star, divested of its circumvolving planets; and in
numbering the stars he would reckon it one of them. But the earth’s
orbit being an ellipse, the sun is not always at an equal distance from
it. When he is in his apogee, that is, furthest from the earth, the sun
is full two millions of miles further from us than when he is in his
perigee, or nearest the earth: nevertheless, we feel greater heat than
when he is in our winter. The difference of temperature between summer
and winter does not depend chiefly upon our nearness to the sun, but
upon the following causes. 1. In summer, the solar rays strike upon the
earth more perpendicularly than in winter, and therefore they act with
greater force than when they strike it obliquely. 2. The rays of the
sun coming more perpendicularly in summer than in winter, have less of
the atmosphere to pass through. 3. In the summer, the sun continues a
longer time above the horizon than below it; and consequently there is
time for the earth to accumulate a greater portion of heat than in the
days of winter. We know, in the longest days, that the sun to us is
above the horizon 16 hours; whereas, in the shortest days, it is not
more than 8 hours visible.[114]

The miraculous suspension of the natural powers of the heavenly
bodies, as recorded in the book of Joshua, shows that they are
upheld, controlled, and directed in their operations, by a Being who
is infinitely wise and powerful. To account for this miracle, and to
ascertain the _manner_ in which it was wrought, has employed the pens
of the ablest _divines_ and _astronomers_, especially of the last
two centuries. For the elucidation of this important fact, I shall
transcribe the view which Dr. Adam Clarke has given of it, which he
considers to be strictly philosophical, consonant to the Pythagorean,
Copernican, or Newtonian system, which is the system of the universe,
laid down in the writings of Moses.

He assumes, as a thoroughly demonstrated truth, that the sun is in
the _centre_ of the system, moving only round his own axis, and the
common centre of the gravity of the planetary system, while all the
planets revolve round _him_; and that his influence is the cause of the
_diurnal_ and _annual_ revolutions of the earth.

“Joshua’s address is in a poetic form in the original, and makes the
two following hemistichs:

    שמש בגבעין דום
    וירח בעמק אילון
    Shemesh, be-Gibêon dom:
    Vyareach, beèmek Aiyalon.
    Sun! upon Gibêon be dumb:
    And the moon on the vale of Aiyalon.

“The effect of this command is related in the following words: וידם
השמש וירח עמד _vayiddom ha_-SHEMESH _ve_-YAREACH _âmad; And the sun was
dumb, or silent, and the moon stood still_. And it is added, _And the
sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about
a whole day._

“I consider, that the word דום _dom_, refers to the _withholding_ or
_restraining_ this influence, so that the cessation of the earth’s
motion might immediately take place. The desire of Joshua was, that the
sun might not sink below the horizon; but as _it_ appeared now to be
over Gibeon, and the _moon_ to be over the valley of Ajalon, he prayed
that they might continue in these positions till the battle should
be ended; or, in other words, that the day should be miraculously
lengthened out.[115]

“Whether Joshua had a correct philosophical notion of the true system
of the universe, is a subject that need not come into the present
inquiry; but whether _he spoke_ with strict propriety on this occasion,
is a matter of importance, because he must be considered as acting
_under the Divine influence_, in requesting the performance of such
a stupendous miracle: and we may safely assert, that no man in his
right mind would have thought of offering such a petition, had he
not felt himself under some Divine afflatus. Leaving, therefore, his
philosophical knowledge out of the question, he certainly spoke as if
he had known that the solar influence was the cause of the earth’s
_rotation_, and therefore, with the strictest philosophic propriety,
he requested, that that influence might be for a time restrained, that
the diurnal motion of the earth might be arrested, through which alone,
the sun could be kept above the horizon, and the day be prolonged. His
mode of expression evidently considers the sun as the great _ruler_ or
_master_ in the system; and all the planets, (or at least the _earth_)
moving in their respective orbits at his _command_. He therefore
desires him, (in the name and by the authority of his Creator) to
suspend his _mandate_ with respect to the earth’s motion, and that of
his satellite, the moon. Had he said, _Earth, stand thou still_--the
cessation of whose diurnal motion was the _effect_ of his command, it
could not have obeyed him; as it is not even the _secondary_ cause
either of its annual motion round the sun, or its diurnal motion round
its own axis. Instead of doing so, he speaks to the sun, the _cause_
(under God) of all these motions, as his great archetype did, when, in
the storm on the sea of Tiberias, he rebuked the _wind_ first, and then
said to the _waves_, Peace, be still! Σιωπα, πεφιμωσο, be _silent_!
be _dumb_! And the effect of this command was, a cessation of the
agitation in the _sea_, because the _wind_ ceased to _command_ it, that
is, to exert its influence upon the waters.

“The terms in this command are worthy of particular note: Joshua does
not say to the sun, _Stand still_, as if he had conceived _him_ to be
_running his race round the earth_; but, be _silent_, or _inactive_;
that is, as I understand it, _restrain thy influence_; no longer act
upon the earth, to cause it to revolve round its axis; a mode of
speech which is certainly consistent with the strictest astronomical
knowledge: and the writer of the account, whether Joshua himself, or
the author of the Book of _Jasher_, in relating the consequence of
this command, is equally accurate, using a word widely different, when
he speaks of the _effect_, the retention of the solar influence had
on the moon: in the first case, the sun was _silent_, or _inactive_,
דום _dom_; in the _latter_, the moon _stood still_, עמד _âmad_. The
_standing still_ of the moon, or its continuance above the horizon,
would be the natural effect of the cessation of the solar influence,
which obliged the earth to discontinue her diurnal rotation, which, of
course, would arrest the moon; and thus both it and the sun were kept
above the horizon, probably for the space of a whole day. As to the
address to the _moon_, it is not conceived in the same terms as that to
the _sun_, and for the most obvious philosophical reason: all that is
said is simply, _and the moon on the vale of Ajalon_, which may be thus
understood: ‘Let the sun restrain his influence, or be inactive, as he
appears now upon Gibeon, _that_ the moon may continue as she appears
now over the vale of Ajalon.’ It is worthy of remark, that every word
in this poetic address is apparently selected with the greatest caution
and precision.

“At the conclusion of the 13th verse, a different expression is used
when it is said, _So, the sun stood still_, it is not דום _dom_, but
עמד _âmad_; ויעמד השמש _vai-yaâmod ha-shemesh_, which expression,
thus varying from _that_ in the command of Joshua, may be considered
as implying, that in order to _restrain his influence_, which I have
assumed to be the _cause_ of the earth’s motion, the sun himself
became _inactive_, that is, ceased to revolve round his own axis;
which revolution is, probably, one cause, not only of the revolution
of the earth, but of all the other planetary bodies in our system, and
might have effected all the planets at the time in question: but this
neither could, nor did produce any disorder in nature; and the delay
of a few hours in the whole planetary motions, dwindles away into an
imperceptible point in the thousands of years of their revolutions. I
need scarcely add, that the _command of Joshua to the sun_, is to be
understood as a _prayer to God_ (from whom the sun derived his being
and continuance) that the effect might be what is expressed in the
command; and therefore it is said, verse 14, ‘that the LORD HEARKENED
UNTO THE VOICE OF A MAN, _for the Lord fought for Israel_.’”

How glorious an object is the sun! too dazzling for mortal eye long to
gaze on: the brightest visible emblem of its adorable Creator. This
luminary rejoices to run his prescribed course, makes our day joyful,
and without his reviving beams we should dwell in perpetual darkness.
He, as the great source of day, distributes light and life through all
nature. Seeds, in the bosom of the earth, feel his vegetative presence,
and unfold themselves. By his diffusive influence he causes the vital
juice to ascend in the tubes of trees, plants, and vegetables; and
clothes them with their various and beautiful foliage. He nourishes the
young fruits, gives them their fine tints, and brings them to maturity.
At his approach, millions of insects awake into life, shine, collect
themselves, and sport in his rays. Animals partake of his benefits,
and without his animating beams they would sink into insensibility
and death: even in caves and dens of the earth, his visitation gives
life. His heat has a pleasing effect on all the juices and fluids in
the human body, which, without his directive or impulsive energy,
would soon become stagnant and useless. He is, by the Divine wisdom
and goodness, placed at such a proper distance from us, that, were he
much nearer, the blood would boil in our veins, and our bodies soon be
either dissolved or calcined: or, were he at a much greater distance,
we should become torpid, and presently be congealed to statues of ice.
The very bowels of the earth partake of his influence, thus producing
many valuable and useful metals. He penetrates the highest mountains,
though composed of stones and rocks. He darts his beams even into the
depths of the ocean, where the watery tribes live and play at his
command.

                                “---- O SUN;
    Soul of surrounding worlds! in whom best seen
    Shines out thy Maker!----
    ’Tis by thy secret, strong, attractive force,
    As with a chain indissoluble bound,
    Thy system rolls entire.----
    INFORMER of the planetary train!
    Without whose quick’ning glance their cumbrous orbs
    Were brute unlovely mass, inert, and dead,
    And not, as now, the green abodes of life!

       *       *       *       *       *

As the sun is the greatest visible glory in the natural world, so it
is selected by the pen of Divine inspiration as the brightest emblem
of the Supreme Being--“The Lord God is a sun.” This great luminary has
been considered by the Heathen as the representative of the Deity,
and as such received religious adoration. According to Mr. Bryant’s
system of Ancient Mythology, the worship of fire is nearly as old as
the flood, having been propagated by the posterity of Ham, in Egypt,
who called themselves Ammonians, and carried this worship with them
wherever they went, erecting their _puratheia_, or fire-temples, in
all their settlements. It is stated, that fire was the primitive,
or at least the principal object of idolatrous worship, and common
to all idolaters from the first apostasy at Babel. For the original
institution of this sacred fire among the Chaldeans, we must go back
to Nimrod, concerning whom the Alexandrian Chronicon asserts, that
“the Assyrians called Nimrod, Ninus; this man taught the Assyrians
to worship fire.” From the Greeks we may trace it backwards to the
Ur of the Chaldeans; on which the learned Classius remarks, that
“Ur is the name of a city wherein the sacred fire was conserved and
worshipped by the Chaldeans, whence it was called _Ur_, which otherwise
signifies _fire_.” Plutarch confesses that the Romans, in the days of
Numa, borrowed their worship of fire from the Greeks at Athens and
Delphi. Numa built a temple of an orbicular form, to represent, as
Plutarch interprets, the system of the heavens; which temple was the
conservatory of a holy and perpetual fire, kindled at first by the
reflections of the sun-beams, and placed in the centre of the building;
the astronomy of that early period placing the sun in the centre of
the world. Fire has such an affinity to light, that the same word has
sometimes comprehended them both. The _Ur_ of the Chaldeans was _fire_;
the _Horus_ of the Egyptians was _light_: and the reason is plain,
because fire and light are united at the body of the sun, and by him
diffused over the world. If, therefore, we consider fire as called into
action by the sun, and bear in mind that the ancient Pythagoreans used
the same term ΠΥΡ to denote both fire and the sun,[116] we shall get at
the root of most of the heathen mythologic divinity.

So universal was the attachment to this fire, that Macrobius undertook
to reduce the names of all the heathen deities to the one object of the
sun and its attributes. He says, “The Egyptians consecrated a lion in
that part of the heavens where the heat of the sun is most powerful,
because that animal seems to derive his nature from the sun, excelling
all other creatures in fire and force, as the sun exceeds the other
lights of heaven. His eyes, likewise, are bright and fiery, as the
sun with a bright and fiery aspect surveys the world. The Lybians
represented their Jupiter Hammon, which was the setting sun, with the
horns of a ram, with which that animal exerts its strength, as the sun
acts by its rays. The worship of Egypt abundantly shows, that the bull
is to be referred to the sun; which is plain from the worship of a bull
at Heliopolis, the city of the sun; and of the bull Apis at Memphis,
where it was an emblem of the sun; and of the other bull called Pacis,
consecrated in the magnificent temple of Apollo at Hermunthis.”[117]

Wheresoever fire was worshipped in the puratheia of antiquity after
the manner of Numa, we may suppose that there the true solar system
prevailed, which places the solar fire in the centre; and that this
was really the universal opinion of the most ancient Heathens.
This doctrine agrees with the name which they gave to the sun in
his physical capacity, calling him _cor cœli_, the heart of the
heaven;[118] which illustration and allusion is probably of very great
antiquity, because it cannot with any propriety be applied to the more
modern Ptolemaic hypothesis. The analogy is very striking; for as the
heart is the centre of the animal system, so is the sun in the centre
of our world: as the heart is the fountain of the blood, so is the sun
the source of light and fire: as the heart is the life of the body, so
is the sun the life and heat of animated nature, and the first mover of
the mundane system: when the heart ceases to beat, the circuit of life
is at an end; and if the sun should cease to act, a total stagnation
would take place throughout the whole frame of nature. Macrobius,
pursuing this analogy, says, “We have before observed, that the sun is
called the fountain of the ethereal fire; therefore the sun is in the
heavens, what the heart is in animals.” Since the circulation of the
blood has been known, this analogy has been taken up with advantage
by the celebrated Hervey himself, who, first of all the moderns,
explained to us with sufficient accuracy this branch of natural
philosophy. He observes, that the heart of animals is the foundation
of life, the chief ruler of all things in the animal system, the sun
of the microcosm, from which flows all its strength and vigor. The
philosophers of antiquity called the sun the heart of the microcosm;
the moderns call the heart the sun of the microcosm. There must be
something very striking in the analogy which is thus convertible, and
has been taken up at both ends by such different persons, at such
remote periods of time.

The savage philosophy of America seems to have comprehended in it the
relation, which we have already noticed, between the animal system and
the frame of nature. Acosta, in his History of the Indies, reports,
that in the human sacrifices of the Mexicans, the high priest pulled
out the heart with his hands, which he showed smoking to the sun, to
whom he offered this heat and fume of the heart, and presently he
turned towards the idol, and cast the heart at his face. A very highly
esteemed correspondent in Ceylon writes, There is a cast of people
inhabiting this island who live wild in the woods, and worship fire
as an emblem of purity; they are called Vandals, and several English
officers have met a premature death by intruding near the holy fire,
which is under a tamarind tree.

With the Persians fire was an object of worship from the earliest
times, under the name of _Amanus_, and _Mithas_; and it is retained as
such at this day by the Geberrs, Gaurs, Guebres, or Ghebers, a sect of
Indian philosophers. Pottinger says, “At the city of Yezd, in Persia,
which is distinguished by the appellation of the Darûb Abadut, or
seat of Religion, the Guebres are permitted to have an Atush Kudu, or
Fire Temple (which, they assert, has had the sacred fire in it since
the days of Zoroaster), in their own compartment of the city; but for
this indulgence they are indebted to the avarice, not the tolerance
of the Persian government, which taxes them at twenty-five rupees
each man.” Hanway informs us, that the Ghebers suppose the throne of
the Almighty is seated in the sun, and hence their worship of that
luminary. “As to fire,” says Grose, “the Ghebers place the spring-head
of it in that globe of fire, the sun, by them called Mithras, or
Mihir, to which they pay the highest reverence, in gratitude for the
manifold benefits flowing from his ministerial omniscience. But they
are so far from confounding the subordination of the servant with the
majesty of the Creator, that they not only attribute no sort of sense
or reasoning to the sun or fire, in any of its operations, but consider
it as a purely passive blind instrument, directed and governed by the
immediate impression on it of the will of God; but they do not even
give that luminary, all glorious as it is, more than the second rank
among his works, reserving the first for the stupendous production of
the Divine power, the mind of man.” The temples are generally built
over subterraneous fires. Rabbi Benjamin observes, “Early in the
morning, they (the Parsees or Ghebers of Ouham) go in crowds to pay
their devotions to the sun, to whom upon all the altars are spheres
consecrated, made by magic, resembling the circles of the sun; and,
when the sun rises, these orbs seem to be inflamed, and turn round with
a great noise. Every one has a censer in his hands, and offers incense
to the sun.”

It is not a little surprising that the descendants of faithful Abraham,
taken into covenant with God, should fall under the influence of this
idolatrous worship! The apostasy of the Israelites in the wilderness
from the true God to the golden calf, was occasioned by a previous
attachment to the sacred rites of the Egyptian idolatry. And the
calves which were afterwards set up in Dan and Bethel, were probably
derived from the same source. The Israelites were not only cautioned
against this worship, but, if the charge of idolatry brought against
an Israelite was proved by unequivocal facts and competent witnesses,
it affected his life. Such was the progress of this idolatrous worship
among this people at one period, that Josiah, king of Judah, took away
out of the temple of the Lord the horses, and burned the chariots,
which the kings, his predecessors, had consecrated to the sun. Job,
in allusion to this vile worship, says, “If I beheld the sun when
it shined, or the moon walking in brightness; if my heart hath been
secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand:[119] this also were
an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have denied the
God that is above.” Ezekiel, in a vision, saw “at the door of the
temple of the Lord, between the porch and the altar, about five and
twenty men, with their backs toward the temple of the Lord, and their
faces toward the east: and they worshipped the sun toward the east,” in
imitation of the Egyptians, Persians, and other Eastern nations.

While the heathen have thus paid idolatrous worship to the sun, some
persons, believing in the truth of revealed religion, have entertained
strange notions concerning this luminary. It is remarkable, observes
a polite writer, that whilst some of the ancients imagined the _sun_
to be the seat of future blessedness, from Psal. xix, 14, “He set his
tabernacle in the sun,” a Mr. Swinden, among the moderns, endeavors
to prove that _hell_ is seated in the sun, chiefly pleading that this
is the grand repository of fire; that its horrible face, viewed by a
telescope, suits the description given of the burning lake; and that
being in the _centre_ of the system, it might be properly said that
wicked men were _cast down into it_. But these are mere hypotheses, and
unworthy of serious consideration.

Notwithstanding this idolatrous worship of the sun, there is a sober
and religious use to be made of this luminary; for being the greatest
visible glory in the natural world it is selected as the brightest
emblem of the Supreme Being--“The Lord God is a sun.” An object thus
illustrious and useful in the regular and wise economy of nature, is
mentioned in the sacred volume as a metaphor fraught with truths of
infinite moment, imparting wisdom to the simple, and instruction to the
ignorant. He admirably represents the unity, glory, and bounty of God.

Viewing our sun in all his paramount qualities to every material
object in nature, how is he eclipsed and surpassed by the Sun of
Righteousness, of whose splendor, grace, and energy this is but a faint
emblem, and from whom issues, in bright and gentle beams, all the
light, life, joy, and hope received and enjoyed in the Christian world.
The one is the most magnificent creature among the vast variety of
objects which surround us, but the other is the source of all that is
excellent, attractive, and beneficial, in the whole range of material
causes and effects, as well as in the nature, extent, and perpetuity of
the kingdom of grace. The material sun runs its course from day to day,
with unwearied regularity, activity, and ardor, and thus completes its
circuit according to its original destination. And did not our adorable
Saviour also finish the great career of our redemption, after he held
performed all those miracles, and published his own everlasting gospel,
which are the sublime and interesting themes of the sacred writers, by
offering himself on the consecrated altar a sacrifice for the sins of
mankind? The former diffuses light, vitality, vegetation, and felicity
through the whole mass of animated nature in our planetary system. And
does not the other likewise dissipate the ignorance which darkens the
intellectual regions, enlighten our minds in all saving knowledge, and
produce in the human heart every grace and virtue?

Were our natural sun to withdraw his beams, or absent himself from
the centre of our system for any given time, the planets would start
out of their orbits; darkness, black as night, would instantly spread
itself over the whole mass, and “chaos come again.” And if the glorious
Luminary of the moral world were to hide his face behind a thick cloud
of gathering vengeance and judicial desertion, this would introduce
into the soul alarming fears and tumultuous passions, which would exist
in a state of opposition and conflict. Those who have been brought out
of the darkness of ignorance, wickedness and misery, into the light
of knowledge, holiness and happiness, by Christ, who is the light of
the world, should be careful to walk in the light of his countenance
all the days of their life. Does not the earth return the fructifying
warmth of the sun, and all his genial effects, in a profusion of
verdure, foliage, and flowers? Do not all the irrational tribes
joyfully greet his rising every morning, and bask in his presence
through the day with great delight? All the orbs which revolve round
him, and are preserved and cherished in their respective spheres by his
ministry, pay him perpetual homage by maintaining invariable harmony
and order. And being thus taught by natural objects, what is due for
the reception of so many mercies, surely it is an unquestionable duty
that we guard against every thing which would prevent us doing the will
of our best benefactor.

Christian believers, rich in the bloom of holiness, and ripening for
the harvest of glory, are said to be “clothed with the sun.” It is the
gracious promise, on which all their hopes and wishes confidently rely,
that the “righteous shall” ultimately “shine as the sun in the kingdom
of their Father.”[120] Thus it is written, “The path of the just is as
the shining light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day.”
In the path of the just there is a progress from a less to a greater
light: it does not only grow clearer, but increases in clearness till
it is light in perfection; advancing from the break of day to the sun
rising, and then to the brightness of noon-day.

    “JESUS, let all thy lovers shine,
      illustrious as the sun,
    And bright with borrow’d rays divine,
      Their glorious circuit run.

    Beyond the reach of mortals, spread
      Their light where’er they go;
    And heavenly influences shed,
      On all the world below.

    As giants, may they run their race,
      Exulting in their might:
    As burning luminaries, chase
      The gloom of hellish night.

    As the bright Sun of Righteousness,
      Their healing wings display;
    And let their lustre still increase
      Unto the perfect day.”

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ II.--THE MOON.

    Names -- Dimensions -- Motions -- Seasons -- Phases --
    Harvest Moon -- Moon’s Surface -- Aërial Stones -- Eclipses --
    Moonlight -- Epithets -- Religious Improvement.


The _moon_ is called a _great light_, but _less_ than the sun. Moses
does not here speak philosophically, according to her bulk, but to the
proportion of light she affords us, which is more than all the planets
in the solar system and all the fixed stars put together.

    “He smooth’d the rough-cast moon’s imperfect mould,
    And comb’d her beamy locks with sacred gold;
    Be thou, said he, Queen of the mournful night,--
    And as he spoke, she rose o’erclad wish light,
    With thousand stars attending on her train.”

The moon is not a primary planet, but only a satellite, or secondary
planet, attendant on our earth, round which she revolves, and along
with which she is carried round the sun.

“The moon,” says Dr. O. Gregory, “is a dark, or opake body, shining
principally with the light she receives from the sun. If she shone by
a light of her own, we should feel a sensible warmth from her rays;
but it is a light reflected from the sun with which she shines, and
is so exceedingly weak and languid, that the greatest burning glass
will not collect enough to make any sensible degree of heat. This has
been accounted for, and those who have gone through the computation
assert that the light of the full moon is ninety thousand times less
than day-light.” The ancients early discovered, that the moon had no
light of its own, but shone with that which it reflected from the sun.
This, after Thales, was the sentiment of Anaxagoras and Empedocles, who
thence accounted not only for the mildness of its splendor, but the
imperceptibility of its heat, which our experiments confirm.

In the Hebrew language the moon is called ירה _Yarah_, or, more
strictly speaking, says Parkhurst, the _lunar light_, or _flux of
light, reflected from the moon’s body_, or _orb_. That this is the true
sense of the word is evident from several passages of Scripture, one of
which is, “For the precious (produce) נרש ירחים _put forth by_--what?
Not the _orbs_ of the moon surely (for the orb is but _one_), but _by
the fluxes_ or _streams of light_ reflected from it, which are not
only _several_ but _various_, according to the moon’s different phases
and aspects in regard to the sun and the earth. And this may lead us
to the radical idea of the word ירח; for as יחר and אחר,‎ יחד and אתד &c.,
are very nearly related to each other respectively, so likewise
I conjecture that ירח is to ארה, in sense as well as in sound, and
consequently that it signifies _to go in a track_ or _in a constant
customary road or way_; and this affords us a good descriptive name
of the _lunar light_; for, _Behold_, says _Bildad_ in Job, chap. xxv,
5, _even to the_ ירח or lunar light ולא יאהיל _and he_ (God) _hath
not pitched a tent_ (for it); as he has for the שמש or _solar light_.
No! The _lunar_ stream has _fixed station_ from whence it issues,
but together with the orb which reflects it, and which like a human
_traveller_ moves now a quicker, now a slower pace, is continually
_performing its appointed journey_, and _proceeding in a constant_,
though regularly irregular _track_.”

The Greeks called the moon μηνη, which may be considered as a
derivative from μην. Parkhurst says, This word may be derived either
from μηνη, _the moon_, by the phases of which the month is reckoned,
or else it may be deduced from the Hebrew מנה _manah_, _to number_,
_compute_, as being computed by the lunar phases. And it is probable
that the first _computations_ of time were made by the _revolutions_ of
the moon. It is obvious to remark, that not only these two Greek words,
but also the Latin _mensis_, a month, and the English _moon_, _month_,
are ultimately derived from the same Hebrew מנה. Leigh observes, that
“the Hebrews call the moon and a month by the same name, because the
moon is renewed every month. The Greeks also call σεληνη, from σελας,
because it every day renews its light.” Parkhurst on the word σεληνη
says, “The Greek etymologists, and particularly Plato, deduce it from
σελας νεον, _new light_, because its light is continually renewed.”
But the learned Goguet says; “The Greeks gave to the _moon_ the name
_selene_, which comes from the Phœnician word (לן or לון namely)
which signifies _to pass the night_; whence also we may observe is
plainly derived the Latin name of the moon, _luna_.” From _lun_ with
the termination _a_, comes _luna_, and this name is given to the planet
from her _changing_ or appearing under different phases.

As to the _dimensions_ of the moon, according to the most accurate
calculations, her diameter is 2,175 miles, the circumference 6,831
miles, the surface contains 14,898,750 square miles, and its solidity
5,408,246,000 cubical ones. Her bulk is equal to about a fiftieth part
of our earth, and her mean distance from the earth is about 240,000
miles.

The _motions_ of the moon are most of them very irregular. The only
equable motion she has, is her revolution on her own axis. The time in
which she moves round her axis is about 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes,
5 seconds; and her revolution through an elliptical orbit is performed
in the same time as her rotation on her axis, moving about 2,290 miles
every hour. Her revolution round her axis exactly in the same time
that she goes round the earth, is the reason she always turns the same
face towards us: she has only one day and one night in the course of a
month. From a long series of observations, it has been ascertained that
the moon makes a complete revolution in 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes, 5
seconds; this is called the periodical month; but, if we refer to the
time passed from new moon to new moon again, the month consists of 29
days, 12 hours, and 44 minutes, which is called the synodical month.
This difference is occasioned by the earth’s annual motion in its
orbit. Thus, if the earth had no motion, the moon would make a complete
round in 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes, and 5 seconds; but while the
moon is describing her journey the earth has passed through nearly a
twelfth part of its orbit, which the moon must also describe before
the two bodies come again into the same position that they before held
with respect to the sun: this takes up so much more time as to make
her synodical month equal to 29 days, 12 hours, and 44 minutes. The
motions of the hour and minute hands of a watch may serve to give some
idea of the periodical and synodical revolutions of the moon; for when
the minute hand has performed a complete revolution, it has yet some
distance to go to obtain a coincidence with the hour hand, similar to
that which it had the preceding hour.

We have observed that the same face is turned towards us during
the whole of the moon’s revolution, and that the other half of her
surface is never visible to us. This arises from the two motions we
have noticed, which, with regard to our view of the moon, appear to
counteract each other. Her revolution round the earth is performed
towards the _east_; while the revolution upon her own axis is performed
towards the _west_: so that, one of these motions turns as much of her
face from us, as the other turns towards us. And from the moon’s axis
being inclined to the plane of her orbit, sometimes one of her poles
is inclined towards the earth, and sometimes the other: in consequence
of which, we see more or less of her polar regions in different periods
of her revolution. When the moon is in _perigee_, or nearest distance
from the earth, her motion is quickest; and when in _apogee_, or most
remote distance, her motion is slowest.

The length of the day is equal to our lunar month, for all that time
is included in one revolution round her axis. Her days and nights,
therefore, will constantly be of the same length, or almost fifteen
of our days each. The year will be exactly the same with our year;
because, being an attendant on the earth, she must go round the sun
in the same time as that does. Her difference of seasons will be much
less than on our earth, having only a small inclination of her axis
of six degrees and a half; so that the variation between her summer’s
heat and her winter’s cold must be comparatively inconsiderable. Hence
there will be only thirteen degrees of Torrid Zone, on some parts
most opposite the sun, and thirteen degrees of Frigid Zone on those
contiguous to her poles; which consequently must leave seventy-seven
degrees for what we should call her Temperate Zones, both in the north
and south parts from her Equator. Our earth, unquestionably, performs
the office of a moon to the moon, waxing and waning regularly, but
appearing thirteen times as large, and, of course, affording her
thirteen times as much light as she does to us. When she changes to us,
the earth appears full to her; when she is in her first quarter to us,
the earth is in its third quarter to her; and _vice versâ_. To the moon
the earth seems to be the largest body in the universe, and must indeed
be a most magnificent sight.

On the supposition that the moon is inhabited, it may be observed, that
those who are placed about the middle of the surface, or face next to
us, will constantly see our earth over their heads, and increasing and
decreasing in light, like as the moon itself appears to us. Those who
are situated near the borders, whether on the right or left, or upon
the top or bottom, will also constantly have the same appearance in the
opposite part of the horizon. But those who live on the side of the
moon which is not presented to us, will know nothing of our earth, or
at least, they will never have an opportunity of seeing this large and
wonderful moon, without travelling perhaps more than 1,500 of our miles
on the surface of that luminary. To those who live on this side of the
moon, or travel to it on any account, as we may pass from the northern
into the southern hemisphere of our globe, the earth, indeed, when at
full to them, will appear to be more than three times as broad as the
moon does to us, and to communicate, as has been already mentioned,
about thirteen times as much light to her, as she does to us when at
the full.

The moon, possessing no native light, shines entirely by light received
from the sun, and which is reflected to us from her surface. That half
of her which is towards the sun is enlightened, and the other half is
dark and invisible: hence, when she is between us and the sun, she
disappears, because her dark side is then towards us. Whilst making
her revolution round the heavens, she undergoes a continual change of
appearance. She is sometimes on our meridian at midnight, and therefore
in that part of the heavens which is opposite to the sun; when she
appears with a face completely circular, which is called a _full
moon_. As she moves eastward, a part of her dark side comes forward
on the western side, and, in a little more than seven days, reaches
to the meridian, at about six in the morning, having the appearance
of a semi-circle, with the convex side turned towards the sun: this
crescent gradually becomes more slender, till, about fourteen days
after the full moon, being so near the sun, and in a line between that
luminary and our earth, she is rendered invisible to us, from the
superior splendor of that orb of light. About four days after this
disappearance, she may be seen in the evening, a little to the eastward
of the sun, in the form of a fine crescent,[121] as before, but having
her convex side turned from the sun. Travelling still towards the
east, the crescent becomes wider; and when advanced to the meridian,
about six in the evening, she again bears the appearance of a bright
semi-circle, with the same difference that we observed of the crescent,
that is, its convex side is now turned _from_ the sun. Advancing still
more eastward, the semi-circular moon widens into an oval shape, till
at last, in about twenty-nine days and a half from the last opposition
to the sun, she is again in the same situation, and appears a full moon.

The following account of the _harvest moon_, so called, taken from
the Pantalogia, will no doubt be acceptable to the reader.--It is
remarkable that the moon, during the week in which she is full about
the time of harvest, rises sooner after sun-setting than she does in
any other full moon week in the year. By this means, she affords an
immediate supply of light after sun-set, which is very beneficial for
the harvest and gathering in the fruits of the earth; and hence this
full moon is distinguished from all the others in the year, by calling
it the harvest-moon.

To conceive the reason of this phenomenon, it may first be considered,
that the moon is always opposite to the sun when she is full; that she
is full in the signs Pisces and Aries in our harvest months, those
being the signs opposite to Virgo and Libra, the signs occupied by the
sun about the same season; and because those parts of the ecliptic
rise in a shorter space of time than others, as may easily be shown
and illustrated by the celestial globe: consequently, when the moon is
about her full in harvest, she rises with less difference of time, or
more immediately after sun-set, than when she is full at other seasons
of the year.

In our winter, the moon is in Pisces and Aries about the time of her
first quarter, when she rises about noon; but her rising is not then
noticed, because the sun is above the horizon. In spring, the moon is
in Pisces and Aries about the time of her change; at which time, as she
gives no light, and rises with the sun, her rising cannot be perceived.
In summer, the moon is in Pisces and Aries about the time of her last
quarter; and then, as she is on the decrease, and rises not till
midnight, her rising usually passes unobserved. But in autumn, the moon
is in Pisces and Aries at the time of her full, and rises soon after
sun-set for several evenings successively; which makes her regular
rising very conspicuous at that time of the year.

And this would always be the case, if the moon’s orbit lay in the plane
of the ecliptic. But as her orbit makes an angle of 5° 18ʹ with the
ecliptic, and crosses it only in the two opposite points called the
nodes, her rising when in Pisces and Aries will sometimes not differ
above 1h. 40min. through the whole of seven days; and at other times,
in the same two signs, she will differ three hours and a half in the
time of her rising in a week, according to the different positions of
the nodes with respect to these signs; which positions are constantly
changing, because the nodes go backward through the whole ecliptic in
18 years 225 days.

This revolution of the nodes will cause the harvest moons to go through
a whole course of the most and least beneficial states, with respect to
the harvest, every nineteen years. The following table shows in what
years the harvest-moons are least beneficial as to the times of their
rising, and in what years they are most beneficial, from the year 1790
to 1861: the column of years under the letter L are those in which the
harvest-moons are least of all beneficial, because they fall about
the descending node; and those under the letter M are the most of all
beneficial, because they fall about the ascending node.

HARVEST MOONS.

     L     M     L     M     L     M     L     M
    1790  1798  1807  1816  1826  1835  1844  1853
    1791  1799  1808  1817  1827  1836  1845  1854
    1792  1800  1809  1818  1828  1837  1846  1855
    1793  1801  1810  1819  1829  1838  1847  1856
    1794  1802  1811  1820  1830  1839  1848  1857
    1795  1803  1812  1821  1831  1840  1849  1858
    1796  1804  1813  1822  1832  1841  1850  1859
    1797  1805  1814  1823  1833  1842  1851  1860
          1806  1815  1824  1834  1843  1852  1861
                      1825

When the moon is viewed through a good telescope, there appear vast
cavities and asperities on various parts of her face, some of them
extremely resembling deep caverns and vallies, and others mountains.

    “Turn’d to the sun direct, her spotted disk
    Shows mountains rise, umbrageous vales descend,
    And caverns deep, as optic tube descries.”

The cavities, it is conjectured, do not contain water; hence it is
concluded that there can be no extensive seas and oceans, like those
which cover a great part of our earth. It is, however, imagined that
there may be springs and RIVERS. The moon seems, as a learned author
has observed, in almost every respect to be a body similar to our
earth, to have its surface diversified by hill and dale, mountains
and vallies, rivers and lakes. With regard to a lunar atmosphere, the
existence of which has long been a subject of much dispute, it is
now generally admitted.[122] The irregularity of the moon’s surface,
arising from hills and vallies, renders her more capable of reflecting
the sun’s rays to us. Though philosophers have differed widely in their
ideas concerning the materials of the moon’s mountains, some from their
brilliancy even supposing them to be rocks of diamonds, there is no
diversity of opinion as to their use. If smooth and polished, like a
mirror, or covered with water, she would not reflect and distribute
the light received from the sun. In some positions she would show us
his image no larger than a single point, and with a lustre that would
injure our sight: but roughened by these hills and vallies, her surface
returns the sun’s light to us in an equable and pleasant manner, and
enables us to examine her with ease and precision.

That the moon is a planet similar to our earth, is a sentiment very
early adopted. Orpheus is the most ancient author, whose opinion on
this subject has come down to us. Proclus presents us with three verses
of that philosopher, wherein he positively asserts, that the moon
was another earth, having in it mountains, vallies, &c. Pythagoras,
who followed Orpheus in many of his opinions, taught likewise, that
the moon was an earth like ours, replete with animals, whose nature
he presumed not to describe, though he was persuaded they were of a
more noble and elegant kind than ours, and not liable to the same
infirmities. Stobæus gives us the opinion of Democritus about the
nature of the moon, and the cause of those spots which we see upon
its disk. That great philosopher imagined, that “those spots were
no other than shades, formed by the excessive height of the lunar
mountains,” which intercepted the light from the lower parts of that
planet, where the valleys formed themselves into what appeared to us
as shades or spots. Plutarch went further, alleging, that there were
embosomed in the moon, vast seas and profound caverns: he says, those
deep and extensive shades which appear upon the disk of that planet,
must be occasioned by _the vast seas_ it contains, which are incapable
of reflecting so vivid a light, as the more solid and opake parts; “or
by caverns extremely wide and deep, wherein the rays of the sun are
absorbed,” whence those shades and that obscurity which we call the
spots of the moon. And Zenophanes said, that those immense cavities
were inhabited by another race of men, who lived there just as we do
upon earth.

        “And oft I think, fair planet of the night,
        That in thy orb the wretched may have rest.”

    [The height of the moon’s atmosphere is supposed to be
    1.622 miles; or a little more than a mile and a half.

    The observations on the moon have been so accurate, and
    so often repeated, by means of the best glasses, that the
    _map of the moon_ is now considered nearly perfect. On this
    map is laid down the position of _spots_, _cavities_, and
    _mountains_, representing their _size_, _height_, _depth_, and
    _peculiarities_. They are very numerous.

    Some of these mountains are full _five miles high_. They
    descend in height, from the highest to small elevations.

    Several astronomers, particularly Herschell, has distinctly
    observed and described _volcanos_ in the moon, _actually
    flaming_; and others in an _expiring state_. _Craters_ of
    extinct volcanos are visible, and so numerous as to indicate
    very clearly, that volcanic action was once very extensive and
    powerful in the moon.

    Some of the _cavities_ are more than _three miles and a
    half deep_, and sixteen broad at the surface. _Ferguson’s
    Astronomy, additional chapters by Dr. Brewster._]

That stones have fallen from the _clouds_ or from much _higher
regions_, is a fact which has recently been very closely investigated,
and also fully demonstrated. A table, constructed by M. Izarn, a
foreign chemist, exhibits a variety of facts of this kind, from which
the following is an extract.

  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |                     |    _Places where_    |      _Period of_     |
  |   _Substances._     |     _they fell._     |     _their fall._    |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  Shower of stones.  |        At Rome.      |     Under Tullus     |
  |                     |                      |      Hostilius.      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  Shower of stones.  |        At Rome.      | Consuls, C. Martius, |
  |                     |                      |   and M. Torquatus.  |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | A very large stone. |    Near the river    |    Second year of    |
  |                     |    Negos, Thrace.    |  the 78th Olympiad.  |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | Three large stones. |      In Thrace.      | Year before J.C. 452.|
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  Stone of 72 lbs.   |     Near Larissa,    |    January, 1706.    |
  |                     |      Macedonia.      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | About 1,200 stones; |      Near Padua,     |       In 1510.       |
  |    one 120 lbs.     |       in Italy.      |                      |
  | Another of 60 lbs.  |                      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | Another of 59 lbs.  |   On Mount Vasier,   |  November 27, 1627.  |
  |                     |       Provence.      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  Two large stones,  |       Liponas,       |   September, 1753.   |
  |  weighing 20 lbs.   |      in Bresse.      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    A stony mass.    |   Niort, Normandy.   |       In 1750.       |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  A stone of 7½ lbs. | At Luce, in Le Maine.| September 13, 1768.  |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |      A stone.       |  At Aire, in Artois. |       In 1768.       |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |      A stone.       |    In Le Contenin.   |       In 1768.       |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  Extensive shower   |   Environs of Agen.  |    July 24, 1790.    |
  |     of stones.      |                      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  About 12 stones.   |   Sienna, Tuscany.   |     July, 1794.      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    A large stone    |     Wold Cottage,    |  December 13, 1795.  |
  |     of 56 lbs.      |       Yorkshire.     |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | A stone of 10 lbs.  |     In Portugal.     |  February 19, 1796.  |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | A stone of 120 lbs. |   Salé, Department   |   March 17, 1798.    |
  |                     |     of the Rhone.    |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  Shower of stones.  | Benares, East Indies.|  December 19, 1798.  |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |  Shower of stones.  |    At Plann, near    |    July 3, 1753.     |
  |                     |    Tabor, Bohemia.   |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |    Mass of iron,    |       America.       |    April 5, 1800.    |
  |   70 cubic feet.    |                      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     Mass of do.     |  Abakauk, Siberia.   |      Very old.       |
  |    14 quintals.     |                      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | Shower of stones.   |      Barboutan,      |     July, 1789.      |
  |                     |    near Roquefort.   |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     Large stone,    |      Ensisheim,      |  November 7, 1492.   |
  |       260 lbs.      |     Upper Rhine.     |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     Two stones,     |     Near Verona.     |       In 1762.       |
  |  200 and 300 lbs.   |                      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  | A stone of 20 lbs.  |      Sales, near     |   March 12, 1798.    |
  |                     |    Ville Franche.    |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+
  |     Several do.     |     Near L'Aigle,    |   April 26, 1803.    |
  | from 10 to 17 lbs.  |       Normandy.      |                      |
  +---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+

The stones generally appear luminous in their descent, moving in
oblique directions, with very great velocities, and commonly with a
hissing noise. They are frequently heard to explode, or burst, and
seem to fly in pieces, the larger parts falling first. They often
strike the earth with such force, as to sink several inches below the
surface. They are always different from the surrounding bodies, but is
every case are similar to one another, being semi-metallic, coated with
a thin black encrustation. They bear strong marks of recent fusion.
Chemists have found, on examining these stones, that they very nearly
agree in their nature and composition, and in the proportions of their
component parts.

Their specific gravities are generally about three or four times that
of water, being heavier than common stones. From the above account,
it is reasonable to conclude, that they have all the same origin. I
believe it is generally agreed among philosophers, that all these
aërial stones, chemically analysed, evince the same properties;
and that no stone, found on our earth, possesses exactly similar
properties, nor in the same proportions: this is an extraordinary
circumstance, and deserves particular notice. At the sitting of the
Society of Natural History at Halle, July 6, 1816, M. Chladni submitted
to the inspection of the members present, a collection of meteoric
stones, or stones fallen from the atmosphere; and to the exhibition, he
added his own observations on their nature and formation. Dr. Kæstner,
taking up the subject in the same point of view which M. Chladni had
given of it, admitted that these stones are not natives of this earth,
but of other celestial bodies; to which he added, that the chemical
analysis of them proves, that many of the same substances as are found
in our mountains, and among the solids of our globe, are also component
parts of the solids and mountains of other globes; certainly of those
celestial bodies which are nearest to us; and probably of the others
which form our planetary system.

That these stones are projected from lunar volcanos, very strong
reasons have been assigned to prove. As 1. Volcanos in the moon have
been observed by means of the telescope. 2. The lunar volcanos are
very high, and the surface of that globe suffers frequent changes,
as appears by the late observations of Schroëter. 3. If a body be
projected from the moon to a distance greater than that of the point
of equilibrium, between the attraction of the earth and the moon,
it will, on the known principles of gravitation, fall to the earth.
4. That a body may be projected from the lunar volcanos beyond the
moon’s influence, is not only possible, but very probable; for on
calculation it is found, that four times the force usually given to a
twelve pounder, will be quite sufficient for this purpose: it is to
be observed, that the point of equilibrium is much nearer; and that a
projectile from the moon will not be so much retarded as one from the
earth, both on account of the moon’s rarer atmosphere, and its less
attractive force.[123]

Of all the phenomena of the heavens, there are none which engage the
attention of mankind more than _eclipses_ of the sun and moon; and to
those who are unacquainted with the principles, nothing can appear more
extraordinary than the accuracy, even to a second of time, with which
they are predicted. Eclipses of the sun are occasioned by the shadow of
the intervening new moon falling on the earth, and those of the moon
are caused by the shadow of the earth falling on the full moon, the
earth at the full moon being always in a direction between the sun and
moon.

It is ascertained that, for an eclipse of the sun to be annular, the
most favorable circumstances will be when the sun is in perigee, and
the moon in apogee; and, for an eclipse to be total, the most favorable
case is when the sun is in apogee, and the moon in perigee. The motion
of the moon being much swifter than that of the earth, and the motions
of both being directed from west to east, an eclipse of the sun must
always begin in the western edge of the sun; and as the moon is a great
deal less than the earth, her shadow forms a cone, the section of which
is much less than the earth, so that a small portion of the earth only
can, at any time, be involved in the shadow at one time. Hence it is,
that an eclipse of the sun is not perceived, at the same instant, in
every part of the hemisphere that is turned towards the sun, and that,
in some parts, it will not be seen at all. For instance, a friend of
mine, writing from Ceylon in the month of May, (1817,) says, “On the
16th of this month, we had a fine sight of an eclipse of the sun about
noon: I think about 3-4ths of the surface were covered.” But in this
country we had no solar eclipse at the same time. Again, in different
situations, different parts of the sun’s disk will appear eclipsed;
but, on the contrary, an eclipse of the moon is perceived, at the same
moment, in every part of the earth where this planet is visible, and
appears every where to occupy the same portion of her disk. Hence,
eclipses of the sun are much less frequent in any particular place than
eclipses of the moon.

If the nodes of the moon constantly corresponded with the same points
in the heavens, the eclipses of the sun or moon might be expected in
the same months, and even on the same days; but as the nodes shift
backwards, or contrary to the earth’s annual motion, about 19½ degrees
in a year, the same node will come round about nineteen days sooner
every year than in the preceding. From the time, therefore, when the
ascending node passes by the sun, as seen from the earth, there will be
only 173 days before the descending node passes by him. If, then, at
any time of the year, we have eclipses about either of the nodes, their
return may be expected in about 173 days, in or near the other.

It may be further observed, that, after the sun, moon, and nodes, have
been once in a line of conjunction, they will return nearly to the same
state again in 228 lunations, or eighteen years and ten days; so that
the same node which was in conjunction with the sun and moon at the
beginning of the first of these lunations, will be within less than
half a degree of the line of conjunction with the sun and moon again,
when the last of these lunations is completed. In that time, therefore,
there will be a regular period of eclipses for many ages.

These things being properly considered, it will not be difficult to
conceive how astronomers are able to foretell the exact time when any
phenomenon of this kind will happen; for, as an eclipse can only take
place at the time of a new or full moon, the principal requisites are,
to determine the number of mean conjunctions and oppositions that
will happen every year, and the true places of the sun and moon in
their orbits at each of those times. And, if from this, when proper
calculations have been made, it appears that the two luminaries are
within the proper limits of the node, there will be an eclipse.
To facilitate these operations, we have astronomical tables ready
computed, by which the places of the heavenly bodies, and every other
particular required, may be easily found for any given instant of
time.[124]

With delight we reflect on the invaluable benefits which this _lesser
light_ confers on our globe. She sometimes appears visible in the
presence of the sun; but how faint and pale is her shining! God has
appointed her to _rule the night_, and give light to men. How cheerless
and uncomfortable would our nights be, were we destitute of the light
which this faithful and inseparable companion of our earth dispenses!
How strange are her eclipses, occasioned by the earth interposing
and shading her face! but, they are highly useful in astronomical,
geographical, and chronological calculations. How salutary, too, is her
attractive influence, which sways the ocean, and actuates the world
of waters; causing the swelling of the tides, and perpetuating the
regular returns of ebb and flow; by which the liquid element itself
is preserved from putrefaction, and the surrounding continents from
infection and disease.

A moonlight night has led the greatest poets in every age to vie with
each other in attempting to describe its beauty and use. Among all
the treasures of modern poetry, I know not one superior, for pleasing
imagery, and variety of numbers, to that of Milton:

    “Now came still evening on, and twilight grey
    Had in her sober livery all things clad.
                    Now glowed the firmament
    With living sapphires: Hesperus, that led
    The starry host, rode brightest, till the Moon,
    Rising in clouded majesty, at length,
    Apparent queen, unveiled her peerless light.
    And o’er the dark her silver mantle threw.”

Homer, in the eighth book of the Iliad, gives us a description of a
fine moonlight night, which is esteemed a master-piece of nocturnal
painting. Milton’s pencil leaves off where that of Homer begins:

    “As when the Moon, refulgent lamp of night,
    O’er heaven’s clear azure sheds her sacred light;
    When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
    And not a cloud o’ercasts the solemn scene;
    Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
    And stars unnumbered gild the glowing pole;
    O’er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
    And tip with silver every mountain’s head;
    Then shine the vales; the rocks in prospect rise;
    A flood of glory bursts from all the skies;
    The conscious swains rejoicing in the sight,
    Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light.”

The wise Son of Sirach, although his writings are not admitted into
the sacred canon, deserves to be heard on this subject. He says, “The
Lord made the moon also to serve in her season, for a declaration of
times, and a sign of the world. From the moon is the sign of feasts,
a light decreaseth in her perfection. The month is called after her
name, increasing wonderfully in her changing, being an instrument of
the armies above, shining in the firmament of heaven; the beauty of
heaven, the glory of the stars, an ornament giving light to the highest
places of the Lord. At the commandment of the Holy One they will stand
in their order, and never faint in their watches.” This is paraphrased
with great elegance and spirit by Mr. Broome:

    “By thy command the moon, as day-light fades,
    Lifts her broad circle in the deep’ning shades;
    Arrayed in glory, and enthroned in light,
    She breaks the solemn terrors of the night;
    Sweetly inconstant in her varying flame,
    She changes still, another, yet the same!
    Now in decrease, by slow degrees she shrouds
    Her fading lustre in a vale of clouds;
    Now of increase, her gathering beams display
    A blaze of light, and give a paler day;
    Ten thousand stars adorn her glittering train,
    Fall when she falls, and rise with her again;
    And o’er the deserts of the sky unfold
    Their burning spangles of sidereal gold:
    Through the wide heavens she moves serenely bright,
    Queen of the gay attendants of the night:
    Orb above orb in sweet confusion lies,
    And with a bright disorder paints the skies.”

Many striking epithets have been given to this refulgent lamp of the
night, some of which are noticed by Nichols in his Conference with
a Theist. Tully asserts, that the moon was called _Diana_, because
she made a day of the night, whilst all other stars did not make a
twilight. Æschylus, a tragic poet, born at Athens 397 before the
Christian era, calls her πρεσβυϛον αϛρων, the ancient, the governess,
or mother of the stars. Apollinaris, bishop of Hierapolis, in Phrygia,
about A.D. 171, denominates her, νυχιων βασιλεια αταρπων, the queen
of the nightly paths. Tynesius, who flourished A.C. 400, styles
her, ποιμην νυχιων θεων, the princess of the nocturnal gods: which
is consonant to Horace’s lucidum cœli decus--syderum regina. Virgil
likewise calls her, astrorum decus, the ornament of the stars. Seneca
terms her, obscuri dea clara mundi, the bright goddess of the obscure
world; and also clarumque cœli sydus et noctis decus, the bright star
of heaven, and the grace of the night. Statius, who lived at Rome in
the reign of Domitian, in his Thebais, terms her, arcanæ moderatrix
Cynthia noctis, the moon the governess of silent night. “Fair as the
moon,” was an ancient manner of describing beauty, and, it is said,
still prevails in the East.

Among the ancients, observes Mr. Butler, the moon was an object of
prime respect. By the Hebrews, she was more regarded than the sun,
and they were more inclined to worship her as a deity. The _new_
moons, or first days of every month, were observed as festivals among
them, which were celebrated with sound of trumpets, entertainments,
and sacrifice. The moon was the goddess of the Phœnicians, whom they
worshipped under the name Ashtoreth, or Astarte. The moon is sometimes
in Scripture styled, the “queen of heaven.” She is likewise styled,
“the goddess of the Zidonians,” and “the abomination of the Zidonians,”
as she was worshipped very much in Zidon, or Sidon, a famous city of
the Phœnicians, situated upon the eastern coast of the Mediterranean.
Solomon, who had many wives that were foreigners, was prevailed upon
by them to introduce the worship of this goddess into Israel, and he
built her a temple on the mount of Olives, which, on account of this
and other idols, is called “the mount of corruption.”[125] Milton says,

                              “There stood
    Her temple on th’ offensive mountain, built
    By that uxorious king, whose heart, though large,
    Beguil’d by fair idolatresses, fell,
    To idols foul.”

The _full_ moon was held favorable for any undertaking by the Spartans;
and no motives could induce them to enter upon an expedition, march
an army, or attack an enemy, till the _full_ of the moon. It is usual
with the modern Arabians to begin their journeys at the _new_ moon; a
practice which, indeed, appears to be very ancient. When the Shunammite
proposed going to Elisha, her husband dissuaded her by observing that
it was neither _new_ moon nor sabbath.

1. The _moon_ is an emblem of the _church_ of God, which receives
its light from Christ as the moon does from the sun. Especially, of
the Jewish dispensation, which consisted much in the observation
of new moons, its solemn feasts being governed by them. The Jewish
dispensation was a veiled and shadowy one: Christ and the blessings
of the covenant of grace were revealed in dark promises, obscure
prophecies, types and ceremonies, which were all significant figures of
that grace which should be displayed, with fulness and evidence, under
the Christian dispensation. The Jewish economy exhibits such marks of
imperfection, as show the necessity of some new revelation to supply
its defects. Its rites and precepts seem to be particularly suited to
the condition, capacity, temper and genius of that particular people,
for whom they were first formed, but not to be calculated for general
use. It consisted chiefly of external performances, such as washings,
sacrifices, and oblations, which could not purify the conscience, nor,
indeed, satisfy the reason of man. The provision for sin, by way of
atonement, was partial, and not thoroughly effectual: for some sins no
sacrifice was admitted; and though sacrifice, where it was appointed,
might atone for ceremonial impurity, yet the inward guilt and
defilement still remained, and the justice of God was not satisfied.
Yet the observance of these was enjoined in a very awful manner. The
omission of what was prescribed by these laws, or even a defect in
observing the minute circumstances of them, was made a capital crime,
or rendered the delinquents liable to be cut off from the congregation.
The Apostle styles the whole code of these laws, “a yoke of bondage;”
and says, that, previous to the coming of Christ, the Jews were in
bondage under what he terms “the beggarly elements of the world.”

There were indeed wise reasons for such a dispensation: to keep the
Jews a distinct people, and preserve them from idolatry, while they
were continually employed in the service of God; to remind them of
their obligations to purity, inward and outward holiness; and, as a
schoolmaster, to bring them to Christ; the law being a type and shadow
of that “truth and grace which came by Jesus Christ,” who was “the end
of the law for righteousness.” On which account, the law of Moses was
not perpetual, but a temporary institution: thus the Apostle reasons,
“There is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for
the weakness and unprofitableness thereof; for,” as he says in another
place, “the law could not in any wise make the comers thereunto
perfect.” He calls the law, “a shadow of good things to come.” The
Levitical ceremonies led the Jewish church into the knowledge of the
promised Messiah, and what he was to do, suffer, purchase, and apply.
Hence the words of St. Peter, “Of which salvation the prophets have
inquired and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that
should come unto you: searching what or what manner of time the Spirit
of Christ which was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand
the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow. Unto whom
it was revealed, that not to themselves, but unto us they did minister
the things which are now reported unto you by them that have preached
the gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven.” The
Christian dispensation is attended with greater clearness. We have
a far more comprehensive knowledge of the glorious Redeemer, in his
person, natures, offices, and blessings; of the spiritual nature of his
kingdom, and the way of salvation through faith in him, than what the
Jews had. Thus the Apostle says, “But we all with open face beholding
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord.”

In the Revelation, we have this representation given of the Christian
church: “And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed
with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelve stars.” An author, quoted by Dr. A. Clarke, gives the following
elucidation of this passage.--That the woman here represents the true
church of Christ, most commentators are agreed. In other parts of the
Apocalypse, the pure church of Christ is evidently pourtrayed by a
woman. In chapter xix, verse 7, a great multitude are represented as
saying, “Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him; for the
marriage of the Lamb is come, and his _wife_ hath made herself ready.”
In chapter xxi, 9, an angel talks with St. John, saying, “Come hither,
I will show thee the _bride_, the Lamb’s wife.” That the Christian
Church is meant will appear also from her being “clothed with the
sun,” a striking emblem of Jesus Christ, the Sun of Righteousness,
the light and glory of the Church; for the countenance of the Son of
God is, as “the sun shineth in his strength.” The woman has the “moon
under her feet.” Bishop Newton understands this of the Jewish typical
worship; and, indeed, the Mosaic system of rites and ceremonies could
not have been better represented. The moon is the less light, ruling
over the night, and deriving all its illumination from the sun: in like
manner, the Jewish dispensation was the bright moonlight night of the
world, and possessed a portion of the glorious light of the gospel.
At the rising of the sun the night is ended, and the lunar light no
longer necessary as the sun which enlightens her shines full upon the
earth: exactly in the same way has the whole Jewish system of types
and shadows been superseded by the birth, life, crucifixion, death,
resurrection, ascension, and intercession of Jesus Christ. Upon the
head of the woman is “a crown of twelve stars;” a very significant
representation of the _twelve apostles_, who were the first founders of
the Christian church; and by whom the gospel was preached in a great
part of the Roman empire with astonishing success.

2. The phenomenon of the moon is _mutability_. This beautiful luminary,
whose gentle beams render the summer evenings still more agreeable, and
in the winter nights cheer the abodes of solitude, and aid the midnight
traveller, is perpetually changing. In this, and in nothing but this,
observes Mr. Basely, she is invariable, and a perfect index to all
within her orbit. This should teach us, says Mr. Browne, that there is
not any thing permanent in the present scene. Mutability is engraved in
legible characters upon every earthly object. Every thing is in motion,
and assuming a different appearance, whilst vicissitude and change wait
on the affairs of mortals. Such is the fluctuating state of the present
world, whether we view kingdoms in general, or the personal concerns of
men in particular.

But while these things are fortuitous as to man, we should reflect that
they are under the direction and control of a Divine providence. The
prosperous issue of all our designs and enterprises depends entirely
on the sovereign disposer of events. “Except the Lord build the house,
they labor in vain that build it; except the Lord keep the city, the
watchman waketh but in vain.” “A man’s heart deviseth his way; but the
Lord directeth his steps;” the result of his designs and projects being
under the dominion and direction of God. Whether his undertaking shall
succeed or fail, belongs alone to the Most High to determine. Let as
arrange our worldly concerns in the most prudent and politic manner,
so that there shall appear the greatest probability of success, yet
God has the ordering of the event. Solomon has long since observed,
that, amongst the many vanities under the sun, one is, “the race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to
the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men
of skill: but time and chance happeneth to them all.” Some unforeseen
circumstance may interrupt our pursuit, and disappoint our expectation.
So great is the uncertainty which attends all human affairs, and all
future events are concealed in such thick darkness, that we can never
positively affirm that this or the other scheme, however wisely laid,
cannot be frustrated, or that it is impossible the success should be
otherwise than as we calculate. No man knows what shall be on the
morrow; the only thing we know previously is, that every event shall be
as God is pleased to settle it.

This consideration, that it is not by our own choice and foresight, but
the will and wisdom of God, our affairs are directed and determined,
we should apply to ourselves. We are not competent to mark out our own
ways, nor can we seriously imagine that matters should be arranged
exactly according to our imperfect views and secret inclinations; but
we should refer ourselves to his guidance who cannot err, and willingly
acquiesce in his providential decisions: saying, “I know, oh Lord, that
the way of man is not in himself: it is not in man that walketh to
direct his own steps.” We are commanded by the Apostle James to say,
“If the Lord will, we shall live, and do this, or that.” And Solomon’s
advice is, “Trust in the Lord with all thine heart; and lean not unto
thine own understanding. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall
direct thy paths.” Concerning all our lawful designs, enterprises, and
projects, we may pray, “Establish thou the work of our hands upon us;
yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.”

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ III.--THE SEASONS.

    Seasons: Spring, Summer, Autumn, Winter -- Displaying
    Divine Power, Wisdom, Goodness, Faithfulness -- Religious
    Improvement.

The Divine Architect appointed the sun and moon the places of their
rising, the circuits they were to run, and where they were to go down:
he marked out the line in which they were to move through all the
different climates of the earth. They instantly obeyed his all-powerful
word, and have ever since acted faithfully to his command. In their
operations, they measure out our days and nights, distinguish between
different periods of time, and produce the several seasons of the year.

    “With what an awful world-revolving power
    Were first th’ unwieldy planets launched along
    Th’ illimitable void! Thus to remain
    Amid the flux of many thousand years,
    That oft has swept the toiling race of men
    And all their labored monuments away,
    Firm, unremitting, matchless in their course;
    To the kind tempered change of night and day,
    And of the seasons ever stealing round,
    Minutely faithful.”

God is the supreme ruler in the kingdom of nature, and the constant
changes of day and night, summer and winter, seed-time and harvest, are
appointed and regulated by his providential influence. This wonderful
and stupendous system, consisting of matter, is preserved by motion.
Deprive it of motion, and, as a system, it must expire. Who, then,
breathed into this amazing combination of things acting together, the
life of motion? What power impelled the planets to move, since motion
is not a property of the matter of which they are composed? Did not
annual observation familiarize it to us (to speak unphilosophically),
who that observes the sun going in appearance further from us during
six months in succession, and all that time decreasing in light and
heat, could ever think that he would again return to us? What hinders
his projection into boundless space, till he should appear no larger
than a star, or get beyond the reach of our powers of vision? What,
but the immediate control of God! for this is a work superior to all
created strength, and only to be effected by almighty energy.[126]

When we have seen that glorious lamp of heaven, the great ruler of the
day, gone so far from us that we scarcely knew how to stand before
the cold, how has his return revived and cheered us, visiting the
frozen earth with his friendly beams, infusing a genial warmth into
every creature, and inspiring us with the pleasing hope of once more
enjoying those various fruits of the earth, which are the liberal gifts
of an indulgent Providence! It is the Divine Being who commands the
sun to rise, who, “coming out of his chamber” in the east, rejoices
as a strong man to run a race. Again, he bids this glorious orb to
withdraw, and obscure his beauty behind thick clouds, or sink below
the western ocean; when, behold, the day is covered with darkness, and
night succeeds. At his sovereign command, the glowing summer recedes,
and winter approaches with chilling aspect. “He sends his snow like
wool, and scattereth his hoar frost like ashes. He casteth forth his
ice like morsels: who can stand before his cold?” He then recalls the
solar influence, scatters the inauspicious clouds, thaws the frozen
ridges of the field; the corn springs up and flourishes, and the heart
of man rejoices with the pleasing hope of a plenteous harvest. Thus
does the almighty Creator, and beneficent Governor of the world, order
and regulate the constant succession of the seasons; his Providence
over-rules and directs the whole movement, and nothing can come to pass
without his superintendence.

Reason, as well as supernatural revelation, asserts the reality of a
Divine providence. The happiest inquirers into the phenomena of nature
have discovered that every thing is made with the justest proportion,
and that the whole machine is directed according to the most exact
rules: but they have also perceived a power above and beyond the energy
of natural principles, and which could not possibly be accounted for
any other way than by admitting an immediate act or influence of the
supreme Being. In the revolving of the celestial orbs, we observe an
exact agreement with the established laws of mechanism: but, yet, there
is a force demonstrable in them which is altogether immechanical; and,
consequently, immediately issuing from God himself.

The remarks made by Dr. A. Clarke on this point, will, it is presumed,
gratify the intelligent reader. “The _double motion_ of a primary
planet, namely, its _annual_ revolution and _diurnal_ rotation, is
one of the greatest wonders the science of astronomy presents to our
view.--The laws which regulate the latter of these motions are so
completely hid from man, notwithstanding his present great extension
of philosophic research, that the times which the planets employ in
their rotations can only be determined by observation. How is it that
two motions, so essentially different from each other, should be in
the same body, at the same time, without one interfering at all with
the other?--No astronomer, since the foundation of the world, has been
able to demonstrate that the earth’s motion in the heavens is at all
accelerated or retarded by the diurnal rotation; or, on the other hand,
that the earth’s motion on its axis experiences the least irregularity
from the annual revolution.”

The rotation of the earth round its own axis, from west to east, once
in 23 hours, 56 minutes, 4 seconds, is the cause of the distinction
between day and night, by bringing the different parts of the earth’s
surface successively into, and from under the solar rays. And the
revolution of the earth round the sun, from any equinox or solstice to
the same point again, in 365 days, 48 minutes, 48 seconds, produces
the agreeable vicissitudes of the seasons, and measures the length of
our year. For though the revolution is that of the earth, yet both
the hours of the day and night, the different lengths of the days
and nights, and the seasons of the year, cannot be determined but by
the heavenly bodies. Thus the earth has a two-fold motion, like a
chariot-wheel; for while it goes forward on its annual journey, it is
still in its diurnal motion turning upon its own centre. But it differs
from the motion of a chariot-wheel in this: that its hourly motion in
its orbit is 75,222 miles; and that by the motion upon its axis, the
inhabitants on the equator are carried after the rate of 1,042 miles an
hour, and those upon the parallel of London 580 miles.

The Dr. proceeds, “How wonderful is this contrivance! and what
incalculable benefits result from it! The uninterrupted and equable
diurnal rotation of the earth gives us day and night in their
succession, and the annual revolution causes all the varied scenery of
the year. If one motion interfered with the other, the return of the
day and night would be irregular; and the change of seasons attended
with uncertainty to the husbandman. These two motions are, therefore,
harmoniously impressed upon the earth, that the gracious promise of the
great Creator might be fulfilled, ‘While the earth remaineth, seed-time
and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and
night, shall not cease.’

“The double motion of a secondary planet is still more singular than
that of its primary; for (taking the moon for an example) besides its
particular revolution round the earth, which is performed in 27 days,
7 hours, 43 minutes, 4½ seconds; it is carried round the sun with the
earth once a year. Of all the planetary motions, with which we have a
tolerable acquaintance, that of the moon is the most intricate: upwards
of twenty equations are necessary, in the great majority of cases, to
reduce her mean to her true place; yet not one of them is derivable
from the circumstance that she accompanies the earth in its revolution
round the sun. They depend on the different distances of the earth
from the sun in its annual revolution, the position of the lunar nodes,
and various other causes, and not on the annual revolution itself,
a motion which, of all others, might be expected to cause greater
irregularities in her revolution round the earth than could be produced
on that of the latter by the planetary attractions. Who can form an
adequate conception of that influence of the earth which thus draws the
moon with it round the sun, precisely in the same manner as if it were
a part of the earth’s surface, notwithstanding the intervening distance
of about 240,000 miles; and, at the same time, leaves undisturbed the
moon’s proper motion round the earth? And what beneficent purposes are
subserved by this harmony? In consequence of it, we have the periodical
returns of new and full moon; and the ebbing and flowing of the sea,
which depend on the various lunar phases, with respect to the sun and
earth, (as if demonstrable from each of these phases being continually
contemporaneous with the particular phenomenon of the tides,) always
succeed each other with a regularity necessarily equal to that of the
causes which produce them. Thus we see that God is continually present,
supporting all things by his energy, and that, while his working is
manifest, his ways are past finding out.”

Thomson, in his descriptive, philosophical, moral, and religious poem,
admirably well delineates the revolving seasons.

    “These, as they change, ALMIGHTY FATHER, these
    Are but the _varied_ God. The rolling year
    Is full of thee. Forth in the pleasing spring
    THY beauty walks. THY tenderness and love
    Wide flush the fields; the softening air is balm;
    Echo the mountains round; the forest smiles;
    And every sense, and every heart is joy.
    Then comes THY glory in the summer-months,
    With light and heat refulgent. Then THY sun
    Shoots full perfection through the swelling year:
    And oft THY voice in dreadful thunder speaks;
    And oft at dawn, deep noon, or falling eve,
    By brooks and groves, in hollow-whispering gales.
    THY bounty shines in Autumn unconfin’d,
    And spreads a common feast for all that lives.
    In Winter awful THOU! with clouds and storms
    Around THEE thrown, tempest o’er tempest roll’d.
    Majestic darkness! on the whirlwind’s wing,
    Riding sublime, THOU bidst the world adore,
    And humblest nature with THY northern blast.
    Mysterious round! what skill, what force divine,
    Deep felt, in these appear! a simple train,
    Yet so delightful mix’d, with such kind art,
    Such beauty and beneficence combin’d;
    Shade, unperceiv’d, so softening into shade;
    And all so forming an harmonious whole;
    That, as they still succeed, they ravish still.”

He who governs the whole frame of nature, and directs and regulates
these successive changes, must possess almighty _power_, without
which, he would be infinitely inadequate to the task. He who made the
celestial orbs of such a prodigious bulk, and whirls them round with
an almost incredible swiftness, causing the regular return of day and
night, summer and winter, what can he not do? None among the mighty
host of heaven, or among the inhabitants of the earth, can resist his
power, or stay his arm when lifted up. He who created all things out
of nothing, could, if he pleased, extinguish the lights of heaven,
and shake the solid earth to atoms. How easily, then, can he stop our
breath, break the slender thread of life, dissolve our feeble frame, or
hurl guilty and impenitent sinners into the pit of destruction! He who
brought darkness for the space of three days upon the Egyptians, and a
dreadful tempest of forty days and forty nights upon the inhabitants
of the old world, can make the days of the ungodly darkness, and their
nights full of horror. He can strike them with “the arrow that flieth
by day,” his swift pointed lightning; or with the pestilential vapors
of the night, which “walk in darkness,” and give the deadly stroke
unseen.

    “Lord, when my thoughtful soul surveys
    Fire, air, and earth, and stars and seas,
      I call them all thy slaves;
    Commissioned by my father’s will,
    Poison shall cure, or balm shall kill;
    Vernal suns or zephyr’s breath,
    May burn or blast the plants to death,
      That sharp _December saves_.

    What can winds or planets boast
      But a precarious power?
    The sun is all in darkness lost,
    Frost shall be fire, and fire be frost,
    When he appoints the hour.”

Shall not, then, such a frail creature as man, think and speak of this
omnipotent Being with the greatest reverence and profound humility?
Oh God, fill the minds of all men with just and enlarged views of thy
majesty and greatness! for thou killest, and thou makest alive; thou
woundest, and thou healest: neither is there any that can deliver out
of thy hand.

Divine _wisdom_ also shines forth in the regular and uninterrupted
succession of the seasons. “The Lord by wisdom hath founded the earth,
and by understanding established the heavens.” Not only the different
magnitudes of the heavenly orbs, but their particular distances, and
the harmonious laws by which they move, do loudly proclaim, that he
who formed, ranges, and actuates them all, must be infinitely wise.
Without looking into boundless space, where shine many thousand globes
of light, or fixed stars, supposed to be suns like our own, and to
have planets revolving round them, we may discover luminous displays
of Divine wisdom in our own system, in the constant succession of the
seasons, that may justly excite our wonder and adoration. How wise
must he be who has so exactly proportioned the different magnitudes
of the earth and the sun, and placed them at a proper distance from
each other! Is not equal wisdom discovered in that equable, steady,
swift, and complicate motion of the earth, by which the delightful
and necessary succession of the seasons return? It is the wisdom of
God that at first arranged the motion of the celestial bodies, and
that preserves them in their rapid and yet regular progressions and
rotations, with so much order and harmony. “How manifold, oh Lord, are
thy works! in wisdom hast thou made them all. Thy understanding is
infinite, for thou tellest the number of the stars, and callest them
all by their names.”

The _goodness_ of God to the inhabitants of the earth, is also
displayed in the revolving seasons. When the almighty Creator took
a survey of all the works his hands had made, he saw that they were
good; not only conformable to eternal reason, but proper to answer the
end for which he designed them. And this goodness manifested in the
formation of the world, is not more clearly discovered in any thing
than in the return of day and night, heat and cold, summer and winter.
We are pleased with the light in the morning, but it is after we have
rested well in the night: when a few hours are spent, we grow weary
of the light, and wish for the return of the silence and darkness of
the nocturnal season. After a long cold winter, we joyfully welcome
the approach of summer; but when scorched a few months with its heat,
and ready to faint, the return of winter is not so unpleasant to us
as it appeared more early in the spring. But whatever effect these
successions may have upon us, it is certain they are very beneficial.
The light of the day is advantageous for managing the toils and
business of life; and the coolness and stillness of the night are
as suitable for rest and sleep. The summer’s heat is necessary for
ripening the fruits of the earth, and hastening the harvest: but the
winter’s cold and hoary frost are subservient to prepare the earth for
the seed, and render it fertile. Nay, this dreary season is serviceable
both to man and beast; it tends to remove distempers contracted in the
summer’s unwholesome air, and gives a new spring and vigor to nature.
How great, then, is the Divine goodness in preserving the constant and
regular revolution of these seasons, so pleasant and beneficial to
mankind! “Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for
his wonderful works to the children of men.”

We cannot but perceive the _faithfulness_ of God in continuing these
seasons, according to his promise, to this period. We still see day
succeeding day, and year succeeding year: this covenant made with
mankind is inviolably kept. The husbandman cultivates his land,
ploughs up the furrows, casts in the seeds, in hope of the ensuing
harvest, when he expects that his expense, labor, and patience, will
be recompensed with a rich and large increase. But should God, in
anger, open the bottles of heaven, pour down the rain in torrents,
cause swelling floods to arise, and, rolling with alarming impetuosity
forward, to sweep away at once the fruit of all his toil, how great
must be his grief and astonishment! Such were the consternation and
confusion that seized mankind at the time of the flood. The husbandman
had tilled his land, thrown his seed into the ground; he saw it with
pleasure springing up, and promised himself a plentiful harvest: when
quickly, all the flood-gates of heaven were opened, all the fountains
of the great deep were broken up, and a rapid current overflowed the
springing corn, swept away numerous flocks of cattle, overthrew the
habitations of the people, and drowned man and beast to the very
tops of the mountains! But in this general ruin, Noah found favor
with God, and he and his family were preserved in the Ark. When the
waters had abated, and the earth became dry, this pious patriarch,
being much affected with the awful judgment inflicted upon mankind,
especially with the distinguishing mercies conferred upon himself
and family, offered sacrifice, in testimony of his gratitude, to his
great Deliverer, who was well-pleased with it. And on this, he made a
covenant with him, and with all his posterity, in which he promises
that he will not again curse the ground for man’s sake, nor any more
smite every living thing, but that, “while the earth remaineth,”
the successive seasons of the year shall be continued. The awful
disobedience of the inhabitants of the old world rendered it necessary
to inflict so dreadful a judgment; but as soon as it had subsided, God
promised never to punish mankind again so universally. And, in token of
his faithfulness, he set the rainbow in the cloud, to be a sign of his
covenant, which has not been broken, but faithfully kept even to this
day. However the Almighty may contend in anger with particular nations
or provinces, he will no more do so with mankind in general.

How happy is the situation of our native isle! There are few countries,
if any, that exceed it. The climate is temperate; neither days nor
nights are ever of immoderate length; the summer and winter are neither
extremely hot, nor excessively cold; the seed-time and harvest are
generally favorable, and the produce of the land is plenteous. The
inhabitants of some countries endure a long and severe winter, seeing
not the sun for many weeks: nay, there are some places where it rises
not for several months; but these parts are not inhabited in the winter
season. In other countries, the inhabitants are scorched with the rays
of a vertical sun, and wish in vain for the cooling winter’s snow.
Some know not what is meant by the heat of summer, and others are as
ignorant of the cold of winter. Some see the sun, but comparatively
feel not his warming influence; while others are penetrated with his
burning rays all the year. But the people of this country have moderate
summer, heat sufficient for ripening the most useful fruits, and winter
that may be well endured. The days are not so hot in the summer, but
the nights are sufficiently cool for allaying the heat; and they are
long enough in winter for managing the business that is requisite to
be done. Some warmer climates produce more delicious fruits: but no
country under the canopy of the heavens does more abound with all the
substantial supports of life; not only equal to our own consumption,
but frequently to enable us to assist our neighbors. Happy are the
people that are in such a case: yea, thrice happy are they whose God is
Jehovah. All his works praise him: may we join the grand chorus, and
bless his holy name. Surely, if the works of creation were attentively
viewed, and seriously considered, they would not only be truly admired,
but their glorious Author would be sincerely regarded, diligently
worshipped, and practically obeyed.

The following table has been ascribed to the illustrious astronomer,
Dr. Herschell. It is constructed upon a philosophical consideration
of the attraction of the sun and moon in their several positions
respecting the earth, and confirmed by the experience of many years:
actual observation will, without trouble, suggest to the observer what
kind of weather will most probably follow the moon’s entrance into any
of her quarters; and that so near the truth, that in very few instances
will it be found to fail.

  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |   _New or Full Moon._    |     _Summer._      |      _Winter._     |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |If it be new or full moon,|    Very rainy.     |   Snow and rain.   |
  |or the moon enters into   |                    |                    |
  |the first or last quarters|                    |                    |
  |at the hour of 12         |                    |                    |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  | Between hours of 2 and 4 |    Changeable.     |   Fair and mild.   |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |                  4  -  6 |       Fair.        |        Fair.       |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |                  6  -  8 | Fair, if wind N.W. |  Fair and frosty,  |
  |                          |Rainy, if S. or S.W.|   if N. or N.E.    |
  |                          |                    |Rainy, if S. or S.W.|
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |                  8  - 10 |       Ditto.       |       Ditto.       |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |          10 and Midnight |       Fair.        |  Fair and frosty.  |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |           Midnight and 2 |       Ditto.       | Hard frost, unless |
  |                          |                    |   wind S. or S.W.  |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |                  2  -  4 |     Cold, with     |  Snow and Stormy.  |
  |                          |  frequent showers. |                    |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |                  4  -  6 |        Rain.       |       Ditto.       |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |                  6  -  8 |   Wind and rain.   |       Stormy.      |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |                  8  - 10 |     Changeable.    |  Cold, rain if W.  |
  |                          |                    |     snow if E.     |
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+
  |              10 and Noon |  Frequent showers. |Cold with high wind.|
  +--------------------------+--------------------+--------------------+

Hence, the nearer the time of the moon’s entrance, at full and change,
or quarters, is to midnight (that is, within two hours before or after
midnight), the more fair weather is in summer, but the nearer to
noon the less fair. Also, the moon’s entrance, at full, change, and
quarters, during six of the afternoon hours, viz. from four to ten,
may be followed by fair weather; but this is mostly dependant on the
wind. The same entrance, during all the hours after midnight except the
two first, is unfavorable to fair weather; the like, nearly, may be
observed in winter.[127]

       *       *       *       *       *

It is an easy and excellent method of conveying instruction, and
impressing it upon the heart, to take occasion from natural objects to
raise the mind to things spiritual and divine. The day and night, and
their alternate changes, may suggest such thoughts as the following, to
a serious mind engaged in meditation.

What a glorious creature is light! How beneficial to this world! How
useful, nay, how necessary for managing those employments which could
not be done in the night! How unwise, then, is he who postpones the
necessary business of the day till night overtake him?--So beneficial,
so requisite, is the light of life in the important work of human
salvation. Does God allow men a day, a gracious season, and the light
of his word, for the good of their souls? Of what extreme folly shall
they be guilty, if they neglect the necessary business till the night
of death come, and they drop into the grave, where there is neither
work, nor wisdom, nor device! Now is the day of grace, and God is
favoring them with the light of reason and revelation. May he give
them wisdom to improve these advantages, to his glory, and their own
happiness! They know not how soon their sun may set, and the night of
death come upon them. If it should be before their everlasting interest
is secured, they will be lost for ever. Oh Lord, teach us so to number
our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom!

Night comes on apace; I must soon undress, and lie down to sleep. And
it cannot be long before I must put off this body, lie down in the
grave and sleep in the dust. What shall I do that my soul may not be
found naked, but be clothed and adorned with the glorious robes of
righteousness? Jesus, to whom shall I go but to thee, for thou hast
the words of eternal life!--How awful, and full of horror, is this
approaching darkness! If the imperfection of man did not require the
rest of sleep, surely it would be a pleasant thing always to dwell in
the light. Will it not then, be unspeakably delightful to abide in the
light of God’s countenance, to see the Divine Majesty with a strong and
open eye? and to behold his unutterable glories without any fear of
being deprived of the beatific vision, or of returning night? But oh!
how dismal must that place of darkness be where the light never shines!
where the miserable inhabitants never see one beam of Divine light,
one ray from God’s reconciled face! where the grossest darkness reigns
for ever, without the least hope of returning day! and where nothing
remains for them, but a black, a horrible, an eternal night!

    “Is light so grateful to the human sense?
    Created light? a faint, refracted ray?
    One, distant sun? the shadow, but, of God!
    Dark adumbration of the DEITY?
    Oh! what is heav’n! that day of endless light?
    Where saints shall from th’ essential fountain drink
    Of radiance! in God’s full, paternal shine?
    Ah! what is Hell? of ever-absent day,
    A night all hopeless!--and all endless too!”

The successive changes of day and night may suggest what is frequently
the condition of good people in this world. Their day of prosperity
is sometimes followed with a night of adversity; and then, when
sorrow and weeping have endured for a night, light and joy spring up
in the morning.--Is the light of the day pleasing? rejoice in it with
trembling, for the night is advancing. Is the darkness of the night
solemn and awful? rejoice in hope that the day is approaching. Hence
be instructed, oh my soul, in the concerns of thy eternal welfare. Are
prosperity, health, and relatives, agreeable? rejoice in them as one
that rejoices not: these must have an end; and adversity, sickness, and
death, will come. Are losses, affliction, and pain, not joyous, but
grievous? mourn as one that weeps not: ease, health, and gladness, are
in prospect, and will continue for ever. And how happy and glorious
will that world be, where light and joy shall never cease! But how
dreadful is that abode where darkness, despair, and anguish shall never
end!

The succession of cold and heat, winter and summer, will always suggest
pious and useful reflections in retirement. How pleasing it is to see
the sun return, and to feel his cheering rays, after a long, cold,
and tempestuous winter! So it is delightful to the humble penitent
sinner, after a long season of darkness and sorrow, when the Sun of
Righteousness arises with his reviving influences, and God lifts upon
him the smiles of his reconciled countenance. All misery, and clouds of
doubt and fear, are then dispersed, and heavenly light breaks into the
soul, and fills it with gladness. And does the want of the light of God
cause the serious Christian to mourn and weep, and taste no sweetness
in any of the comforts of life? How extremely miserable, then, must a
person be, who is driven to an everlasting distance from the presence
of God, and from the glorious Sun of Righteousness; only to see his
glory very remote, but never to feel the reviving beams of his love;
and to be punished in hell, far “from the presence of the Lord, and the
glory of his power.”

       *       *       *       *       *


_Section_ IV.--THE PLANETS AND FIXED STARS.

    Mercury -- Venus -- The Earth -- Mars -- Ceres -- Pallas --
    Juno -- Vesta -- Jupiter -- Saturn -- Georgium Sidus -- Comets
    -- Fixed Stars -- Religious Improvement.

Moses, after stating that God created the sun and the moon, says, “he
made the stars also.” A learned author explains it, “he made the lesser
light, with the stars, to rule the night.” It is very probable that the
whole _solar system_ was created in six days: but as the design of the
sacred historian was to relate what especially belongs to our globe and
its inhabitants, he therefore passes by the planetary system, leaving
it simply included in the plural word, שמים _shamayim_, _heavens_. In
a work of this nature, it is proper to take a concise view of all the
planets, their number, distances, magnitudes, revolutions, &c.

_Wandering Stars_, says Baseley, is one of the many appellations by
which our solar system has been sometimes designated. And the figure
it makes in the heavens is not unaptly expressed by the phraseology.
For we distinguish the planets from the fixed stars by the lustre
of the former, which is only from that side which faces the sun,
and by their motion, which is seldom, and then but apparently,
interrupted. Their brightness seems more uniform, has the cast of
reflected rather than direct illumination, and is altogether free from
scintillation or twinkling. Their connection with the globe we inhabit
is more perceptible, and their relative situation to one another
less stationary. Their distance from us is not so remote, and more
susceptible of calculation. The latter occupy a certain region situated
in our neighborhood between us and the former.

The planets are opake bodies, and nearly spherical. Being opake in
themselves, they become visible only by reflecting the light, which
they receive from the sun. The laws by which they are governed were
discovered by Kepler, who demonstrated that they must necessarily
revolve in elliptical, and not in circular orbits. Astronomers have
divided them into classes: the _primary_ planets are Mercury, Venus,
the Earth, Mars, Ceres, Pallas, Juno, Vesta, Jupiter, Saturn, and the
Georgium Sidus; and the second class includes the satellites which
belong to some of the primary planets, such as the Moon, the attendant
on the Earth, the four moons or satellites that revolve about Jupiter,
the seven that attend Saturn, and the six that wait on the Georgium
Sidus.

_Mercury_ is the smallest of the seven primary planets, and nearest
to the sun; he appears as a small star, and emits a very vivid
white light. He was called by the Greeks Στιλβων, plainly alluding
to his brightness. Costard observes, “ברק אור _Bark-oor_, ברק אורי
_Bark-oori_, or, changing the letter ב into מ as letters of the same
organ frequently are, מרק אורי _Mark-oori_, we have in another dialect,
with a Latin termination _us_, another name of this planet, Mercurius;
and from whence comes _Mercury_, as he is called by us.” This planet
never goes to a greater distance from the sun than about 27° 50ʹ; so
that he appears only a little after sunset, and again a little before
sunrise; he is never longer in setting after the sun than an hour and
fifty minutes nor does he ever rise more than an hour and fifty minutes
before that luminary: he is then about as far as the moon appears to
be from the sun on the second day after the change. His mean distance
from the sun says Dr. O. Gregory, is to that of the earth from the sun
as 387 to 1,000: hence his distance is about thirty-seven millions of
miles. To an inhabitant of Mercury, the sun appears almost three times
broader than we see him from the earth; because the planet is almost
three times nearer to the sun than the earth. Whence also the solar
disk, seen from Mercury, is seven times greater than the disk as it
appears to us, and Mercury has seven times more light than the earth.

                  “---- Mercury the first,
    Near bordering on the day, with speedy wheel
    Flies swifter on, inflaming where he comes
    With seven-fold splendor.”

The diameter of this planet is more than one-third of the diameter
of the earth, or 3,180 miles. Hence his surface is about 1/7th; and
his magnitude 1/16th of that of the earth. His period of revolution
round the sun is 87 days, 23 hours, 14 minutes, 33 seconds, which is
his year, and falls short of three of our months: hence he moves in
his orbit round the sun at the rate of more than 95,000 miles in an
hour. According to some astronomers, it has not been ascertained by
observation, whether Mercury turns upon his own axis, and therefore it
cannot be certainly affirmed that he has the vicissitude of day and
night, neither the return of summer and winter: because they depend
upon the inclination of the axis of his rotation, which is unknown,
to the plane of the orbit which he describes about the sun; though
there is very little doubt entertained on the subject. But Schroëter
affirms that he “has distinguished spots and mountains, which he
has assiduously followed, till he has arrived at the subsequent
conclusions: that the apparent diameter of the planet is about 6ʺ;
that it does not present any sensible ellipticity; that the mountains
it contains are proportionably larger than those of Venus and the
Earth; that the highest are, as in these two bodies, in the southern
hemisphere; that the angle which the equator makes with its orbit is
very considerable; that the difference of days and seasons ought to be
much greater in Mercury than it is on the earth; that its atmosphere,
like that of Venus, is very dense; and lastly, that its rotation about
its axis is 24 hours, 5 minutes, 30 seconds.” When examined by means
of a telescope magnifying about 200 or 300 times, he appears equally
luminous throughout his whole surface, without the least dark spot. He
exhibits the same difference of phases with the moon, being alternately
horned, gibbous, and shining almost with a round face, though not
entirely full because his enlightened side is never turned directly
toward us; but at all times perfectly well defined without any ragged
edge, and completely bright; and, like the moon, the crescent is always
turned toward the sun. Mercury has no inferior planet known to us, and
if that be actually the case, a spectator on his body will want the
argument taken from the horned phases of the planets, to establish
the true system of the world. But though we do not see any planets
inferior to Mercury, it does by no means follow that there are none:
for we seldom see Mercury himself, he being buried in the rays of the
sun; and a planet much nearer the sun could never be seen from the
earth. The first observation that was ever made of a transit, was by
Gassendi, who saw Mercury on the sun, A.M. November 7, 1631. Since his
time there have occurred seventeen other transits of this planet, the
last of which was at his ascending node on the 9th of November, 1802.
The ascending and descending nodes are in the 16° of Taurus, and 16°
of Scorpio. Other transits are expected in the years 1822, 1832, 1835,
1845, and 1848.

_Venus_, the second planet from the sun in the order of the system,
is the most beautiful star in the heavens, being easily distinguished
by her brightness and whiteness, which exceeds that of all the other
planets, and is so considerable, that in a dusky night she projects
a sensible shadow. Concerning her name, Costard remarks, “From the
Chaldee הן _Han_, or _Hen_, which signifies _gratia_, _decor_,
_elegantia_, with the Æolic digamma Ϝ, comes _Fen_, or _Ven_, and
with the additional termination _us, Venus_; the name by which this
planet was known among the Romans, and by which, from them, it has
been transmitted to us.” The mean distance of Venus from the sun is
about 69,000,000 miles; her diameter is 7,630 miles; she performs
her revolution round the sun in 224 days, 16 hours, 41 minutes, 27
seconds; her diurnal motion on her axis, according to some observations
accurately made by Schroëter, is performed in 23 hours, 21 minutes; and
she moves at the rate of 81,398 miles an hour.

This planet constantly attends the sun, and never departs from him more
than forty-seven degrees, and consequently is never seen at midnight,
nor in opposition to that luminary; being visible only for three or
four hours in a morning or evening, according as she is before or
after the sun. Venus is a _morning star_ when she appears westward
of the sun, for she then rises before him, and is among poets called
Phosphorus or Lucifer--

                  “----Fair morning star,
    That leads on dawning day to yonder world,
    The _seat of man_.”

but when eastward of the sun, she is an _evening star_, shining after
he is set, and then the poets give her the name Hesperus or Vesper.

              “---- Her lovely beams adorn
    As well the dewy eve, as opening morn.”

She is in each situation, alternately, between nine and ten months,
or about 290 days. Pythagoras is said to have first discovered that
Hesperus and Phosphorus were one and the same star. “From the name
Phosphorus,” says Costard, “it seems as if this is the same star that
in Isaiah is called הילל בן שהר _Helal-ben-shahar_, or _Helal, son of
the morning_; a name given it on account of its remarkable brightness.
If so, that is the oldest record of a planet that occurs in any author
whatever now extant: this was about the year before Christ 710.”

Venus is frequently seen in the day-time, when in the inferior part of
her orbit, at about forty degrees distant from the sun.

    “No stars besides their radiance can display
    In Phœbus’ presence the dread Lord of day;
    Ev’n Cynthia’s self, though regent of the night,
    Is quite obscur’d by his emergent light;
    But VENUS only, as if more divine,
    With Phœbus dares in partnership to shine.”

To quiet the minds of some superstitious people, greatly alarmed at
the appearance of Venus in the day-time, Dr. Halley wrote a small
piece, published in the Philosophical Transactions (No. 349) to show
that this was nothing extraordinary, and might be expected every eight
years. Venus, when viewed through a good telescope, is rarely seen to
shine with a full face, but has phases just like those of the moon,
being now gibbous, now horned, &c, and her illuminated part constantly
turned towards the sun, looking toward the east when a morning star,
and toward the west when an evening star. M. de la Hire, in 1700,
through a telescope of sixteen feet, discovered mountains in Venus,
which he found to be larger than those in the moon. These observations
have recently been confirmed by M. Schroëter, who, in the year 1780,
commenced a course of observations on this planet, the results of which
were published in the Philosophical Transactions for 1792.

Venus, as well as Mercury, is sometimes seen to transit the sun’s
disk, in form of a dark round spot; but these transits seldom happen.
The first that was ever observed, was seen by our countryman Jeremiah
Horrox, at Hool, an obscure village fifteen miles north of Liverpool:
his account of which was published by Hevelius at Dantzic in 1661,
under the title, “Venus in sole visa, anno 1631, November 24.” Mr.
Horrox’s friend, William Crabtree, according to his direction, saw
this transit at the same time, at Manchester. Two have occurred in the
last century, namely, one June 6th, 1761, seen by many astronomers,
which excited particular attention by a dissertation published by
Dr. Halley in the Philosophical Transactions (No. 348) in which he
proposed finding, from that transit, the sun’s parallax, and thence the
distance of the earth from the sun: and the other, June 3d, 1769, at
10^{h}. 10ʹ, according to M. de la Lande, and consequently invisible
at Paris and London; but by comparing together two observations made,
one at Mexico, and the other to the north of Petersburgh, we perceive
the sun’s parallax, was determined with great precision. The transits
of Venus, occurring between the years 1631 and 2110, according to the
calculations of persons most eminent in astronomical science, are as
follow:

    1631      December  6
    1639      December  4
    1761      June      5
    1769      June      3
    1874      December  8
    1882      December  6
    2004      June      7
    2109      December 10

The _Earth_ is the next planet in order; called by the Greeks Γη, and
by the poets Γαια, from γαω to _generate_, _produce_, which, says
Parkhurst, is from the Hebrew, גאה _to grow_ as a plant, because it
produces, or is the mother of all terrestrial things; or in the poetic
language of the Orphic hymn to the earth,

        “---- Brings forth her various fruits,
    With throes maternal.”

The word used by Moses is הארץ _haarets_, translated _earth_, whence
in the Anglo-Saxon, _eard_ and _eord_; Danish _jord_, _jorden_; Dutch
_erd_ and _aerd_; and Teutonic _erd_, _erde_.

The distance of the earth from the sun is about 95,000,000 miles:
her orbit round the sun is 597,000,000 miles, and she performs her
revolution round the sun, from any equinox or solstice to the same
point again, in 365 days, 5 hours, 49 minutes, 57 seconds; of course,
her hourly motion in her orbit is 68,000 miles. Her diameter is 7,964
miles, her circumference is 25,000 miles, and the time of rotation upon
her axis, from west to east, is 23 hours, 56 minutes, 4 seconds: by
which the inhabitants upon the equator are carried after the rate of
1,042 miles an hour, and those upon the parallel of London, 580 miles,
as we have already noticed. The annual and diurnal motion of the earth
is thus described by Milton:

    “She from the West her silent course advances
    With inoffensive pace, that spinning sleeps
    On her soft axle, while she paces even,
    And bears us soft with the smooth air along.”

From this circumstance arises the _apparent_ diurnal revolution of all
the heavenly bodies from east to west.

“The motion of the earth,” says an intelligent writer, “has so long
ceased to be a disputed question, that the arguments on each side are
nearly forgotten; and those who do not scruple to adopt the hypothesis
of the earth’s motions, are often less acquainted with the arguments
on which it is supported, than they would have been in former times,
when their opinions must have been the subjects of fierce contention.”
La Place observes, “that if the earth be at rest, and the stars move,
the velocity of these latter must be immense; and yet all the purposes
thereof might have been answered by a moderate motion of the earth
alone. The moon’s distance from the earth is 240,000 miles; of course,
the length of the tract which it traverses, if it moves round the
earth in 24 hours, is about 1,500,000; that is, at the rate of 62,500
miles an hour, instead of 2,290 miles, which is really the case:
consequently, in each second of time, the moon, known to be the slowest
of all the heavenly bodies, must move more than seventeen miles. Again,
the sun’s mean distance from the earth is about 95,000,000 miles;
consequently, the diurnal path of that luminary, if it revolve about
our globe in twenty-four hours, must be 580,000,000: and therefore, in
a single second, the beat of a clock, he must move nearly 7,000 miles.
Upon the same principle; that is, supposing the earth to be the centre
of the system, and not the sun, the planet Mars, in a second of time,
must travel at the rate of more than 10,000 miles, Jupiter 36,000, and
Saturn 62,000. And, lastly, the fixed stars being yet indefinitely more
remote from the earth than the sun or Saturn, their motion in or near
the equator must be vastly swifter than this. If the earth does not
move round the sun, the sun must move with the moon round the earth;
now; the distance of the sun to that of the moon is nearly 400 to 1,
and the period of the moon being about twenty-eight days, the sun’s
period should be, by the law above mentioned, full 600 years, whereas,
it is, in fact, but a single year. This consideration was, of itself,
thought of weight enough to determine the controversy between the two
opinions, and to establish the motion of the earth in its orbit for
ever.”

That the shape of the earth was an extended plane, and the visible
horizon its utmost bounds, was the opinion of the ancients. But that
it is globular, a little raised at the equator, and flattened at the
poles, being about thirty-seven miles shorter than at the equator, so
as nearly to resemble an orange, is demonstrable on the most evident
and unquestionable principles. 1. All the appearances of the heavens,
both at land and at sea, are the same as they would be if the earth
were a globe. Mariners first begin to lose sight of the lower parts of
objects, and then gradually of the higher parts; also, persons on shore
first discover the masts before the hull of approaching vessels, and
on leaving a port the masts are seen when the hull is out of sight,
which must be owing to the convexity of the water between the eye and
the object, otherwise the largest and most conspicuous parts would have
been visible the longest.

    “Behold, when the glad ship shoots from the port
    Upon full sail, the hulk first disappears,
    And then the lower, then the higher sails;
    At length the summit of the towering mast
    Alone is seen; nor less, when from the ship
    The longing sailor’s eye in hope of shore:
    For then, from the top-mast, though more remote
    Than either deck, the shore is first beheld.”[128]

2. Navigators sailing round the globe, as Magellan, Drake, Lord Anson,
Cook, and others, have steered their course directly south and west
till they came to the Magellanic sea, and from thence to the north
and west, till they returned to their port from the east; and all the
phenomena which should naturally arise from the earth’s rotundity,
happened to them. Beside, their method of sailing was also founded
upon this hypothesis, which could not have succeeded so happily, if
the earth had been of any other figure. 3. In all lunar eclipses, the
shadow of the earth falling upon the moon is always circular; and a
body can be no other than a globe, which in all situations casts a
circular shadow. It is true, the surface of the earth is not an exact
geometrical globe: but what the earth loses of its sphericity by
its inequalities, as writers on this subject have remarked, is very
inconsiderable: the highest mountains bearing so little proportion to
its bulk, as scarcely to be equivalent to the minutest protuberance on
the surface of an orange, or a grain of dust to a common globe.

    “These inequalities to us seem great;
    But to an eye that comprehends the whole,
    The tumor, which to us so monstrous seems,
    Is as a grain of sparkling sand that clings
    To the smooth surface of a sphere of glass;
    Or as a fly upon the convex dome
    Of a sublime, stupendous edifice.”

It is not so easy as some imagine, says a German philosopher and
divine, to determine exactly the size of the earth. It is true, there
is but one longitude; but there are two latitudes, the north and the
south. Both of these begin at the equator; the one extends northward,
the other southward, as far as the arctic and antarctic poles. But, no
one has yet been able to reach either pole. The mountains of ice in
Greenland and the Northern Sea, have always obstructed the passage to
the north pole: and immense fields, mountains, and islands of ice, have
rendered the passage to the south pole impossible. Thanks, however, to
the geometricians, we can at present know very nearly the size of our
globe. According to the most exact calculations, the surface of the
earth is 199,512,595 square miles. The seas and unknown parts of the
earth, by a measurement of the best maps, contain 160,522,026 square
miles. The inhabited parts contain about 38,990,559 square miles,
in the following proportion: Europe--4,456,065; Asia--10,768,823;
Africa--9,654,807; America--14,110,874: Hence it appears that scarcely
one-third of the globe is habitable. It has been calculated, that
there might be at least _three thousand millions_ of men upon the
earth at once: but in reality there are no more than about a _thousand
and eighty millions_: of which there are, in Asia--650 millions; in
Africa--150; in America--150; in Europe--130.

The path traversed by the earth, which, in astronomical language, is
called its orbit, is the apparent path of the sun: it is called the
_ecliptic_, because eclipses, both solar and lunar, always happen in
this circle--also _via solis_, or the sun’s path, because the sun
never departs from it; and, therefore, at any time to denote the sun’s
place in the heavens, astronomers have divided the whole circle of the
earth’s motion in 360 equal parts, which they term _degrees_, and every
thirty of these a _sign_, of which there are twelve. In this circle
the sun advances nearly one degree every twenty-four hours, and thirty
degrees every month; thus passing through the whole 360 degrees in a
year. The signs are called by different names, and, with regard to
their situations and corresponding seasons and months, they stand in
the following order:

    _Northern Signs; so denominated as being north of the Equator._

              {Aries ♈, the Ram, part of March and April.
    Spring.   {Taurus ♉, the Bull, April and May.
              {Gemini ♊, the Twins, May and June.

              {Cancer ♋, the Crab, June and July.
    Summer.   {Leo ♌, the Lion, July and August.
              {Virgo ♍, the Virgin, August and September.

    _Southern Signs; so called as being south of the Equator._

              {Libra ♎, the Balance, September and October.
    Autumn.   {Scorpio ♏, the Scorpion, October and November.
              {Sagittarius ♐, the Archer, November and December.


              {Capricornus ♑, the Goat, December and January.
    Winter.   {Aquarius ♒, the Water-bearer, January and February.
              {Pisces ♓, the Fishes, February and March.

The order of the signs is thus poetically described by Dr. Watts.

    “The Ram, the Bull, the heavenly Twins,
    And next the Crab the Lion shines,
        The Virgin and the Scales:
    The Scorpion, Archer, and Sea-goat,
    The Man that holds the Water-pot,
        And Fish with glittering tails.”

Dr. Long observes, that ♈ represents the horns of the ram; ♉ the head
and horns of the bull; ♊ the figure of gemini, the twins joining hands
and feet; the character cancer ♋ represents the changes of the sun’s
declination from north to south, by two lines or figures drawn so as to
point two contrary ways; ♌ is the tail of the lion; ♍ was originally
the three ears of corn which Virgo held; ♎ is the beam of the balance;
♏ was at first the picture of the scorpion; ♐ the arrow of the Archer;
♑ represents capricorn, the goat-fish; ♒ is a natural representation
of the water’s undulating surface; ♓ is the picture of two fishes tied
together back to back.

The figures of the twelve signs are supposed by Dr. Jennings, and other
astronomers, to be Egyptian hieroglyphics, by which they designed to
exhibit some remarkable natural occurrence in each month, as the sun
passed through these signs. Thus the first three months, beginning
from the vernal equinox, were remarkable for the production of those
animals which they most valued, namely, sheep, kine, and goats. The
lambs came first, which are represented by their parent, the Ram; next
the calves, represented by the Bull; and the kids, which commonly come
in pairs, and which, therefore, gave the name to Gemini, the third
constellation; which was not at first represented by Two Boys, but by
Two Beasts; as referring to the fruitfulness of goats, in producing
_twin kids_ about the time when the sun was in that constellation.
When, in the fourth month, the sun is arrived at the summer solstice,
he discontinues his progress towards the north pole, and begins to
go back again to the southward; this retrograde motion the Egyptians
expressed by the Crab, which is said to go backwards. The excessive
heat that usually follows in the next month, is signified by the Lion;
an animal remarkable for his strength and fierceness; or, as others
observe, when that animal, driven by thirst from the desert, made his
appearance on the banks of the Nile. Nothing could be more proper
than the symbol for the harvest: namely, the Virgin reaper or gleaner
with an ear of corn in her hand. The seventh constellation, when the
sun arrives at the autumnal equinox, is expressed by the Balance or
Scales, in equilibrio, because the days and nights, being then of the
same length, seemed to indicate an equilibrium like that instrument.
October is often a sickly season, when the surfeits acquired in the
hot months of the summer produce their fatal effects; the symbol is
therefore the Scorpion, who wounds with a sting in his tail, as he
recedes; or, according to others, when certain regular winds brought
forth a burning vapor like the poison of the scorpion. The diversion
of hunting, which is chiefly followed after the fall of the leaf, is
designated by Sagittarius, or the archer. The Goat, which is an animal
that delights to browse up hill and to climb the highest rocks, is the
emblem of the winter solstice, when the sun begins to ascend from the
southern tropic, and is continually mounting higher and higher for the
ensuing half year. Aquarius, or the Water-bearer, fitly represents the
rains, or snows, of the winter. And the Two Fishes in a band, had, it
is imagined, reference to the prime fishing season, which began in
February.

The names given to our months originated as follows:

The name given to the month of _January_ by the Romans was taken
from _Janus_, one of their divinities, to whom they gave two faces;
because on the one side, the first day of this month looked towards
the new year, and on the other towards the old one. It was called
_wolf-monat_ by our Saxon ancestors, on account of the danger they
then experienced from wolves. Some etymologists derive _February_ from
_Februa_, an epithet given to Juno, as the goddess of purification;
while others attribute the origin of the name to _Februa_, a feast
held by the Romans in this month, in behalf of the manes of the
deceased. The Saxons named February _sprout kele_, on account of the
sprouts of the cole-wort which began to appear in this month. Among
the Romans, _March_, from Mars, was the first month, and marriages
made in this month were accounted unhappy. The Saxons called March
_lent-monat_, or _length-moneth_, “because the days did first begin,
in length, to exceed the nights.”--_April_ is derived from _Aprilis_,
of _aperio_, I open; because the earth, in this month, begins to open
her bosom for the production of vegetables. The Saxons called this
month _oster-monat_, from the goddess Eoster, or because the winds
were found to blow generally from the east in this month.--_May_ is
so called from _Maia_, the mother of Mercury, to whom sacrifices were
offered by the Romans on the first of this month; or, according to
some, from respect to the senators and nobles of Rome, who were named
_Majores_, as the following month was termed Junius, in honor of the
youth of Rome. The Saxons called May, _tri-milki_, because, in that
month, they began to milk their kine three times in the day.--The
Saxons called June _weyd-monat_, because their beasts did then _weyd_
or feed in the meadows.--The word _July_ is derived from the Latin
_Julius_, the surname of C. Cæsar, the dictator, who was born in it.
Mark Antony first gave to this month the name of July, which was before
called _Quintilis_, as being the fifth month in the year, in the old
Roman calender established by Romulus. July was called by the Saxons,
_hew-monat_, or _hey-monat_, because therein they usually mowed, and
made their hay-harvest.--_Sextilis_ was the ancient Roman name for
_September_, it being the sixth month from March. The Emperor Augustus
changed this name, and gave it his own, because in this month Cæsar
Augustus took possession of his first consulship, celebrated three
triumphs, reduced Egypt under the power of the Roman people, and put
an end to all civil wars. “The Saxons called August _arn-monat_ (more
rightly _barn-monat_,) intending thereby the then filling of their
barnes with corne.” _September_ is composed of _septem_, seven, and the
termination _ber_, like _lis_ in _Aprilis_, _Quintilis_, _Sextilis_.
This rule will also apply to the three following months, Octo-ber.
Novem-ber, Decem-ber. Our Saxon ancestors called it _Gerst-monat_,
“for that barley which that moneth commonly yielded was anciently
called gerst.”--_October_ was called _Domitianus_ in the time of
Domitian: but, after his death, by the decree of the senate, it took
the name of October, every one hating the name and memory of so
detestable a tyrant. It was called _wyn-monat_, or wine month, by the
Saxons--The Saxons called _November wint-monat_, or wind-month, on
account of the prevalence of high winds in this month.--_December_ was
called _winter-monat_ by the Saxons; but, after they were converted
to Christianity, it received the name of _heligh-monat_, or holy
month.[129]

The names of our days are of Heathen origin. The seven planets were
anciently looked on as presiding over the affairs of the world, and to
take it by turns each one hour at a time, according to the following
order: Saturn first, then Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, and
last of all, the Moon. Hence they denominated each day of the week
from the planet whose turn it was to preside the first hour of the
nychthemeron, a term compounded of νυξ, _night_, and ἡμερα, _day_,
which implies both night and day, and is divided into twenty-four
parts, called _hours_. Thus, assigning the first hour of Saturday to
Saturn, the second will fall to Jupiter, the third to Mars, and so the
twenty-second of the same nychthemeron will fall to Saturn again, and
therefore the twenty-third to Jupiter, and the last to Mars: so that
on the first hour of the next day, it will fall to the Sun to preside;
and by the like manner of reckoning, the first hour of the next will
fall to the Moon, of the next to Mars, of the next to Mercury, of the
next to Jupiter, and the next to Venus: hence the days of the week came
to be distinguished by the Latin names of _Dies Saturni_, _Solis_,
_Lunæ_, _Martis_, _Mercurii_, _Jovis_, and _Veneris_. The ancient
Saxons had a great many idols, seven of which were appropriated to the
seven days of the week, because of some worship that was offered to
each idol on its respective day. The northern nations substituted, for
the Roman Divinities, such of their own as most nearly resembled them
in their peculiar attributes, and hence the derivation of the names
now in use. These were Seater, the Sun, the Moon, Tuisco, Woden, Thor,
Friga: hence among us the names of Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. For, as Saturday, Sunday, and Monday,
plainly denote the day of Saturn, the Sun, and the Moon; so Tuesday,
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, denote the day of Tuisco, Woden, Thor,
and Friga, which are the Saxon names respectively answering to Mars,
Mercury, Jupiter, and Venus. Verstegan, in his “Restitution of Decayed
Intelligence,” describes the Saxon deities who presided over each day
of the week, and gives plates of the idols, pp. 74-85.

How amazing it is that this ponderous globe should be suspended in
the fluid air, without any visible support, and upheld only by the
sovereign will of its almighty Creator! His power, who “hangeth the
earth upon nothing,” is inconceivably great; and the revolutions of
this globe produce the most beneficial effects. The daily rotation of
the earth causes the uniform succession of light and darkness; and
its annual motion occasions the difference of the length of the days
and nights, and the beautiful diversity of the seasons. Many pious
Christians, who read the Scriptures to great personal advantage,
but who are unacquainted with the science of astronomy, are apt to
doubt the truth of the astronomical principles concerning the shape
and motion of the earth, because, as Dr. O. Gregory judiciously
observes, they think them contrary to divine revelation. Such persons
would do well to consider for what purpose the Holy Scriptures were
written, whether as a measure of faith, or as a rule to regulate our
philosophical notions? Gassendus, though he does not give a direct
answer to the question, has made the following very pertinent
observations on the subject. “There are,” says he, “two sacred volumes,
the one written, called the Bible; the other Nature, or the World;
God having manifested himself by two lights, the one of revelation,
and the other of demonstration; accordingly the interpreters of the
former are divines; of the latter mathematicians. As to matters of
natural knowledge, the mathematicians are to be consulted; and as to
objects of faith, the prophets; the former being no less interpreters,
or apostles, from God to men than the latter. And as the mathematician
would be judged to wander out of his province, if he should pretend
to controvert, or set aside any article of faith from principles of
geometry; so it must be granted, the divines are no less out of their
limits, when they venture to pronounce on a point of natural knowledge,
beyond the reach of any not versed in geometry and optics, merely
from Holy Scripture, which does not pretend to teach any thing of the
matter.”

_Mars_ is the first of the four superior planets in order from the sun,
his orbit being immediately beyond that of the earth. He was called by
the Greeks Αρης, the supposed god of war, which, says Parkhurst, comes
from the Hebrew עריץ _violent_, _destructive_. Costard remarks, “This
planet, I suppose, was called ערע _Ara_, ערץ _Aretz_, Αρης, and, in
another dialect, מערץ _Ma-aretz_, or _Mars_, in a softer pronunciation,
from his _strong glowing brightness_.” He is distinguished from the
other planets by the red and fiery appearance, of his disk: whether his
ruddy troubled color arises from a natural disposition to reflect the
red rays of light best, or from a thick atmosphere attending it, is
rather uncertain; but it is generally attributed to the density of his
atmosphere.

    “In larger circuit rolls the orb of Mars,
    Guiltless of stern debate, and wasteful wars,
    As some have erring taught: he journies on,
    Impell’d and nourish’d by the attractive sun;
    Like us, his seasons and his days he owes
    To the vast bounty which from Phœbus flows.”

His figure, like that of the earth, is an oblate spheroid. His mean
distance from the sun is 145,000,000 miles, and he travels round that
common centre of gravity in about 687 of our days, or 1 year, 321 days,
22 hours, 18 minutes, 27 seconds, which is nearly equal to two of
our years; and therefore his velocity in his orbit is at the rate of
55,000 miles an hour. He has likewise a rotation upon his axis, which
is performed in 1 day, 39 minutes, 22 seconds. This was discovered
by means of spots seen on his surface. Dr. Hook, in 1665, observed
several spots, which, having a motion, he concluded that the planet
revolved upon its axis. In 1666, M. Cassini saw several spots in the
two hemispheres of Mars, which, by continuing his observations very
diligently, he found to move from east to west, and to return in the
space of 24 hours, 40 minutes, to their former situation. Whence both
the motion and period, or natural day of this planet, were determined.
In 1781, Dr. Herschell observed the spots of Mars very minutely, from
the motion of which he has found his rotation upon his axis to be
performed in 24 hours, 39 minutes, 21-2/3 seconds; and he says that
there cannot be more than two seconds of uncertainty in this result.
The different seasons will take place on this planet very much like
what they are known to do upon our earth, with this difference, that
the seasons there will be almost as long again as with us, on account
of the time he takes in moving round the sun being nearly twice as long
as our year. The diameter of Mars being 4,135 miles, he is about 2/11,
or less than a fifth, and more than a sixth part as large as the earth;
and if any moon attend him, she must be very small, for it has not yet
been discovered by the best telescopes of our most eminent astronomers;
if without a moon, walking his round in perpetual solitude, he must
consequently want that division of time, which, from the moon’s
revolution round the earth, is called a month.

From the greater distance of Mars in his orbit than our earth is,
the inhabitants there will scarcely see Mercury, unless it be when
he appears on the sun’s face, and passes over him like a dark spot,
in the same manner as he sometimes does to us. Venus will to them
appear somewhat similar to the appearances of Mercury to our earth,
the apparent distance from the sun being nearly the same to them as
Mercury is to us. Our earth to them, also, will be an inferior planet,
or within his orbit, being nearer to the sun, in a way similar to what
Venus appears to us, and will alternately be a morning or evening star;
and our moon, which will always be seen to accompany her, when in a
position to have the benefit of the sun’s light, will not be seen at a
greater distance, than about a semi-diameter of the sun or moon from it.

This planet being half as far again from the sun as our earth is, his
light and heat are not half so much as our own. When in opposition
to the sun, he is found to be five times nearer to us than when in
conjunction; and, therefore, he appears so much bigger and brighter at
one time than another. In 1719, his apparent magnitude and brightness
were so much increased, that, by the uninformed, he was taken for a new
star.

The telescopic appearance of Mars is very variable. This planet
exhibits larger and more remarkable spots than any of the others.
The belts and cloudy appearances are found to change their shape and
arrangement frequently. The predominant brightness of the polar regions
leads to the supposition that those parts of his surface, like the
poles of the earth, are intensely frozen, or always covered with snow;
and Dr. Herschell imagines that the changes in brightness are connected
with the summer and winter seasons on that planet. The phases of Mars
were first discovered by Galileo. Having his light from the sun, and
revolving round it, he has an increase and decrease like the moon.
At his quadratures, he appears gibbous, but never horned, like Venus,
Mercury, and the Moon; which shows, that his orbit includes that of the
earth, and that it is from the sun that he receives his light.

Between the orbit of Mars and that of Jupiter, the smaller planetary
bodies, lately discovered, revolve. _Ceres_ was discovered on the 1st
of January, 1801, by M. Piazzi, astronomer at Palermo, in the island
of Sicily. When viewed through a good telescope, it is of a ruddy
color, appears to be of the size of a star of the eighth magnitude,
and surrounded with a dense atmosphere. Her mean distance from the sun
is 260,000,000 miles; and her revolution is performed in 4 years, 7
months, 10 days. Dr. Herschell and Schroëter differ very much as to
the magnitude of this planet; the former says the diameter is only 160
miles, but the latter makes it more than ten times greater, or 1,624
miles. _Pallas_ was discovered on the 28th of March, 1802, by Dr.
Olbers, of Bremen. Its mean distance from the sun 270,000,000 miles;
its diameter 80 miles; and it performs its revolution in about 4 years,
280 days. _Juno_ was discovered on the 1st of September, 1804, by M.
Harding, of Lilienthal. Its mean distance from the sun is 290,000,000
miles; and its diameter is 119 miles, and the time of revolution round
the sun 5 years, 181 days. _Vesta_ was discovered by Dr. Olbers, on
the 29th of March, 1807. It is nearer to Mars than either of the other
newly discovered planets; and the revolution through its orbit is
performed in less time. The size of this planet is not known. Its light
is more intense, pure, and white, than any of the other three.

A century and half ago it was conjectured, says a very intelligent
author, that there must be a planet between the orbits of Jupiter
and Mars, on account of the distance subsisting between those two
planets. The discovery of Ceres confirmed this happy conjecture; but
the opinion which it seemed to establish respecting the harmony of the
solar system, appeared to be completely overturned by the discovery
of Pallas and Juno. Dr. Olbers, willing to find a theory that should
account for the facts newly ascertained, imagined that these small
celestial bodies were merely the fragments of a larger planet, which
had burst asunder by some internal convulsion, and that several more
might yet be discovered between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter. He
therefore concluded, that though the orbits of all these fragments
might be differently inclined to the ecliptic, yet, as they must
have all diverged from the same point, they ought to have two common
points of re-union, or two nodes in opposite regions of the heavens,
through which all the planetary fragments must sooner or later pass.
One of these nodes Dr. Olbers found to be in Virgo, and the other in
the Whale; and it was actually in the latter of these regions that M.
Harding discovered the planet Juno. With the intention, therefore, of
detecting other fragments of the supposed planet, Dr. Olbers examined,
thrice every year, all the little stars in the opposite constellation
of the Virgin and the Whale, till his labors were crowned with success,
by the discovery of a new planet in the constellation of Virgo, to
which he gave the name of Vesta.

The existence of four planets between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter,
(continues the same author,) revolving round the sun at nearly the
same distances, and differing from all the other planets in their
diminutive size, and in the form and position of their orbits, is
acknowledged to be one of the most singular phenomena in the history of
astronomy. The discordance of these phenomena with the regularity of
the planetary distances, and with the general harmony of the system,
naturally suggests the opinion, that the inequalities in this part
of the system were produced by some great convulsion, and that the
four planets, as we have already hinted, are the fragments of a large
celestial body, which once existed between Mars and Jupiter. To suppose
them independent planets, as they must necessarily be if they did not
originally form one, their diminutive size, the great eccentricity
and inclination of their orbits, and their numerous intersections,
when projected on the plane of the ecliptic, are phenomena absolutely
inexplicable on every principle of science, and subversive of that
harmony and order which before the discovery of these bodies, seemed
to pervade the planetary system. Admitting, however, the hypothesis
that these planetary bodies, are the remains of a larger body, which
circulated round the sun, nearly in the orbit of the greatest fragment,
the system resumes its order, and we discover a regular procession in
the distances of the planets, and a general harmony in the form and
position of their orbits. But, independently of analogical reasoning,
the elements of the new planets furnish several direct arguments, drawn
from the eccentricity and inclination of their orbits, and from the
position of their perihelia and nodes; and all concurring to show, that
the four new planets have diverged from one point, and have, therefore,
been originally combined in a larger body.

_Jupiter_ is the largest of all the planetary bodies, and, next to
Venus the brightest. He was called by the Greeks Ζευς, which is from
ζεω, _to be hot_, or, says Parkhurst, immediately from the Hebrew זי
_to shine_, compounded, perhaps, with יש _substance_, q.d. _the shining
substance_; a name very justly given to this planet, on account of his
strong and clear light.

                      ----“In distant skies
    Revolves the mighty magnitude of Jove,
    With kingly state, the rival of the sun.”

His mean distance from the sun is 490,000,000 miles, and his diameter
is 89,170 miles, or more than 11 times that of the earth, and therefore
his magnitude is 1,400 times greater than our earth; of course, as the
surface of a globe increases according to the square of its diameter,
our earth will, to the inhabitants of Jupiter, appear 121 times less
than this noble planet appears to us. His revolution round the sun,
from east to west, is performed in 11 years, 315 days, 14 hours, 39
minutes, 2 seconds, which is nearly twelve of our years; and his motion
in his orbit is 29,000 miles an hour. He performs his diurnal rotation
upon his axis in 9 hours, 55 minutes, 33 seconds, by which motion his
equatorial parts are carried round at the amazing rate of 26,000 miles
an hour, which is about twenty-five times the velocity of the like
parts of our earth. He has, of course, a rapid succession of days, as
the poet observes,

    “In ample compass Jove conducts his sphere,
    And later finishes his tedious year;
    Yet swiftly on his axle turn’d, regains
    The frequent aid of day to warm his plains.”

The axis of Jupiter is nearly perpendicular to his orbit, so that he
has no sensible change of seasons. This is not the work of chance, as
Dr. O. Gregory observes, but wisely ordered by the Divine Architect;
for if the axis of this planet were inclined any considerable number
of degrees, so many degrees round each pole would be almost six years
together in darkness. And as each degree of a great circle on this
planet contains more than 700 miles, it is natural to conceive, that
vast tracts of land would be rendered uninhabitable by any considerable
inclination of his axis.

The appearance of this planet, through a telescope, opens a vast
field for interesting inquiry. His surface is not equally bright, but
variegated with certain bands, or belts, of a dusky appearance: they
run parallel to each other, and are continued round the body of the
planet. They are not regular or constant in their appearance: sometimes
only one is seen; at other times six or eight. The breadth of them
is likewise variable; one belt is sometimes becoming narrow, while
another, in its neighborhood, grows broader as if one had flowed into
the other: in these cases, an oblique belt has been observed to be
between them, as if for the purpose of establishing a communication.
Sometimes, one or more spots are formed between the belts, which
increase till the whole is united in a large dusky belt. There are also
bright spots to be discovered on Jupiter’s surface; these are rather
more permanent than the belts, and re-appear after unequal intervals of
time. The remarkable spot, by whose motion the rotation of Jupiter upon
his own axis was first ascertained, disappeared in the year 1694, and
was not seen again till 1708, when it re-appeared exactly in the same
place, and has been occasionally seen ever since.

Jupiter is enlightened by four moons, or satellites, each of them
larger than that with which we are supplied, and which revolve at
different distances from that planet. In the solar system the moons,
or satellites, revolve round their respective primary planets as
centres, in the same manner as the primary planets revolve round the
sun. By means of Jupiter’s satellites, a method has been obtained
for demonstrating that the motion of light is progressive, and not
instantaneous, as was formerly supposed; which discovery is important
to the interests of science. M. Huygens, in his Treatise on Light,
concludes from these eclipses, that light transmits itself about
600,000 times faster than sound.

Distances and Revolutions of Jupiter’s Satellites.

                                      Revolution.
                      Distance.     _d._ _h._ _m._
    1st Satellite      250,000        1   18   36
    2d                 401,000        3   13   15
    3d                 648,000        7    3   59
    4th              1,128,000       16   18   30

They are thus referred to by Mallet:

    “About him round _four_ planetary moons,
    On earth with wonder all night long beheld,
    Moon above moon, his fair attendants dance.”

To a spectator placed on the surface of Jupiter, each of the satellites
would put on the phases of the moon; but as the distance of any of
them from Jupiter is but small, when compared with the distance of
that planet from the sun, the satellites are therefore illuminated by
the sun very nearly in the same manner with the primary itself; hence
they appear to us always round, having constantly the greatest part
of their enlightened half turned towards the earth: and indeed they
are so small, that were they to put on the phases of the moon, these
phases could scarcely be discerned through the best telescopes. When
the satellites pass through their inferior semicircles, they may cast
a shadow upon their primary, and thus cause an eclipse of the sun to
his inhabitants; and in some situations this shadow may be observed
going before or following the satellite. On the other hand, in passing
through their superior semicircles, the satellites may be eclipsed in
the same manner as our moon by passing through the shadow of Jupiter:
and this is actually the case with the first, second, and third; but
the fourth, by reason of the extent of its orbit, passes sometimes
above or below the shadow, as is the case with our moon.

These satellites were first discovered on the 7th of January, 1610,
by the celebrated Galileo, who called them _Medician Stars_, in honor
of the family of the Medici, dukes of Tuscany, his patrons. These
satellites, revolving about Jupiter at different distances, from west
to east, when viewed through a telescope, make a beautiful appearance.
As our moon revolves round the earth, enlightening the nights, by
reflecting the light she receives from the sun; so these satellites,
revolving round Jupiter, may also be supposed to enlighten the nights
of that planet.

_Saturn_ is a very conspicuous planet, though he shines with a pale and
feeble light, very unlike that of Jupiter and the other planets. He
was called by the Greeks φαινων. “From the account given by Diodorus
Siculus,” says Costard, “it seems as if the Chaldeans called this
planet by some name not widely different from this of the Greeks.
In the language of Chaldea, the verb פנא _phana_, or פנה _phanah_,
signifies _convertere se_, _divertere se_, _declinare_. And whatever
_vanishes_, or _disappears_, very properly _declines_, or _turns
aside_, from our view. This planet, therefore, was most probably called
פן _phen_, or פין _phain_, and, with a Greek termination, φαινων, on
account of his _withdrawing_ himself, by reason of his distance. And
this conjecture is yet further confirmed from his name in another
dialect, or among another people. For from סתר _sater, latuit,
abscondit se_, with the paragogic ן _nun_ which is not unusual in the
formation of Eastern words, comes the word סתרן _Saturn_, and with the
Latin termination _us, Saturnus_.”

His mean distance from the sun is 900,000,000 miles, consequently his
motion in his orbit is proportionably slow; and his annual revolution
round the sun, from west to east, being so much longer likewise than
that of the other planets, he takes 29 years, 164 days, 7 hours,
21 minutes, 50 seconds, which is almost _thirty_ of our years, to
accomplish it, in his orbit travelling with a velocity of 22,000 miles
an hour. His diameter is 79,000 miles; and his magnitude is about 1,000
times that of the earth. The time of rotation upon his axis is 10
hours, 17 minutes.

    “Still further off, scarce warm’d by Phœbus’ ray,
    Through his wide orbit, Saturn wheels away;
    How great the change, could we be wafted there!
    How slow the seasons! and how long the year!”

There is a singular and curious appendage to Saturn, namely, a thin,
broad, opake ring, encompassing the body of the planet, without
touching it; like the horizon of an artificial globe; it appears to be
suspended round the planet, and to keep its place without any immediate
connection with it. The distance of this prodigious circle from the
body of the planet is usually stated to be about 21,000 miles.

The dimensions of the ring, or of the two rings with the space between
them, Dr. Herschell has given as follows:

                                                  Miles.
    Inner diameter of the smaller ring           146,345
    Outside diameter of ditto                    184,393
    Inner diameter of the larger ring            190,248
    Outside diameter of ditto                    204,883
    Breadth of the inner ring                     20,000
    Breadth of the outer ring                      7,200
    Breadth of the vacant space, or dark zone      2,839

It puts on different appearances to us, sometimes being seen quite
open, or as a wide oval, and at others, only as a single line. When
our eye is in the plane of the ring, or looking at it directly on
the edge, it is invisible to us; and it is in this situation twice
in each revolution of the planet; that is, once in about fifteen
years: at these times, he appears quite round, for nine or ten months
together. The ring was invisible to us on the 15th of June, 1803, and,
since that time, gradually increased in light and breadth for about
seven years: and, after which, has again decreased, till, as before,
after an interval of fifteen years, in the present year 1818, the
ring is again edgewise to us, and invisible. With telescopes of great
magnifying power, two belts or stripes have been discovered on Saturn;
they appear parallel to the ring, and are supposed to be permanent. Of
what component materials this ring is composed, or by what means it is
suspended, we as yet remain ignorant: but of its use, it is supposed to
supply light and heat to the planet, agreeably to the observation of a
poet who has evinced an extensive acquaintance with philosophy.

    “Muse! raise thy voice, mysterious truth to sing,
    How o’er the copious orb a lucid ring,
    Opake and broad, is seen its arch to spread,
    Round the big globe at stated periods led;
    Perhaps (its use unknown) with gather’d heat
    To aid the regions of that gelid seat,
    The want of nearer Phœbus to supply,
    And warm with reflex beams his summer sky;
    Else might the high-plac’d world, expos’d to frost,
    Lie waste, in one eternal winter lost.”

Besides the ring, Saturn is also furnished with seven attendant moons,
or satellites, which move around him at different distances, in a way
similar to those of Jupiter.

Distances and Revolutions of Saturn’s Satellites.

                                      Revolution.
                     Distance.    _d._ _h._ _m._ _s._
    1st Satellite     172,000       1   21   18   26
    2d                217,000       2   17   44   51
    3d                315,000       4   12   25   11
    4th               705,000      15   22   41   14
    5th             2,126,000      79    7   53   42
    6th               137,000       1    8   53    9
    7th               107,000       0   22   37   30

The sixth and seventh satellites were discovered by Dr. Herschell in
1787 and 1788: they are nearer to Saturn than any of the other five;
but, to prevent confusion, they have been called the 6th and 7th. The
5th satellite has been observed by Dr. Herschell to turn once round its
axis, exactly in the time in which it revolves round Saturn: in this
respect it resembles our moon. Their distance from us is so far, as not
to be easily visible, even with a good telescope, unless the air be
exceedingly clear.

It was for ages that astronomical science limited the solar system to
six planets, and Saturn was considered as its utmost extent. Vitruvius,
speaking of the planet Saturn, says, that star “is near the extremity
of the world, and touches the frozen regions of heaven.” He did not
understand the extent of our planetary system.

It is to the indefatigable application of Dr. Herschell that we are
indebted for the discovery of a new planet, which is the fourth of the
superior ones then known, and, being at twice the distance of Saturn
from the sun, has quadrupled the bounds formerly assigned to the solar
system. This planet was discovered on the 13th of March, 1781, and
is called by different names: the discoverer bestowed upon it that
of _Georgium Sidus_, in honor of our present venerable and beloved
sovereign; by the French it is called _Herschell_, and by the Italians,
_Uranus_. This important discovery is very deservedly noticed by the
Poet Laureat, in his Ode entitled “Carmen Seculare for the year 1800.”

          “Mathesis with uplifted eye,
          Tracing the wonders of the sky,
          Beholds new constellations rise,
          New systems crown the argent skies;
    Views with new lustre round the glowing pole,
    Wide his stupendous orb the _Georgian Planet_ roll.”

On the 11th January, 1787, Dr. Herschell discovered the second and
fourth satellites which attend his own planet the Georgium Sidus; and
in the following years, previously to 1791, he observed four others
revolving round the same body. Though this celebrated astronomer was
the first who discovered the Georgium Sidus to be one of the planets
of the solar system, yet no doubt can be entertained of its having
been before observed and considered as a fixed star. Flamsteed in
1690, Mayer in 1756, and Monnier in 1769, determined the places of
three stars which cannot now be found. And M. La Place, according to
his theory of Jupiter and Saturn, has found that the Georgium Sidus
was _exactly_ in those three points at those very times. These truly
singular occurrences leave no doubt of the identity of these three
stars with the new planet. The lines which Mallet applied to Saturn are
now, with a little alteration, more applicable to the Georgium Sidus,
or Herschell planet.

    “Last, outmost Herschell walks his frontier round,
    The boundary of worlds; with his pale moons,
    Faint-glimmering through the darkness night has thrown,
    Deep-dy’d and dead, o’er this chill globe forlorn:
    An endless desert, where extreme of cold
    Eternal sits, as in his native seat,
    On wintry hills of never-thawing ice;
    Such Herschell’s earth.”

His mean distance from the sun is about 1,800,000,000 miles, and he
performs his revolution from west to east round the sun in 83 years,
294 days, 8 hours, 39 minutes; and in his orbit he moves with a
velocity of 15,846 miles an hour. His diameter is 4½ times larger than
that of the earth, being more than 35,000 miles; and his magnitude
is 80½ times larger than that of the earth. The orbit in which he
revolves is nineteen times further from the sun than the earth’s
orbit; consequently he has 361 times less light and heat from the
sun than we have. Notwithstanding this, his proportion of light is
considerable; for having been calculated, it is found to be equal to
the effect of 284 of our full moons. When the sky is very serene and
clear, and the moon absent, this planet may be perceived with the naked
eye, unassisted by a telescope: and it appears as a star of the fifth
magnitude, with a blueish white light, and a brilliancy between that of
Venus and the Moon.

The want of light arising from the great distance of this planet from
the sun, is supplied by six satellites, which revolve at different
distances round their primary.

Distances and Revolutions of the Satellites of the Georgium Sidus.

                                       Revolution.
                      Distance.    _d._ _h._ _m._ _s._
    1st Satellite      226,450       5   21   25    0
    2d                 293,053       8   17    0    0
    3d                 342,784      10   23    0    0
    4th                392,514      13   11    0    0
    5th                785,028      38    1   49    0
    6th              1,570,057     107    7   35   10

All these satellites, it has been said, perform their revolutions in
their orbits contrary to the order of the signs; that is, their real
motion is retrograde, but probably, as suggested by Dr. Hutton, this
is an optical illusion.[130] As the indefatigable Dr. Herschell has
already discovered six satellites belonging to this planet, does not
its immense distance from the sun leave some ground for conjecture,
that there may remain some undiscovered, and that his attendants are as
numerous, if not more so, than those of Saturn?

    Characters used for the Sun, Moon, and Planets.

    ☉ The Sun
    ☽ The Moon
    ☿ Mercury
    ♀ Venus
    ⊕ The Earth
    ♂ Mars
    ♃ Jupiter
    ♄ Saturn
    ♅ Herschell, or Georgium Sidus.

The mark which characterises the planet Herschell is the initial of the
discoverer’s name, intersected by a cross bar to represent a cross, by
which to denote that the discovery of the planet took place after the
birth of Christ.

Astronomy produces calculations concerning the magnitudes, distances,
and revolutions of the planets, and their respective satellites,
which, to the uninformed, appear absurd, chimerical, and presumptuous;
while, probably, they laugh at such notions as were received among men,
when even the wisest of them were weak enough to believe, that the
earth was an immense plain, situated in the centre of the universe;
that the vault of heaven was of crystal; and that the sun was no other
than a plate of red hot iron, about as large as the Peloponnessus. The
following thoughts, communicated by my much esteemed friend Thomas
Exley, A. M. may assist such persons to entertain more favorable
sentiments of the science of astronomy, and also serve to enlarge their
views of the Supreme Being.

“Many persons who have not had the advantages of proper instruction
in mathematical science, cannot be persuaded that it is in the power
of man to ascertain the distances of the sun, moon, and planets,
and, of course, pay little regard to the assertions of astronomers
on this subject. Sometimes, they are bold enough to say the thing is
impossible, because no one has ever been to any of those bodies. Let
such persons consider, that it is not necessary to go to a remote
object in order to measure its distance; for that purpose, it will be
sufficient to know the length of a line at the place of the spectator,
and the inclination of this line to two others directed from its
extremities to the object; for, on the length of this line, and the
position of the two others, depends the distance of the object from the
ends of that line.

“Thus, if I wish to know the distance of a neighboring tower, or
other object beyond a river, or in some other way inaccessible; I
measure any convenient line terminating in my station, and by some
instrument proper for measuring angles, I ascertain the position of
my measured line to the lines connecting its extreme points and the
object. On these data depends the distance, and from this line and
these angles accurately measured, the exact distance may be with
great ease truly found. It is on similar principles that astronomers
investigate the distances of the heavenly bodies. They take as the
given or measured line, which may be called the base, some line on the
earth, the semi-diameter for instance, as being the most convenient.
The angle formed, or rather contained by two lines drawn from the sun
or planet to the ends of the semi-diameter of the earth, is called the
parallax, because it shows the difference of the apparent situation
of the object as seen from the extremities of the semi-diameter, that
is, it measures the arc of a great circle in the heavens contained
between its two apparent places. Hence to ascertain its parallax, or
difference of the apparent place when the object is viewed from the
other end of the semi-diameter, becomes a problem of great importance
in astronomy; for this being truly discovered, the distance of the
planet will be obtained with the utmost exactitude. If any other line
besides the semi-diameter of the earth, whose length and position are
known, be used as a base, and the parallax in respect of this line be
found, the same conclusions will follow. The chief difficulty in this
affair arises from the smallness of the angle to be measured, which
is a consequence of the greatness of the distance in respect of the
earth’s semi-diameter. Several ingenious methods have been proposed
and employed by astronomers to discover the distances of the sun and
planets, but nothing serves this purpose so well as the transits of
Venus over the sun’s disk. At certain periods, which can be foretold
by astronomers, this planet passes exactly between us and the sun, and
is seen as a dark round spot for some hours, moving in a line across
the sun’s face or disk. The observer should be furnished with a good
chronometer, or pendulum clock with seconds, to note the time of the
transit; and good instruments, to take the apparent diameters of the
sun and Venus, and her greatest distance from the sun’s limb while
passing over his disk: from these observations, and the known phenomena
of the motions of the earth and Venus, the parallax may be found. But
if two observers, at very distant places of the earth properly chosen,
make these observations, the parallax may be obtained with much greater
ease and nicety; because the distance of the apparent tracks of Venus
across the sun as seen from the two places, and also the difference of
the time of the passage, arises from the parallax of Venus and that
of the sun. The two last transits, which happened in the years 1761
and 1769, were carefully observed for this purpose; and it is to the
results of these observations that the present astronomers are indebted
for their more accurate knowledge of the distances of the planets, and
the dimensions of the solar system.

“It should be observed, that if the parallax, and consequently the
distance of any one of the planets by any means becomes known, the same
is easily obtained for each of the other planets, from the relation
which has been clearly discovered to subsist between the periodical
times of revolution of the planets round the sun, and their distances
from that central luminary. Astronomers have most decidedly proved that
the square of the time in which any planet revolves is to the square
of the time in which any other revolves, as the cube of the distance
of the first, is to the cube of the distance of the other; and since
all the times are known from observation, if the distance of any one be
determined, there is no difficulty at all to find the distances of all
the other planets from the sun.

“It has also been matter of great surprise to the unlearned, that
astronomers should pretend to tell the magnitudes of the sun and
planets. But this is no difficult problem when the distance is known.
The _apparent_ diameter is readily found from observation, and on this
and the distance depends the _true_ diameter. If the apparent diameters
of two objects be equal, the true diameter of the one will be greater
as it is more remote; and the apparent diameter of any object will
increase as the distance of it from the observer diminishes. From this
every one sees, that a knowledge of the distance of the object is an
indispensible element for finding its bulk; and, according to the
accuracy of the measure of the distance, will be that of the measure of
the magnitude, provided the apparent distance be truly taken; and this,
in the present improved state of our instruments, presents no obstacle.
There can be no doubt but that astronomers are very near the truth in
the numbers which they now give us for expressing the distances and
magnitudes of the sun and planets.

“The telescope has been of singular use to the astronomer; it has
shown him many phenomena of the heavenly bodies, concerning which he
would otherwise have been totally ignorant. It is by the assistance of
this noble instrument that we have attained to the knowledge of the
rotations of the sun and planets, the phases of Venus and Mercury,
Saturn’s ring, and many other particulars exceedingly interesting. The
telescope has discovered several planets which otherwise would have
revolved in their courses unknown and unnoticed by the inhabitants of
this globe; it has informed us that several of the planets have moons
moving round them, as our moon revolves round the earth; besides, it
has presented to our view an innumerable multitude of fixed stars which
without this assistance we should never have seen.

“It is no wonder that great efforts have been made to improve this
excellent instrument; these efforts have been attended with great
success, and what may be further done in this respect we cannot tell;
however, there is a limit to the improvements of the telescope, for
after it has attained a certain degree of magnifying power, the motes
and vapors in the atmosphere would be so magnified as to occupy its
whole field of view, and thus render it a useless incumbrance.”

Who can contemplate the power which produced the solar system, at once
so magnificent, beautiful, and delightful, without astonishment and
admiration? The planets are kept in a regular motion, and retained in
an invariable course round the sun, by the power of this luminary’s
attraction or gravity. These bodies have a projectile force, being
propelled forwards in a right line, which is the nature of all simple
motion; but the sun’s attraction combining with their own projectile
force, withdraws them from their rectilineal courses, and preserves
the most perfect harmony in the system. This wonderful mechanism
was originally impressed on the system by its infinitely wise and
omnipotent Creator; to which primary impulse it has with undeviating
uniformity adhered, having never suffered in its operations from the
greatest distance of space, or intervals of time!

Surely no power less than that which at first gave existence and
modification to matter, is equal to the government of the world. The
solar orb and the planetary bodies could no more subsist in their
present form and order, without a Divine, supporting, and directing
hand, than they could at the beginning make themselves. What is that
general law or force called _gravitation_, without which the whole
frame of nature would soon be dissolved? Is it not a power constantly
issuing from the Deity, and which if he should suspend but for one
moment, the whole creation would sink into ruins? How inconceivably
great and operative must that power be, that is present throughout the
universe, with all the heavenly orbs to preserve them in their courses;
and on this earth, with every creature, and every particle of matter,
to preserve its present form!

In addition to the planets and their satellites, there are _Comets_,
which revolve round the sun, and, consequently, are a part of the
solar system. They have often a long tail, in appearance resembling
hair, issuing from that side which is turned away from the sun. Comets
are popularly divided into three kinds, namely, bearded, tailed, and
hairy: but this arrangement seems to apply rather to the different
circumstances of the same comet, than to the phenomena of several.
Thus, when a comet is eastward of the sun, and moves with him, it is
said to be bearded, because the light precedes it in the manner of a
beard: but when it is westward of him, it is said to be tailed, because
the train of light follows it in the manner of a tail: and, lastly,
when the sun and comet are diametrically opposite, the earth being
between them, the train is hid behind the body of the comet, excepting
the extremities, which being broader than the body of the comet, appear
round it like a border of hair (_coma_), from which circumstance it is
said to be hairy, and is denominated a comet.

Without attending to the variety of opinions which philosophers and
astronomers have entertained concerning the nature and use of comets,
we may affirm, that they have been considered as alarming phenomena,
displayed by the Divine Being to warn mankind of the near approach of
some dreadful calamity, such as wars, pestilence, and famine. This
opinion prevailed during the dark ages between the decline of the Roman
empire, and the dawn of the Reformation. To this apprehension some of
our modern poets have alluded in strong and descriptive language. Young
says,

    “Hast thou ne’er seen the comet’s flaming light?
    Th’ illustrious stranger passing, terror sheds
    On gazing nations, from his fiery train
    Of length enormous; takes his ample round
    Through depths of ether; coasts unnumber’d worlds
    Of more than solar glory; doubles wide
    Heaven’s mighty cape; and then revisits earth,
    From the long travel of a thousand years.”

Milton uses still greater strength of language when he compares his
hero to a comet:

    “Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
    Unterrified, and like a comet burn’d
    That fines the length of Ophiucus huge
    In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
    Shakes pestilence and war.”

Similar ideas are finely expressed by Savage:

    “In fancy’s eye encount’ring armies glare,
    And sanguine ensigns wave unfurled in air!
    Hence the deep vulgar deem impending fate,
    A monarch ruined, or unpeopled state.
    Thus comets, dreadful visitants! arise,
    To _them_ wild omens, science to the _wise_,
    These mark the comet to the sun incline,
    While deep red flames around its centre shine!
    While its fierce rear a winding trail displays,
    And lights all ether with a sweeping blaze!
    Or when, compell’d, it flies the torrid zone,
    And shoots by worlds unnumbered and unknown;
    By worlds, whose people, all aghast with fear,
    May view that minister of vengeance near.”

Notwithstanding the present improved state of astronomical science, it
is evident that the philosophy of comets is very imperfect. Kepler,
though in other respects a very great genius, and to whose useful
labors astronomy is deeply indebted, indulged in the most extravagant
conjectures; he imagined that the planets were large animals, swimming
round the sun: and that the comets were animals still more huge and
monstrous, which had been generated in the celestial spaces. Jean
Bodin, a learned Frenchman of the 16th century, entertained an opinion,
if possible, still more absurd and ridiculous. He maintained that the
comets are spirits, which having lived on the earth innumerable ages,
and being at last arrived on the confines of death, celebrated their
last triumph, or are recalled to the firmament like shining stars! Mr.
Whiston was of opinion, that comets are so many hells, appointed in
their orbits alternately to carry the damned into the confines of the
sun, there to be scorched by its violent heat, and then to return with
them beyond the orb of Saturn, there to starve them in those cold and
dismal regions. Thus

    “Born in an age more curious than devout;
    More fond to fix the place of heaven or hell,
    Than studious this to shun, or that secure.”[131]

James Bernoulli, in his Systema Cometarum, says, that comets are no
other than the satellites of some very distant planet, which is itself
invisible to us on account of its vast distance, as are also the
satellites, unless when they are in that part of their orbits which
is nearest the earth. Comets, according to Des Cartes, were formerly
fixed stars: but which becoming gradually covered with maculæ, and
at length wholly deprived of their light, cannot keep their places,
but are carried off by the vortices of the circumjacent stars; and in
proportion to their magnitude and solidity, moved in such a manner as
to be brought nearer the orb of Saturn; and thus, coming within reach
of the sun’s light, are rendered visible.

Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarch, and others, testify, that the
Pythagoreans, and the whole Italian sect, maintained, that a comet
was a kind of planet or wandering star, which appeared again after a
long interval of time. Hippocrates Chius was of the same opinion as
Aristotle informs us. Democritus held also the same opinion, as Seneca
tells us in his “Natural Questions;” book vii, chap. 3, “For,” says he,
“Democritus, the most curious and subtle of all the ancients, suspected
that there were many more stars which moved, meaning by this expression
the comets; but he neither established their number, or their names,
the courses of the five planets not having as yet been discovered.”
Again, Seneca assures us, that Apollonius Myndius, one of the most
skilful philosophers in the search of natural causes, asserted, that
the Chaldeans reckoned comets among the other wandering stars, and
that they knew their courses. Apollonius himself maintained, that a
comet was a star of its own kind, as the sun and moon are, but that its
course was not yet known; that by its motions it mounts very high in
the heavens, and only appears when it descends into the lower part of
its orbit. And Seneca himself embraces this opinion in the following
truly philosophical words: “I cannot believe,” says he, “that a comet
is a fire suddenly kindled, but that it ought to be ranked among the
eternal works of nature. A comet has its proper place, and is not
easily moved from thence; it goes its course, and is not extinguished,
but runs off from us. But you will say, if it were a wandering star
it would keep in the zodiac. But who can set one boundary to all
the stars? Who can restrain the works of the Divinity to a narrow
compass? For each of those bodies, which you imagine to be the only
ones that have motion, have very different circles; why, therefore,
may there not be some that have peculiar ways of their own, wherein
they recede far from the rest? But that their courses may be known,
it is necessary to have a collection of all the ancient observations
about comets; for their appearances are so rare, that their orbits are
not yet determined; nor can we as yet find whether they have their
periods, or whether they return again in a certain order.”--“The time
will come,” continues he, “wherein these things which are now hid from
us will be discovered; which observation, and the diligence of after
ages, will find out. For it is not one age that is sufficient for so
great matters: the time will be when posterity will wonder that we were
ignorant of things so plain; one will arise who will demonstrate in
what regions of space the comets wander, why they recede so far from
the other planets; how great and what sort of bodies they are.”[132]
The period, predicted by Seneca, in the first century of the Christian
era, is not yet arrived. “After all that has been done and written on
the subject of comets,” says a late writer, “we must confess, that
our knowledge of these wandering bodies is still very imperfect.”
“It appears to me,” says La Lande, “that almost every thing depends
on comets. The only thing that I recommend to my correspondents, is
to look after and attend to comets: the knowledge of comets is alone
wanting to complete the science of astronomy.”

Several ages elapsed before this prediction of Seneca seemed likely to
be fulfilled. Tycho Brahé was the first who attempted to restore the
comets to their proper rank in creation. Having diligently observed the
comet of 1577, and finding that it had no sensible diurnal parallax,
he very properly determined its true place to be among the other
revolving bodies in the planetary regions, as appears by his book De
Cometa, 1577. And Sir Isaac Newton, from his amazing discoveries, gives
the following theory of comets: “They are,” says he, “compact, solid,
fixed, and durable bodies; in fact, a kind of planets, which move in
very oblique and eccentric orbits, every way with the greatest freedom;
persevering in their motions even against the course and direction of
the planets: and their tail is a very thin and slender vapor, emitted
by the head or nucleus of the comet, ignited or heated by the sun.”

Various conjectures have been formed concerning the nature of the tails
of comets. Dr. Hamilton, of Dublin, in the second of his Philosophical
Essays, urges several objections against the Newtonian hypothesis: he
remarks, that, since the tail of a comet, though exceedingly rare,
meets with no resistance in its rapid motion round the sun (except so
slight a one as can only cause a very small condensation on that side
of it which moves foremost, and thereby may make it a little brighter
than the other side), it cannot possibly move in a medium denser and
heavier than itself, and therefore cannot be raised up from the sun
by the superior gravity of such a medium. And since the stars seen
through all parts of a comet’s tail appear in their proper places,
and with their usual colors, he infers that the rays of light suffer
no refraction in passing through the tail; therefore, since bodies
reflect and refract light by one and the same power, he concludes
that the matter of a comet’s tail has not the power of refracting or
reflecting light, and is, of consequence, a lucid or self shining
substance. Also from what astronomers say of the splendor of comets’
tails, it is manifest they do not shine with such a dull light as would
be reflected to us by the clouds or vapors at so great a distance, but
with a brisker though a glimmering light, such as would arise from a
very thin, volatile, burning matter. Dr. Halley, speaking of the great
streams of light in the remarkable aurora borealis seen in 1716, says,
“they so much resembled the long tails of comets, that at first sight
they might be taken for such:” and afterwards, “this light seems to
have a great affinity to that which the effluvia of electric bodies
emit in the dark.” Dr. Hamilton improves upon these hints: and since,
as he shows, the tails of comets, the aurora borealis, and the electric
fluid, agree remarkably, not only in their appearance, but also in such
properties as we can observe of each of them, he concludes that they
are substances of the same nature. And, because the electric matter,
from its vast subtility and velocity, seems capable of making great
excursions from the planetary system, he imagines that the several
comets, in their long excursions from the sun in all directions, may
overtake this matter; and by attracting it to themselves may come back
replete with it, and being again heated by the sun, may disperse it
among the planets, and so keep up a circulation of this matter, which
there is reason to think is necessary in our system.[133]

Comets, descending from the remote parts of the system with great
rapidity become visible to us in the lower parts of their orbits; and
after a short stay, go off again to vast distances, and disappear. They
move about the sun in very eccentric ellipses; and the velocity with
which they seem to move is variable in every part of their path round
the sun; when near to which they appear to move with great swiftness,
and, when very remote, their motion is slow. They are opake bodies, but
of a much greater density than the earth; for some of them are heated
in every period to such a degree, as would vitrify or dissipate any
substance known to us. Sir Isaac Newton computed the heat of the comet,
which appeared in the year 1680, when nearest the sun, to be 2,000
times hotter than red hot iron, and that, being thus heated, it must
retain its heat till it comes round again, although its period should
be more than 20,000 years; and it is computed to be only 575.

The number of the comets is much greater than that of the planets
belonging to our system. From the beginning of the Christian era, till
now, there have appeared about five hundred. Before that time, we
have accounts of about one hundred others. But, when it is considered
that there may have been many that have not been seen, from being too
near the sun, from appearing in moon-light, from being in the other
hemisphere, or from being too small, or from not being recorded, the
number is probably much greater. Miss Herschell, by means of the
telescope, has, within the last twenty years, discovered several
comets. The orbits of about one hundred comets have been calculated
with sufficient accuracy for ascertaining their identity on any future
appearance. Many of these orbits are inclined to the plane of the
ecliptic in large angles, and many of them approach much nearer the sun
than the earth does. Their motions are also different from those of the
planets, some of them being direct and others retrograde, nearly half
the number moving each way. The different motions of the comets, and
the various inclinations of their orbits to the plane of the ecliptic,
must not be regarded as the work of chance, but as calculated to answer
beneficial purposes, or avoid baneful consequences; for if these orbits
had been nearly coincident with that of the earth, both bodies might
have arrived at the common point of intersection of their orbits at
the same time; in which case a derangement of both motions must, at
least, have been the necessary result.[134] But, according to all the
observations that have been made respecting their present distribution
and direction, there is not the least reason to apprehend any such
consequence.

The following table contains a list of the last twenty-three of the
principal comets that have been observed, with the time of passing
their perihelia, and their nearest approach to the sun.

                            Nearest distance
            Passage of the   from the Sun in  Direction of
    Years.    Perihelion.    English Miles.   their Motion.
    ------  --------------  ----------------  -------------
    1790     January   15      71 millions     Retrograde.
    1790     January   28     101              Direct.
    1790     May       21      75              Retrograde.
    1792     January   13     122              Retrograde.
    1792     December  27      91              Retrograde.
    1793     November   4      38              Retrograde.
    1793     November  18     142              Direct.
    1795     December  15      23              Direct.
    1796     April      2     149              Retrograde.
    1797     July       9      50              Retrograde.
    1798     April      4      46              Direct.
    1798     December  31      73              Retrograde.
    1799     September  7      79              Retrograde.
    1799     December  25      25              Retrograde.
    1801     August     8      22              Retrograde.
    1802     September  9     103              Direct.
    1804     February  13     101              Direct.
    1805     November  18      35              Direct.
    1805     December  31      84              Direct.
    1806     December  28     102              Retrograde.
    1807     September 18      61              Direct.
    1811     August    20      25              Direct.
    1815     April     26     121              Direct.

But of all the comets, the periods of three only are known with any
degree of certainty, being found to return at intervals of 75, 129,
and 575 years; and of these, that which appeared in 1680 is the most
remarkable. This comet, at its greatest distance, is about 11,200
millions of miles from the sun, while its least distance from the
centre of the sun is about 490,000 miles; being less than one third
part of the sun’s semi-diameter from his surface. In that part of its
orbit which is nearest the sun, it flies with the amazing velocity of
880,000 miles in an hour; and the sun, as seen from it, appears 100
degrees in breadth, consequently 40,000 times as large as he appears
to us. The astonishing distance that this comet runs out into empty
space, naturally suggests to our imagination the vast distance between
our sun and the nearest of the fixed stars, of whose attractions all
the comets must keep clear, to return periodically and go round the
sun. How wonderful that, though this body travelled almost two thousand
times faster than a cannon ball, yet it drew after it a tail of fire,
or of phosphoric gas, eight millions of miles in length! How amazing
to consider, that this stupendous body, traversing the immensity of
the creation with such rapidity, and at the same time wheeling about
in that line which its great Creator prescribed to it, should move
with such inconceivable velocity, and at the same time with such
exact regularity! How spacious must the universe be, that, gives such
bodies as these full play, without suffering the least disorder or
confusion by it! With what a glorious exhibition must those beings
be entertained, who can look into this great theatre of nature, and
see myriads of these tremendous objects wandering through those
immeasurable depths of æther, and running their appointed courses!
Our eyes may hereafter be strong enough to command this magnificent
prospect, and our understandings able to find out the several uses of
these immense parts of the universe. In the mean time, they are most
suitable objects for our imagination to contemplate, that we may
form more extensive notions of infinite wisdom and power, and learn
to think humbly of ourselves, and of all the little works of human
invention.[135]

The _Fixed Stars_ are objects of peculiar interest, and are so
denominated, because they are observed always to preserve the same
distance from each other; and are distinguished from the planets by
their twinkling, which seems to depend on the atmosphere; for we are
assured, that where the air is exceedingly pure and dry, the stars
appear with a light altogether free from scintillation. All the
heavenly bodies, the sun, moon, and stars, appear to move round the
earth, in circles parallel to the equinoctial, once in the compass of
twenty-four hours; though these _apparent_ motions are almost entirety
to be accounted for by the _real_ motions of the earth: but by far
the greater number of them never change their relative situations,
each (so long as an observer continues in the same place) rising and
setting at the same interval of time, and at the same points of the
horizon;--these are called the _fixed stars_.

The fixed stars, as appears from several considerations, are placed
at immense distances from us. Mr. Exley, in a friendly communication,
says, “It should be noticed, that the distances of the fixed stars have
never yet been discovered; not indeed so much for want of a method,
as for want of a base line sufficiently large for this admeasurement.
The diameter of the earth’s orbit is about one hundred and ninety
millions of miles; and the fixed stars, viewed from the opposite ends
of this extensive base line or diameter, have no sensible parallax, but
all appear in the very same situations, and of the same magnitudes;
and as this is the greatest line to the extremities of which we can
have access, it is very probable we shall ever remain in ignorance of
the true distances of the fixed stars. One thing, however, is fully
ascertained by the observations which have been made to find the
parallax of the stars, which is, that they are so immensely distant
from our planetary regions, that the whole solar system, consisting
of the sun and planets, with their satellites, and the comets, would,
if viewed from the nearest fixed star, appear as crowded into one
single point of space, which is also known from other observations.
How astonishingly extensive is the view of the universe which such
observations furnish!”

Our earth is at so great a distance from the sun, that if seen from
thence, it would appear no bigger than a point, although its diameter
is 7,954 miles. Yet that distance is so small, compared with the
earth’s remote situation from the fixed stars, that if the orbit in
which the earth moves round the sun were the circumference of a globe,
that globe, seen from the nearest star, would likewise appear no bigger
than a point, although, it is at least 190,000,000 miles in diameter.
For the earth in going round the sun is 190,000,000 miles nearer to
some of the stars at one time of the year than at another, and yet
their apparent magnitudes, situations, and distances from one another
still remain the same; and being viewed through a telescope which
magnifies above 200 times, they still appear as mere points: which
proves them to be at least 400,000 times further from us than we are
from the sun.

It is not to be imagined, that all the stars are placed in one concave
surface, so as to be equally distant from us; but that they are
scattered at immense distances from one another through unlimited
space. So that there may be as great a distance between any two
neighboring stars, as between our sun and those which are nearest to
him. Therefore an observer, who is nearest any fixed star, will look
on it alone as a real sun; and consider the rest as so many shining
points, placed apparently at equal distances from him in the firmament.
The star nearest to us, or the largest in appearance, is Sirius, or the
Dog Star, and astronomers have calculated from indubitable principles,
that its distance from us is considerably more than two millions of
millions of miles! The apparent magnitude of Sirius has been computed
at 27,000 times less than the sun, and, therefore, supposing their
magnitudes equal, is 27,000 times more distant. If so, as our earth
is ninety-five millions of miles from the sun, that multiplied by
twenty-seven thousand, will give two millions of millions, and an
addition of 565 thousand millions, for the distance of this star from
the sun.[136] Our earth, in moving round the sun, is 195,000,000 miles
nearer to this star in one part of its orbit, than in the opposite
one; and yet the magnitude of the star appears not to be in the least
altered or affected by it. A cannon-ball flying from thence at the
rate of 400 miles in an hour, would not reach us in 732,000 years! The
distance of the star γ Draconis appears, by Dr. Bradley’s observations,
to be at least 400,000 times that of the sun, and the distance of
the nearest fixed star not less than 80,000 diameters of the earth’s
annual orbit; that is, the distance of the earth from the former is =
to 400,000 × 95,000,000 = 38,000,000,000,000, and the latter not less
than 7,600,000,000,000. As these distances are much too great to be
comprehended by the human imagination, we shall, perhaps, obtain a
better idea of them by comparing them with the velocity of some moving
body, by which they may, in some way, be estimated. The swiftest motion
we know of is that of light, which passes from the sun to the earth
in about eight minutes, or, at the rate of 200,000 miles nearly in a
second of time: and yet even light would be more than six years in
traversing the first space, and a year and a quarter nearly, in passing
from the nearest fixed star to the earth. Again, a cannon ball, moving
with its initial or greatest velocity of about ten miles in a minute,
would be more than seven millions of years in passing from the star γ
Draconis to the earth. The celebrated M. Huygens carried his thoughts
so far upon this subject, as to believe that there might be stars at
such inconceivable distances from our earth, that their light, though
it is known to travel at the rate of 12,000,000 miles in a minute, has
not yet reached us, since the creation of the world!

    “How distant some of the nocturnal suns!
    So distant, says the sage, ’twere not absurd
    To doubt, if beams, set out at nature’s birth,
    Are yet arrived at this so foreign world;
    Though nothing half so rapid as their flight.”

And Mr. Addison observes, that this thought of Mr. Huygens is far from
being extravagant, when we consider that the universe is the work of
infinite power, prompted by infinite goodness, having an infinite space
wherein to exert itself, so that our imaginations can set no bounds to
it.

The magnitudes of the stars appear to be very different from one
another; which difference may probably arise, partly from a diversity
in their real magnitude, but chiefly, no doubt, from their different
distances. Hence it is, that the fixed stars have been divided, for the
sake of distinction, into six orders or classes. Those which appear
largest, are considered as stars of the first magnitude; the next to
them in lustre, stars of the second magnitude; and so on, through the
different gradations, to the smallest that are visible to the naked
eye, which are said to be of the sixth magnitude. This distribution
having been made long before the invention of telescopes, the stars
which cannot be seen without the assistance of these instruments,
are distinguished by the name of telescopic stars. Bayer, besides
accurately distinguishing the relative size and situation of each star,
marked the stars in each constellation with the letters of the Greek
and Roman alphabets, setting the first Greek letter to the first or
principal star in each constellation, to the second in order; then,
when the Greek alphabet was gone over, he passed to _a_, _b_, _c_, of
the Roman, and so on. This useful method of noting and describing the
stars has been adopted by all astronomers since the time of Bayer; and
they have further enlarged it, by adding the ordinal numbers 1, 2, 3,
&c, when any constellation contains more stars than can be marked by
the two alphabets.

As it would be impossible to furnish names for all the fixed stars,
and retain those names in the memory; it became necessary not only to
ascertain their exact relative situations, but to invent some method
by which the principal part of the stars which can be seen may be
known, without having recourse to a separate name for each. Ancient
astronomers formed a commodious plan of arranging the fixed stars
in constellations under names and figures of various personages,
celebrated in antiquity, and even of birds, beasts, fishes, &c.
This division of the heavens into constellations is obviously very
ancient; for some of them are mentioned by Hesiod and Homer, both of
whom probably flourished nearly 1000 years before the Christian era.
Arcturus, Orion, and the Pleiades, are twice mentioned in the book
of Job: and in the prophecy of Amos, composed about 400 years before
Christ, the _seven stars_ and _Orion_ are mentioned. As the knowledge
of the stars became more extensive, the number of the constellations
was increased; and at the same time more stars were introduced into
each constellation. Such of the stars as were not comprehended under
any constellations, were by the ancient astronomers, called unformed
stars. The modern astronomers have reduced not these unformed stars
only, but many other stars, into new figures; and it is probable that
other constellations will still continue to be invented.[137]

With respect to the number of fixed stars, there have been several
accounts, given by different persons, at various times. The celebrated
Hipparchus, of Rhodes, 120 years before Christ, formed a catalogue
of 1,022 stars; to which Ptolemy added four more. Ulug Beigh, the
grandson of Tamerlane, formed a catalogue of 1,017 stars. Tycho Brahé’s
catalogue only extended to 777; but he took care to ascertain all their
places. Kepler’s catalogue amounted to 1,163, which Ricciolus enlarged
to 1,468. Bayerus extended his catalogue further than any of his
predecessors, having described the places of 1,725. Hevelius increased
the catalogue to 1,888. Flamsteed enlarged these catalogues to the
number of about 3,000. But by means of the telescope, which affords
us a glimpse of infinite space, and presents to our view myriads of
worlds, and systems of worlds, by which it is filled, the number of
the stars is astonishingly increased. Galileo found eighty stars in
the space of the belt of Orion’s sword, and F. de Rheita observed more
than 2,000 in the whole constellation of Orion, of which not more than
seventy or eighty can ever be seen without glasses. Dr. Hook reckoned
seventy-eight stars in the single constellation of the Pleiades; and F.
de Rheita, with a better telescope, discovered 188: whereas we cannot
reckon above seven or eight seen by the naked eye. At the present
period, the positions of 60,000 fixed stars have been exactly recorded,
and they are generally arranged according to the size they appear; 20
of the largest are called stars of the first magnitude; 65 are of
the second magnitude; 205 of the third; 485 of the fourth; 648 of the
fifth; and about 1,500 of the sixth magnitude; the remainder, being
invisible to the naked eye, are called telescopic stars.

Where the stars are in great abundance, Dr. Herschell supposes they
form primaries and secondaries, that is, suns revolving about suns, as
planets revolve about the sun in our system. He considers that this
must be the case in what is called the _milky way_, the stars being
there in prodigious quantity. Of this he gives the following proof:
on August 22, 1792, he found that in forty-one minutes of time, not
less than 258,000 stars had passed through the field of view in his
telescope! Dr. Chalmers observes, If we ask the number of suns and of
systems--the unassisted eye of man can take in a thousand, and the
best telescope which the genius of man has constructed can take in
eighty millions. Thus, by the help of telescopes, we discover a vast
multitude of stars which are invisible to the naked eye; and the better
the glasses are, still the more become visible; so that we can set no
limits either to their number, or to their distances.

    “Myriads beyond with blended rays inflame
    The _milky way_, whose stream of vivid light,
    Poured from innumerable fountains round,
    Flows trembling, wave on wave, from sun to sun,
    And whitens the long path to heaven’s extreme:
    Distinguished tract!”

From an attentive examination of the stars with good telescopes, many
that appear only single to the naked eye, are found to consist of two,
three, or more stars. The late Dr. Maskelyne observed the α Herculis to
be a double star, and other astronomers have discovered many more to
be double. Dr. Herschell has found 700; of these about forty had been
observed before. The following will serve as a specimen, and afford the
observer a few objects for his attention. α Herculis is a beautiful
double star: the two bodies are apparently unequal: the largest is red,
and the smallest of a blueish color inclining to green. γ Andromedæ,
double, very unequal: the larger of a reddish white color; the smaller
a fine bright sky blue, inclining to green. β Lyræ, quadruple, unequal
white, but three out of the four inclined to red. ε Bootis, double,
very unequal, larger, of a reddish color; the smaller is blue, or of a
faint lilac color. α Lyræ, double, very unequal; the larger is a fine
brilliant white, the smaller dusky.

New stars sometimes appear, while others disappear. Several stars
mentioned by ancient astronomers are not now to be found: several
are now visible to the naked eye, which are not mentioned in ancient
catalogues; and some stars have suddenly appeared, and again after
a considerable interval vanished. Fortunio Liceti, a celebrated
physician, who died in 1656, in Padua, published a treatise, entitled,
“De novis Astris et Cometis.” In it he gives us an ample account
of the several new stars spoken of by the ancients, among which he
mentions that remarkable one which appeared A.D. 389, near the Eagle.
It was as bright as the planet Venus, for the space of three weeks,
but afterwards entirely disappeared. In the ninth century, the Arabian
astronomers, Massahala, Haly, and Albumazar, observed a new star in
the 15th degree of Scorpio, whose light equalled that of the moon in
her first octant: it was visible for four months. Cyprianus Leovitius
relates, that in the reign of the emperor Otho, A.D. 946, a new star
was seen between the constellations of Cepheus and Cassiopeia; and
also that another was seen A.D. 1264, very near the same part of the
heavens, which had no proper motion. One of the most celebrated of the
new stars is that discovered by Cornelius Jansen, November 8, 1572, in
the chair of Cassiopeia: it exceeded Sirius in brilliancy, and Jupiter
in apparent magnitude; it gradually decayed; and, after sixteen months,
disappeared. On the 13th of August, 1596, David Fabricius observed a
new star in the neck of the Whale, and it disappeared after October
in the same year, but was supposed to be again discovered in the year
1637. In the year 1600, William Jansen discovered a changeable star
in the neck of the Swan. It was seen by Kepler, who wrote a treatise
upon it, and determined its place to be 16° 18ʹ ♒, and 55° 30ʹ or 32ʹ
north latitude. Ricciolus saw it in 1616, 1621, and 1624. Cassini saw
it again in 1655; it increased till 1660; then decreased, and at the
end of 1661 it disappeared. In November, 1665, it appeared again, and
disappeared in 1681. In 1715 it appeared, as it does at present, and
is of the sixth magnitude. In 1686, Kircher observed χ in the Swan,
to be a changeable star in the neck of that constellation; and, from
twenty years’ observations, the period of the return of the same phases
was found to be 405 days. In 1604, Kepler discovered a new star near
the heel of Serpentarius, so very brilliant that it exceeded every
fixed star, and even Jupiter, in apparent magnitude. For more recent
discoveries, see Dr. Herschell’s paper, “On the proper Motion of the
Sun and the Solar System, with an account of the several changes that
have happened among the fixed stars since the time of Mr. Flamsteed,”
vol. lxxiii, of the Philosophical Transactions, or the fifteenth of the
Abridgment.

All the stars seem to have a common and general motion about the
pole of the ecliptic, at the rate of a degree in seventy-two years;
this is occasioned by the precession of the equinoctial points. In
consequence of this apparent motion, the constellations change their
positions in regard to the equinoctial points. Hence it is, that the
constellation Aries now is in the sign Taurus, and Taurus occupies the
sign Gemini. It has been the common opinion that the fixed stars have
no real motion, but the accurate observations of modern astronomers
show, that some of them have a motion peculiar to themselves, by which
they slowly change their places. Thus Arcturus is found to approach
the ecliptic about four minutes in 100 years; and its distance from a
small star near it has been sensibly changed during the last century.
Sirius seems to recede from the ecliptic about two minutes per century.
Similar motions have been observed in Aldebaran, Rigel, the eastern
shoulder of Orion, the Goat, the Eagle, &c. Other stars have been
observed to have a motion in different directions. Perhaps all the
stars have similar motions, which are performed by certain fixed laws
in spaces, which, though very large in reality, yet, because of their
immense distance, subtend at the earth angles so very small, as in
some cases to be quite imperceptible, while in other cases they may
be observed, as in the stars above-mentioned; and on this rational
supposition the appearance and disappearance, and variations in
magnitude, of some stars may be accounted for.

The fixed stars do not appear to be all regularly disseminated through
the heavens, but the greater part of them are collected into clusters;
and it requires a large magnifying power, with a great quantity
of light, to distinguish separately the stars which compose these
clusters. With a small magnifying power, and small quantity of light,
they only appear as minute whitish spots, much like small light clouds,
and thence they are called nebulæ. The number of nebulæ was formerly
imagined to be about 103; but Dr. Herschell, early in the year 1784,
had discovered 469 more, and since then has given a catalogue of
2,000 nebulæ which he has discovered. The most careful and accurate
observations give great reason to conclude, that they all consist
of large masses or clusters of stars at prodigious distances from
our system. Dr. Herschell is of opinion the starry heaven is replete
with these nebulæ, and that each of them is a distinct and separate
system independent of the rest. The milky way he supposes to be that
particular nebulæ in which our sun is placed; and, in order to account
for the appearance it exhibits, he supposes its figure to be much more
extended towards the apparent zone of illumination, than in any other
direction; which is a supposition that he thinks allowable, from the
observations he has made on the figures of other nebulæ.

That there are other worlds, beside our earth, inhabited by rational
beings, endued with bodily constitutions adapted to the nature and
economy of the respective planets for which they are destined, is a
conjecture that approaches the nearest to certainty. There is scarcely
any doubt now remaining amongst philosophers, that our moon is a
habitable globe. The most accurate observations that have been made
with the most powerful telescopes, have confirmed the opinion. The
surface of the moon seems to be diversified by high mountains, large
valleys, and small and larger collections of water; consequently she
resembles our earth; and there can be no doubt that our earth serves
as a moon to the moon, whose inhabitants, comparing it with the sun,
may well say,

        ----“gives us his blaze again
    Void of its flame, and sheds a softer day;”

which similarity existing between them, is a presumptive proof that
the moon, like our earth, is a commodious habitation for creatures
endowed with capacity for knowing and adoring their beneficent Creator.
By a very correct analogy we are led to infer, says a learned author,
that all the _planets_ and their _satellites_ or attendant moons, are
_inhabited_; for matter seems only to exist for the sake of intelligent
beings. And Dr. Herschell’s discoveries have, by the general consent
of philosophers, added, besides the Georgian planet, a _new habitable
world_ to our system, which is the SUN.

To an attentive mind it will appear highly probable, that the planets
of our system, and their moons, are much of the same nature with our
earth, and destined for the like purposes; for they are solid opaque
globes, capable of supporting animals and vegetables. Some of them
are bigger, some less, and others about the size of our earth. They
move round the sun, as the earth does, in a shorter or longer time,
according to their respective distances from him: and have, where
it would not be inconvenient, regular returns of summer and winter,
spring and autumn. They have warmer and colder climates, as the various
productions of our earth require: and, in such as afford a possibility
of discovering it, we observe a regular motion round their axis like
that of our earth, causing an alternate return of day and night; which
is necessary for labor, rest, and vegetation, and that all their
surfaces may be exposed to the rays of the sun.

Can a person who attends to the vast magnitude of the three planets,
Jupiter, Saturn, and Herschell or the Georgium Sidus, and compares the
systems of moons together which belong to them, bring himself to think,
that an infinitely wise Creator should dispose of all his animals and
vegetables here, leaving the other planets destitute of living and
rational creatures? To suppose that he had any view to our benefit
in creating these moons, and giving them their motions round their
respective primaries; to imagine, that he intended these vast bodies
for any advantage to us, when he well knew, that they could not be seen
but by a few astronomers looking through telescopes; and that he gave
to the planets regular returns of day and night, and different seasons
to all where they would be convenient, but of no manner of service to
us, except only what immediately concerns our own planet, the earth; to
imagine, I say, that, he did all this on our account, would, I presume,
be charging him with having done much in vain: and be as absurd, as to
fancy that he has created a little sun, and a planetary system within
the shell of our earth, and intended them for our use.

    “As well might the minutest emmet say,
    That Caucasus was raised to pave his way
    The snail, that Lebanon’s extended wood
    Was destin’d only for his walk and food.
    The vilest cockle, gaping on the coast,
    That rounds the ample seas, as well may boast,
    The craggy rock projects above the sky,
    That he in safety at its foot may lie;
    And the whole ocean’s confluent waters swell,
    Only to quench his thirst, and move and blanch his shell.”

These considerations amount to little less than a positive proof, that
all the planets are inhabited: for if they are not, why all this care
in furnishing them with so many moons, to supply those with light
which are at the greater distances from the sun? Do we not see, that
the further a planet is from the sun, the greater apparatus it has for
that purpose? Such of the planets as are most remote from the sun, and
therefore enjoy least of his light, have that deficiency made up by
several moons, which constantly accompany, and revolve about them, as
our moon revolves round our earth. So that if the more distant planets
have the sun’s light in less proportion by day than we, they have an
addition made to it morning and evening by one or more of their moons,
and a greater proportion of light during the night. We know that the
earth goes round the sun, and turns round upon its own axis, to produce
the vicissitudes of summer and winter by the former, and of day and
night by the latter motion, for the benefit of its inhabitants: may we
not then fairly conclude, by parity of reason, that the end or design
of all the other planets is the same? And is not this agreeable to the
beautiful harmony which exists throughout the works of nature? Surely
it is! and it raises in us the most magnificent ideas of the supreme
Being, who is every where, and at all times present; displaying his
power, wisdom, and goodness, among all his creatures; and distributing
happiness to innumerable beings of various ranks!

When we consider the infinite power and goodness of God; the latter
inclining, the former enabling him to make creatures suited to all
states and circumstances; that matter exists only for the sake of
intelligent beings; and that wherever we see it, we always find it
pregnant with life, or necessarily subservient thereto; the numberless
species, the astonishing diversity of animals in earth, air, water, and
even on other animals; every blade of grass, every tender leaf, every
natural fluid, swarming with life; and every one of these enjoying
such gratifications as the nature and state of each requires: when
we reflect also, that some centuries ago, till experience undeceived
us, a great part of the earth was judged uninhabitable; the Torrid
Zone, by reason of excessive heat, and the two Frigid Zones because of
their intolerable cold; it seems highly probable, that these numerous
and large masses of the planets are not destitute of beings capable
of contemplating with wonder, and acknowledging with gratitude, the
wisdom, symmetry, and beauty of the creation. It is an undoubted
truth, that wherever God exerts his power, there also he manifests his
wisdom and goodness.

From what we know of our own system, it may be reasonably concluded,
that all the rest are with equal wisdom contrived, situated, and
provided with accommodations for rational inhabitants. Taking a survey
of the system to which we belong; the only one accessible to us; from
thence we are the better enabled to judge of the nature and end of the
other systems of the universe. For although there is almost an infinite
variety in the parts of the creation which we have opportunities
of examining, yet there is a general analogy running through and
connecting all the parts into one scheme, one design, one whole!

The stars, being at such immense distances from the sun, cannot
possibly receive from him so strong a light as they seem to have; nor
any brightness sufficient to make them visible to us. For the sun’s
rays must be scattered and dissipated before they reach such remote
objects, that they can never be transmitted back to our eyes, so as to
render these objects visible by reflection.

    “I launch into the trackless deeps of space,
    Where, burning round, ten thousand suns appear
    Of elder beam, which ask no leave to shine
    Of our terrestrial star, nor borrow light
    From the proud regent of our scanty day.”

The stars, therefore, shine with their own native and unborrowed
lustre, as the sun does; and since each particular star, as well as the
sun, is confined to a particular portion of space, it is plain, that
the stars are of the same nature with the sun.

It is not probable that the Almighty, who always acts with infinite
wisdom, and does nothing in vain, should create so many suns, fit for
so many important purposes, and place them at such distances from
one another, without proper objects near enough to be benefited by
their influences. Whoever imagines they were created only to give a
faint glimmering light to the inhabitants of this globe, must have a
very superficial knowledge of astronomy, and a mean opinion of the
Divine wisdom: since, by a much less exertion of creating power, God
could have given to our earth considerably more light by one single
additional moon. Since the fixed stars are prodigious globes of light
and heat, like our sun, and at inconceivable distances from one
another, as well as from us, it is reasonable to conclude they are made
for the same purposes that the sun is; each to bestow light, heat, and
produce vegetation, on a certain number of inhabited planets, kept by
gravitation within the sphere of its activity.

Instead then of one sun, and one world only, in the universe, as the
unskilful in astronomy imagine, that science discovers to us such an
inconceivable number of suns, systems, and worlds, dispersed through
boundless space, that if our sun, with all the planets, moons, and
comets belonging to it, were annihilated, they would with difficulty be
missed, by an eye that could take in the whole creation; the space they
possess being comparatively so small that it would scarce be a sensible
blank in the universe, although Herschell, or the Georgium Sidus, the
most remote of our planets, revolves about the sun in an orbit whose
mean distance from the sun is 1,822,575,228 miles, and some of our
comets make excursions to an amazing distance beyond the bounds of that
planet: and yet, they are incomparably nearer to the sun than to any
of the stars; as is evident from their keeping clear of the attractive
power of all the stars, and returning periodically by the virtue of the
sun’s attraction.

“In the immensity of God’s creation,” says a learned author, “we may
readily conceive one system of heavenly bodies, and others beyond them,
and others still in endless progression, through the whole vortex of
space! Every _star_ in the vast abyss of nature being a _sun_, with its
peculiar and numerous attendant worlds. Thus there may be systems of
systems, in endless gradation, up to the throne of God!”

    “Oh, for a telescope HIS THRONE to reach!
    Tell me ye learn’d on earth, or blest above!
    Where your great Master’s orb? His planets where?
                      On nature’s Alps I stand
    And see a thousand firmaments beneath!
    A thousand systems as a thousand grains!
    _Each_ of these STARS is a _religious house_;
    I saw their altars smoke, their incense rise,
    And heard Hosannas ring through _ev’ry sphere_;
    A seminary fraught with future gods!
    Oh, what a root! Oh, what a branch is here!
    Oh, what a Father! What a family!
    Worlds, systems, and creations!---- And creations
    In one agglomerated cluster hung,
    Great _Vine_! on THEE; on THEE the cluster hangs;
    The filial cluster! infinitely spread
    In glowing globes, with various being fraught;
    And drinks (nectareous draught!) immortal life!”

What an august! what an amazing conception, if human imagination can
conceive it, does this give of the works of the Creator! Thousands
of thousands of suns, multiplied without end, and ranged all around
us, at immense distances from each other, attended by ten thousand
times ten thousand worlds, all in rapid motion, yet calm, regular,
and harmonious, invariably keeping the paths prescribed them; and
these worlds peopled with myriads of intelligent creatures, formed
for endless progression in perfection and felicity. If so much power,
wisdom, goodness, and magnificence, is displayed in the material
creation, which is the least considerable part of the universe,
how great, how wise, how good must He be, who made and governs the
whole![138]

The persuasion that rational beings inhabit other worlds, has a
powerful tendency to excite our curiosity.

    “Ye sparkling isles of light that stud the sea
    Of empyrean ether! Ye abodes
    Of unknown myriads, spirits, or in bands
    Held of corporeal frame! Fain would my soul
    A thirst for knowledge unreveal’d to man,
    Question your habitants, and fain would hear
    A voice responsive from your distant bourn.
    Tell, tell me who possess your radiant climes;
    What are their forms, their faculties, their hopes,
    Their fears, if subject or to hope or fear?
    What fond pursuits, what animating toils
    Diversify existence with delight?
    Rove they in course aërial unconfined
    From sphere to sphere, with interchange of joy
    Heightening their mutual bliss; or dwell they fix’d,
    Each in his native solitary orb,
    Unconscious of the lot of neighboring worlds?
    What homage, what returns of grateful love
    Yield they to Him who made them? Stand they fast
    In undecaying blessedness, secure
    From risk of loss: or tread they yet the stage
    Of perilous probation? Hath sin won
    Conquests through disobedience o’er those hosts
    In your bright regions yawn the gates of Death?
    Falls he, who falls, for ever?--Power supreme
    Pardon the aspiring thoughts that would presume
    To pierce the veil which shrowds from mortal eye
    The wonders of thy realms! Enough, to know
    That Thou art Lord! Thy universal love
    Pervades Creation; on each living form
    Showers down its proper happiness; and, when guilt
    Wakes thy reluctant vengeance, stays the bolt
    Of wrath, and pales its mitigated fire!”[139]

       *       *       *       *       *

Stars are the hieroglyphics used to express both rulers and teachers;
therefore they may with great propriety be applied to the pastors of
the church. The Jews, says Dr. Doddridge, are said to have called
their teachers _stars_. They are represented under that emblem in the
Revelation, where St. John, speaking of our Lord, says, “He had in his
right hand seven stars;” and the allegorical explanation is, “The seven
stars which thou sawest in my right hand are the angels (or ministers)
of the seven churches,” namely, in Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamos,
Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea. By αγγελοι, _angels_, we are
to understand the _messengers_ or persons whom God sent to preside
over these churches. “Angel of the church,” in this place, says a
learned author, answers exactly to that officer of the synagogue
among the Jews, called שליח ציבור _sheliach tsibbor_, the messenger
of the church, whose business it was to _read_, _pray_, and _teach_,
in the synagogue. The ministers of the gospel bear this allegorical
designation.

1. Because, like stars in the firmament, they are placed in a _high
situation_ in the church. Eliphaz says, “Behold the height of the
stars, how high they are!” The sacred office is the highest that men
can occupy, both in point of rank and importance; and therefore the
views, dispositions, and deportment of ministers, should accord with
it. They should not be sordid in their attachments, nor grovelling
in their pursuits. A predilection for lucrative places, and worldly
honors, is inconsistent with the sanctity of their character, and the
design of their profession. As they are in a station above others, so
their minds should have a high elevation, contemplating spiritual and
divine things, with intense application, and holy delight. The glories
of the new Jerusalem, and the felicities of the celestial Paradise,
are subjects which should engross their thoughts, and be exhibited
in their official ministrations. They should look on all debasing
pleasures, fleeting honors, and perishing riches, as things vastly
below the dignity of their character, and contrary to the objects of
their professional engagements. They have higher considerations to
excite their solicitude, and more important affairs to employ their
powers, than to spend their time in things, which neither can afford
them any rational satisfaction, nor are of long duration. St. James
calls their attention to what is of most interest to them, where he
says, that “he who converteth a sinner from the error of his way shall
save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins.” Success is
the most valuable remuneration, and should actuate ministers both in
their private studies, and their public labors.

2. Because of the _beneficial effects_ of their ministerial labors,
being useful to men, in affording them light, direction, and comfort;
and, consequently, the need the church has of them. Gospel ministers
are as necessary to the moral world, during the present state of
things, as the sun, moon, and stars are in the universe. A church
without such helps, would be like a firmament deprived of globular
lights. Ministers, with the bright rays of heavenly doctrine, dispel
the darkness of ignorance, chase away the clouds of error, scatter
the mists of prejudice, disperse the fogs of vice, from the human
mind. As stars engage the attention, and draw the eyes of persons
toward heaven, presenting in themselves astonishing displays of the
infinite perfections of wisdom, power, and goodness: so it is the work
of ministers to endeavor to excite people to the contemplation of
Divine things--to behold through the medium of the sacred Writings,
the mediatorial character of Christ, the results of his passion, the
prevalence of his intercession, the happiness of his subjects, and the
glories of his kingdom. As the stars serve for guides to seafaring
men, while traversing the untrodden paths of the swelling ocean; so
these symbolical stars are guides to those who embark in the vessel
of the church, directing her course, through the inconstant sea of
this tumultuous and fluctuating world, to the harbor of everlasting
rest. And as an extraordinary star in the east directed the wise men
to Bethlehem, where Christ was born; so it devolves upon ministers, as
stars of the church, to conduct inquiring sinners to Jesus, who is able
and willing to save them from their sins, and bless them with holiness
and eternal life. They may with propriety adopt the language of an old
poet:--

    “Oh that his light and influence
      Would work effectually in me
      Another new Epiphany,
    Exhale and elevate me hence:

    That as my calling doth require,
      Star-like I may to others shine;
      And guide them to that Sun divine,
    Whose day-light never shall expire.”

3. All the light that ministers communicate to mankind, or to
the members of the church, is derived from Christ, the Sun of
Righteousness, as the light of the planets is from the natural sun.
The pastors of the church have neither light nor grace of themselves:
they receive all from the “Father of lights,” in whose light only they
can see light; and it pleased him that in Christ should “all fulness
dwell.” Both ministers and people must be enlightened with emanations
from him, or remain in darkness. St. Paul frankly acknowledges, “By the
grace of God I am what I am.” Without him, the most eminent minister
would be like a dark lamp. Hence they have no reason to be proud of
their qualifications; for they have received all their gifts and
graces from Christ. Their fitness for the ministerial work is not to
be ascribed either to their natural powers, the force of a superior
genius, a liberal education, intense study, or even to goodness and
piety, but to the gratuitous bounty of God only. So likewise, whatever
success in the exercise of those gifts and graces they may have had,
it flowed not from such sources, but from Christ. “I have planted,”
says St. Paul, “and Apollos watered; but God gave the increase.” The
largest planets are inconsiderable in comparison of the sun, which is
the great natural fountain of light and heat. The holy prophets are
nothing when brought into contrast with Jesus Christ. And John the
Baptist, though superior to all his predecessors, conscious of his own
vast inferiority, confessed, “He it is who coming after me is preferred
before me, whose shoe’s latchet I am not worthy to unloose.”--As the
planets shine with no other light than that derived from the sun;
so ministers are to be resplendent only with the radiance of Divine
truth, received from the eternal Fountain of illumination. They are
not to shine with the glimmering light of fallable reason, the sparks
of human wisdom, the glow-worm rays of vain philosophy; not with the
subtlety of Aristotle, the penetration of Cartes, the eloquence of
Cicero, the speculations of Plato, the propositions of Euclid; but
with the correct and comprehensive knowledge of the Scripture, which
is “given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness; that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
works.” In a lower sense, it must be acknowledged, that human learning
is of considerable use, affording ministers certain qualifications
for their work. The knowledge of the languages, moral and natural
philosophy, sacred and profane history, mathematical science, the art
of speaking, particularly those branches of logic which teach us to
range our thoughts in a right method, to form propositions distinctly,
and to draw just conclusions from acknowledged premises: I say, the
knowledge of these different branches of literature and science, may
very much assist ministers to discover and defend the truth, and refute
its adversaries with their own weapons. But they must derive all their
peculiar lustre and excellence from the volume of Divine inspiration,
whence, as chosen instruments, they can make people wise to salvation.

4. Ministers are like the stars of heaven, because of the difference
that is among them, in respect of gifts and ability. The stars differ
from one another in situation, magnitude, influence, and glory. “There
is one glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory
of the stars: for one star differeth from another star in glory.”
The gradation extends from stars of the first to those of the sixth
magnitude. Some are so dazzling, that they appear with a peculiar
splendor among the shining beauties of the night: others are obscure
and nebulous; and there are many which can only be seen with the
help of telescopes. The stars of the moral hemisphere are not all
enlightened, “by the Day-spring from on high,” with the same degree of
intellectual and Divine radiance. They have not all the same gifts, nor
gifts in the same measure. Profound knowledge, excellency of speech,
solidity and firmness of judgment, prudence and dexterity of conduct,
are not usually the portion of one, but distributed among several
ministers. One excels in a talent for preaching, another is eminent
for utterance and power in prayer, and another is distinguished by
wisdom and stability for government. Paul was sublime and cogent in
reasoning; Apollos was copious, eloquent, and mighty in the Scriptures;
John soars high in mysteries, and yet excels in sweetness; Isaiah is
pompous and magnificent in his style; David charms and surprises us at
the same time, with his ecstatic raptures and poetic strains. In the
largest assembly of ministers there are not two alike, far less equal
in all things. Some, like stars of the first magnitude, shine with
great brilliancy: others have rays which are weak and obscure. Some are
prudent, but not eloquent. Some have the gift of preaching, but are not
remarkable for prudence and moderating their passions. Some have the
art of affecting the passions: others have the skill of enlightening
the mind, and informing the judgment. Some, appearing as if formed
in a finer mould, have a talent of politeness and address, in their
intercourse with people of character. Some, like skillful physicians,
know how to deal with afflicted souls, and relieve wounded consciences.
Some are sons of thunder, while others are sons of consolation. Though
every minister should have a competency of each of these gifts, yet
some excel in one, and some in another. Thus “there are diversities of
gifts, but the same Spirit;” and God, in diversifying his gifts, makes
his manifold wisdom appear. The Christians at Corinth not understanding
this, or too emulous for the first-rate talent, without sufficiently
regarding Divine agency, which can render the meanest useful, became
clamorous, and their indecorous conduct is held up to all succeeding
ages, with the censure they deservedly merited. However, to calm their
perturbation, he says, “Therefore let no man glory in men. For all
things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas; and ye are
Christ’s; and Christ is God’s.”

5. While some stars disappear, others arise that were not previously
observed. “Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live
forever?” Many, “of whom the world was not worthy,” who were bold to
suffer for the name of Christ, not only the spoiling of their goods,
the loss of liberty, and banishment from their native country, but
even death itself, have rested from their labors and afflictions, and
are now enjoying a glorious reward. The Lord also sometimes raises
up extraordinary lights, for asserting and propagating the truth,
when his church is overwhelmed with the dark clouds of heresy and
superstition. Of this Moses, Joshua, Elijah, and Elisha, as well as
many other prophets, whom the Lord called in an extraordinary manner,
were remarkable instances, in the Old Testament: and, in the New
Testament, John the Baptist, and the apostles of Christ, whose voices
were heard, and whose rays extended to the ends of the earth. When the
Christian church was covered with the dark superstition and idolatry
of antichrist, God raised up some eminent lights, from time to time,
to diffuse the pure doctrines of the Gospel, and lead the people out
of mystic Babylon. Such were John Wickliffe in England, John Huss and
Jerome of Prague in Bohemia; and, a hundred years afterwards, Luther
in Germany, Zuinglius in Switzerland, Calvin in France and Geneva,
and John Knox in Scotland, whom Beza calls the apostle of the Scots.
Then did the Gospel run, and was glorified, like a mighty torrent
carrying before it not only cities and provinces, but whole nations
and kingdoms.[140] Actuated by zeal for religion, says a clergyman of
the Establishment, “Wickliffe, Jerome, and Huss, roused the slumbering
clergy to opposition. The zeal of Luther and his associates alarmed all
Germany, and shook the Papal throne itself. Gilpin alone, in a dark
period, evangelized a large part of the northern counties of England.
Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, by their steady perseverance unto death,
illuminated the British Isles. The zeal of Whitefield and the two
Wesleys has, even in our day, made England, Scotland, Ireland, and
America, experience very important consequences.” Missionaries actuated
by primitive zeal, and sent out by different societies to preach the
Gospel among Heathen nations, like burning luminaries are chasing away
the darkness of ignorance, gross superstition, and degrading idolatry,
and, on their ruins, establishing the kingdom of Christ, and the reign
of truth, peace, righteousness, and benevolence, in the earth.

6. Ministers, considered as stars placed in the moral firmament, should
shine with purity of doctrine, fervency of zeal, and holiness of life,
both in the summer of prosperity, and in the winter of adversity. 1st.
In the _solemn assemblies_ of God’s people. Jerome says, Our pulpit
should be as Mount Tabor, where we should converse with Moses and the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, minding that we have to do with a
holy God, and with the immortal souls of people, which must be shortly
either in heaven or hell. 2d. Amongst _their flocks_, by an innocent,
instructive, and pious conversation, giving them no encouragement, by
their example, to sin; but alluring them to better worlds, and pointing
out the way thither. Their whole life should be a transcript of the
holy life of the blessed Jesus, a living epistle in which the people
may read the way wherein they ought to walk. 3d. In _their families_.
A minister should be “one that ruleth well his own house,” properly
presiding over and governing his own family: “for if a man know not how
to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?”
Eli’s conduct brought heavy judgments on himself and family, and a
great scandal on the church.


_Theory of the earth._

    [Such intimations and analogies as can be drawn from nature
    may, with propriety, be applied to the explanation of natural
    phenomena, in the absence of direct and satisfactory proof.
    Allowing this assumption, we conclude that the intimations
    and analogies in nature are sufficiently strong and clear to
    authorize a belief, _that all heavenly bodies are similar in
    their great constitutional principles, and designs, and that
    our earth may be taken as a fair and satisfactory sample of
    them all_.

    The only probable departure from this strong analogy in
    the heavenly bodies, seems to be this: the _suns_, or _centres
    of systems_, have a peculiar collection of phosphorescent
    clouds, which are designed to be the great exciting causes, or
    dispensers, of light to the planets which move round them. The
    planets have not these phosphorescent clouds.

    This does not interfere with the _general_ analogies
    between the heavenly bodies; and establishes the _strict
    analogies_ between the planets of all systems; and the suns, or
    centres of all systems.

    From all this we conclude, that a theory of _our earth_
    which is satisfactory, will also be deemed satisfactory in
    regard to the other heavenly bodies. We therefore lay down,
    as authorized by the intimations and analogies of nature, the
    following positions.

    1. _There is a general analogy between the constitutional
    principles and designs of the heavenly bodies; i.e. the suns
    and their planets._

    2. _That the sun, or center of each system, with all
    the planets and satellites revolving about it, were created
    simultaneously, as it regards their substances._

    3. _That they were created at their relative distances from
    the centre which they now preserve._

    4. _That they were stationary when first created, having no
    motion either on their axis, or in their orbits._

    5. _That the materials of each body, when first created,
    were solid, frozen, and lifeless._

    6. _That the materials of each body were created in their
    simple, uncombined, or elementary states._

    7. _That it is most probable these elementary materials
    were promiscuous in the mass, without regard to specific
    gravity, or any other principle or law._

    8. _That the arrangement of the materials of which our
    earth is composed was effected by the operation of the laws
    of nature, as they are called, which were simultaneously
    impressed upon the matter of the Solar System, and is continued
    impressed, by the direct agency of the Divine Being._

    9. _That this reference of the commencement, and
    continuance of the energies of the laws of nature, directly
    to the Almighty, is both philosophical and scriptural; and is
    noted by Moses in these words: “And the spirit of God moved
    upon the face of the waters (or deep.”)_

    Reasoning from these data, let us now see whether the
    phenomena of the structure and arrangement of our planet are
    explicable to a satisfactory degree.

    1. Immediately upon the impress of the laws of nature, by
    the direct effort of the Divine Being, the whole mass would
    commence revolving on its own axis, and moving around its
    centre in its orbit. At the same time a quickening impulse
    would be felt, from the operation of the laws of nature, which
    would impart life and animation to the mass. The first effect
    of this impulse would be to call the _caloric_, light, and
    electricity into action throughout the body. This would raise
    its temperature instantly, and call into action all the other
    powerful agents, as soon as formed: such as the acids, alkalis,
    &c.

    2. There will be no difficulty, to those who know the power
    of these agents, in believing _that the consequence of their
    united action would be an immediate fusion of the whole mass_.
    This would establish a state of _chemical mobility_; i.e. the
    various materials, owing to their fusion, would be at liberty
    to _combine_, according to the laws of chemical affinity; and
    to take their relative positions, according to the laws of
    gravitation.

    3. The result of this process would be binary, and ternary,
    and other combinations. Oxygen would enter into combination
    with the bases of the various acids, and thus form the acids;
    and with the various metals and thus form oxides; and the acids
    and oxides would unite and thus form other compounds, commonly
    called _salts_.

    4. As such combinations as these would commence forming
    first, water and air would be gradually and subsequently
    formed, by the three gasses, oxygen, hydrogen, and nitrogen,
    escaping from the mass and rising to the surface, where the
    oxygen combining with the hydrogen would form water; and with
    the nitrogen would form air.

    5. It is evident that the very small specific gravity of
    the gases would cause them to escape from the interior parts of
    the earth, rapidly, and to accumulate at the surface in immense
    quantities. The consequence of this would be, _an immense
    amount of water would be generated at the earth’s surface; but
    the oxidizable bodies in the interior of the mass would not,
    all of them, be completely saturated with oxygen_.

    6. The condition of the earth, at this stage of the action,
    would be an inconceivably high state of ignition, specially
    in the interior, and a rapid chemical action still going on;
    the combinations still forming, and the bodies thus formed
    arranging themselves. In a very little time the various classes
    of bodies would have obtained, generally, their natural
    relative positions, according to their specific gravities; and
    all the combinable elements, in the same neighborhood, having
    combined, a state of comparative rest would ensue of course.

    7. In the mean time, large quantities of different
    substances would be held in solution by the acids, alkalis, and
    water, whose solvent powers would be very much increased by the
    presence of intense heat.

    8. If we examine the whole mass at this stage of the
    natural process, we will find it is in a condition to
    _crystallize_ whenever it can be _reduced_ to a sufficiently
    low temperature to admit of crystallization. We know that the
    reduction of temperature would commence at the surface, where
    the caloric would be conducted upwards through the waters, and
    would fly off into the celestial spaces. Of course, the first
    crystallized depositions would take place _at the junction of
    the waters with the oxides or earths, in a state of fusion, on
    which the lower stratum of water was resting_.

    9. This first deposition would extend all around the globe,
    as the waters _entirely invested_ the earth, and would lay the
    _foundation of the primitive family of rocks_, which are well
    known to be crystalline in their structure, and the result
    of chemical action. It is, however, evident that there were
    occasional tremendous agitations, and concussions during the
    deposition of the primitive rocks, which altered the state of
    the fluids, and caused successive, and, sometimes, alternating
    strata to deposit.

    10. The period of the deposition of the primitive rocks
    continued until the elevations on the earth’s surface were
    uncovered, became dry, and were subject to the disintegrating,
    and rending powers of the elements: at which time some marine
    animals, and some vegetables, adapted to warm and moist
    climates, were created. The consequence of this state of
    things would be that fragments of rocks, and marine animal and
    vegetable remains would be found in the composition of the
    strata deposited at this period, and subsequently. The family
    of rocks thus deposited is called _transition_ rocks.

    11. This is the proper place to institute an inquiry into
    the origin of these _primitive elevations or mountains_.

    12. It will be very obvious, that a mass of materials
    thrown into chemical action, and raised to a very high
    temperature, as explained above, would naturally, and
    necessarily be upheaved at different points on its surface,
    by the gases, and other bodies escaping from the interior.
    And though the general softness of the mass would cause these
    elevations to sink back again _at first_, upon the escape
    of the gaseous bodies upheaving them; yet, when the surface
    of the earth, which would cool by coming into contact with
    the water, would thus begin to become solid, _the elevations
    would maintain themselves, and consolidate_, and thus lay
    the foundations of the irregularities which, subsequently,
    would rise into mountains, and mountain chains, and sink into
    vallies, by the combined action of the internal heat, and the
    occasional rapid rise and subsidence of the waters, which would
    alter the shape and appearance of the mountains, and deepen the
    vallies.

    13. But it becomes very natural to inquire into the cause
    of the rapid rise, and subsidence of the waters at particular
    times; which will also explain the cause of the distinctions
    so obvious in the nature and ages of the different families of
    rocks.

    14. It will be recollected that the interior parts of
    the earth are in a state of high ignition, and an immense
    quantity of water surrounds the globe, the crust of which
    is consolidating. By the natural pressure of the water, by
    an occasional eruption of gas from the interior, and by
    percolation, &c, the water would have access to the interior
    materials in a heated state. In this case there would be an
    immense production of steam, and decomposition of water, which
    would of course produce an earthquake, until it broke forth in
    a volcano under the waters. In this case an _elevation_ would
    be produced on the surface, and, in all probability, a _cavity_
    in the interior from whence the elevated materials came.

    15. These phenomena would happen in quick succession, and
    very extensively in the first period of the world; and every
    time they happened, they would _reduce_ the quantity of water
    at the surface, by admitting some into the interior cavities;
    and by decomposing much; the oxygen and hydrogen of which would
    enter into other combinations.

    16. This will account for the rise and subsidence of the
    waters, the formation of vallies, and mountains, and the
    alterations in the fluids, so as to deposit the different
    strata in succession.

    17. During this process above, cavities sufficiently
    numerous and capacious, filled with water, would be formed
    in the earth to relieve the surface, in a great measure. But
    it seems pretty evident that the waters thus retired into
    those cavities were occasionally thrown back on the earth,
    by the same means with which earthquakes and volcanos are
    produced; and thus tremendous currents would ensue, which would
    successively bury the vegetable materials in the adjoining
    lakes, out of which the coal basins are formed; and also bury
    those immense forests of trees, with the bones of animals, and
    fishes also, which have been so clearly and satisfactorily
    described by geologists.

    18. Each successive deluge, in proportion to its power and
    extent, would alter the quantity and quality of the materials
    held in solution, and thus cause a corresponding deposition
    subsequently. Hence, as remarked above, the distinction in
    the strata, and the alternations of different substances
    successively.

    19. It may not be amiss here to say, it is very probable,
    that many deluges preceded the formation of man, produced on
    the same principles as the deluge of Noah, though for different
    purposes, according to the wishes of the Divine Being.

    20. To what has been said above, it is only necessary
    to add, that all depositions, or formations of rocks took
    place _at the bottom of the ocean_, or waters which held
    the materials in solution, or suspended; and that this
    ocean maintained its dominion for long periods together, in
    comparative tranquility, and during such times the different
    rock formations were deposited. The marine animals would
    multiply, die, and their exuviæ quietly fall to the bottom: at
    the same time carbonate of lime would be copiously deposited
    from the sea waters, and thus would consolidate into a stratum
    of rock, the thickness of which would bear some proportion to
    the length of the period of its deposition. If this stratum
    _remained in its place_, upon the retiring of the sea, it would
    appear at the surface at first; until it was covered with
    mould, and the ruins of other rocks disintegrated into earth,
    or soil. But if it were _upheaved_ by the force of the internal
    fire, it would become a _limestone mountain_, containing the
    organic remains as they were first quietly deposited. The same
    may be said of primitive mountains, or any other kind.

    21. The _transition_ rocks, the formation of which was
    barely noticed above, (No. 10) were deposited successively
    in strata, indicating their relative ages by the increase of
    rocky fragments, and fossil remains in their composition,
    from the oldest of the family to the newest: and also by the
    gradual change in their structure, which is more crystalline
    in the oldest, and becomes less so in the newest, owing to the
    decrease of chemical action, and the increase of mechanical
    deposition.

    22. From the fossil remains in the different strata of the
    transition rocks, we have good evidence of successive deluges,
    which swept away the animals existing at the time, and buried
    their remains which are now found in a fossil state; and others
    succeeded them. This will account for particular animals being
    peculiar to particular strata of rocks.

    23. During the transition period the chemical action ceased
    almost entirely, and the succeeding family of rocks, i.e. the
    _secondary_, was deposited _mechanically_, their materials
    being merely _suspended_ in the waters. This class, therefore,
    is not crystalline in its structure, and is nearly horizontal
    in position and contains greater quantities of fossil remains,
    both of animals and vegetables. These remains are, also, the
    relics of beings more delicately organized, and approach much
    nearer to the genera and species of animals now existing.

    24. During the deposition of this class of rocks, and also
    of the _tertiary_ class which succeeded it, the sea retired far
    from the up-lands, and well nigh into its permanent beds. The
    up-lands would, by the disintegrating power of the elements, be
    worn away at their surface, and thus afford the matter of soil,
    which would naturally be carried down towards the final retreat
    of the sea, by the waters, and be deposited in the vallies,
    and low countries. The same process would furnish fragments of
    rocks in abundance, and of all kinds, which would be rolled
    down the declivities of the up-lands, and become more or less
    rounded, and thus be found entering into the rocks of the
    secondary and tertiary classes; or in beds of sand and gravel,
    or in the channels of rivers in the form of _pebbles_. If these
    fragments were thrown together in sufficient quantities, and a
    suitable cement deposited among them they would consolidate and
    form _pudding-stone_, or breccia marble; such as the Potomac
    marble, of which the columns in the Capitol at Washington City
    are made.

    25. It is very evident that this process would deposit
    the heavier fragments, and materials nearest the highlands
    whence they originated; and carry the finer and richer matter
    further away towards the sea, and deposit it nearer the mouths
    of the rivers. This is well known to be the case, as in the
    Mississippi. Here the phenomena are doubtless, from the mouth,
    along all its tributaries to their sources.

    26. While these successive depositions were making,
    modified by tremendous eruptions from the force of subterranean
    fire, the same agent of these modifications would produce
    another very striking phenomena. The immense quantity of matter
    thrown from the interior to the surface in a melted state,
    would either shoot up in the form of cones, or columns, and
    by cooling crystallize and consolidate; or would flow in its
    melted state over the surface of the upper rocks, and thus
    cover them. This is the case with a class of rocky substances
    which may be called by the general name of _basalt_. Sometimes
    when the force below was not sufficient to protrude the
    melted matter through the superincumbent rocks, it drove it
    in _between_ the strata, or shot it up _through_ some of the
    strata; frequently upheaving the rocks on one side of the
    protruding body, or depressing them on the other. In this case
    the injected matter constitutes what is called a _fault_,
    _shaft_, or _dike_, by miners.

    27. It is not improbable, nay, it is pretty certain, that
    many of these basaltic ejections took place under the ancient
    chaotic abyss of waters, and have become visible by the
    retiring of the sea.

    28. In this theory we have a satisfactory explanation
    of the formation of _metallic veins_, and the _dispersion_
    of metallic grains in sands, and soil. The metals being in
    a pure state, or nearly so, in the bowels of the earth when
    _projected_ upwards by the force of subterranean power,
    would be _injected_ into the rocks in the direction of the
    operating force. Hence they are found in veins in solid rocks,
    running in all directions, and descending to unknown depths.
    Sometimes the whole of the vein appears to be _insulated_ by
    the rock. In this case, the whole mass was _fused_, at least
    partly, and when the force ceased to act, it would consolidate
    around the injected metal, leaving no trace of its injection.
    Sometimes the metallic vein evidently entered the rock _from
    above_. In this case the metal in a _melted_ state was thrown
    to the surface, and _meeting with a chasm, ran into it and
    consolidated into a vein_. When the metal was raised from
    below in a state of fusion in conjunction with an immense
    mass of rocky matter in a state of fusion, they would appear
    at the surface mixed throughout. When this rocky mass yielded
    to the disintegrating power of the elements, the particles
    of the metal and rock would be carried off together into the
    lower positions, and be found in the form of _dust_, in the
    secondary, or lower countries.

    29. The shape of the earth, in regard to which it is said
    the polar diameter is less than the equatorial, would be the
    same on the above theory, as it has been shown to be, on the
    supposition that the earth was in a soft state by the solvent
    powers of water, as commonly supposed.

    30. It is a matter of peculiar pleasure to the Christian
    philosopher, to observe the strong tendency in the Science of
    Geology, to confirm the account of the creation of the world,
    as given by Moses in the Bible. By a careful comparison of the
    account of Moses with well established geological positions,
    it will be found that _they agree expressly, in the_ ORDER
    _and_ NATURE _of the events_. This is a splendid evidence in
    favor of revelation. There can be no doubt, but, that if the
    phenomena of nature, and the teachings of the Bible were better
    understood, more striking and unexpected agreements would be
    found. Religion and Science will one day be inseparable.


    _Remarks._

    1. It will be necessary for the reader to peruse the above
    theory very attentively, in order to form a correct judgment
    of it, as it is merely an _outline_, very briefly drawn up,
    yet it is hoped, pretty clearly. Whether it be well calculated
    to explain the great leading geological phenomena which we
    observe, the reader will determine for himself. It was not
    drawn up _in view_ of such explanation, but was constructed
    by _induction_ from those well ascertained phenomena. It was
    drawn up _out of view_ of any ultimate object, or system,
    _previously_ embraced, and is even _different_ from the
    writer’s previous opinions, before he had diligently compared
    all the facts within his reach. It is therefore entitled to the
    merit of having been drawn up with a sincere desire to attain
    to truth on this interesting subject, and not to support a
    favorite theory.

    2. Upon examination it will be found to reconcile, in a
    great measure, the _Vulcanian_ and _Neptunian_ theories which
    have so long divided the principal writers on Geology. It
    will be found that both _fire_ and _water_ were concerned in
    producing the great geological phenomena. It cannot be doubted
    but that subterranean force _commenced_ the irregularities on
    our earth’s surface, and continued the action, probably with
    occasional intermissions, in upheaving the mountains, and
    mountain chains: but as this was commenced, and principally
    accomplished, _under_ the ancient sea, there can be no doubt
    but that the water has had a powerful and extensive agency
    in modifying the structure and composition of mountain, and
    moderate elevations. And while we have every reason to believe
    the force of subterranean fire was the principal agent in
    rending, dislocating, and confusing the rock formations of the
    crust of our earth; we have no less reason to acknowledge the
    agency of water in depositing the various strata; contributing
    to the disintegration of the exposed uplands; and carrying down
    the _alluvion_ which form the fertile tracts of vallies, and
    low countries; and the sand bars, and banks at the outlets, of
    rivers, bays, gulfs, &c.

    3. This view will be more clearly explained by examining
    the _shape_ of continents, islands, and countries, which will
    be found to correspond, pretty nearly with the shape of the
    mountain ranges in each. That is: the _length_ of a continent,
    island, or country will be found to be _in the direction of the
    mountain range_; and the _breadth across_ the mountain range.

    4. This would be the shape which would naturally result
    from the transition, secondary, and tertiary formations arising
    principally from the disintegration of the materials of the
    mountain range. This is evident from a single reflection: if a
    _conical_ body stood in the midst of a plain, and was equally
    exposed to a power which wore it away, the portions thus torn
    from the body would roll down the declivity towards the base of
    the cone, and would occupy a circle, generally speaking, of the
    plane at the base equidistant from the body. In the same manner
    the wasting away of the primitive elevations would deposit the
    detritus equidistant from the foot of the range.

    5. It will be obvious, however, that the conformity of
    a country, _in shape_, to the mountain ranges which run
    through it, will be more or less modified by adventitious
    circumstances. If one side of the mountain range was originally
    more precipitous than the other: or if some tremendous
    collection or current of water lashed or swept one side, and
    not the other, the shape of the country would be modified; but
    not so much as to destroy the general conformity in shape. The
    above remarks will be confirmed by an inspection of accurately
    drawn maps.

    6. Finally: Some formations are entirely owing to the
    agency of water; as sand banks, bars, shoals, &c, and some
    entirely owing to the action of fire, as the deposites of lava;
    the upheaving of volcanic mountains, even in the memory of man.
    These are _adventitious_ formations, and do not even _modify_
    a general theory.]

       *       *       *       *       *

Footnotes - Chapter V

    [114] Time’s Telescope for 1815, Introduction.

    [115] Dr. Robert Wittie, in his Survey of the Heavens,
    makes the following observations concerning this miraculous
    interposition of Divine providence. “We read that Joshua, in
    his zeal against the enemies of God and his people, in the heat
    of battle, called to the sun and moon to stand still, &c. The
    design was that the light might be lengthened, till he might
    destroy the army of the Amorites, and the day was accordingly
    prolonged, as the sun went not down for the whole day, and the
    moon also staid.--But why should Joshua call to the moon to
    stand still, as well as the sun, which I could be of no use
    to him, while the sun was up? To this I answer with all due
    modesty; I do believe Joshua did call thus by inspiration, and
    a special impulse from God upon his spirit: for that which
    would make the sun stand still, would stay the moon. He that
    from the hasty zealous call of this great general, shall think
    to form an argument to prove the philosophical notion of the
    sun’s diurnal motion about the earth, by taking the words in
    a proper literal sense, may as well go on, and eke it out a
    little further, and then he may prove the sun to have been in
    the next great town, Gibeon, and the moon in the valley; but if
    to all men this latter shall be judged a weak inference, I dare
    say, to many wise men, so will the former.” P. 12, 13.

    [116] Aristotle de Cœl. lib. ii, cap. 13.

    [117] Macrob. Sat. lib. i, cap. 21.

    [118] Macrob. in Somn. Scip. lib. i, cap. 20.

    [119] That is, in adoration; from _ad ore_, to the mouth,
    i.e. _hand_ to the mouth.

    [120] Baseley’s Glory of the Heavens, pp. 73-76.

    [121] The new moon is often styled a _crescent_; a word
    formed from the Latin _crescere_, to _grow_; and though it is
    used from the same figure of the moon in her wane or decrease,
    when her horns are turned towards the west, yet these horns
    always point to the east in the just crescent.

    [122] M. Schroëter, of the Royal Society of Gottingen,
    has recently published a very curious and elaborate work
    in German, entitled, Selenotographische Fragmente, &c, or
    Selenotopographical Fragments, intended to promote a more
    accurate knowledge of the moon’s surface: a valuable extract
    from which may be seen in the Pantologia, article _Moon_.

    [123] See Mr. Howard’s valuable paper on the Philosophical
    Transactions for 1802, Dr. Hutton’s Dissertation in the New
    Abridgment, part xxi, and Dr. Adam Clarke on Josh. x, 11.

    [124] The principal eclipse of the sun, for the present
    century, has been already calculated, and it is fully
    determined that it will take place in the year 1847. It will
    be annular in this country, and several other places. Time’s
    Telescope for 1815.

    The Athenians, according to Plutarch, entertained very
    terrific ideas of eclipses of the moon. Nicias and his army,
    when they were on the point of withdrawing secretly from
    Sicily, without being observed or suspected by the enemy,
    refused to embark, because the moon became suddenly eclipsed;
    this ignorant and superstitious conduct proved fatal, for they
    were all, shortly after, either slain or taken prisoners.

    [125] A valuable correspondent writing from Matura, in
    Ceylon, May 7, 1817, says, “A festival was lately celebrated
    here, principally on the river. A large boat was rigged for the
    purpose, somewhat after the manner of a ship, which carried a
    number of dancers and other persons in disguise, accompanied
    with the music of pipes and drums. I particularly inquired into
    the meaning of the ceremonies; and, as far as I could learn, it
    was a celebration of the birth of the sun and moon. The world
    is believed to have been once inhabited by holy brahmins, whose
    bodies were transparent, and afforded sufficient light. When
    these fell into sin, they lost their splendor, and other lights
    became necessary.”

    The African negroes, in the West Indies, on seeing the new
    moon, take out of their pocket a piece of whatever money they
    have, and, holding it up in their hand, say, “God bless the new
    moon, this is all I can give you; take this, and give me good
    luck:” and then throw it up toward it. After this action, they
    believe that prosperity will attend them during the time that
    moon continues. On embracing the Christian religion, they lay
    aside this heathenish practice.

    [126] On the dial of the cathedral at Bruges, the sun is
    represented directing the hours, with this motto, _Non rego,
    nisi regar_: signifying, that the sun could not rule the
    day, if it was not first ruled itself. Had the Pagan world
    known this truth, the greatest part of it had not fallen into
    idolatry.

    [127] Literary Panorama, for January, 1814, pp. 954, 955.

    [128] “At what time the earth began to be considered,
    or rather suspected, to be spherical,” says Costard, “is
    uncertain, but probably not before the undertaking long
    voyages; the first of which, it may be, were down the Arabian
    Gulf, and out of the Straits of _Bab-Al-mandub_, by Europeans
    corruptly called _Babelmandel_. What opinion was commonly
    entertained of those who undertook those long voyages, may be
    learned, in some measure, from this word. For _Mandub_ is one
    that is lamented at his funeral; therefore _Bab-al-mandub_ is
    the _gate_, or _strait_, of one lamented at his funeral; as if
    a person sailing beyond that point, was considered as going to
    certain death, or never to return.”

    [129] See Verstigan’s “Restitution of Decayed
    Intelligence,” Edit. 1673, pp. 64-68; and Time’s Telescope.

    [130] On June 14, 1815, was published the following
    astronomical notice. The Georgium Sidus is now visible to
    the naked eye any clear night. It souths now a little before
    midnight, is paler and less vivid than the fixed stars near it
    in Scorpio; it will remain in company with Arcturus for two or
    three years, passing north of it about the middle of the year
    1816, and veering to the east, or left hand, at the rate of 4°
    18ʹ annually, being near seven years in passing one sign, and
    near 84 in making an entire revolution.

    Dr. Herschell assumes, that the eclipses of the satellites
    of the Georgium Sidus will, in the year 1818, be visible to
    those who possess telescopes of high magnifying powers, when
    they will appear to ascend through the shadow of the planet in
    the direction almost perpendicular to the ecliptic.

    [131] In the year 1712, Mr. Whiston having calculated
    the return of a comet, which was to make its appearance on
    Wednesday, the 14th of October, at five minutes after five in
    the morning; he gave notice to the public accordingly, with
    this terrifying addition, that _a total dissolution of the
    world by fire was to take place on the Friday following_. The
    reputation Mr. Whiston had long maintained, both as a divine
    and a philosopher, left little or no doubt with the populace
    of the truth of his prediction. Several ludicrous events
    took place in consequence. A number of persons in and about
    London seized all the barges and boats they could lay their
    hands on in the Thames, very rationally concluding, that when
    the conflagration took place, there would be the most safety
    on the water. A gentleman who had neglected _family prayer_
    for longer than five years, informed his wife that it was
    his determination to resume that laudable practice the same
    evening; but his wife having engaged _a ball at her house_,
    persuaded her husband to put it off till they saw whether the
    comet appeared or not. The South-sea stock immediately fell to
    _five per cent._, and India stock to _eleven_. The captain of a
    Dutch ship threw all his powder into the river, that the ship
    might not be endangered.

    The next morning the comet appeared according to the
    prediction, and before noon the belief was universal, that
    _the day of judgment was at hand_. About this time of the
    day 123 clergymen were ferried over to Lambeth, it was said,
    to petition that a short prayer might be penned and ordered,
    there being none in the church service on that occasion.
    Three maids of honor burnt their collections of novels and
    plays, and sent to a bookseller’s to buy each of them a Bible,
    and Bishop Taylor’s Holy Living and Dying. The run upon the
    Bank was so prodigious, that all hands were employed from
    morning till night in discounting notes, and handing out
    specie. On Thursday, considerably more than _seven thousand
    kept mistresses were legally married_! in the face of several
    congregations. And to crown the whole, Sir Gilbert Heathcote,
    at that time head director of the Bank, issued orders to all
    the fire-offices in London, requiring them “to keep a good look
    out, and have a particular eye upon the Bank of England.”

    The comet which might have put the earth in most hazard,
    was that of 1680. By Halley’s calculation it passed, November
    11, within 60 semi-diameters of the earth’s orbit: and if, at
    that time, the earth had been in that part of her orbit, there
    is no conjecturing at the consequences.--Literary Panorama, for
    December, 1811.--Probably the above was only a hoax upon Mr.
    Whiston on account of the singularity of his opinion concerning
    comets.

    [132] Dr. Keill’s Astronomy, 5th Edit. pp. 189, 190.

    [133] Dr. O. Gregory’s Treatise on Astronomy, p. 413.

    [134] The celebrated Buffon supposed, that our earth was
    originally formed by a comet’s sweeping off and receiving in
    his train a portion of the exterior part of the sun; which,
    after having been sufficiently cooled, in the lapse of time,
    perhaps hundreds of thousands of years, had gradually assumed
    its present form! When we reflect that this eminent French
    naturalist was an infidel and a libertine, his many strange
    theories confirm the remark of the Poet,

        “An undevout astronomer is mad.”

    When a person through the pride of intellect, will not
    submit his fallible understanding to the sure light of Divine
    revelation, he is liable to embrace the greatest absurdities,
    which a sober and well-regulated mind would prevent.

    [135] Guardian, No. 103.

    [136] The distances of the fixed stars have never been
    absolutely determined, and what is here stated is not given
    as the true distance of Sirius; but from what has been
    ascertained, the distance cannot be less than as above. Dr.
    Bradley, after another method of calculation, makes it to
    be more than ten times greater, or twenty-five millions of
    millions, and 650 thousand of millions.

    [137] In 1627, Schiller published a work, entitled Cœlum
    Stellatum Christianum, containing the ancient catalogue,
    with new constellations. In this work he rejected the
    old designations, and substituted new figures for the
    constellations, and names taken from the sacred Scriptures;
    thus Aries he changed into St. Peter; Taurus, into St. Andrew;
    Andromeda, into the holy sepulchre; Lyra, into the manger
    of Christ; Hercules, into the wise men of the east; Canis
    Major, into David; and so on. This he is said to have done in
    imitation of the venerable Bede, who, instead of the profane
    names and figures adopted by pagans, substituted the names of
    the twelve apostles for those of the twelve constellations
    in the zodiac: but these innovations were disregarded by
    astronomers. Weigelius, professor of mathematics at Jena,
    attempted to make an innovation of another kind; he wished to
    change the starry heavens into a kind of Cœlum Heraldicum, by
    introducing the arms of all the princes and states of Europe,
    by way of constellations; but his project experienced the same
    fate as those of Bede and Schiller.

    [138] See Ferguson’s Astronomy.

    [139] Gisborne’s _Walks in a Forest_, sixth edit. pp. 44,
    45, 46.

    [140] The author thankfully acknowledges his obligations
    for many of the above thoughts to an old sermon preached “at
    the opening of the Synod of Lothian and Tweeddale;” but cannot
    say of what date, or by whom delivered, as his copy of it is
    without title-page.


       *       *       *       *       *




