CHAPTER VI.


The exaggeration of the severity of Bunyan's imprisonment long current,
now that the facts are better known, has led, by a very intelligible
reaction, to an undue depreciation of it.  Mr. Froude thinks that his
incarceration was "intended to be little more than nominal," and was
really meant in kindness by the authorities who "respected his
character," as the best means of preventing him from getting himself into
greater trouble by "repeating an offence that would compel them to adopt
harsh measures which they were earnestly trying to avoid."  If convicted
again he must be transported, and "they were unwilling to drive him out
of the country."  It is, however, to be feared that it was no such kind
consideration for the tinker-preacher which kept the prison doors closed
on Bunyan.  To the justices he was simply an obstinate law-breaker, who
must be kept in prison as long as he refused compliance with the Act.  If
he rotted in gaol, as so many of his fellow sufferers for conscience'
sake did in those unhappy times, it was no concern of theirs.  He and his
stubbornness would be alone to blame.

It is certainly true that during a portion of his captivity, Bunyan, in
Dr. Brown's words, "had an amount of liberty which in the case of a
prisoner nowadays would be simply impossible."  But the mistake has been
made of extending to the whole period an indulgence which belonged only
to a part, and that a very limited part of it.  When we are told that
Bunyan was treated as a prisoner at large, and like one "on parole," free
to come and go as he pleased, even as far as London, we must remember
that Bunyan's own words expressly restrict this indulgence to the six
months between the Autumn Assizes of 1661 and the Spring Assizes of 1662.
"Between these two assizes," he says, "I had by my jailer some liberty
granted me more than at the first."  This liberty was certainly of the
largest kind consistent with his character of a prisoner.  The church
books show that he was occasionally present at their meetings, and was
employed on the business of the congregation.  Nay, even his preaching,
which was the cause of his imprisonment, was not forbidden.  "I
followed," he says, writing of this period, "my wonted course of
preaching, taking all occasions that were put into my hand to visit the
people of God."  But this indulgence was very brief and was brought
sharply to an end.  It was plainly irregular, and depended on the
connivance of his jailer.  We cannot be surprised that when it came to
the magistrates' ears--"my enemies," Bunyan rather unworthily calls
them--they were seriously displeased.  Confounding Bunyan with the Fifth
Monarchy men and other turbulent sectaries, they imagined that his visits
to London had a political object, "to plot, and raise division, and make
insurrections," which, he honestly adds, "God knows was a slander."  The
jailer was all but "cast out of his place," and threatened with an
indictment for breach of trust, while his own liberty was so seriously
"straitened" that he was prohibited even "to look out at the door."  The
last time Bunyan's name appears as present at a church meeting is October
28, 1661, nor do we see it again till October 9, 1668, only four years
before his twelve years term of imprisonment expired.

But though his imprisonment was not so severe, nor his prison quite so
narrow and wretched as some word-painters have described them, during the
greater part of the time his condition was a dreary and painful one,
especially when spent, as it sometimes was, "under cruel and oppressive
jailers."  The enforced separation from his wife and children, especially
his tenderly loved blind daughter, Mary, was a continually renewed
anguish to his loving heart.  "The parting with them," he writes, "hath
often been to me as pulling the flesh from the bones; and that not only
because I am somewhat too fond of these great mercies, but also because I
should often have brought to my mind the many hardships, miseries, and
wants my poor family was like to meet with, should I be taken from them;
especially my poor blind child, who lay nearer to my heart than all
beside.  Poor child, thought I, thou must be beaten, thou must beg, thou
must suffer hunger, cold, nakedness, and a thousand calamities, though I
cannot now endure the wind should blow on thee.  O, the thoughts of the
hardships my blind one might go under would break my heart to pieces."  He
seemed to himself like a man pulling down his house on his wife and
children's head, and yet he felt, "I must do it; O, I must do it."  He
was also, he tells us, at one time, being but "a young prisoner," greatly
troubled by the thoughts that "for aught he could tell," his
"imprisonment might end at the gallows," not so much that he dreaded
death as that he was apprehensive that when it came to the point, even if
he made "a scrabbling shift to clamber up the ladder," he might play the
coward and so do discredit to the cause of religion.  "I was ashamed to
die with a pale face and tottering knees for such a cause as this."  The
belief that his imprisonment might be terminated by death on the
scaffold, however groundless, evidently weighed long on his mind.  The
closing sentences of his third prison book, "Christian Behaviour,"
published in 1663, the second year of his durance, clearly point to such
an expectation.  "Thus have I in few words written to you before I die,
.  . . not knowing the shortness of my life, nor the hindrances that
hereafter I may have of serving my God and you."  The ladder of his
apprehensions was, as Mr. Froude has said, "an imaginary ladder," but it
was very real to Bunyan.  "Oft I was as if I was on the ladder with a
rope about my neck."  The thought of it, as his autobiography shows,
caused him some of his deepest searchings of heart, and noblest ventures
of faith.  He was content to suffer by the hangman's hand if thus he
might have an opportunity of addressing the crowd that he thought would
come to see him die.  "And if it must be so, if God will but convert one
soul by my very last words, I shall not count my life thrown away or
lost."  And even when hours of darkness came over his soul, and he was
tempted to question the reality of his Christian profession, and to doubt
whether God would give him comfort at the hour of death, he stayed
himself up with such bold words as these.  "I was bound, but He was free.
Yea, 'twas my duty to stand to His word whether He would ever look on me
or no, or save me at the last.  If God doth not come in, thought I, I
will leap off the ladder even blindfold into Eternity, sink or swim, come
heaven, come hell.  Lord Jesus, if Thou wilt catch me, do.  If not, I
will venture for Thy name."

Bunyan being precluded by his imprisonment from carrying on his brazier's
craft for the support of his wife and family, and his active spirit
craving occupation, he got himself taught how to make "long tagged
laces," "many hundred gross" of which, we are told by one who first
formed his acquaintance in prison, he made during his captivity, for "his
own and his family's necessities."  "While his hands were thus busied,"
writes Lord Macaulay, "he had often employment for his mind and for his
lips."  "Though a prisoner he was a preacher still."  As with St. Paul in
his Roman chains, "the word of God was not bound."  The prisoners for
conscience' sake, who like him, from time to time, were cooped up in
Bedford gaol, including several of his brother ministers and some of his
old friends among the leading members of his own little church, furnished
a numerous and sympathetic congregation.  At one time a body of some
sixty, who had met for worship at night in a neighbouring wood, were
marched off to gaol, with their minister at their head.  But while all
about him was in confusion, his spirit maintained its even calm, and he
could at once speak the words of strength and comfort that were needed.
In the midst of the hurry which so many "newcomers occasioned," writes
the friend to whom we are indebted for the details of his prison life, "I
have heard Mr. Bunyan both preach and pray with that mighty spirit of
faith and plerophory of Divine assistance that has made me stand and
wonder."  These sermons addressed to his fellow prisoners supplied, in
many cases, the first outlines of the books which, in rapid succession,
flowed from his pen during the earlier years of his imprisonment,
relieving the otherwise insupportable tedium of his close confinement.
Bunyan himself tells us that this was the case with regard to his "Holy
City," the first idea of which was borne in upon his mind when addressing
"his brethren in the prison chamber," nor can we doubt that the case was
the same with other works of his.  To these we shall hereafter return.
Nor was it his fellow prisoners only who profited by his counsels.  In
his "Life and Death of Mr. Badman," he gives us a story of a woman who
came to him when he was in prison, to confess how she had robbed her
master, and to ask his help.  Hers was probably a representative case.
The time spared from his handicraft, and not employed in religious
counsel and exhortation, was given to study and composition.  For this
his confinement secured him the leisure which otherwise he would have
looked for in vain.  The few books he possessed he studied indefatigably.
His library was, at least at one period, a very limited one,--"the least
and the best library," writes a friend who visited him in prison, "that I
ever saw, consisting only of two books--the Bible, and Foxe's 'Book of
Martyrs.'"  "But with these two books," writes Mr. Froude, "he had no
cause to complain of intellectual destitution."  Bunyan's mode of
composition, though certainly exceedingly rapid,--thoughts succeeding one
another with a quickness akin to inspiration,--was anything but careless.
The "limae labor" with him was unsparing.  It was, he tells us, "first
with doing, and then with undoing, and after that with doing again," that
his books were brought to completion, and became what they are, a mine of
Evangelical Calvinism of the richest ore, entirely free from the narrow
dogmatism and harsh predestinarianism of the great Genevan divine; books
which for clearness of thought, lucidity of arrangement, felicity of
language, rich even if sometimes homely force of illustration, and
earnestness of piety have never been surpassed.

Bunyan's prison life when the first bitterness of it was past, and habit
had done away with its strangeness, was a quiet and it would seem, not an
unhappy one.  A manly self-respect bore him up and forbade his dwelling
on the darker features of his position, or thinking or speaking harshly
of the authors of his durance.  "He was," writes one who saw him at this
time, "mild and affable in conversation; not given to loquacity or to
much discourse unless some urgent occasion required.  It was observed he
never spoke of himself or his parents, but seemed low in his own eyes.  He
was never heard to reproach or revile, whatever injury he received, but
rather rebuked those who did so.  He managed all things with such
exactness as if he had made it his study not to give offence."

According to his earliest biographer, Charles Doe, in 1666, the year of
the Fire of London, after Bunyan had lain six years in Bedford gaol, "by
the intercession of some interest or power that took pity on his
sufferings," he enjoyed a short interval of liberty.  Who these friends
and sympathisers were is not mentioned, and it would be vain to
conjecture.  This period of freedom, however, was very short.  He at once
resumed his old work of preaching, against which the laws had become even
more stringent during his imprisonment, and was apprehended at a meeting
just as he was about to preach a sermon.  He had given out his text,
"Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" (John ix. 35), and was standing
with his open Bible in his hand, when the constable came in to take him.
Bunyan fixed his eyes on the man, who turned pale, let go his hold, and
drew back, while Bunyan exclaimed, "See how this man trembles at the word
of God!"  This is all we know of his second arrest, and even this little
is somewhat doubtful.  The time, the place, the circumstances, are as
provokingly vague as much else of Bunyan's life.  The fact, however, is
certain.  Bunyan returned to Bedford gaol, where he spent another six
years, until the issuing of the "Declaration of Indulgence" early in 1672
opened the long-closed doors, and he walked out a free man, and with what
he valued far more than personal liberty, freedom to deliver Christ's
message as he understood it himself, none making him afraid, and to
declare to his brother sinners what their Saviour had done for them, and
what he expected them to do that they might obtain the salvation He died
to win.

From some unknown cause, perhaps the depressing effect of protracted
confinement, during this second six years Bunyan's pen was far less
prolific than during the former period.  Only two of his books are dated
in these years.  The last of these, "A Defence of the Doctrine of
Justification by Faith," a reply to a work of Edward Fowler, afterwards
Bishop of Gloucester, the rector of Northill, was written in hot haste
immediately before his release, and issued from the press
contemporaneously with it, the prospect of liberty apparently breathing
new life into his wearied soul.  When once Bunyan became a free man
again, his pen recovered its former copiousness of production, and the
works by which he has been immortalized, "The Pilgrim's Progress"--which
has been erroneously ascribed to Bunyan's twelve years' imprisonment--and
its sequel, "The Holy War," and the "Life and Death of Mr. Badman," and a
host of more strictly theological works, followed one another in rapid
succession.

Bunyan's second term of imprisonment was certainly less severe than that
which preceded it.  At its commencement we learn that, like Joseph in
Egypt, he found favour in his jailer's eyes, who "took such pity of his
rigorous suffering, that he put all care and trust into his hands."
Towards the close of his imprisonment its rigour was still further
relaxed.  The Bedford church book begins its record again in 1688, after
an interval of ominous silence of five years, when the persecution was at
the hottest.  In its earliest entries we find Bunyan's name, which occurs
repeatedly up to the date of his final release in 1672.  Not one of these
notices gives the slightest allusion of his being a prisoner.  He is
deputed with others to visit and remonstrate with backsliding brethren,
and fulfil other commissions on behalf of the congregation, as if he were
in the full enjoyment of his liberty.  This was in the two years'
interval between the expiration of the Conventicle Act, March 2, 1667-8,
and the passing of the new Act, styled by Marvell, "the quintessence of
arbitrary malice," April 11, 1670.  After a few months of hot
persecution, when a disgraceful system of espionage was set on foot and
the vilest wretches drove a lucrative trade as spies on "meetingers," the
severity greatly lessened.  Charles II. was already meditating the
issuing of a Declaration of Indulgence, and signified his disapprobation
of the "forceable courses" in which, "the sad experience of twelve years"
showed, there was "very little fruit."  One of the first and most notable
consequences of this change of policy was Bunyan's release.

Mr. Offor's patient researches in the State Paper Office have proved that
the Quakers, than whom no class of sectaries had suffered more severely
from the persecuting edicts of the Crown, were mainly instrumental in
throwing open the prison doors to those who, like Bunyan, were in bonds
for the sake of their religion.  Gratitude to John Groves, the Quaker
mate of Tattersall's fishing boat, in which Charles had escaped to France
after the battle of Worcester, had something, and the untiring advocacy
of George Whitehead, the Quaker, had still more, to do with this act of
royal clemency.  We can readily believe that the good-natured Charles was
not sorry to have an opportunity of evidencing his sense of former
services rendered at a time of his greatest extremity.  But the main
cause lay much deeper, and is connected with what Lord Macaulay justly
styles "one of the worst acts of one of the worst governments that
England has ever seen"--that of the Cabal.  Our national honour was at
its lowest ebb.  Charles had just concluded the profligate Treaty of
Dover, by which, in return for the "protection" he sought from the French
king, he declared himself a Roman Catholic at heart, and bound himself to
take the first opportunity of "changing the present state of religion in
England for a better," and restoring the authority of the Pope.  The
announcement of his conversion Charles found it convenient to postpone.
Nor could the other part of his engagement be safely carried into effect
at once.  It called for secret and cautious preparation.  But to pave the
way for it, by an unconstitutional exercise of his prerogative he issued
a Declaration of Indulgence which suspended all penal laws against
"whatever sort of Nonconformists or Recusants."  The latter were
evidently the real object of the indulgence; the former class were only
introduced the better to cloke his infamous design.  Toleration, however,
was thus at last secured, and the long-oppressed Nonconformists hastened
to profit by it.  "Ministers returned," writes Mr. J. R. Green, "after
years of banishment, to their homes and their flocks.  Chapels were re-
opened.  The gaols were emptied.  Men were set free to worship God after
their own fashion.  John Bunyan left the prison which had for twelve
years been his home."  More than three thousand licenses to preach were
at once issued.  One of the earliest of these, dated May 9, 1672, four
months before his formal pardon under the Great Seal, was granted to
Bunyan, who in the preceding January had been chosen their minister by
the little congregation at Bedford, and "giving himself up to serve
Christ and His Church in that charge, had received of the elders the
right hand of fellowship."  The place licensed for the exercise of
Bunyan's ministry was a barn standing in an orchard, once forming part of
the Castle Moat, which one of the congregation, Josias Roughead, acting
for the members of his church, had purchased.  The license bears date May
9, 1672.  This primitive place of worship, in which Bunyan preached
regularly till his death, was pulled down in 1707, when a "three-ridged
meeting-house" was erected in its place.  This in its turn gave way, in
1849, to the existing more seemly chapel, to which the present Duke of
Bedford, in 1876, presented a pair of noble bronze doors bearing scenes,
in high relief, from "The Pilgrim's Progress," the work of Mr. Frederick
Thrupp.  In the vestry are preserved Bunyan's chair, and other relics of
the man who has made the name of Bedford famous to the whole civilized
world.




