Chapter VIII.

Next comes the question, whether a man is a man of Self-Control for
abiding by his conclusions and moral choice be they of what kind they
may, or only by the right one; or again, a man of Imperfect
Self-Control for not abiding by his conclusions and moral choice be
they of whatever kind; or, to put the case we did before, is he such
for not abiding by false conclusions and wrong moral choice?

Is not this the truth, that _incidentally_ it is by conclusions and
moral choice of any kind that the one character abides and the other
does not, but _per se_ true conclusions and right moral choice:[19] to
explain what is meant by incidentally, and _per se_; suppose a man
chooses or pursues this thing for the sake of that, he is said to
pursue and choose that _per se_, but this only incidentally. For the
term _per se_ we use commonly the word “simply,” and so, in a way, it
is opinion of any kind soever by which the two characters respectively
abide or not, but he is “simply” entitled to the designations who
abides or not by the true opinion.

There are also people, who have a trick of abiding by their, own
opinions, who are commonly called Positive, as they who are hard to be
persuaded, and whose convictions are not easily changed: now these
people bear some resemblance to the character of Self-Control, just as
the prodigal to the liberal or the rash man to the brave, but they are
different in many points. The man of Self-Control does not change by
reason of passion and lust, yet when occasion so requires he will be
easy of persuasion: but the Positive man changes not at the call of
Reason, though many of this class take up certain desires and are led
by their pleasures. Among the class of Positive are the Opinionated,
the Ignorant, and the Bearish: the first, from the motives of pleasure
and pain: I mean, they have the pleasurable feeling of a kind of
victory in not having their convictions changed, and they are pained
when their decrees, so to speak, are reversed: so that, in fact, they
rather resemble the man of Imperfect Self-Control than the man of
Self-Control.

Again, there are some who depart from their resolutions not by reason
of any Imperfection of Self-Control; take, for instance, Neoptolemus in
the Philoctetes of Sophocles. Here certainly pleasure was the motive of
his departure from his resolution, but then it was one of a noble sort:
for to be truthful was noble in his eyes and he had been persuaded by
Ulysses to lie.

So it is not every one who acts from the motive of pleasure who is
utterly destitute of Self-Control or base or of Imperfect Self-Control,
only he who acts from the impulse of a base pleasure.

Chapter IX.

Moreover as there is a character who takes less pleasure than he ought
in bodily enjoyments, and he also fails to abide by the conclusion of
his Reason,[20] the man of Self-Control is the mean between him and the
man of Imperfect Self-Control: that is to say, the latter fails to
abide by them because of somewhat too much, the former because of
somewhat too little; while the man of Self-Control abides by them, and
never changes by reason of anything else than such conclusions.

Now of course since Self-Control is good both the contrary States must
be bad, as indeed they plainly are: but because the one of them is seen
in few persons, and but rarely in them, Self-Control comes to be viewed
as if opposed only to the Imperfection of it, just as Perfected
Self-Mastery is thought to be opposed only to utter want of
Self-Control.

Again, as many terms are used in the way of similitude, so people have
come to talk of the Self-Control of the man of Perfected Self-Mastery
in the way of similitude: for the man of Self-Control and the man of
Perfected Self-Mastery have this in common, that they do nothing
against Right Reason on the impulse of bodily pleasures, but then the
former has bad desires, the latter not; and the latter is so
constituted as not even to feel pleasure contrary to his Reason, the
former feels but does not yield to it.

Like again are the man of Imperfect Self-Control and he who is utterly
destitute of it, though in reality distinct: both follow bodily
pleasures, but the latter under a notion that it is the proper line for
him to take, his former without any such notion.

And it is not possible for the same man to be at once a man of
Practical Wisdom and of Imperfect Self-Control: because the character
of Practical Wisdom includes, as we showed before, goodness of moral
character. And again, it is not knowledge merely, but aptitude for
action, which constitutes Practical Wisdom: and of this aptitude the
man of Imperfect Self-Control is destitute. But there is no reason why
the Clever man should not be of Imperfect Self-Control: and the reason
why some men are occasionally thought to be men of Practical Wisdom,
and yet of Imperfect Self-Control, is this, that Cleverness differs
from Practical Wisdom in the way I stated in a former book, and is very
near it so far as the intellectual element is concerned but differs in
respect of the moral choice.

Nor is the man of Imperfect Self-Control like the man who both has and
calls into exercise his knowledge, but like the man who, having it, is
overpowered by sleep or wine. Again, he acts voluntarily (because he
knows, in a certain sense, what he does and the result of it), but he
is not a confirmed bad man, for his moral choice is good, so he is at
all events only half bad. Nor is he unjust, because he does not act
with deliberate intent: for of the two chief forms of the character,
the one is not apt to abide by his deliberate resolutions, and the
other, the man of constitutional strength of passion, is not apt to
deliberate at all.

So in fact the man of Imperfect Self-Control is like a community which
makes all proper enactments, and has admirable laws, only does not act
on them, verifying the scoff of Anaxandrides,

“That State did will it, which cares nought for laws;”


whereas the bad man is like one which acts upon its laws, but then
unfortunately they are bad ones.

Imperfection of Self-Control and Self-Control, after all, are above the
average state of men; because he of the latter character is more true
to his Reason, and the former less so, than is in the power of most
men.

Again, of the two forms of Imperfect Self-Control that is more easily
cured which they have who are constitutionally of strong passions, than
that of those who form resolutions and break them; and they that are so
through habituation than they that are so naturally; since of course
custom is easier to change than nature, because the very resemblance of
custom to nature is what constitutes the difficulty of changing it; as
Evenus says,

“Practice, I say, my friend, doth long endure,
And at the last is even very nature.”


We have now said then what Self-Control is, what Imperfection of
Self-Control, what Endurance, and what Softness, and how these states
are mutually related.

APPENDIX.
Book VII. Chapters 12 to 15. (Bekker.)

To consider the subject of Pleasure and Pain falls within the province
of the Social-Science Philosopher, since he it is who has to fix the
Master-End which is to guide us in dominating any object absolutely
evil or good.

But we may say more: an enquiry into their nature is absolutely
necessary. First, because we maintained that Moral Virtue and Moral
Vice are both concerned with Pains and Pleasures: next, because the
greater part of mankind assert that Happiness must include Pleasure
(which by the way accounts for the word they use, μακάριος; χαίρειν
being the root of that word).

Now some hold that no one Pleasure is good, either in itself or as a
matter of result, because Good and Pleasure are not identical. Others
that some Pleasures are good but the greater number bad. There is yet a
third view; granting that every Pleasure is good, still the Chief Good
cannot possibly be Pleasure.

In support of the first opinion (that Pleasure is utterly not-good) it
is urged that:

1. Every Pleasure is a sensible process towards a complete state; but
no such process is akin to the end to be attained: _e.g._ no process of
building to the completed house.

2. The man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids Pleasures.

3. The man of Practical Wisdom aims at avoiding Pain, not at attaining
Pleasure.

4. Pleasures are an impediment to thought, and the more so the more
keenly they are felt. An obvious instance will readily occur.

5. Pleasure cannot be referred to any Art: and yet every good is the
result of some Art.

6. Children and brutes pursue Pleasures.

In support of the second (that not all Pleasures are good), That there
are some base and matter of reproach, and some even hurtful: because
some things that are pleasant produce disease.

In support of the third (that Pleasure is not the Chief Good), That it
is not an End but a process towards creating an End.

This is, I think, a fair account of current views on the matter.

But that the reasons alleged do not prove it either to be not-good or
the Chief Good is plain from the following considerations.

First. Good being either absolute or relative, of course the natures
and states embodying it will be so too; therefore also the movements
and the processes of creation. So, of those which are thought to be bad
some will be bad absolutely, but relatively not bad, perhaps even
choice-worthy; some not even choice-worthy relatively to any particular
person, only at certain times or for a short time but not in themselves
choice-worthy.

Others again are not even Pleasures at all though they produce that
impression on the mind: all such I mean as imply pain and whose purpose
is cure; those of sick people, for instance.

Next, since Good may be either an active working or a state, those
[κινήσεις or γενέσεις] which tend to place us in our natural state are
pleasant incidentally because of that tendency: but the active working
is really in the desires excited in the remaining (sound) part of our
state or nature: for there are Pleasures which have no connection with
pain or desire: the acts of contemplative intellect, for instance, in
which case there is no deficiency in the nature or state of him who
performs the acts.

A proof of this is that the same pleasant thing does not produce the
sensation of Pleasure when the natural state is being filled up or
completed as when it is already in its normal condition: in this latter
case what give the sensation are things pleasant _per se_, in the
former even those things which are contrary. I mean, you find people
taking pleasure in sharp or bitter things of which no one is naturally
or in itself pleasant; of course not therefore the Pleasures arising
from them, because it is obvious that as is the classification of
pleasant things such must be that of the Pleasures arising from them.

Next, it does not follow that there must be something else better than
any given pleasure because (as some say) the End must be better than
the process which creates it. For it is not true that all Pleasures are
processes or even attended by any process, but (some are) active
workings or even Ends: in fact they result not from our coming to be
something but from our using our powers. Again, it is not true that the
End is, in every case, distinct from the process: it is true only in
the case of such processes as conduce to the perfecting of the natural
state.

For which reason it is wrong to say that Pleasure is “a sensible
process of production.” For “process etc.” should be substituted
“active working of the natural state,” for “sensible” “unimpeded.” The
reason of its being thought to be a “process etc.” is that it is good
in the highest sense: people confusing “active working” and “process,”
whereas they really are distinct.

Next, as to the argument that there are bad Pleasures because some
things which are pleasant are also hurtful to health, it is the same as
saying that some healthful things are bad for “business.” In this
sense, of course, both may be said to be bad, but then this does not
make them out to be bad _simpliciter_: the exercise of the pure
Intellect sometimes hurts a man’s health: but what hinders Practical
Wisdom or any state whatever is, not the Pleasure peculiar to, but some
Pleasure foreign to it: the Pleasures arising from the exercise of the
pure Intellect or from learning only promote each.

Next. “No Pleasure is the work of any Art.” What else would you expect?
No active working is the work of any Art, only the faculty of so
working. Still the perfumer’s Art or the cook’s are thought to belong
to Pleasure.

Next. “The man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids Pleasures.” “The man of
Practical Wisdom aims at escaping Pain rather than at attaining
Pleasure.”

“Children and brutes pursue Pleasures.”

One answer will do for all.

We have already said in what sense all Pleasures are good _per se_ and
in what sense not all are good: it is the latter class that brutes and
children pursue, such as are accompanied by desire and pain, that is
the bodily Pleasures (which answer to this description) and the
excesses of them: in short, those in respect of which the man utterly
destitute of Self-Control is thus utterly destitute. And it is the
absence of the pain arising from these Pleasures that the man of
Practical Wisdom aims at. It follows that these Pleasures are what the
man of Perfected Self-Mastery avoids: for obviously he has Pleasures
peculiarly his own.

Then again, it is allowed that Pain is an evil and a thing to be
avoided partly as bad _per se_, partly as being a hindrance in some
particular way. Now the contrary of that which is to be avoided, _quâ_
it is to be avoided, _i.e._ evil, is good. Pleasure then must be _a_
good.

The attempted answer of Speusippus, “that Pleasure may be opposed and
yet not contrary to Pain, just as the greater portion of any magnitude
is contrary to the less but only opposed to the exact half,” will not
hold: for he cannot say that Pleasure is identical with evil of any
kind.

Again. Granting that some Pleasures are low, there is no reason why
some particular Pleasure may not be very good, just as some particular
Science may be although there are some which are low.

Perhaps it even follows, since each state may have active working
unimpeded, whether the active workings of all be Happiness or that of
some one of them, that this active working, if it be unimpeded, must be
choice-worthy: now Pleasure is exactly this. So that the Chief Good may
be Pleasure of some kind, though most Pleasures be (let us assume) low
_per se_.

And for this reason all men think the happy life is pleasant, and
interweave Pleasure with Happiness. Reasonably enough: because
Happiness is perfect, but no impeded active working is perfect; and
therefore the happy man needs as an addition the goods of the body and
the goods external and fortune that in these points he may not be
fettered. As for those who say that he who is being tortured on the
wheel, or falls into great misfortunes is happy provided only he be
good, they talk nonsense, whether they mean to do so or not. On the
other hand, because fortune is needed as an addition, some hold good
fortune to be identical with Happiness: which it is not, for even this
in excess is a hindrance, and perhaps then has no right to be called
good fortune since it is good only in so far as it contributes to
Happiness.

The fact that all animals, brute and human alike, pursue Pleasure, is
some presumption of its being in a sense the Chief Good;

(“There must be something in what most folks say,”) only as one and the
same nature or state neither is nor is thought to be the best, so
neither do all pursue the same Pleasure, Pleasure nevertheless all do.
Nay further, what they pursue is, perhaps, not what they think nor what
they would say they pursue, but really one and the same: for in all
there is some instinct above themselves. But the bodily Pleasures have
received the name exclusively, because theirs is the most frequent form
and that which is universally partaken of; and so, because to many
these alone are known they believe them to be the only ones which
exist.

It is plain too that, unless Pleasure and its active working be good,
it will not be true that the happy man’s life embodies Pleasure: for
why will he want it on the supposition that it is not good and that he
can live even with Pain? because, assuming that Pleasure is not good,
then Pain is neither evil nor good, and so why should he avoid it?

Besides, the life of the good man is not more pleasurable than any
other unless it be granted that his active workings are so too.

Some enquiry into the bodily Pleasures is also necessary for those who
say that some Pleasures, to be sure, are highly choice-worthy (the good
ones to wit), but not the bodily Pleasures; that is, those which are
the object-matter of the man utterly destitute of Self-Control.

If so, we ask, why are the contrary Pains bad? they cannot be (on their
assumption) because the contrary of bad is good.

May we not say that the necessary bodily Pleasures are good in the
sense in which that which is not-bad is good? or that they are good
only up to a certain point? because such states or movements as cannot
have too much of the better cannot have too much of Pleasure, but those
which can of the former can also of the latter. Now the bodily
Pleasures do admit of excess: in fact the low bad man is such because
he pursues the excess of them instead of those which are necessary
(meat, drink, and the objects of other animal appetites do give
pleasure to all, but not in right manner or degree to all). But his
relation to Pain is exactly the contrary: it is not excessive Pain, but
Pain at all, that he avoids [which makes him to be in this way too a
bad low man], because only in the case of him who pursues excessive
Pleasure is Pain contrary to excessive Pleasure.

It is not enough however merely to state the truth, we should also show
how the false view arises; because this strengthens conviction. I mean,
when we have given a probable reason why that impresses people as true
which really is not true, it gives them a stronger conviction of the
truth. And so we must now explain why the bodily Pleasures appear to
people to be more choice-worthy than any others.

The first obvious reason is, that bodily Pleasure drives out Pain; and
because Pain is felt in excess men pursue Pleasure in excess, _i.e._
generally bodily Pleasure, under the notion of its being a remedy for
that Pain. These remedies, moreover, come to be violent ones; which is
the very reason they are pursued, since the impression they produce on
the mind is owing to their being looked at side by side with their
contrary.

And, as has been said before, there are the two following reasons why
bodily Pleasure is thought to be not-good.

1. Some Pleasures of this class are actings of a low nature, whether
congenital as in brutes, or acquired by custom as in low bad men.

2. Others are in the nature of cures, cures that is of some deficiency;
now of course it is better to have [the healthy state] originally than
that it should accrue afterwards.

(But some Pleasures result when natural states are being perfected:
these therefore are good as a matter of result.)

Again, the very fact of their being violent causes them to be pursued
by such as can relish no others: such men in fact create violent
thirsts for themselves (if harmless ones then we find no fault, if
harmful then it is bad and low) because they have no other things to
take pleasure in, and the neutral state is distasteful to some people
constitutionally; for toil of some kind is inseparable from life, as
physiologists testify, telling us that the acts of seeing or hearing
are painful, only that we are used to the pain and do not find it out.

Similarly in youth the constant growth produces a state much like that
of vinous intoxication, and youth is pleasant. Again, men of the
melancholic temperament constantly need some remedial process (because
the body, from its temperament, is constantly being worried), and they
are in a chronic state of violent desire. But Pleasure drives out Pain;
not only such Pleasure as is directly contrary to Pain but even any
Pleasure provided it be strong: and this is how men come to be utterly
destitute of Self-Mastery, _i.e._ low and bad.

But those Pleasures which are unconnected with Pains do not admit of
excess: _i.e._ such as belong to objects which are naturally pleasant
and not merely as a matter of result: by the latter class I mean such
as are remedial, and the reason why these are thought to be pleasant is
that the cure results from the action in some way of that part of the
constitution which remains sound. By “pleasant naturally” I mean such
as put into action a nature which is pleasant.

The reason why no one and the same thing is invariably pleasant is that
our nature is, not simple, but complex, involving something different
from itself (so far as we are corruptible beings). Suppose then that
one part of this nature be doing something, this something is, to the
other part, unnatural: but, if there be an equilibrium of the two
natures, then whatever is being done is indifferent. It is obvious that
if there be any whose nature is simple and not complex, to such a being
the same course of acting will always be the most pleasurable.

For this reason it is that the Divinity feels Pleasure which is always
one, _i.e._ simple: not motion merely but also motionlessness acts, and
Pleasure resides rather in the absence than in the presence of motion.

The reason why the Poet’s dictum “change is of all things most
pleasant” is true, is “a baseness in our blood;” for as the bad man is
easily changeable, bad must be also the nature that craves change,
_i.e._ it is neither simple nor good.

We have now said our say about Self-Control and its opposite; and about
Pleasure and Pain. What each is, and how the one set is good the other
bad. We have yet to speak of Friendship.




