BOOK IX

Chapter I.


Well, in all the Friendships the parties to which are dissimilar it is
the proportionate which equalises and preserves the Friendship, as has
been already stated: I mean, in the Social Friendship the cobbler, for
instance, gets an equivalent for his shoes after a certain rate; and
the weaver, and all others in like manner. Now in this case a common
measure has been provided in money, and to this accordingly all things
are referred and by this are measured: but in the Friendship of Love
the complaint is sometimes from the lover that, though he loves
exceedingly, his love is not requited; he having perhaps all the time
nothing that can be the object of Friendship: again, oftentimes from
the object of love that he who as a suitor promised any and every thing
now performs nothing. These cases occur because the Friendship of the
lover for the beloved object is based upon pleasure, that of the other
for him upon utility, and in one of the parties the requisite quality
is not found: for, as these are respectively the grounds of the
Friendship, the Friendship comes to be broken up because the motives to
it cease to exist: the parties loved not one another but qualities in
one another which are not permanent, and so neither are the
Friendships: whereas the Friendship based upon the moral character of
the parties, being independent and disinterested, is permanent, as we
have already stated.

Quarrels arise also when the parties realise different results and not
those which they desire; for the not attaining one’s special object is
all one, in this case, with getting nothing at all: as in the
well-known case where a man made promises to a musician, rising in
proportion to the excellence of his music; but when, the next morning,
the musician claimed the performance of his promises, he said that he
had given him pleasure for pleasure: of course, if each party had
intended this, it would have been all right: but if the one desires
amusement and the other gain, and the one gets his object but the other
not, the dealing cannot be fair: because a man fixes his mind upon what
he happens to want, and will give so and so for that specific thing.

The question then arises, who is to fix the rate? the man who first
gives, or the man who first takes? because, _primâ facie_, the man who
first gives seems to leave the rate to be fixed by the other party.
This, they say, was in fact the practice of Protagoras: when he taught
a man anything he would bid the learner estimate the worth of the
knowledge gained by his own private opinion; and then he used to take
so much from him. In such cases some people adopt the rule,

“With specified reward a friend should be content.”


They are certainly fairly found fault with who take the money in
advance and then do nothing of what they said they would do, their
promises having been so far beyond their ability; for such men do not
perform what they agreed, The Sophists, however, are perhaps obliged to
take this course, because no one would give a sixpence for their
knowledge. These then, I say, are fairly found fault with, because they
do not what they have already taken money for doing.

In cases where no stipulation as to the respective services is made
they who disinterestedly do the first service will not raise the
question (as we have said before), because it is the nature of
Friendship, based on mutual goodness to be reference to the intention
of the other, the intention being characteristic of the true friend and
of goodness.

And it would seem the same rule should be laid down for those who are
connected with one another as teachers and learners of philosophy; for
here the value of the commodity cannot be measured by money, and, in
fact, an exactly equivalent price cannot be set upon it, but perhaps it
is sufficient to do what one can, as in the case of the gods or one’s
parents.

But where the original giving is not upon these terms but avowedly for
some return, the most proper course is perhaps for the requital to be
such as _both_ shall allow to be proportionate, and, where this cannot
be, then for the receiver to fix the value would seem to be not only
necessary but also fair: because when the first giver gets that which
is equivalent to the advantage received by the other, or to what he
would have given to secure the pleasure he has had, then he has the
value from him: for not only is this seen to be the course adopted in
matters of buying and selling but also in some places the law does not
allow of actions upon voluntary dealings; on the principle that when
one man has trusted another he must be content to have the obligation
discharged in the same spirit as he originally contracted it: that is
to say, it is thought fairer for the trusted, than for the trusting,
party, to fix the value. For, in general, those who have and those who
wish to get things do not set the same value on them: what is their
own, and what they give in each case, appears to them worth a great
deal: but yet the return is made according to the estimate of those who
have received first, it should perhaps be added that the receiver
should estimate what he has received, not by the value he sets upon it
now that he has it, but by that which he set upon it before he obtained
it.

Chapter II.

Questions also arise upon such points as the following: Whether one’s
father has an unlimited claim on one’s services and obedience, or
whether the sick man is to obey his physician? or, in an election of a
general, the warlike qualities of the candidates should be alone
regarded?

In like manner whether one should do a service rather to one’s friend
or to a good man? whether one should rather requite a benefactor or
give to one’s companion, supposing that both are not within one’s
power?

Is not the true answer that it is no easy task to determine all such
questions accurately, inasmuch as they involve numerous differences of
all kinds, in respect of amount and what is honourable and what is
necessary? It is obvious, of course, that no one person can unite in
himself all claims. Again, the requital of benefits is, in general, a
higher duty than doing unsolicited kindnesses to one’s companion; in
other words, the discharging of a debt is more obligatory upon one than
the duty of giving to a companion. And yet this rule may admit of
exceptions; for instance, which is the higher duty? for one who has
been ransomed out of the hands of robbers to ransom in return his
ransomer, be he who he may, or to repay him on his demand though he has
not been taken by robbers, or to ransom his own father? for it would
seem that a man ought to ransom his father even in preference to
himself.

Well then, as has been said already, as a general rule the debt should
be discharged, but if in a particular case the giving greatly
preponderates as being either honourable or necessary, we must be
swayed by these considerations: I mean, in some cases the requital of
the obligation previously existing may not be equal; suppose, for
instance, that the original benefactor has conferred a kindness on a
good man, knowing him to be such, whereas this said good man has to
repay it believing him to be a scoundrel.

And again, in certain cases no obligation lies on a man to lend to one
who has lent to him; suppose, for instance, that a bad man lent to him,
as being a good man, under the notion that he should get repaid,
whereas the said good man has no hope of repayment from him being a bad
man. Either then the case is really as we have supposed it and then the
claim is not equal, or it is not so but supposed to be; and still in so
acting people are not to be thought to act wrongly. In short, as has
been oftentimes stated before, all statements regarding feelings and
actions can be definite only in proportion as their object-matter is
so; it is of course quite obvious that all people have not the same
claim upon one, nor are the claims of one’s father unlimited; just as
Jupiter does not claim all kinds of sacrifice without distinction: and
since the claims of parents, brothers, companions, and benefactors, are
all different, we must give to each what belongs to and befits each.

And this is seen to be the course commonly pursued: to marriages men
commonly invite their relatives, because these are from a common stock
and therefore all the actions in any way pertaining thereto are common
also: and to funerals men think that relatives ought to assemble in
preference to other people, for the same reason.

And it would seem that in respect of maintenance it is our duty to
assist our parents in preference to all others, as being their debtors,
and because it is more honourable to succour in these respects the
authors of our existence than ourselves. Honour likewise we ought to
pay to our parents just as to the gods, but then, not all kinds of
honour: not the same, for instance, to a father as to a mother: nor
again to a father the honour due to a scientific man or to a general
but that which is a father’s due, and in like manner to a mother that
which is a mother’s.

To all our elders also the honour befitting their age, by rising up in
their presence, turning out of the way for them, and all similar marks
of respect: to our companions again, or brothers, frankness and free
participation in all we have. And to those of the same family, or
tribe, or city, with ourselves, and all similarly connected with us, we
should constantly try to render their due, and to discriminate what
belongs to each in respect of nearness of connection, or goodness, or
intimacy: of course in the case of those of the same class the
discrimination is easier; in that of those who are in different classes
it is a matter of more trouble. This, however, should not be a reason
for giving up the attempt, but we must observe the distinctions so far
as it is practicable to do so.

