Chapter III.

Now since all involuntary action is either upon compulsion or by reason
of ignorance, Voluntary Action would seem to be “that whose origination
is in the agent, he being aware of the particular details in which the
action consists.”

For, it may be, men are not justified by calling those actions
involuntary, which are done by reason of Anger or Lust.

Because, in the first place, if this be so no other animal but man, and
not even children, can be said to act voluntarily. Next, is it meant
that we never act voluntarily when we act from Lust or Anger, or that
we act voluntarily in doing what is right and involuntarily in doing
what is discreditable? The latter supposition is absurd, since the
cause is one and the same. Then as to the former, it is a strange thing
to maintain actions to be involuntary which we are bound to grasp at:
now there are occasions on which anger is a duty,[5] and there are
things which we are bound to lust after,[6] health, for instance, and
learning.

Again, whereas actions strictly involuntary are thought to be attended
with pain, those which are done to gratify lust are thought to be
pleasant.

Again: how does the involuntariness make any difference[7] between
wrong actions done from deliberate calculation, and those done by
reason of anger? for both ought to be avoided, and the irrational
feelings are thought to be just as natural to man as reason, and so of
course must be such actions of the individual as are done from Anger
and Lust. It is absurd then to class these actions among the
involuntary.

Chapter IV.

Having thus drawn out the distinction between voluntary and involuntary
action our next step is to examine into the nature of Moral Choice,
because this seems most intimately connected with Virtue and to be a
more decisive test of moral character than a man’s acts are.

Now Moral Choice is plainly voluntary, but the two are not
co-extensive, voluntary being the more comprehensive term; for first,
children and all other animals share in voluntary action but not in
Moral Choice; and next, sudden actions we call voluntary but do not
ascribe them to Moral Choice.

Nor do they appear to be right who say it is lust or anger, or wish, or
opinion of a certain kind; because, in the first place, Moral Choice is
not shared by the irrational animals while Lust and Anger are. Next;
the man who fails of self-control acts from Lust but not from Moral
Choice; the man of self-control, on the contrary, from Moral Choice,
not from Lust. Again: whereas Lust is frequently opposed to Moral
Choice, Lust is not to Lust.

Lastly: the object-matter of Lust is the pleasant and the painful, but
of Moral Choice neither the one nor the other. Still less can it be
Anger, because actions done from Anger are thought generally to be
least of all consequent on Moral Choice.

Nor is it Wish either, though appearing closely connected with it;
because, in the first place, Moral Choice has not for its objects
impossibilities, and if a man were to say he chose them he would be
thought to be a fool; but Wish may have impossible things for its
objects, immortality for instance.

Wish again may be exercised on things in the accomplishment of which
one’s self could have nothing to do, as the success of any particular
actor or athlete; but no man chooses things of this nature, only such
as he believes he may himself be instrumental in procuring.

Further: Wish has for its object the End rather, but Moral Choice the
means to the End; for instance, we wish to be healthy but we choose the
means which will make us so; or happiness again we wish for, and
commonly say so, but to say we choose is not an appropriate term,
because, in short, the province of Moral Choice seems to be those
things which are in our own power.

Neither can it be Opinion; for Opinion is thought to be unlimited in
its range of objects, and to be exercised as well upon things eternal
and impossible as on those which are in our own power: again, Opinion
is logically divided into true and false, not into good and bad as
Moral Choice is.

However, nobody perhaps maintains its identity with Opinion simply; but
it is not the same with opinion of any kind,[8] because by choosing good
and bad things we are constituted of a certain character, but by having
opinions on them we are not.

Again, we choose to take or avoid, and so on, but we opine what a thing
is, or for what it is serviceable, or how; but we do not opine to take
or avoid.

Further, Moral Choice is commended rather for having a right object
than for being judicious, but Opinion for being formed in accordance
with truth.

Again, we choose such things as we pretty well know to be good, but we
form opinions respecting such as we do not know at all.

And it is not thought that choosing and opining best always go
together, but that some opine the better course and yet by reason of
viciousness choose not the things which they should.

It may be urged, that Opinion always precedes or accompanies Moral
Choice; be it so, this makes no difference, for this is not the point
in question, but whether Moral Choice is the same as Opinion of a
certain kind.

Since then it is none of the aforementioned things, what is it, or how
is it characterised? Voluntary it plainly is, but not all voluntary
action is an object of Moral Choice. May we not say then, it is “that
voluntary which has passed through a stage of previous deliberation?”
because Moral Choice is attended with reasoning and intellectual
process. The etymology of its Greek name seems to give a hint of it,
being when analysed “chosen in preference to somewhat else.”

