Chapter III.

But the object of our enquiry is Justice, in the sense in which it is a
part of Virtue (for there is such a thing, as we commonly say), and
likewise with respect to particular Injustice. And of the existence of
this last the following consideration is a proof: there are many vices
by practising which a man acts unjustly, of course, but does not grasp
at more than his share of good; if, for instance, by reason of
cowardice he throws away his shield, or by reason of ill-temper he uses
abusive language, or by reason of stinginess does not give a friend
pecuniary assistance; but whenever he does a grasping action, it is
often in the way of none of these vices, certainly not in all of them,
still in the way of some vice or other (for we blame him), and in the
way of Injustice. There is then some kind of Injustice distinct from
that co-extensive with Vice and related to it as a part to a whole, and
some “Unjust” related to that which is co-extensive with violation of
the law as a part to a whole.

Again, suppose one man seduces a man’s wife with a view to gain and
actually gets some advantage by it,[6] and another does the same from
impulse of lust, at an expense of money and damage; this latter will be
thought to be rather destitute of self-mastery than a grasping man, and
the former Unjust but not destitute of self-mastery: now why? plainly
because of his gaining.

Again, all other acts of Injustice we refer to some particular
depravity, as, if a man commits adultery, to abandonment to his
passions; if he deserts his comrade, to cowardice; if he strikes
another, to anger: but if he gains by the act to no other vice than to
Injustice.

Thus it is clear that there is a kind of Injustice different from and
besides that which includes all Vice, having the same name because the
definition is in the same genus; for both have their force in dealings
with others, but the one acts upon honour, or wealth, or safety, or by
whatever one name we can include all these things, and is actuated by
pleasure attendant on gain, while the other acts upon all things which
constitute the sphere of the good man’s action.

Chapter IV.

Now that there is more than one kind of Justice, and that there is one
which is distinct from and besides that which is co-extensive with,
Virtue, is plain: we must next ascertain what it is, and what are its
characteristics.

Well, the Unjust has been divided into the unlawful and the unequal,
and the Just accordingly into the lawful and the equal: the
aforementioned Injustice is in the way of the unlawful. And as the
unequal and the more[7] are not the same, but differing as part to
whole (because all more is unequal, but not all unequal more), so the
Unjust and the Injustice we are now in search of are not the same with,
but other than, those before mentioned, the one being the parts, the
other the wholes; for this particular Injustice is a part of the
Injustice co-extensive with Vice, and likewise this Justice of the
Justice co-extensive with Virtue. So that what we have now to speak of
is the particular Justice and Injustice, and likewise the particular
Just and Unjust.

Here then let us dismiss any further consideration of the Justice
ranking as co-extensive with Virtue (being the practice of Virtue in
all its bearings towards others), and of the co-relative Injustice
(being similarly the practice of Vice). It is clear too, that we must
separate off the Just and the Unjust involved in these: because one may
pretty well say that most lawful things are those which naturally
result in action from Virtue in its fullest sense, because the law
enjoins the living in accordance with each Virtue and forbids living in
accordance with each Vice. And the producing causes of Virtue in all
its bearings are those enactments which have been made respecting
education for society.

By the way, as to individual education, in respect of which a man is
simply good without reference to others, whether it is the province of
πολιτικὴ or some other science we must determine at a future time: for
it may be it is not the same thing to be a good man and a good citizen
in every case.[8]

Chapter V.

Now of the Particular Justice, and the Just involved in it, one species
is that which is concerned in the distributions of honour, or wealth,
or such other things as are to be shared among the members of the
social community (because in these one man as compared with another may
have either an equal or an unequal share), and the other is that which
is Corrective in the various transactions between man and man.

And of this latter there are two parts: because of transactions some
are voluntary and some involuntary; voluntary, such as follow; selling,
buying, use, bail, borrowing, deposit, hiring: and this class is called
voluntary because the origination of these transactions is voluntary.

The involuntary again are either such as effect secrecy; as theft,
adultery, poisoning, pimping, kidnapping of slaves, assassination,
false witness; or accompanied with open violence; as insult, bonds,
death, plundering, maiming, foul language, slanderous abuse.

Chapter VI.

Well, the unjust man we have said is unequal, and the abstract “Unjust”
unequal: further, it is plain that there is some mean of the unequal,
that is to say, the equal or exact half (because in whatever action
there is the greater and the less there is also the equal, i.e. the
exact half). If then the Unjust is unequal the Just is equal, which all
must allow without further proof: and as the equal is a mean the Just
must be also a mean. Now the equal implies two terms at least: it
follows then that the Just is both a mean and equal, and these to
certain persons; and, in so far as it is a mean, between certain things
(that is, the greater and the less), and, so far as it is equal,
between two, and in so far as it is just it is so to certain persons.
The Just then must imply four terms at least, for those[9]  to which it
is just are two, and the terms representing the things are two.

And there will be the same equality between the terms representing the
persons, as between those representing the things: because as the
latter are to one another so are the former: for if the persons are not
equal they must not have equal shares; in fact this is the very source
of all the quarrelling and wrangling in the world, when either they who
are equal have and get awarded to them things not equal, or being not
equal those things which are equal. Again, the necessity of this
equality of ratios is shown by the common phrase “according to rate,”
for all agree that the Just in distributions ought to be according to
some rate: but what that rate is to be, all do not agree; the democrats
are for freedom, oligarchs for wealth, others for nobleness of birth,
and the aristocratic party for virtue.

The Just, then, is a certain proportionable thing. For proportion does
not apply merely to number in the abstract,[10] but to number
generally, since it is equality of ratios, and implies four terms at
least (that this is the case in what may be called discrete proportion
is plain and obvious, but it is true also in continual proportion, for
this uses the one term as two, and mentions it twice; thus A:B:C may be
expressed A:B::B:C. In the first, B is named twice; and so, if, as in
the second, B is actually written twice, the proportionals will be
four): and the Just likewise implies four terms at the least, and the
ratio between the two pair of terms is the same, because the persons
and the things are divided similarly. It will stand then thus,
A:B::C:D, and then permutando A:C::B:D, and then (supposing C and D to
represent the things) A+C:B+D::A:B. The distribution in fact consisting
in putting together these terms thus: and if they are put together so
as to preserve this same ratio, the distribution puts them together
justly.[11] So then the joining together of the first and third and
second and fourth proportionals is the Just in the distribution, and
this Just is the mean relatively to that which violates the
proportionate, for the proportionate is a mean and the Just is
proportionate. Now mathematicians call this kind of proportion
geometrical: for in geometrical proportion the whole is to the whole as
each part to each part. Furthermore this proportion is not continual,
because the person and thing do not make up one term.

The Just then is this proportionate, and the Unjust that which violates
the proportionate; and so there comes to be the greater and the less:
which in fact is the case in actual transactions, because he who acts
unjustly has the greater share and he who is treated unjustly has the
less of what is good: but in the case of what is bad this is reversed:
for the less evil compared with the greater comes to be reckoned for
good, because the less evil is more choice-worthy than the greater, and
what is choice-worthy is good, and the more so the greater good.

This then is the one species of the Just.

