Chapter V.

Kindly Feeling, though resembling Friendship, is not identical with it,
because it may exist in reference to those whom we do not know and
without the object of it being aware of its existence, which Friendship
cannot. (This, by the way, has also been said before.) And further, it
is not even Affection because it does not imply intensity nor yearning,
which are both consequences of Affection. Again Affection requires
intimacy but Kindly Feeling may arise quite suddenly, as happens
sometimes in respect of men against whom people are matched in any way,
I mean they come to be kindly disposed to them and sympathise in their
wishes, but still they would not join them in any action, because, as
we said, they conceive this feeling of kindness suddenly and so have
but a superficial liking.

What it does seem to be is the starting point of a Friendship; just as
pleasure, received through the sight, is the commencement of Love: for
no one falls in love without being first pleased with the personal
appearance of the beloved object, and yet he who takes pleasure in it
does not therefore necessarily love, but when he wearies for the object
in its absence and desires its presence. Exactly in the same way men
cannot be friends without having passed through the stage of Kindly
Feeling, and yet they who are in that stage do not necessarily advance
to Friendship: they merely have an inert wish for the good of those
toward whom they entertain the feeling, but would not join them in any
action, nor put themselves out of the way for them. So that, in a
metaphorical way of speaking, one might say that it is dormant
Friendship, and when it has endured for a space and ripened into
intimacy comes to be real Friendship; but not that whose object is
advantage or pleasure, because such motives cannot produce even Kindly
Feeling.

I mean, he who has received a kindness requites it by Kindly Feeling
towards his benefactor, and is right in so doing: but he who wishes
another to be prosperous, because he has hope of advantage through his
instrumentality, does not seem to be kindly disposed to that person but
rather to himself; just as neither is he his friend if he pays court to
him for any interested purpose.

Kindly Feeling always arises by reason of goodness and a certain
amiability, when one man gives another the notion of being a fine
fellow, or brave man, etc., as we said was the case sometimes with
those matched against one another.

Chapter VI.

Unity of Sentiment is also plainly connected with Friendship, and
therefore is not the same as Unity of Opinion, because this might exist
even between people unacquainted with one another.

Nor do men usually say people are united in sentiment merely because
they agree in opinion on _any_ point, as, for instance, on points of
astronomical science (Unity of Sentiment herein not having any
connection with Friendship), but they say that Communities have Unity
of Sentiment when they agree respecting points of expediency and take
the same line and carry out what has been determined in common
consultation.

Thus we see that Unity of Sentiment has for its object matters of
action, and such of these as are of importance, and of mutual, or, in
the case of single States, common, interest: when, for instance, all
agree in the choice of magistrates, or forming alliance with the
Lacedæmonians, or appointing Pittacus ruler (that is to say, supposing
he himself was willing). But when each wishes himself to be in power
(as the brothers in the Phœnissæ), they quarrel and form parties: for,
plainly, Unity of Sentiment does not merely imply that each entertains
the same idea be it what it may, but that they do so in respect of the
same object, as when both the populace and the sensible men of a State
desire that the best men should be in office, because then all attain
their object.

Thus Unity of Sentiment is plainly a social Friendship, as it is also
said to be: since it has for its object-matter things expedient and
relating to life.

And this Unity exists among the good: for they have it towards
themselves and towards one another, being, if I may be allowed the
expression, in the same position: I mean, the wishes of such men are
steady and do not ebb and flow like the Euripus, and they wish what is
just and expedient and aim at these things in common.

The bad, on the contrary, can as little have Unity of Sentiment as they
can be real friends, except to a very slight extent, desiring as they
do unfair advantage in things profitable while they shirk labour and
service for the common good: and while each man wishes for these things
for himself he is jealous of and hinders his neighbour: and as they do
not watch over the common good it is lost. The result is that they
quarrel while they are for keeping one another to work but are not
willing to perform their just share.

Chapter VII.

Benefactors are commonly held to have more Friendship for the objects
of their kindness than these for them: and the fact is made a subject
of discussion and enquiry, as being contrary to reasonable expectation.

The account of the matter which satisfies most persons is that the one
are debtors and the others creditors: and therefore that, as in the
case of actual loans the debtors wish their creditors out of the way
while the creditors are anxious for the preservation of their debtors,
so those who have done kindnesses desire the continued existence of the
people they have done them to, under the notion of getting a return of
their good offices, while these are not particularly anxious about
requital.

Epicharmus, I suspect, would very probably say that they who give this
solution judge from their own baseness; yet it certainly is like human
nature, for the generality of men have short memories on these points,
and aim rather at receiving than conferring benefits.

But the real cause, it would seem, rests upon nature, and the case is
not parallel to that of creditors; because in this there is no
affection to the persons, but merely a wish for their preservation with
a view to the return: whereas, in point of fact, they who have done
kindnesses feel friendship and love for those to whom they have done
them, even though they neither are, nor can by possibility hereafter
be, in a position to serve their benefactors.

And this is the case also with artisans; every one, I mean, feels more
affection for his own work than that work possibly could for him if it
were animate. It is perhaps specially the case with poets: for these
entertain very great affection for their poems, loving them as their
own children. It is to this kind of thing I should be inclined to
compare the case of benefactors: for the object of their kindness is
their own work, and so they love this more than this loves its creator.

And the account of this is that existence is to all a thing
choice-worthy and an object of affection; now we exist by acts of
working, that is, by living and acting; he then that has created a
given work exists, it may be said, by his act of working: therefore he
loves his work because he loves existence. And this is natural, for the
work produced displays in act what existed before potentially.

Then again, the benefactor has a sense of honour in right of his
action, so that he may well take pleasure in him in whom this resides;
but to him who has received the benefit there is nothing honourable in
respect of his benefactor, only something advantageous which is both
less pleasant and less the object of Friendship.

Again, pleasure is derived from the actual working out of a present
action, from the anticipation of a future one, and from the
recollection of a past one: but the highest pleasure and special object
of affection is that which attends on the actual working. Now the
benefactor’s work abides (for the honourable is enduring), but the
advantage of him who has received the kindness passes away.

Again, there is pleasure in recollecting honourable actions, but in
recollecting advantageous ones there is none at all or much less (by
the way though, the contrary is true of the expectation of advantage).

Further, the entertaining the feeling of Friendship is like acting on
another; but being the object of the feeling is like being acted upon.

So then, entertaining the sentiment of Friendship, and all feelings
connected with it, attend on those who, in the given case of a
benefaction, are the superior party.

Once more: all people value most what has cost them much labour in the
production; for instance, people who have themselves made their money
are fonder of it than those who have inherited it: and receiving
kindness is, it seems, unlaborious, but doing it is laborious. And this
is the reason why the female parents are most fond of their offspring;
for their part in producing them is attended with most labour, and they
know more certainly that they are theirs. This feeling would seem also
to belong to benefactors.

