BOOK VIII

Chapter I.


Next would seem properly to follow a dissertation on Friendship:
because, in the first place, it is either itself a virtue or connected
with virtue; and next it is a thing most necessary for life, since no
one would choose to live without friends though he should have all the
other good things in the world: and, in fact, men who are rich or
possessed of authority and influence are thought to have special need
of friends: for where is the use of such prosperity if there be taken
away the doing of kindnesses of which friends are the most usual and
most commendable objects? Or how can it be kept or preserved without
friends? because the greater it is so much the more slippery and
hazardous: in poverty moreover and all other adversities men think
friends to be their only refuge.

Furthermore, Friendship helps the young to keep from error: the old, in
respect of attention and such deficiencies in action as their weakness
makes them liable to; and those who are in their prime, in respect of
noble deeds (“They _two_ together going,” Homer says, you may
remember), because they are thus more able to devise plans and carry
them out.

Again, it seems to be implanted in us by Nature: as, for instance, in
the parent towards the offspring and the offspring towards the parent
(not merely in the human species, but likewise in birds and most
animals), and in those of the same tribe towards one another, and
specially in men of the same nation; for which reason we commend those
men who love their fellows: and one may see in the course of travel how
close of kin and how friendly man is to man.

Furthermore, Friendship seems to be the bond of Social Communities, and
legislators seem to be more anxious to secure it than Justice even. I
mean, Unanimity is somewhat like to Friendship, and this they certainly
aim at and specially drive out faction as being inimical.

Again, where people are in Friendship Justice is not required;[1] but,
on the other hand, though they are just they need Friendship in
addition, and that principle which is most truly just is thought to
partake of the nature of Friendship.

Lastly, not only is it a thing necessary but honourable likewise: since
we praise those who are fond of friends, and the having numerous
friends is thought a matter of credit to a man; some go so far as to
hold, that “good man” and “friend” are terms synonymous.

Chapter II.

Yet the disputed points respecting it are not few: some men lay down
that it is a kind of resemblance, and that men who are like one another
are friends: whence come the common sayings, “Like will to like,”
“Birds of a feather,” and so on. Others, on the contrary, say, that all
such come under the maxim, “Two of a trade never agree.”[2]

Again, some men push their enquiries on these points higher and reason
physically: as Euripides, who says,

“The earth by drought consumed doth love the rain,
And the great heaven, overcharged with rain,
Doth love to fall in showers upon the earth.”


Heraclitus, again, maintains, that “contrariety is expedient, and that
the best agreement arises from things differing, and that all things
come into being in the way of the principle of antagonism.”

Empedocles, among others, in direct opposition to these, affirms, that
“like aims at like.”

These physical questions we will take leave to omit, inasmuch as they
are foreign to the present enquiry; and we will examine such as are
proper to man and concern moral characters and feelings: as, for
instance, “Does Friendship arise among all without distinction, or is
it impossible for bad men to be friends?” and, “Is there but one
species of Friendship, or several?” for they who ground the opinion
that there is but one on the fact that Friendship admits of degrees
hold that upon insufficient proof; because things which are different
in species admit likewise of degrees (on this point we have spoken
before).

Chapter III.

Our view will soon be cleared on these points when we have ascertained
what is properly the object-matter of Friendship: for it is thought
that not everything indiscriminately, but some peculiar matter alone,
is the object of this affection; that is to say, what is good, or
pleasurable, or useful. Now it would seem that that is useful through
which accrues any good or pleasure, and so the objects of Friendship,
as absolute Ends, are the good and the pleasurable.

A question here arises; whether it is good absolutely or that which is
good to the individuals, for which men feel Friendship (these two being
sometimes distinct): and similarly in respect of the pleasurable. It
seems then that each individual feels it towards that which is good to
himself, and that abstractedly it is the real good which is the object
of Friendship, and to each individual that which is good to each. It
comes then to this; that each individual feels Friendship not for what
_is_ but for that which _conveys to his mind the impression of being_
good to himself. But this will make no real difference, because that
which is truly the object of Friendship will also convey this
impression to the mind.

There are then three causes from which men feel Friendship: but the
term is not applied to the case of fondness for things inanimate
because there is no requital of the affection nor desire for the good
of those objects: it certainly savours of the ridiculous to say that a
man fond of wine wishes well to it: the only sense in which it is true
being that he wishes it to be kept safe and sound for his own use and
benefit.[3] But to the friend they say one should wish all good for his
sake. And when men do thus wish good to another (he not reciprocating
the feeling), people call them Kindly; because Friendship they describe
as being “Kindliness between persons who reciprocate it.” But must they
not add that the feeling must be mutually known? for many men are
kindly disposed towards those whom they have never seen but whom they
conceive to be amiable or useful: and this notion amounts to the same
thing as a real feeling between them.

Well, these are plainly Kindly-disposed towards one another: but how
can one call them friends while their mutual feelings are unknown to
one another? to complete the idea of Friendship, then, it is requisite
that they have kindly feelings towards one another, and wish one
another good from one of the aforementioned causes, and that these
kindly feelings should be mutually known.

