Chapter III.

A question is also raised as to the propriety of dissolving or not
dissolving those Friendships the parties to which do not remain what
they were when the connection was formed.

Now surely in respect of those whose motive to Friendship is utility or
pleasure there can be nothing wrong in breaking up the connection when
they no longer have those qualities; because they were friends [not of
one another, but] of those qualities: and, these having failed, it is
only reasonable to expect that they should cease to entertain the
sentiment.

But a man has reason to find fault if the other party, being really
attached to him because of advantage or pleasure, pretended to be so
because of his moral character: in fact, as we said at the
commencement, the most common source of quarrels between friends is
their not being friends on the same grounds as they suppose themselves
to be.

Now when a man has been deceived in having supposed himself to excite
the sentiment of Friendship by reason of his moral character, the other
party doing nothing to indicate he has but himself to blame: but when
he has been deceived by the pretence of the other he has a right to
find fault with the man who has so deceived him, aye even more than
with utterers of false coin, in proportion to the greater preciousness
of that which is the object-matter of the villany.

But suppose a man takes up another as being a good man, who turns out,
and is found by him, to be a scoundrel, is he bound still to entertain
Friendship for him? or may we not say at once it is impossible? since
it is not everything which is the object-matter of Friendship, but only
that which is good; and so there is no obligation to be a bad man’s
friend, nor, in fact, ought one to be such: for one ought not to be a
lover of evil, nor to be assimilated to what is base; which would be
implied, because we have said before, like is friendly to like.

Are we then to break with him instantly? not in all cases; only where
our friends are incurably depraved; when there is a chance of amendment
we are bound to aid in repairing the moral character of our friends
even more than their substance, in proportion as it is better and more
closely related to Friendship. Still he who should break off the
connection is not to be judged to act wrongly, for he never was a
friend to such a character as the other now is, and therefore, since
the man is changed and he cannot reduce him to his original state, he
backs out of the connection.

To put another case: suppose that one party remains what he was when
the Friendship was formed, while the other becomes morally improved and
widely different from his friend in goodness; is the improved character
to treat the other as a friend?

May we not say it is impossible? The case of course is clearest where
there is a great difference, as in the Friendships of boys: for suppose
that of two boyish friends the one still continues a boy in mind and
the other becomes a man of the highest character, how can they be
friends? since they neither are pleased with the same objects nor like
and dislike the same things: for these points will not belong to them
as regards one another, and without them it was assumed they cannot be
friends because they cannot live in intimacy: and of the case of those
who cannot do so we have spoken before.

Well then, is the improved party to bear himself towards his former
friend in no way differently to what he would have done had the
connection never existed?

Surely he ought to bear in mind the intimacy of past times, and just as
we think ourselves bound to do favours for our friends in preference to
strangers, so to those who have been friends and are so no longer we
should allow somewhat on the score of previous Friendship, whenever the
cause of severance is not excessive depravity on their part.

Chapter IV.

Now the friendly feelings which are exhibited towards our friends, and
by which Friendships are characterised, seem to have sprung out of
those which we entertain toward ourselves.

I mean, people define a friend to be “one who intends and does what is
good (or what he believes to be good) to another for that other’s
sake,” or “one who wishes his friend to be and to live for that
friend’s own sake” (which is the feeling of mothers towards their
children, and of friends who have come into collision). Others again,
“one who lives with another and chooses the same objects,” or “one who
sympathises with his friend in his sorrows and in his joys” (this too
is especially the case with mothers).

Well, by some one of these marks people generally characterise
Friendship: and each of these the good man has towards himself, and all
others have them in so far as they suppose themselves to be good. (For,
as has been said before, goodness, that is the good man, seems to be a
measure to every one else.)

For he is at unity in himself, and with every part of his soul he
desires the same objects; and he wishes for himself both what is, and
what he believes to be, good; and he does it (it being characteristic
of the good man to work at what is good), and for the sake of himself,
inasmuch as he does it for the sake of his Intellectual Principle which
is generally thought to be a man’s Self. Again, he wishes himself And
specially this Principle whereby he is an intelligent being, to live
and be preserved in life, because existence is a good to him that is a
good man.

But it is to himself that each individual wishes what is good, and no
man, conceiving the possibility of his becoming other than he now is,
chooses that that New Self should have all things indiscriminately: a
god, for instance, has at the present moment the Chief Good, but he has
it in right of being whatever he actually now is: and the Intelligent
Principle must be judged to be each man’s Self, or at least eminently
so [though other Principles help, of course, to constitute him the man
he is].

Furthermore, the good man wishes to continue to live with himself; for
he can do it with pleasure, in that his memories of past actions are
full of delight and his anticipations of the future are good and such
are pleasurable. Then, again, he has good store of matter for his
Intellect to contemplate, and he most especially sympathises with his
Self in its griefs and joys, because the objects which give him pain
and pleasure are at all times the same, not one thing to-day and a
different one to-morrow: because he is not given to repentance,[1] if
one may so speak. It is then because each of these feelings are
entertained by the good man towards his own Self and a friend feels
towards a friend as towards himself (a friend being in fact another
Self), that Friendship is thought to be some one of these things and
they are accounted friends in whom they are found. Whether or no there
can really be Friendship between a man and his Self is a question we
will not at present entertain: there may be thought to be Friendship,
in so far as there are two or more of the aforesaid requisites, and
because the highest degree of Friendship, in the usual acceptation of
that term, resembles the feeling entertained by a man towards himself.

But it may be urged that the aforesaid requisites are to all appearance
found in the common run of men, though they are men of a low stamp.

May it not be answered, that they share in them only in so far as they
please themselves, and conceive themselves to be good? for certainly,
they are not either really, or even apparently, found in any one of
those who are very depraved and villainous; we may almost say not even
in those who are bad men at all: for they are at variance with
themselves and lust after different things from those which in cool
reason they wish for, just as men who fail of Self-Control: I mean,
they choose things which, though hurtful, are pleasurable, in
preference to those which in their own minds they believe to be good:
others again, from cowardice and indolence, decline to do what still
they are convinced is best for them: while they who from their
depravity have actually done many dreadful actions hate and avoid life,
and accordingly kill themselves: and the wicked seek others in whose
company to spend their time, but fly from themselves because they have
many unpleasant subjects of memory, and can only look forward to others
like them when in solitude but drown their remorse in the company of
others: and as they have nothing to raise the sentiment of Friendship
so they never feel it towards themselves.

Neither, in fact, can they who are of this character sympathise with
their Selves in their joys and sorrows, because their soul is, as it
were, rent by faction, and the one principle, by reason of the
depravity in them, is grieved at abstaining from certain things, while
the other and better principle is pleased thereat; and the one drags
them this way and the other that way, as though actually tearing them
asunder.[2] And though it is impossible actually to have at the same
time the sensations of pain and pleasure; yet after a little time the
man is sorry for having been pleased, and he could wish that those
objects had not given him pleasure; for the wicked are full of remorse.

It is plain then that the wicked man cannot be in the position of a
friend even towards himself, because he has in himself nothing which
can excite the sentiment of Friendship. If then to be thus is
exceedingly wretched it is a man’s duty to flee from wickedness with
all his might and to strive to be good, because thus may he be friends
with himself and may come to be a friend to another.

