Chapter XII.

May we not say then that, as seeing the beloved object is most prized
by lovers and they choose this sense rather than any of the others
because Love

“Is engendered in the eyes,
With gazing fed,”


in like manner intimacy is to friends most choice-worthy, Friendship
being communion? Again, as a man is to himself so is he to his friend;
now with respect to himself the perception of his own existence is
choice-worthy, therefore is it also in respect of his friend.

And besides, their Friendship is acted out in intimacy, and so with
good reason they desire this. And whatever in each man’s opinion
constitutes existence, or whatsoever it is for the sake of which they
choose life, herein they wish their friends to join with them; and so
some men drink together, others gamble, others join in gymnastic
exercises or hunting, others study philosophy together: in each case
spending their days together in that which they like best of all things
in life, for since they wish to be intimate with their friends they do
and partake in those things whereby they think to attain this object.

Therefore the Friendship of the wicked comes to be depraved; for, being
unstable, they share in what is bad and become depraved in being made
like to one another: but the Friendship of the good is good, growing
with their intercourse; they improve also, as it seems, by repeated
acts, and by mutual correction, for they receive impress from one
another in the points which give them pleasure; whence says the Poet,

“Thou from the good, good things shalt surely learn.”


Here then we will terminate our discourse of Friendship. The next thing
is to go into the subject of Pleasure.




BOOK X

Chapter I.


Next, it would seem, follows a discussion respecting Pleasure, for it
is thought to be most closely bound up with our kind: and so men train
the young, guiding them on their course by the rudders of Pleasure and
Pain. And to like and dislike what one ought is judged to be most
important for the formation of good moral character: because these
feelings extend all one’s life through, giving a bias towards and
exerting an influence on the side of Virtue and Happiness, since men
choose what is pleasant and avoid what is painful.

Subjects such as these then, it would seem, we ought by no means to
pass by, and specially since they involve much difference of opinion.
There are those who call Pleasure the Chief Good; there are others who
on the contrary maintain that it is exceedingly bad;[1] some perhaps
from a real conviction that such is the case, others from a notion that
it is better, in reference to our life and conduct, to show up Pleasure
as bad, even if it is not so really; arguing that, as the mass of men
have a bias towards it and are the slaves of their pleasures, it is
right to draw them to the contrary, for that so they may possibly
arrive at the mean.[2]

I confess I suspect the soundness of this policy; in matters respecting
men’s feelings and actions theories are less convincing than facts:
whenever, therefore, they are found conflicting with actual experience,
they not only are despised but involve the truth in their fall: he, for
instance, who deprecates Pleasure, if once seen to aim at it, gets the
credit of backsliding to it as being universally such as he said it
was, the mass of men being incapable of nice distinctions.

Real accounts, therefore, of such matters seem to be most expedient,
not with a view to knowledge merely but to life and conduct: for they
are believed as being in harm with facts, and so they prevail with the
wise to live in accordance with them.

But of such considerations enough: let us now proceed to the current
maxims respecting Pleasure.

Chapter II.

Now Eudoxus thought Pleasure to be the Chief Good because he saw all,
rational and irrational alike, aiming at it: and he argued that, since
in all what was the object of choice must be good and what most so the
best, the fact of all being drawn to the same thing proved this thing
to be the best for all: “For each,” he said, “finds what is good for
itself just as it does its proper nourishment, and so that which is
good for all, and the object of the aim of all, is their Chief Good.”

(And his theories were received, not so much for their own sake, as
because of his excellent moral character; for he was thought to be
eminently possessed of perfect self-mastery, and therefore it was not
thought that he said these things because he was a lover of Pleasure
but that he really was so convinced.)

And he thought his position was not less proved by the argument from
the contrary: that is, since Pain was in itself an object of avoidance
to all the contrary must be in like manner an object of choice.

Again he urged that that is most choice-worthy which we choose, not by
reason of, or with a view to, anything further; and that Pleasure is
confessedly of this kind because no one ever goes on to ask to what
purpose he is pleased, feeling that Pleasure is in itself
choice-worthy.

Again, that when added to any other good it makes it more
choice-worthy; as, for instance, to actions of justice, or perfected
self-mastery; and good can only be increased by itself.

However, this argument at least seems to prove only that it belongs to
the class of goods, and not that it does so more than anything else:
for every good is more choicewortby in combination with some other than
when taken quite alone. In fact, it is by just such an argument that
Plato proves that Pleasure is not the Chief Good:[3] “For,” says he,
“the life of Pleasure is more choice-worthy in combination with
Practical Wisdom than apart from it; but, if the compound better then
simple Pleasure cannot be the Chief Good; because the very Chief Good
cannot by any addition become choice-worthy than it is already:” and it
is obvious that nothing else can be the Chief Good, which by
combination with any of the things in themselves good comes to be more
choice-worthy.

What is there then of such a nature? (meaning, of course, whereof we
can partake; because that which we are in search of must be such).

As for those who object that “what all aim at is not necessarily good,”
I confess I cannot see much in what they say, because what all _think_
we say _is_. And he who would cut away this ground from under us will
not bring forward things more dependable: because if the argument had
rested on the desires of irrational creatures there might have been
something in what he says, but, since the rational also desire
Pleasure, how can his objection be allowed any weight? and it may be
that, even in the lower animals, there is some natural good principle
above themselves which aims at the good peculiar to them.

Nor does that seem to be sound which is urged respecting the argument
from the contrary: I mean, some people say “it does not follow that
Pleasure must be good because Pain is evil, since evil may be opposed
to evil, and both evil and good to what is indifferent:” now what they
say is right enough in itself but does not hold in the present
instance. If both Pleasure and Pain were bad both would have been
objects of avoidance; or if neither then neither would have been, at
all events they must have fared alike: but now men do plainly avoid the
one as bad and choose the other as good, and so there is a complete
opposition.

Nor again is Pleasure therefore excluded from being good because it
does not belong to the class of qualities:[4] the acts of Virtue are
not qualities, neither is Happiness [yet surely both are goods].

Again, they say the Chief Good is limited but Pleasure unlimited, in
that it admits of degrees.

Now if they judge this from the act of feeling Pleasure then the same
thing will apply to justice and all the other virtues,[5] in respect of
which clearly it is said that men are more or less of such and such
characters (according to the different virtues), they are more just or
more brave, or one may practise justice and self-mastery more or less.

If, on the other hand, they judge in respect of the Pleasures
themselves then it may be they miss the true cause, namely that some
are unmixed and others mixed: for just as health being in itself
limited, admits of degrees, why should not Pleasure do so and yet be
limited? in the former case we account for it by the fact that there is
not the same adjustment of parts in all men, nor one and the same
always in the same individual: but health, though relaxed, remains up
to a certain point, and differs in degrees; and of course the same may
be the case with Pleasure.

Again, assuming the Chief Good to be perfect and all Movements[6] and
Generations imperfect, they try to shew that Pleasure is a Movement and
a Generation.

Yet they do not seem warranted in saying even that it is a Movement:
for to every Movement are thought to belong swiftness and slowness, and
if not in itself, as to that of the universe, yet relatively: but to
Pleasure neither of these belongs: for though one may have got quickly
into the state Pleasure, as into that of anger, one cannot be in the
state quickly,[7] nor relatively to the state of any other person; but
we can walk or grow, and so on, quickly or slowly.

Of course it is possible to change into the state of Pleasure quickly
or slowly, but to act in the state (by which, I mean, have the
perception of Pleasure) quickly, is not possible.

And how can it be a Generation? because, according to notions generally
held, not _any_thing is generated from _any_thing, but a thing resolves
itself into that out of which it was generated: whereas of that of
which Pleasure is a Generation Pain is a Destruction.

Again, they say that Pain is a lack of something suitable to nature and
Pleasure a supply of it.

But these are affections of the body: now if Pleasure really is a
supplying of somewhat suitable to nature, that must feel the Pleasure
in which the supply takes place, therefore the body of course: yet this
is not thought to be so: neither then is Pleasure a supplying, only a
person of course will be pleased when a supply takes place just as he
will be pained when he is cut short.

This notion would seem to have arisen out of the Pains and Pleasures
connected with natural nourishment; because, when people have felt a
lack and so have had Pain first, they, of course, are pleased with the
supply of their lack.

But this is not the case with all Pleasures: those attendant on
mathematical studies, for instance, are unconnected with any Pain; and
of such as attend on the senses those which arise through the sense of
Smell; and again, many sounds, and sights, and memories, and hopes: now
of what can these be Generations? because there has been here no lack
of anything to be afterwards supplied.

And to those who bring forward disgraceful Pleasures we may reply that
these are not really pleasant things; for it does not follow because
they are pleasant to the ill-disposed that we are to admit that they
are pleasant except to them; just as we should not say that those
things are really wholesome, or sweet, or bitter, which are so to the
sick, or those objects really white which give that impression to
people labouring under ophthalmia.[8]

Or we might say thus, that the Pleasures are choice-worthy but not as
derived from these sources: just as wealth is, but not as the price of
treason; or health, but not on the terms of eating anything however
loathsome.

Or again, may we not say that Pleasures differ in kind? those derived
from honourable objects, for instance are different from those arising
from disgraceful ones; and it is not possible to experience the
Pleasure of the just man without being just, or of the musical man
without being musical; and so on of others.

The distinction commonly drawn between the friend and the flatterer
would seem to show clearly either that Pleasure is not a good, or that
there are different kinds of Pleasure: for the former is thought to
have good as the object of his intercourse, the latter Pleasure only;
and this last is reproached, but the former men praise as having
different objects in his intercourse.

Again, no one would choose to live with a child’s intellect all his
life through, though receiving the highest possible Pleasure from such
objects as children receive it from; or to take Pleasure in doing any
of the most disgraceful things, though sure never to be pained.

There are many things also about which we should be diligent even
though they brought no Pleasure; as seeing, remembering, knowing,
possessing the various Excellences; and the fact that Pleasures do
follow on these naturally makes no difference, because we should
certainly choose them even though no Pleasure resulted from them.

It seems then to be plain that Pleasure is not the Chief Good, nor is
every kind of it choice-worthy: and that there are some choice-worthy
in themselves, differing in kind, _i.e._ in the sources from which they
are derived. Let this then suffice by way of an account of the current
maxims respecting Pleasure and Pain.

