Chapter V.

As there are some things naturally pleasant, and of these two kinds;
those, namely, which are pleasant generally, and those which are so
relatively to particular kinds of animals and men; so there are others
which are not naturally pleasant but which come to be so in consequence
either of maimings, or custom, or depraved natural tastes: and one may
observe moral states similar to those we have been speaking of, having
respectively these classes of things for their object-matter.

I mean the Brutish, as in the case of the female who, they say, would
rip up women with child and eat the foetus; or the tastes which are
found among the savage tribes bordering on the Pontus, some liking raw
flesh, and some being cannibals, and some lending one another their
children to make feasts of; or what is said of Phalaris. These are
instances of Brutish states, caused in some by disease or madness;
take, for instance, the man who sacrificed and ate his mother, or him
who devoured the liver of his fellow-servant. Instances again of those
caused by disease or by custom, would be, plucking out of hair, or
eating one’s nails, or eating coals and earth.[13] Now wherever nature
is really the cause no one would think of calling men of Imperfect
Self-Control, ... nor, in like manner, such as are in a diseased state
through custom.

The having any of these inclinations is something foreign to what is
denominated Vice, just as Brutishness is: and when a man has them his
mastering them is not properly Self-Control, nor his being mastered by
them Imperfection of Self-Control in the proper sense, but only in the
way of resemblance; just as we may say a man of ungovernable wrath
fails of Self-Control in respect of anger but not simply fails of
Self-Control. For all excessive folly, cowardice, absence of
Self-Control, or irritability, are either Brutish or morbid. The man,
for instance, who is naturally afraid of all things, even if a mouse
should stir, is cowardly after a Brutish sort; there was a man again
who, by reason of disease, was afraid of a cat: and of the fools, they
who are naturally destitute of Reason and live only by Sense are
Brutish, as are some tribes of the far-off barbarians, while others who
are so by reason of diseases, epileptic or frantic, are in morbid
states.

So then, of these inclinations, a man may sometimes merely have one
without yielding to it: I mean, suppose that Phalaris had restrained
his unnatural desire to eat a child: or he may both have and yield to
it. As then Vice when such as belongs to human nature is called Vice
simply, while the other is so called with the addition of “brutish” or
“morbid,” but not simply Vice, so manifestly there is Brutish and
Morbid Imperfection of Self-Control, but that alone is entitled to the
name without any qualification which is of the nature of utter absence
of Self-Control, as it is found in Man.

Chapter VI.

It is plain then that the object-matter of Imperfect Self-Control and
Self-Control is restricted to the same as that of utter absence of
Self-Control and that of Perfected Self-Mastery, and that the rest is
the object-matter of a different species so named metaphorically and
not simply: we will now examine the position, “that Imperfect
Self-Control in respect of Anger is less disgraceful than that in
respect of Lusts.”

In the first place, it seems that Anger does in a way listen to Reason
but mishears it; as quick servants who run out before they have heard
the whole of what is said and then mistake the order; dogs, again, bark
at the slightest stir, before they have seen whether it be friend or
foe; just so Anger, by reason of its natural heat and quickness,
listening to Reason, but without having heard the command of Reason,
rushes to its revenge. That is to say, Reason or some impression on the
mind shows there is insolence or contempt[14] in the offender, and then
Anger, reasoning as it were that one ought to fight against what is
such, fires up immediately: whereas Lust, if Reason or Sense, as the
case may be, merely says a thing is sweet, rushes to the enjoyment of
it: and so Anger follows Reason in a manner, but Lust does not and is
therefore more disgraceful: because he that cannot control his anger
yields in a manner to Reason, but the other to his Lust and not to
Reason at all.

Again, a man is more excusable for following such desires as are
natural, just as he is for following such Lusts as are common to all
and to that degree in which they are common. Now Anger and irritability
are more natural than Lusts when in excess and for objects not
necessary. (This was the ground of the defence the man made who beat
his father, “My father,” he said, “used to beat his, and his father his
again, and this little fellow here,” pointing to his child, “will beat
me when he is grown a man: it runs in the family.” And the father, as
he was being dragged along, bid his son leave off beating him at the
door, because he had himself been used to drag his father so far and no
farther.)

Again, characters are less unjust in proportion as they involve less
insidiousness. Now the Angry man is not insidious, nor is Anger, but
quite open: but Lust is: as they say of Venus,

“Cyprus-born Goddess, _weaver of deceits_”


Or Homer of the girdle called the Cestus,

“Persuasiveness _cheating_ e’en the subtlest mind.”


And so since this kind of Imperfect Self-Control is more unjust, it is
also more disgraceful than that in respect of Anger, and is simply
Imperfect Self-Control, and Vice in a certain sense.

Again, no man feels pain in being insolent, but every one who acts
through Anger does act with pain; and he who acts insolently does it
with pleasure. If then those things are most unjust with which we have
most right to be angry, then Imperfect Self-Control, arising from Lust,
is more so than that arising from Anger: because in Anger there is no
insolence.[15]

Well then, it is clear that Imperfect Self-Control in respect of Lusts
is more disgraceful than that in respect of Anger, and that the
object-matter of Self-Control, and the Imperfection of it, are bodily
Lusts and pleasures; but of these last we must take into account the
differences; for, as was said at the commencement, some are proper to
the human race and natural both in kind and degree, others Brutish, and
others caused by maimings and diseases.

Now the first of these only are the object-matter of Perfected
Self-Mastery and utter absence of Self-Control; and therefore we never
attribute either of these states to Brutes (except metaphorically, and
whenever any one kind of animal differs entirely from another in
insolence, mischievousness, or voracity), because they have not moral
choice or process of deliberation, but are quite different from that
kind of creature just as are madmen from other men.

Brutishness is not so low in the scale as Vice, yet it is to be
regarded with more fear: because it is not that the highest principle
has been corrupted, as in the human creature, but the subject has it
not at all.

It is much the same, therefore, as if one should compare an inanimate
with an animate being, which were the worse: for the badness of that
which has no principle of origination is always less harmful; now
Intellect is a principle of origination. A similar case would be the
comparing injustice and an unjust man together: for in different ways
each is the worst: a bad man would produce ten thousand times as much
harm as a bad brute.

