IV

REBECCA'S POINT OF VIEW

    Dear Mother,--I am safely here. My dress was not much tumbled
    and Aunt Jane helped me press it out. I like Mr. Cobb very
    much. He chews but throws newspapers straight up to the
    doors. I rode outside a little while, but got inside before I
    got to Aunt Miranda's house. I did not want to, but thought
    you would like it better. Miranda is such a long word that I
    think I will say Aunt M. and Aunt J. in my Sunday letters.
    Aunt J. has given me a dictionary to look up all the hard
    words in. It takes a good deal of time and I am glad people
    can talk without stoping to spell. It is much eesier to talk
    than write and much more fun. The brick house looks just the
    same as you have told us. The parler is splendid and gives
    you creeps and chills when you look in the door. The
    furnature is ellergant too, and all the rooms but there are
    no good sitting-down places exsept in the kitchen. The same
    cat is here but they do not save kittens when she has them,
    and the cat is too old to play with. Hannah told me once you
    ran away with father and I can see it would be nice. If Aunt
    M. would run away I think I should like to live with Aunt J.
    She does not hate me as bad as Aunt M. does. Tell Mark he can
    have my paint box, but I should like him to keep the red cake
    in case I come home again. I hope Hannah and John do not get
    tired doing my chores.

    Your afectionate friend

    Rebecca.

    P. S. Please give the piece of poetry to John because he
    likes my poetry even when it is not very good. This piece is
    not very good but it is true but I hope you won't mind what
    is in it as you ran away.

       This house is dark and dull and dreer
       No light doth shine from far or near
           Its like the tomb.

       And those of us who live herein
       Are most as dead as serrafim
           Though not as good.

       My gardian angel is asleep
       At leest he doth no vigil keep

       Ah! woe is me!

       Then give me back my lonely farm
       Where none alive did wish me harm
           Dear home of youth!

    P. S. again. I made the poetry like a piece in a book but
    could not get it right at first. You see "tomb" and "good" do
    not sound well together but I wanted to say "tomb" dreadfully
    and as serrafim are always "good" I couldn't take that out. I
    have made it over now. It does not say my thoughts as well
    but think it is more right. Give the best one to John as he
    keeps them in a box with his birds' eggs. This is the best
    one.


      SUNDAY THOUGHTS

             BY

      REBECCA ROWENA RANDALL

      This house is dark and dull and drear
      No light doth shine from far or near
          Nor ever could.

      And those of us who live herein
      Are most as dead as seraphim
          Though not as good.

      My guardian angel is asleep
      At least he doth no vigil keep
          But far doth roam.

      Then give me back my lonely farm
      Where none alive did wish me harm,
          Dear childhood home!


    Dear Mother,--I am thrilling with unhappyness this morning. I
    got that out of Cora The Doctor's Wife whose husband's mother
    was very cross and unfealing to her like Aunt M. to me. I
    wish Hannah had come instead of me for it was Hannah that was
    wanted and she is better than I am and does not answer back
    so quick. Are there any peaces of my buff calico. Aunt J.
    wants enough to make a new waste button behind so I wont look
    so outlandish. The stiles are quite pretty in Riverboro and
    those at Meeting quite ellergant more so than in Temperance.

      This town is stilish, gay and fair,
      And full of wellthy riches rare,
      But I would pillow on my arm
      The thought of my sweet Brookside Farm.

    School is pretty good. The Teacher can answer more questions
    than the Temperance one but not so many as I can ask. I am
    smarter than all the girls but one but not so smart as two
    boys. Emma Jane can add and subtract in her head like a
    streek of lightning and knows the speling book right through
    but has no thoughts of any kind. She is in the Third Reader
    but does not like stories in books. I am in the Sixth Reader
    but just because I cannot say the seven multiplication Table
    Miss Dearborn threttens to put me in the baby primer class
    with Elijah and Elisha Simpson, little twins.

      Sore is my heart and bent my stubborn pride,
      With Lijah and with Lisha am I tied,
      My soul recoyles like Cora Doctor's Wife,
      Like her I feer I cannot bare this life.


    I am going to try for the speling prize but fear I cannot get
    it. I would not care but wrong speling looks dreadful in
    poetry. Last Sunday when I found seraphim in the dictionary I
    was ashamed I had made it serrafim but seraphim is not a word
    you can guess at like another long one outlandish in this
    letter which spells itself. Miss Dearborn says use the words
    you CAN spell and if you cant spell seraphim make angel do
    but angels are not just the same as seraphims. Seraphims are
    brighter whiter and have bigger wings and I think are older
    and longer dead than angels which are just freshly dead and
    after a long time in heaven around the great white throne
    grow to be seraphims.

    I sew on brown gingham dresses every afternoon when Emma Jane
    and the Simpsons are playing house or running on the Logs
    when their mothers do not know it. Their mothers are afraid
    they will drown and Aunt M. is afraid I will wet my clothes
    so will not let me either. I can play from half past four to
    supper and after supper a little bit and Saturday afternoons.
    I am glad our cow has a calf and it is spotted. It is going
    to be a good year for apples and hay so you and John will be
    glad and we can pay a little more morgage. Miss Dearborn
    asked us what is the object of edducation and I said the
    object of mine was to help pay off the morgage. She told Aunt
    M. and I had to sew extra for punishment because she says a
    morgage is disgrace like stealing or smallpox and it will be
    all over town that we have one on our farm. Emma Jane is not
    morgaged nor Richard Carter nor Dr. Winship but the Simpsons
    are.

      Rise my soul, strain every nerve,
      Thy morgage to remove,
      Gain thy mother's heartfelt thanks
      Thy family's grateful love.

    Pronounce family QUICK or it won't sound right

    Your loving little friend
    Rebecca


    Dear John,--You remember when we tide the new dog in the barn
    how he bit the rope and howled I am just like him only the
    brick house is the barn and I can not bite Aunt M. because I
    must be grateful and edducation is going to be the making of
    me and help you pay off the morgage when we grow up.
    Your loving

    Becky.



