X

RAINBOW BRIDGES

Uncle Jerry coughed and stirred in his chair a good deal during
Rebecca's recital, but he carefully concealed any undue feeling of
sympathy, just muttering, "Poor little soul! We'll see what we can do
for her!"

"You will take me to Maplewood, won't you, Mr. Cobb?" begged Rebecca
piteously.

"Don't you fret a mite," he answered, with a crafty little notion at
the back of his mind; "I'll see the lady passenger through somehow. Now
take a bite o' somethin' to eat, child. Spread some o' that tomato
preserve on your bread; draw up to the table. How'd you like to set in
mother's place an' pour me out another cup o' hot tea?"

Mr. Jeremiah Cobb's mental machinery was simple, and did not move very
smoothly save when propelled by his affection or sympathy. In the
present case these were both employed to his advantage, and mourning
his stupidity and praying for some flash of inspiration to light his
path, he blundered along, trusting to Providence.

Rebecca, comforted by the old man's tone, and timidly enjoying the
dignity of sitting in Mrs. Cobb's seat and lifting the blue china
teapot, smiled faintly, smoothed her hair, and dried her eyes.

"I suppose your mother'll be turrible glad to see you back again?"
queried Mr. Cobb.

A tiny fear--just a baby thing--in the bottom of Rebecca's heart
stirred and grew larger the moment it was touched with a question.

"She won't like it that I ran away, I s'pose, and she'll be sorry that
I couldn't please aunt Mirandy; but I'll make her understand, just as I
did you."

"I s'pose she was thinkin' o' your schoolin', lettin' you come down
here; but land! you can go to school in Temperance, I s'pose?"

"There's only two months' school now in Temperance, and the farm 's too
far from all the other schools."

"Oh well! there's other things in the world beside edjercation,"
responded uncle Jerry, attacking a piece of apple pie.

"Ye--es; though mother thought that was going to be the making of me,"
returned Rebecca sadly, giving a dry little sob as she tried to drink
her tea.

"It'll be nice for you to be all together again at the farm--such a
house full o' children!" remarked the dear old deceiver, who longed for
nothing so much as to cuddle and comfort the poor little creature.

"It's too full--that's the trouble. But I'll make Hannah come to
Riverboro in my place."

"S'pose Mirandy 'n' Jane'll have her? I should be 'most afraid they
wouldn't. They'll be kind o' mad at your goin' home, you know, and you
can't hardly blame 'em."

This was quite a new thought,--that the brick house might be closed to
Hannah, since she, Rebecca, had turned her back upon its cold
hospitality.

"How is this school down here in Riverboro--pretty good?" inquired
uncle Jerry, whose brain was working with an altogether unaccustomed
rapidity,--so much so that it almost terrified him.

"Oh, it's a splendid school! And Miss Dearborn is a splendid teacher!"

"You like her, do you? Well, you'd better believe she returns the
compliment. Mother was down to the store this afternoon buyin' liniment
for Seth Strout, an' she met Miss Dearborn on the bridge. They got to
talkin' 'bout school, for mother has summer-boarded a lot o' the
schoolmarms, an' likes 'em. 'How does the little Temperance girl git
along?' asks mother. 'Oh, she's the best scholar I have!' says Miss
Dearborn. 'I could teach school from sun-up to sun-down if scholars was
all like Rebecca Randall,' says she."

"Oh, Mr. Cobb, DID she say that?" glowed Rebecca, her face sparkling
and dimpling in an instant. "I've tried hard all the time, but I'll
study the covers right off of the books now."

"You mean you would if you'd ben goin' to stay here," interposed uncle
Jerry. "Now ain't it too bad you've jest got to give it all up on
account o' your aunt Mirandy? Well, I can't hardly blame ye. She's
cranky an' she's sour; I should think she'd ben nussed on bonny-clabber
an' green apples. She needs bearin' with; an' I guess you ain't much on
patience, be ye?"

"Not very much," replied Rebecca dolefully.

"If I'd had this talk with ye yesterday," pursued Mr. Cobb, "I believe
I'd have advised ye different. It's too late now, an' I don't feel to
say you've ben all in the wrong; but if 't was to do over again, I'd
say, well, your aunt Mirandy gives you clothes and board and schoolin'
and is goin' to send you to Wareham at a big expense. She's turrible
hard to get along with, an' kind o' heaves benefits at your head, same
's she would bricks; but they're benefits jest the same, an' mebbe it's
your job to kind o' pay for 'em in good behavior. Jane's a leetle bit
more easy goin' than Mirandy, ain't she, or is she jest as hard to
please?"

"Oh, aunt Jane and I get along splendidly," exclaimed Rebecca; "she's
just as good and kind as she can be, and I like her better all the
time. I think she kind of likes me, too; she smoothed my hair once. I'd
let her scold me all day long, for she understands; but she can't stand
up for me against aunt Mirandy; she's about as afraid of her as I am."

"Jane'll be real sorry to-morrow to find you've gone away, I guess; but
never mind, it can't be helped. If she has a kind of a dull time with
Mirandy, on account o' her bein' so sharp, why of course she'd set
great store by your comp'ny. Mother was talkin' with her after prayer
meetin' the other night. 'You wouldn't know the brick house, Sarah,'
says Jane. 'I'm keepin' a sewin' school, an' my scholar has made three
dresses. What do you think o' that,' says she, 'for an old maid's
child? I've taken a class in Sunday-school,' says Jane, 'an' think o'
renewin' my youth an' goin' to the picnic with Rebecca,' says she; an'
mother declares she never see her look so young 'n' happy."

There was a silence that could be felt in the little kitchen; a silence
only broken by the ticking of the tall clock and the beating of
Rebecca's heart, which, it seemed to her, almost drowned the voice of
the clock. The rain ceased, a sudden rosy light filled the room, and
through the window a rainbow arch could be seen spanning the heavens
like a radiant bridge. Bridges took one across difficult places,
thought Rebecca, and uncle Jerry seemed to have built one over her
troubles and given her strength to walk.

"The shower 's over," said the old man, filling his pipe; "it's cleared
the air, washed the face o' the airth nice an' clean, an' everything
to-morrer will shine like a new pin--when you an' I are drivin' up
river."

Rebecca pushed her cup away, rose from the table, and put on her hat
and jacket quietly. "I'm not going to drive up river, Mr. Cobb," she
said. "I'm going to stay here and--catch bricks; catch 'em without
throwing 'em back, too. I don't know as aunt Mirandy will take me in
after I've run away, but I'm going back now while I have the courage.
You wouldn't be so good as to go with me, would you, Mr. Cobb?"

"You'd better b'lieve your uncle Jerry don't propose to leave till he
gits this thing fixed up," cried the old man delightedly. "Now you've
had all you can stan' to-night, poor little soul, without gettin' a fit
o' sickness; an' Mirandy'll be sore an' cross an' in no condition for
argyment; so my plan is jest this: to drive you over to the brick house
in my top buggy; to have you set back in the corner, an' I git out an'
go to the side door; an' when I git your aunt Mirandy 'n' aunt Jane out
int' the shed to plan for a load o' wood I'm goin' to have hauled there
this week, you'll slip out o' the buggy and go upstairs to bed. The
front door won't be locked, will it?"

"Not this time of night," Rebecca answered; "not till aunt Mirandy goes
to bed; but oh! what if it should be?"

"Well, it won't; an' if 't is, why we'll have to face it out; though in
my opinion there's things that won't bear facin' out an' had better be
settled comfortable an' quiet. You see you ain't run away yet; you've
only come over here to consult me 'bout runnin' away, an' we've
concluded it ain't wuth the trouble. The only real sin you've
committed, as I figger it out, was in comin' here by the winder when
you'd ben sent to bed. That ain't so very black, an' you can tell your
aunt Jane 'bout it come Sunday, when she's chock full o' religion, an'
she can advise you when you'd better tell your aunt Mirandy. I don't
believe in deceivin' folks, but if you've hed hard thoughts you ain't
obleeged to own 'em up; take 'em to the Lord in prayer, as the hymn
says, and then don't go on hevin' 'em. Now come on; I'm all hitched up
to go over to the post-office; don't forget your bundle; 'it's always a
journey, mother, when you carry a nightgown;' them 's the first words
your uncle Jerry ever heard you say! He didn't think you'd be bringin'
your nightgown over to his house. Step in an' curl up in the corner; we
ain't goin' to let folks see little runaway gals, 'cause they're goin'
back to begin all over ag'in!"


When Rebecca crept upstairs, and undressing in the dark finally found
herself in her bed that night, though she was aching and throbbing in
every nerve, she felt a kind of peace stealing over her. She had been
saved from foolishness and error; kept from troubling her poor mother;
prevented from angering and mortifying her aunts.

Her heart was melted now, and she determined to win aunt Miranda's
approval by some desperate means, and to try and forget the one thing
that rankled worst, the scornful mention of her father, of whom she
thought with the greatest admiration, and whom she had not yet heard
criticised; for such sorrows and disappointments as Aurelia Randall had
suffered had never been communicated to her children.

It would have been some comfort to the bruised, unhappy little spirit
to know that Miranda Sawyer was passing an uncomfortable night, and
that she tacitly regretted her harshness, partly because Jane had taken
such a lofty and virtuous position in the matter. She could not endure
Jane's disapproval, although she would never have confessed to such a
weakness.

As uncle Jerry drove homeward under the stars, well content with his
attempts at keeping the peace, he thought wistfully of the touch of
Rebecca's head on his knee, and the rain of her tears on his hand; of
the sweet reasonableness of her mind when she had the matter put
rightly before her; of her quick decision when she had once seen the
path of duty; of the touching hunger for love and understanding that
were so characteristic in her. "Lord A'mighty!" he ejaculated under his
breath, "Lord A'mighty! to hector and abuse a child like that one! 'T
ain't ABUSE exactly, I know, or 't wouldn't be to some o' your
elephant-hided young ones; but to that little tender will-o'-the-wisp a
hard word 's like a lash. Mirandy Sawyer would be a heap better woman
if she had a little gravestun to remember, same's mother 'n' I have."


"I never see a child improve in her work as Rebecca has to-day,"
remarked Miranda Sawyer to Jane on Saturday evening. "That settin' down
I gave her was probably just what she needed, and I daresay it'll last
for a month."

"I'm glad you're pleased," returned Jane. "A cringing worm is what you
want, not a bright, smiling child. Rebecca looks to me as if she'd been
through the Seven Years' War. When she came downstairs this morning it
seemed to me she'd grown old in the night. If you follow my advice,
which you seldom do, you'll let me take her and Emma Jane down beside
the river to-morrow afternoon and bring Emma Jane home to a good Sunday
supper. Then if you'll let her go to Milltown with the Cobbs on
Wednesday, that'll hearten her up a little and coax back her appetite.
Wednesday 's a holiday on account of Miss Dearborn's going home to her
sister's wedding, and the Cobbs and Perkinses want to go down to the
Agricultural Fair."



