PART II


CHAPTER ONE


The light and heat fell upon the settlement, the clearings, and the
river as if flung down by an angry hand. The land lay silent, still,
and brilliant under the avalanche of burning rays that had destroyed all
sound and all motion, had buried all shadows, had choked every breath.
No living thing dared to affront the serenity of this cloudless sky,
dared to revolt against the oppression of this glorious and cruel
sunshine. Strength and resolution, body and mind alike were helpless,
and tried to hide before the rush of the fire from heaven. Only the
frail butterflies, the fearless children of the sun, the capricious
tyrants of the flowers, fluttered audaciously in the open, and their
minute shadows hovered in swarms over the drooping blossoms, ran lightly
on the withering grass, or glided on the dry and cracked earth. No voice
was heard in this hot noontide but the faint murmur of the river that
hurried on in swirls and eddies, its sparkling wavelets chasing each
other in their joyous course to the sheltering depths, to the cool
refuge of the sea.

Almayer had dismissed his workmen for the midday rest, and, his little
daughter on his shoulder, ran quickly across the courtyard, making for
the shade of the verandah of his house. He laid the sleepy child on the
seat of the big rocking-chair, on a pillow which he took out of his
own hammock, and stood for a while looking down at her with tender and
pensive eyes. The child, tired and hot, moved uneasily, sighed, and
looked up at him with the veiled look of sleepy fatigue. He picked up
from the floor a broken palm-leaf fan, and began fanning gently the
flushed little face. Her eyelids fluttered and Almayer smiled. A
responsive smile brightened for a second her heavy eyes, broke with a
dimple the soft outline of her cheek; then the eyelids dropped suddenly,
she drew a long breath through the parted lips--and was in a deep sleep
before the fleeting smile could vanish from her face.

Almayer moved lightly off, took one of the wooden armchairs, and placing
it close to the balustrade of the verandah sat down with a sigh of
relief. He spread his elbows on the top rail and resting his chin on his
clasped hands looked absently at the river, at the dance of sunlight
on the flowing water. Gradually the forest of the further bank became
smaller, as if sinking below the level of the river. The outlines
wavered, grew thin, dissolved in the air. Before his eyes there was
now only a space of undulating blue--one big, empty sky growing dark at
times. . . . Where was the sunshine? . . . He felt soothed and happy, as
if some gentle and invisible hand had removed from his soul the burden
of his body. In another second he seemed to float out into a cool
brightness where there was no such thing as memory or pain. Delicious.
His eyes closed--opened--closed again.

“Almayer!”

With a sudden jerk of his whole body he sat up, grasping the front rail
with both his hands, and blinked stupidly.

“What? What’s that?” he muttered, looking round vaguely.

“Here! Down here, Almayer.”

Half rising in his chair, Almayer looked over the rail at the foot of
the verandah, and fell back with a low whistle of astonishment.

“A ghost, by heavens!” he exclaimed softly to himself.

“Will you listen to me?” went on the husky voice from the courtyard.
“May I come up, Almayer?”

Almayer stood up and leaned over the rail. “Don’t you dare,” he said,
in a voice subdued but distinct. “Don’t you dare! The child sleeps here.
And I don’t want to hear you--or speak to you either.”

“You must listen to me! It’s something important.”

“Not to me, surely.”

“Yes! To you. Very important.”

“You were always a humbug,” said Almayer, after a short silence, in an
indulgent tone. “Always! I remember the old days. Some fellows used to
say there was no one like you for smartness--but you never took me in.
Not quite. I never quite believed in you, Mr. Willems.”

“I admit your superior intelligence,” retorted Willems, with scornful
impatience, from below. “Listening to me would be a further proof of it.
You will be sorry if you don’t.”

“Oh, you funny fellow!” said Almayer, banteringly. “Well, come up. Don’t
make a noise, but come up. You’ll catch a sunstroke down there and die
on my doorstep perhaps. I don’t want any tragedy here. Come on!”

Before he finished speaking Willems’ head appeared above the level of
the floor, then his shoulders rose gradually and he stood at last before
Almayer--a masquerading spectre of the once so very confidential clerk
of the richest merchant in the islands. His jacket was soiled and torn;
below the waist he was clothed in a worn-out and faded sarong. He flung
off his hat, uncovering his long, tangled hair that stuck in wisps on
his perspiring forehead and straggled over his eyes, which glittered
deep down in the sockets like the last sparks amongst the black embers
of a burnt-out fire. An unclean beard grew out of the caverns of his
sunburnt cheeks. The hand he put out towards Almayer was very unsteady.
The once firm mouth had the tell-tale droop of mental suffering and
physical exhaustion. He was barefooted. Almayer surveyed him with
leisurely composure.

“Well!” he said at last, without taking the extended hand which dropped
slowly along Willems’ body.

“I am come,” began Willems.

“So I see,” interrupted Almayer. “You might have spared me this treat
without making me unhappy. You have been away five weeks, if I am not
mistaken. I got on very well without you--and now you are here you are
not pretty to look at.”

“Let me speak, will you!” exclaimed Willems.

“Don’t shout like this. Do you think yourself in the forest with your
. . . your friends? This is a civilized man’s house. A white man’s.
Understand?”

“I am come,” began Willems again; “I am come for your good and mine.”

“You look as if you had come for a good feed,” chimed in the
irrepressible Almayer, while Willems waved his hand in a discouraged
gesture. “Don’t they give you enough to eat,” went on Almayer, in a tone
of easy banter, “those--what am I to call them--those new relations of
yours? That old blind scoundrel must be delighted with your company. You
know, he was the greatest thief and murderer of those seas. Say! do
you exchange confidences? Tell me, Willems, did you kill somebody in
Macassar or did you only steal something?”

“It is not true!” exclaimed Willems, hotly. “I only borrowed. . . . They
all lied! I . . .”

“Sh-sh!” hissed Almayer, warningly, with a look at the sleeping child.
“So you did steal,” he went on, with repressed exultation. “I thought
there was something of the kind. And now, here, you steal again.”

For the first time Willems raised his eyes to Almayer’s face.

“Oh, I don’t mean from me. I haven’t missed anything,” said Almayer,
with mocking haste. “But that girl. Hey! You stole her. You did not pay
the old fellow. She is no good to him now, is she?”

“Stop that. Almayer!”

Something in Willems’ tone caused Almayer to pause. He looked narrowly
at the man before him, and could not help being shocked at his
appearance.

“Almayer,” went on Willems, “listen to me. If you are a human being you
will. I suffer horribly--and for your sake.”

Almayer lifted his eyebrows. “Indeed! How? But you are raving,” he
added, negligently.

“Ah! You don’t know,” whispered Willems. “She is gone. Gone,” he
repeated, with tears in his voice, “gone two days ago.”

“No!” exclaimed the surprised Almayer. “Gone! I haven’t heard that
news yet.” He burst into a subdued laugh. “How funny! Had enough of you
already? You know it’s not flattering for you, my superior countryman.”

Willems--as if not hearing him--leaned against one of the columns of the
roof and looked over the river. “At first,” he whispered, dreamily, “my
life was like a vision of heaven--or hell; I didn’t know which. Since
she went I know what perdition means; what darkness is. I know what it
is to be torn to pieces alive. That’s how I feel.”

“You may come and live with me again,” said Almayer, coldly. “After all,
Lingard--whom I call my father and respect as such--left you under my
care. You pleased yourself by going away. Very good. Now you want
to come back. Be it so. I am no friend of yours. I act for Captain
Lingard.”

“Come back?” repeated Willems, passionately. “Come back to you and
abandon her? Do you think I am mad? Without her! Man! what are you
made of? To think that she moves, lives, breathes out of my sight. I am
jealous of the wind that fans her, of the air she breathes, of the earth
that receives the caress of her foot, of the sun that looks at her now
while I . . . I haven’t seen her for two days--two days.”

The intensity of Willems’ feeling moved Almayer somewhat, but he
affected to yawn elaborately, “You do bore me,” he muttered. “Why don’t
you go after her instead of coming here?”

“Why indeed?”

“Don’t you know where she is? She can’t be very far. No native craft has
left this river for the last fortnight.”

“No! not very far--and I will tell you where she is. She is in Lakamba’s
campong.” And Willems fixed his eyes steadily on Almayer’s face.

“Phew! Patalolo never sent to let me know. Strange,” said Almayer,
thoughtfully. “Are you afraid of that lot?” he added, after a short
pause.

“I--afraid!”

“Then is it the care of your dignity which prevents you from following
her there, my high-minded friend?” asked Almayer, with mock solicitude.
“How noble of you!”

There was a short silence; then Willems said, quietly, “You are a fool.
I should like to kick you.”

“No fear,” answered Almayer, carelessly; “you are too weak for that. You
look starved.”

“I don’t think I have eaten anything for the last two days; perhaps
more--I don’t remember. It does not matter. I am full of live embers,”
 said Willems, gloomily. “Look!” and he bared an arm covered with fresh
scars. “I have been biting myself to forget in that pain the fire that
hurts me there!” He struck his breast violently with his fist, reeled
under his own blow, fell into a chair that stood near and closed his
eyes slowly.

“Disgusting exhibition,” said Almayer, loftily. “What could father ever
see in you? You are as estimable as a heap of garbage.”

“You talk like that! You, who sold your soul for a few guilders,”
 muttered Willems, wearily, without opening his eyes.

“Not so few,” said Almayer, with instinctive readiness, and stopped
confused for a moment. He recovered himself quickly, however, and went
on: “But you--you have thrown yours away for nothing; flung it under
the feet of a damned savage woman who has made you already the thing you
are, and will kill you very soon, one way or another, with her love or
with her hate. You spoke just now about guilders. You meant Lingard’s
money, I suppose. Well, whatever I have sold, and for whatever price, I
never meant you--you of all people--to spoil my bargain. I feel pretty
safe though. Even father, even Captain Lingard, would not touch you now
with a pair of tongs; not with a ten-foot pole. . . .”

He spoke excitedly, all in one breath, and, ceasing suddenly, glared at
Willems and breathed hard through his nose in sulky resentment. Willems
looked at him steadily for a moment, then got up.

“Almayer,” he said resolutely, “I want to become a trader in this
place.”

Almayer shrugged his shoulders.

“Yes. And you shall set me up. I want a house and trade goods--perhaps a
little money. I ask you for it.”

“Anything else you want? Perhaps this coat?” and here Almayer unbuttoned
his jacket--“or my house--or my boots?”

“After all it’s natural,” went on Willems, without paying any attention
to Almayer--“it’s natural that she should expect the advantages which
. . . and then I could shut up that old wretch and then . . .”

He paused, his face brightened with the soft light of dreamy enthusiasm,
and he turned his eyes upwards. With his gaunt figure and dilapidated
appearance he looked like some ascetic dweller in a wilderness, finding
the reward of a self-denying life in a vision of dazzling glory. He went
on in an impassioned murmur--

“And then I would have her all to myself away from her people--all
to myself--under my own influence--to fashion--to mould--to adore--to
soften--to . . . Oh! Delight! And then--then go away to some distant
place where, far from all she knew, I would be all the world to her! All
the world to her!”

His face changed suddenly. His eyes wandered for awhile and then became
steady all at once.

“I would repay every cent, of course,” he said, in a business-like tone,
with something of his old assurance, of his old belief in himself, in
it. “Every cent. I need not interfere with your business. I shall cut
out the small native traders. I have ideas--but never mind that now. And
Captain Lingard would approve, I feel sure. After all it’s a loan, and I
shall be at hand. Safe thing for you.”

“Ah! Captain Lingard would approve! He would app . . .” Almayer choked.
The notion of Lingard doing something for Willems enraged him. His face
was purple. He spluttered insulting words. Willems looked at him coolly.

“I assure you, Almayer,” he said, gently, “that I have good grounds for
my demand.”

“Your cursed impudence!”

“Believe me, Almayer, your position here is not so safe as you may
think. An unscrupulous rival here would destroy your trade in a year.
It would be ruin. Now Lingard’s long absence gives courage to certain
individuals. You know?--I have heard much lately. They made proposals to
me . . . You are very much alone here. Even Patalolo . . .”

“Damn Patalolo! I am master in this place.”

“But, Almayer, don’t you see . . .”

“Yes, I see. I see a mysterious ass,” interrupted Almayer, violently.
“What is the meaning of your veiled threats? Don’t you think I know
something also? They have been intriguing for years--and nothing has
happened. The Arabs have been hanging about outside this river for
years--and I am still the only trader here; the master here. Do you
bring me a declaration of war? Then it’s from yourself only. I know all
my other enemies. I ought to knock you on the head. You are not worth
powder and shot though. You ought to be destroyed with a stick--like a
snake.”

Almayer’s voice woke up the little girl, who sat up on the pillow with a
sharp cry. He rushed over to the chair, caught up the child in his arms,
walked back blindly, stumbled against Willems’ hat which lay on the
floor, and kicked it furiously down the steps.

“Clear out of this! Clear out!” he shouted.

Willems made an attempt to speak, but Almayer howled him down.

“Take yourself off! Don’t you see you frighten the child--you scarecrow!
No, no! dear,” he went on to his little daughter, soothingly, while
Willems walked down the steps slowly. “No. Don’t cry. See! Bad man going
away. Look! He is afraid of your papa. Nasty, bad man. Never come back
again. He shall live in the woods and never come near my little girl. If
he comes papa will kill him--so!” He struck his fist on the rail of the
balustrade to show how he would kill Willems, and, perching the consoled
child on his shoulder held her with one hand, while he pointed toward
the retreating figure of his visitor.

“Look how he runs away, dearest,” he said, coaxingly. “Isn’t he funny.
Call ‘pig’ after him, dearest. Call after him.”

The seriousness of her face vanished into dimples. Under the long
eyelashes, glistening with recent tears, her big eyes sparkled and
danced with fun. She took firm hold of Almayer’s hair with one hand,
while she waved the other joyously and called out with all her might, in
a clear note, soft and distinct like the pipe of a bird:--

“Pig! Pig! Pig!”



CHAPTER TWO

A sigh under the flaming blue, a shiver of the sleeping sea, a cool
breath as if a door had been swung upon the frozen spaces of the
universe, and with a stir of leaves, with the nod of boughs, with the
tremble of slender branches the sea breeze struck the coast, rushed up
the river, swept round the broad reaches, and travelled on in a soft
ripple of darkening water, in the whisper of branches, in the rustle of
leaves of the awakened forests. It fanned in Lakamba’s campong the dull
red of expiring embers into a pale brilliance; and, under its touch,
the slender, upright spirals of smoke that rose from every glowing heap
swayed, wavered, and eddying down filled the twilight of clustered shade
trees with the aromatic scent of the burning wood. The men who had been
dozing in the shade during the hot hours of the afternoon woke up, and
the silence of the big courtyard was broken by the hesitating murmur
of yet sleepy voices, by coughs and yawns, with now and then a burst of
laughter, a loud hail, a name or a joke sent out in a soft drawl. Small
groups squatted round the little fires, and the monotonous undertone of
talk filled the enclosure; the talk of barbarians, persistent, steady,
repeating itself in the soft syllables, in musical tones of the
never-ending discourses of those men of the forests and the sea, who
can talk most of the day and all the night; who never exhaust a subject,
never seem able to thresh a matter out; to whom that talk is poetry and
painting and music, all art, all history; their only accomplishment,
their only superiority, their only amusement. The talk of camp fires,
which speaks of bravery and cunning, of strange events and of far
countries, of the news of yesterday and the news of to-morrow. The talk
about the dead and the living--about those who fought and those who
loved.

Lakamba came out on the platform before his own house and sat
down--perspiring, half asleep, and sulky--in a wooden armchair under the
shade of the overhanging eaves. Through the darkness of the doorway
he could hear the soft warbling of his womenkind, busy round the looms
where they were weaving the checkered pattern of his gala sarongs. Right
and left of him on the flexible bamboo floor those of his followers to
whom their distinguished birth, long devotion, or faithful service had
given the privilege of using the chief’s house, were sleeping on mats
or just sat up rubbing their eyes: while the more wakeful had mustered
enough energy to draw a chessboard with red clay on a fine mat and were
now meditating silently over their moves. Above the prostrate forms
of the players, who lay face downward supported on elbow, the soles of
their feet waving irresolutely about, in the absorbed meditation of the
game, there towered here and there the straight figure of an attentive
spectator looking down with dispassionate but profound interest. On the
edge of the platform a row of high-heeled leather sandals stood ranged
carefully in a level line, and against the rough wooden rail leaned the
slender shafts of the spears belonging to these gentlemen, the broad
blades of dulled steel looking very black in the reddening light of
approaching sunset.

A boy of about twelve--the personal attendant of Lakamba--squatted
at his master’s feet and held up towards him a silver siri box. Slowly
Lakamba took the box, opened it, and tearing off a piece of green leaf
deposited in it a pinch of lime, a morsel of gambier, a small bit of
areca nut, and wrapped up the whole with a dexterous twist. He paused,
morsel in hand, seemed to miss something, turned his head from side
to side, slowly, like a man with a stiff neck, and ejaculated in an
ill-humoured bass--

“Babalatchi!”

The players glanced up quickly, and looked down again directly. Those
men who were standing stirred uneasily as if prodded by the sound of
the chief’s voice. The one nearest to Lakamba repeated the call, after
a while, over the rail into the courtyard. There was a movement
of upturned faces below by the fires, and the cry trailed over the
enclosure in sing-song tones. The thumping of wooden pestles husking
the evening rice stopped for a moment and Babalatchi’s name rang
afresh shrilly on women’s lips in various keys. A voice far off shouted
something--another, nearer, repeated it; there was a short hubbub which
died out with extreme suddenness. The first crier turned to Lakamba,
saying indolently--

“He is with the blind Omar.”

Lakamba’s lips moved inaudibly. The man who had just spoken was again
deeply absorbed in the game going on at his feet; and the chief--as if
he had forgotten all about it already--sat with a stolid face amongst
his silent followers, leaning back squarely in his chair, his hands on
the arms of his seat, his knees apart, his big blood-shot eyes blinking
solemnly, as if dazzled by the noble vacuity of his thoughts.

Babalatchi had gone to see old Omar late in the afternoon. The delicate
manipulation of the ancient pirate’s susceptibilities, the skilful
management of Aissa’s violent impulses engrossed him to the exclusion
of every other business--interfered with his regular attendance upon his
chief and protector--even disturbed his sleep for the last three nights.
That day when he left his own bamboo hut--which stood amongst others in
Lakamba’s campong--his heart was heavy with anxiety and with doubt as
to the success of his intrigue. He walked slowly, with his usual air of
detachment from his surroundings, as if unaware that many sleepy eyes
watched from all parts of the courtyard his progress towards a small
gate at its upper end. That gate gave access to a separate enclosure
in which a rather large house, built of planks, had been prepared by
Lakamba’s orders for the reception of Omar and Aissa. It was a superior
kind of habitation which Lakamba intended for the dwelling of his chief
adviser--whose abilities were worth that honour, he thought. But after
the consultation in the deserted clearing--when Babalatchi had disclosed
his plan--they both had agreed that the new house should be used at
first to shelter Omar and Aissa after they had been persuaded to leave
the Rajah’s place, or had been kidnapped from there--as the case might
be. Babalatchi did not mind in the least the putting off of his own
occupation of the house of honour, because it had many advantages for
the quiet working out of his plans. It had a certain seclusion, having
an enclosure of its own, and that enclosure communicated also with
Lakamba’s private courtyard at the back of his residence--a place set
apart for the female household of the chief. The only communication with
the river was through the great front courtyard always full of armed men
and watchful eyes. Behind the whole group of buildings there stretched
the level ground of rice-clearings, which in their turn were closed in
by the wall of untouched forests with undergrowth so thick and tangled
that nothing but a bullet--and that fired at pretty close range--could
penetrate any distance there.

Babalatchi slipped quietly through the little gate and, closing it, tied
up carefully the rattan fastenings. Before the house there was a square
space of ground, beaten hard into the level smoothness of asphalte. A
big buttressed tree, a giant left there on purpose during the process
of clearing the land, roofed in the clear space with a high canopy of
gnarled boughs and thick, sombre leaves. To the right--and some small
distance away from the large house--a little hut of reeds, covered with
mats, had been put up for the special convenience of Omar, who, being
blind and infirm, had some difficulty in ascending the steep plankway
that led to the more substantial dwelling, which was built on low posts
and had an uncovered verandah. Close by the trunk of the tree, and
facing the doorway of the hut, the household fire glowed in a small
handful of embers in the midst of a large circle of white ashes. An
old woman--some humble relation of one of Lakamba’s wives, who had been
ordered to attend on Aissa--was squatting over the fire and lifted up
her bleared eyes to gaze at Babalatchi in an uninterested manner, as he
advanced rapidly across the courtyard.

Babalatchi took in the courtyard with a keen glance of his solitary eye,
and without looking down at the old woman muttered a question. Silently,
the woman stretched a tremulous and emaciated arm towards the hut.
Babalatchi made a few steps towards the doorway, but stopped outside in
the sunlight.

“O! Tuan Omar, Omar besar! It is I--Babalatchi!”

Within the hut there was a feeble groan, a fit of coughing and an
indistinct murmur in the broken tones of a vague plaint. Encouraged
evidently by those signs of dismal life within, Babalatchi entered the
hut, and after some time came out leading with rigid carefulness the
blind Omar, who followed with both his hands on his guide’s shoulders.
There was a rude seat under the tree, and there Babalatchi led his old
chief, who sat down with a sigh of relief and leaned wearily against the
rugged trunk. The rays of the setting sun, darting under the spreading
branches, rested on the white-robed figure sitting with head thrown back
in stiff dignity, on the thin hands moving uneasily, and on the stolid
face with its eyelids dropped over the destroyed eyeballs; a face set
into the immobility of a plaster cast yellowed by age.

“Is the sun near its setting?” asked Omar, in a dull voice.

“Very near,” answered Babalatchi.

“Where am I? Why have I been taken away from the place which I
knew--where I, blind, could move without fear? It is like black night to
those who see. And the sun is near its setting--and I have not heard the
sound of her footsteps since the morning! Twice a strange hand has given
me my food to-day. Why? Why? Where is she?”

“She is near,” said Babalatchi.

“And he?” went on Omar, with sudden eagerness, and a drop in his voice.
“Where is he? Not here. Not here!” he repeated, turning his head from
side to side as if in deliberate attempt to see.

“No! He is not here now,” said Babalatchi, soothingly. Then, after a
pause, he added very low, “But he shall soon return.”

“Return! O crafty one! Will he return? I have cursed him three times,”
 exclaimed Omar, with weak violence.

“He is--no doubt--accursed,” assented Babalatchi, in a conciliating
manner--“and yet he will be here before very long--I know!”

“You are crafty and faithless. I have made you great. You were dirt
under my feet--less than dirt,” said Omar, with tremulous energy.

“I have fought by your side many times,” said Babalatchi, calmly.

“Why did he come?” went on Omar. “Did you send him? Why did he come to
defile the air I breathe--to mock at my fate--to poison her mind and
steal her body? She has grown hard of heart to me. Hard and merciless
and stealthy like rocks that tear a ship’s life out under the smooth
sea.” He drew a long breath, struggled with his anger, then broke
down suddenly. “I have been hungry,” he continued, in a whimpering
tone--“often I have been very hungry--and cold--and neglected--and
nobody near me. She has often forgotten me--and my sons are dead, and
that man is an infidel and a dog. Why did he come? Did you show him the
way?”

“He found the way himself, O Leader of the brave,” said Babalatchi,
sadly. “I only saw a way for their destruction and our own greatness.
And if I saw aright, then you shall never suffer from hunger any more.
There shall be peace for us, and glory and riches.”

“And I shall die to-morrow,” murmured Omar, bitterly.

“Who knows? Those things have been written since the beginning of the
world,” whispered Babalatchi, thoughtfully.

“Do not let him come back,” exclaimed Omar.

“Neither can he escape his fate,” went on Babalatchi. “He shall come
back, and the power of men we always hated, you and I, shall crumble
into dust in our hand.” Then he added with enthusiasm, “They shall fight
amongst themselves and perish both.”

“And you shall see all this, while, I . . .”

“True!” murmured Babalatchi, regretfully. “To you life is darkness.”

“No! Flame!” exclaimed the old Arab, half rising, then falling back in
his seat. “The flame of that last day! I see it yet--the last thing I
saw! And I hear the noise of the rent earth--when they all died. And
I live to be the plaything of a crafty one,” he added, with
inconsequential peevishness.

“You are my master still,” said Babalatchi, humbly. “You are very
wise--and in your wisdom you shall speak to Syed Abdulla when he comes
here--you shall speak to him as I advised, I, your servant, the man who
fought at your right hand for many years. I have heard by a messenger
that the Syed Abdulla is coming to-night, perhaps late; for those things
must be done secretly, lest the white man, the trader up the river,
should know of them. But he will be here. There has been a surat
delivered to Lakamba. In it, Syed Abdulla says he will leave his ship,
which is anchored outside the river, at the hour of noon to-day. He will
be here before daylight if Allah wills.”

He spoke with his eye fixed on the ground, and did not become aware of
Aissa’s presence till he lifted his head when he ceased speaking. She
had approached so quietly that even Omar did not hear her footsteps, and
she stood now looking at them with troubled eyes and parted lips, as
if she was going to speak; but at Babalatchi’s entreating gesture she
remained silent. Omar sat absorbed in thought.

“Ay wa! Even so!” he said at last, in a weak voice. “I am to speak
your wisdom, O Babalatchi! Tell him to trust the white man! I do not
understand. I am old and blind and weak. I do not understand. I am very
cold,” he continued, in a lower tone, moving his shoulders uneasily. He
ceased, then went on rambling in a faint whisper. “They are the sons of
witches, and their father is Satan the stoned. Sons of witches. Sons
of witches.” After a short silence he asked suddenly, in a firmer
voice--“How many white men are there here, O crafty one?”

“There are two here. Two white men to fight one another,” answered
Babalatchi, with alacrity.

“And how many will be left then? How many? Tell me, you who are wise.”

“The downfall of an enemy is the consolation of the unfortunate,” said
Babalatchi, sententiously. “They are on every sea; only the wisdom of
the Most High knows their number--but you shall know that some of them
suffer.”

“Tell me, Babalatchi, will they die? Will they both die?” asked Omar, in
sudden agitation.

Aissa made a movement. Babalatchi held up a warning hand.

“They shall, surely, die,” he said steadily, looking at the girl with
unflinching eye.

“Ay wa! But die soon! So that I can pass my hand over their faces when
Allah has made them stiff.”

“If such is their fate and yours,” answered Babalatchi, without
hesitation. “God is great!”

A violent fit of coughing doubled Omar up, and he rocked himself to and
fro, wheezing and moaning in turns, while Babalatchi and the girl looked
at him in silence. Then he leaned back against the tree, exhausted.

“I am alone, I am alone,” he wailed feebly, groping vaguely about with
his trembling hands. “Is there anybody near me? Is there anybody? I am
afraid of this strange place.”

“I am by your side, O Leader of the brave,” said Babalatchi, touching
his shoulder lightly. “Always by your side as in the days when we both
were young: as in the time when we both went with arms in our hands.”

“Has there been such a time, Babalatchi?” said Omar, wildly; “I have
forgotten. And now when I die there will be no man, no fearless man to
speak of his father’s bravery. There was a woman! A woman! And she has
forsaken me for an infidel dog. The hand of the Compassionate is heavy
on my head! Oh, my calamity! Oh, my shame!”

He calmed down after a while, and asked quietly--

“Is the sun set, Babalatchi?”

“It is now as low as the highest tree I can see from here,” answered
Babalatchi.

“It is the time of prayer,” said Omar, attempting to get up.

Dutifully Babalatchi helped his old chief to rise, and they walked
slowly towards the hut. Omar waited outside, while Babalatchi went in
and came out directly, dragging after him the old Arab’s praying
carpet. Out of a brass vessel he poured the water of ablution on
Omar’s outstretched hands, and eased him carefully down into a kneeling
posture, for the venerable robber was far too infirm to be able to
stand. Then as Omar droned out the first words and made his first bow
towards the Holy City, Babalatchi stepped noiselessly towards Aissa, who
did not move all the time.

Aissa looked steadily at the one-eyed sage, who was approaching her
slowly and with a great show of deference. For a moment they stood
facing each other in silence. Babalatchi appeared embarrassed. With a
sudden and quick gesture she caught hold of his arm, and with the other
hand pointed towards the sinking red disc that glowed, rayless, through
the floating mists of the evening.

“The third sunset! The last! And he is not here,” she whispered; “what
have you done, man without faith? What have you done?”

“Indeed I have kept my word,” murmured Babalatchi, earnestly. “This
morning Bulangi went with a canoe to look for him. He is a strange
man, but our friend, and shall keep close to him and watch him without
ostentation. And at the third hour of the day I have sent another canoe
with four rowers. Indeed, the man you long for, O daughter of Omar! may
come when he likes.”

“But he is not here! I waited for him yesterday. To-day! To-morrow I
shall go.”

“Not alive!” muttered Babalatchi to himself. “And do you doubt your
power,” he went on in a louder tone--“you that to him are more beautiful
than an houri of the seventh Heaven? He is your slave.”

“A slave does run away sometimes,” she said, gloomily, “and then the
master must go and seek him out.”

“And do you want to live and die a beggar?” asked Babalatchi,
impatiently.

“I care not,” she exclaimed, wringing her hands; and the black pupils of
her wide-open eyes darted wildly here and there like petrels before the
storm.

“Sh! Sh!” hissed Babalatchi, with a glance towards Omar. “Do you think,
O girl! that he himself would live like a beggar, even with you?”

“He is great,” she said, ardently. “He despises you all! He despises you
all! He is indeed a man!”

“You know that best,” muttered Babalatchi, with a fugitive smile--“but
remember, woman with the strong heart, that to hold him now you must be
to him like the great sea to thirsty men--a never-ceasing torment, and a
madness.”

He ceased and they stood in silence, both looking on the ground, and
for a time nothing was heard above the crackling of the fire but the
intoning of Omar glorifying the God--his God, and the Faith--his faith.
Then Babalatchi cocked his head on one side and appeared to listen
intently to the hum of voices in the big courtyard. The dull noise
swelled into distinct shouts, then into a great tumult of voices, dying
away, recommencing, growing louder, to cease again abruptly; and in
those short pauses the shrill vociferations of women rushed up, as if
released, towards the quiet heaven. Aissa and Babalatchi started, but
the latter gripped in his turn the girl’s arm and restrained her with a
strong grasp.

“Wait,” he whispered.

The little door in the heavy stockade which separated Lakamba’s private
ground from Omar’s enclosure swung back quickly, and the noble exile
appeared with disturbed mien and a naked short sword in his hand. His
turban was half unrolled, and the end trailed on the ground behind him.
His jacket was open. He breathed thickly for a moment before he spoke.

“He came in Bulangi’s boat,” he said, “and walked quietly till he was
in my presence, when the senseless fury of white men caused him to rush
upon me. I have been in great danger,” went on the ambitious nobleman
in an aggrieved tone. “Do you hear that, Babalatchi? That eater of swine
aimed a blow at my face with his unclean fist. He tried to rush amongst
my household. Six men are holding him now.”

A fresh outburst of yells stopped Lakamba’s discourse. Angry voices
shouted: “Hold him. Beat him down. Strike at his head.”

Then the clamour ceased with sudden completeness, as if strangled by
a mighty hand, and after a second of surprising silence the voice of
Willems was heard alone, howling maledictions in Malay, in Dutch, and in
English.

“Listen,” said Lakamba, speaking with unsteady lips, “he blasphemes his
God. His speech is like the raving of a mad dog. Can we hold him for
ever? He must be killed!”

“Fool!” muttered Babalatchi, looking up at Aissa, who stood with set
teeth, with gleaming eyes and distended nostrils, yet obedient to the
touch of his restraining hand. “It is the third day, and I have kept
my promise,” he said to her, speaking very low. “Remember,” he added
warningly--“like the sea to the thirsty! And now,” he said aloud,
releasing her and stepping back, “go, fearless daughter, go!”

Like an arrow, rapid and silent she flew down the enclosure, and
disappeared through the gate of the courtyard. Lakamba and Babalatchi
looked after her. They heard the renewed tumult, the girl’s clear voice
calling out, “Let him go!” Then after a pause in the din no longer
than half the human breath the name of Aissa rang in a shout loud,
discordant, and piercing, which sent through them an involuntary
shudder. Old Omar collapsed on his carpet and moaned feebly; Lakamba
stared with gloomy contempt in the direction of the inhuman sound; but
Babalatchi, forcing a smile, pushed his distinguished protector through
the narrow gate in the stockade, followed him, and closed it quickly.

The old woman, who had been most of the time kneeling by the fire, now
rose, glanced round fearfully and crouched hiding behind the tree. The
gate of the great courtyard flew open with a great clatter before a
frantic kick, and Willems darted in carrying Aissa in his arms. He
rushed up the enclosure like a tornado, pressing the girl to his breast,
her arms round his neck, her head hanging back over his arm, her eyes
closed and her long hair nearly touching the ground. They appeared for
a second in the glare of the fire, then, with immense strides, he dashed
up the planks and disappeared with his burden in the doorway of the big
house.

Inside and outside the enclosure there was silence. Omar lay supporting
himself on his elbow, his terrified face with its closed eyes giving him
the appearance of a man tormented by a nightmare.

“What is it? Help! Help me to rise!” he called out faintly.

The old hag, still crouching in the shadow, stared with bleared eyes
at the doorway of the big house, and took no notice of his call. He
listened for a while, then his arm gave way, and, with a deep sigh of
discouragement, he let himself fall on the carpet.

The boughs of the tree nodded and trembled in the unsteady currents of
the light wind. A leaf fluttered down slowly from some high branch and
rested on the ground, immobile, as if resting for ever, in the glow of
the fire; but soon it stirred, then soared suddenly, and flew, spinning
and turning before the breath of the perfumed breeze, driven helplessly
into the dark night that had closed over the land.



CHAPTER THREE


For upwards of forty years Abdulla had walked in the way of his Lord.
Son of the rich Syed Selim bin Sali, the great Mohammedan trader of the
Straits, he went forth at the age of seventeen on his first commercial
expedition, as his father’s representative on board a pilgrim ship
chartered by the wealthy Arab to convey a crowd of pious Malays to the
Holy Shrine. That was in the days when steam was not in those seas--or,
at least, not so much as now. The voyage was long, and the young man’s
eyes were opened to the wonders of many lands. Allah had made it his
fate to become a pilgrim very early in life. This was a great favour
of Heaven, and it could not have been bestowed upon a man who prized it
more, or who made himself more worthy of it by the unswerving piety of
his heart and by the religious solemnity of his demeanour. Later on it
became clear that the book of his destiny contained the programme of a
wandering life. He visited Bombay and Calcutta, looked in at the Persian
Gulf, beheld in due course the high and barren coasts of the Gulf of
Suez, and this was the limit of his wanderings westward. He was then
twenty-seven, and the writing on his forehead decreed that the time had
come for him to return to the Straits and take from his dying father’s
hands the many threads of a business that was spread over all the
Archipelago: from Sumatra to New Guinea, from Batavia to Palawan.

Very soon his ability, his will--strong to obstinacy--his wisdom beyond
his years, caused him to be recognized as the head of a family whose
members and connections were found in every part of those seas. An uncle
here--a brother there; a father-in-law in Batavia, another in Palembang;
husbands of numerous sisters; cousins innumerable scattered north,
south, east, and west--in every place where there was trade: the great
family lay like a network over the islands. They lent money to
princes, influenced the council-rooms, faced--if need be--with peaceful
intrepidity the white rulers who held the land and the sea under the
edge of sharp swords; and they all paid great deference to Abdulla,
listened to his advice, entered into his plans--because he was wise,
pious, and fortunate.

He bore himself with the humility becoming a Believer, who never
forgets, even for one moment of his waking life, that he is the servant
of the Most High. He was largely charitable because the charitable man
is the friend of Allah, and when he walked out of his house--built of
stone, just outside the town of Penang--on his way to his godowns in the
port, he had often to snatch his hand away sharply from under the lips
of men of his race and creed; and often he had to murmur deprecating
words, or even to rebuke with severity those who attempted to touch his
knees with their finger-tips in gratitude or supplication. He was very
handsome, and carried his small head high with meek gravity. His lofty
brow, straight nose, narrow, dark face with its chiselled delicacy of
feature, gave him an aristocratic appearance which proclaimed his pure
descent. His beard was trimmed close and to a rounded point. His large
brown eyes looked out steadily with a sweetness that was belied by the
expression of his thin-lipped mouth. His aspect was serene. He had a
belief in his own prosperity which nothing could shake.

Restless, like all his people, he very seldom dwelt for many days
together in his splendid house in Penang. Owner of ships, he was often
on board one or another of them, traversing in all directions the field
of his operations. In every port he had a household--his own or that
of a relation--to hail his advent with demonstrative joy. In every port
there were rich and influential men eager to see him, there was
business to talk over, there were important letters to read: an immense
correspondence, enclosed in silk envelopes--a correspondence which had
nothing to do with the infidels of colonial post-offices, but came into
his hands by devious, yet safe, ways. It was left for him by taciturn
nakhodas of native trading craft, or was delivered with profound salaams
by travel-stained and weary men who would withdraw from his presence
calling upon Allah to bless the generous giver of splendid rewards. And
the news was always good, and all his attempts always succeeded, and
in his ears there rang always a chorus of admiration, of gratitude, of
humble entreaties.

A fortunate man. And his felicity was so complete that the good genii,
who ordered the stars at his birth, had not neglected--by a refinement
of benevolence strange in such primitive beings--to provide him with a
desire difficult to attain, and with an enemy hard to overcome. The envy
of Lingard’s political and commercial successes, and the wish to get the
best of him in every way, became Abdulla’s mania, the paramount interest
of his life, the salt of his existence.

For the last few months he had been receiving mysterious messages from
Sambir urging him to decisive action. He had found the river a couple of
years ago, and had been anchored more than once off that estuary where
the, till then, rapid Pantai, spreading slowly over the lowlands, seems
to hesitate, before it flows gently through twenty outlets; over a maze
of mudflats, sandbanks and reefs, into the expectant sea. He had never
attempted the entrance, however, because men of his race, although brave
and adventurous travellers, lack the true seamanlike instincts, and he
was afraid of getting wrecked. He could not bear the idea of the Rajah
Laut being able to boast that Abdulla bin Selim, like other and lesser
men, had also come to grief when trying to wrest his secret from him.
Meantime he returned encouraging answers to his unknown friends in
Sambir, and waited for his opportunity in the calm certitude of ultimate
triumph.

Such was the man whom Lakamba and Babalatchi expected to see for the
first time on the night of Willems’ return to Aissa. Babalatchi, who had
been tormented for three days by the fear of having over-reached
himself in his little plot, now, feeling sure of his white man, felt
lighthearted and happy as he superintended the preparations in the
courtyard for Abdulla’s reception. Half-way between Lakamba’s house and
the river a pile of dry wood was made ready for the torch that would
set fire to it at the moment of Abdulla’s landing. Between this and
the house again there was, ranged in a semicircle, a set of low
bamboo frames, and on those were piled all the carpets and cushions of
Lakamba’s household. It had been decided that the reception was to take
place in the open air, and that it should be made impressive by the
great number of Lakamba’s retainers, who, clad in clean white, with
their red sarongs gathered round their waists, chopper at side and lance
in hand, were moving about the compound or, gathering into small knots,
discussed eagerly the coming ceremony.

Two little fires burned brightly on the water’s edge on each side of
the landing place. A small heap of damar-gum torches lay by each, and
between them Babalatchi strolled backwards and forwards, stopping often
with his face to the river and his head on one side, listening to the
sounds that came from the darkness over the water. There was no moon and
the night was very clear overhead, but, after the afternoon breeze had
expired in fitful puffs, the vapours hung thickening over the glancing
surface of the Pantai and clung to the shore, hiding from view the
middle of the stream.

A cry in the mist--then another--and, before Babalatchi could answer,
two little canoes dashed up to the landing-place, and two of the
principal citizens of Sambir, Daoud Sahamin and Hamet Bahassoen, who had
been confidentially invited to meet Abdulla, landed quickly and after
greeting Babalatchi walked up the dark courtyard towards the house. The
little stir caused by their arrival soon subsided, and another silent
hour dragged its slow length while Babalatchi tramped up and down
between the fires, his face growing more anxious with every passing
moment.

At last there was heard a loud hail from down the river. At a call from
Babalatchi men ran down to the riverside and, snatching the torches,
thrust them into the fires, then waved them above their heads till they
burst into a flame. The smoke ascended in thick, wispy streams, and hung
in a ruddy cloud above the glare that lit up the courtyard and flashed
over the water, showing three long canoes manned by many paddlers lying
a little off; the men in them lifting their paddles on high and dipping
them down together, in an easy stroke that kept the small flotilla
motionless in the strong current, exactly abreast of the landing-place.
A man stood up in the largest craft and called out--

“Syed Abdulla bin Selim is here!”

Babalatchi answered aloud in a formal tone--

“Allah gladdens our hearts! Come to the land!”

Abdulla landed first, steadying himself by the help of Babalatchi’s
extended hand. In the short moment of his passing from the boat to the
shore they exchanged sharp glances and a few rapid words.

“Who are you?”

“Babalatchi. The friend of Omar. The protected of Lakamba.”

“You wrote?”

“My words were written, O Giver of alms!”

And then Abdulla walked with composed face between the two lines of
men holding torches, and met Lakamba in front of the big fire that was
crackling itself up into a great blaze. For a moment they stood with
clasped hands invoking peace upon each other’s head, then Lakamba, still
holding his honoured guest by the hand, led him round the fire to the
prepared seats. Babalatchi followed close behind his protector. Abdulla
was accompanied by two Arabs. He, like his companions, was dressed in a
white robe of starched muslin, which fell in stiff folds straight from
the neck. It was buttoned from the throat halfway down with a close row
of very small gold buttons; round the tight sleeves there was a narrow
braid of gold lace. On his shaven head he wore a small skull-cap of
plaited grass. He was shod in patent leather slippers over his naked
feet. A rosary of heavy wooden beads hung by a round turn from his right
wrist. He sat down slowly in the place of honour, and, dropping his
slippers, tucked up his legs under him decorously.

The improvised divan was arranged in a wide semi-circle, of which the
point most distant from the fire--some ten yards--was also the nearest
to Lakamba’s dwelling. As soon as the principal personages were seated,
the verandah of the house was filled silently by the muffled-up forms of
Lakamba’s female belongings. They crowded close to the rail and looked
down, whispering faintly. Below, the formal exchange of compliments
went on for some time between Lakamba and Abdulla, who sat side by side.
Babalatchi squatted humbly at his protector’s feet, with nothing but a
thin mat between himself and the hard ground.

Then there was a pause. Abdulla glanced round in an expectant manner,
and after a while Babalatchi, who had been sitting very still in a
pensive attitude, seemed to rouse himself with an effort, and began to
speak in gentle and persuasive tones. He described in flowing sentences
the first beginnings of Sambir, the dispute of the present ruler,
Patalolo, with the Sultan of Koti, the consequent troubles ending
with the rising of Bugis settlers under the leadership of Lakamba. At
different points of the narrative he would turn for confirmation to
Sahamin and Bahassoen, who sat listening eagerly and assented together
with a “Betul! Betul! Right! Right!” ejaculated in a fervent undertone.

Warming up with his subject as the narrative proceeded, Babalatchi went
on to relate the facts connected with Lingard’s action at the critical
period of those internal dissensions. He spoke in a restrained voice
still, but with a growing energy of indignation. What was he, that
man of fierce aspect, to keep all the world away from them? Was he a
government? Who made him ruler? He took possession of Patalolo’s mind
and made his heart hard; he put severe words into his mouth and caused
his hand to strike right and left. That unbeliever kept the Faithful
panting under the weight of his senseless oppression. They had to trade
with him--accept such goods as he would give--such credit as he would
accord. And he exacted payment every year . . .

“Very true!” exclaimed Sahamin and Bahassoen together.

Babalatchi glanced at them approvingly and turned to Abdulla.

“Listen to those men, O Protector of the oppressed!” he exclaimed. “What
could we do? A man must trade. There was nobody else.”

Sahamin got up, staff in hand, and spoke to Abdulla with ponderous
courtesy, emphasizing his words by the solemn flourishes of his right
arm.

“It is so. We are weary of paying our debts to that white man here,
who is the son of the Rajah Laut. That white man--may the grave of his
mother be defiled!--is not content to hold us all in his hand with a
cruel grasp. He seeks to cause our very death. He trades with the Dyaks
of the forest, who are no better than monkeys. He buys from them guttah
and rattans--while we starve. Only two days ago I went to him and
said, ‘Tuan Almayer’--even so; we must speak politely to that friend of
Satan--‘Tuan Almayer, I have such and such goods to sell. Will you buy?’
And he spoke thus--because those white men have no understanding of any
courtesy--he spoke to me as if I was a slave: ‘Daoud, you are a lucky
man’--remark, O First amongst the Believers! that by those words he
could have brought misfortune on my head--‘you are a lucky man to have
anything in these hard times. Bring your goods quickly, and I shall
receive them in payment of what you owe me from last year.’ And he
laughed, and struck me on the shoulder with his open hand. May Jehannum
be his lot!”

“We will fight him,” said young Bahassoen, crisply. “We shall fight if
there is help and a leader. Tuan Abdulla, will you come among us?”

Abdulla did not answer at once. His lips moved in an inaudible whisper
and the beads passed through his fingers with a dry click. All waited in
respectful silence. “I shall come if my ship can enter this river,” said
Abdulla at last, in a solemn tone.

“It can, Tuan,” exclaimed Babalatchi. “There is a white man here
who . . .”

“I want to see Omar el Badavi and that white man you wrote about,”
 interrupted Abdulla.

Babalatchi got on his feet quickly, and there was a general move.

The women on the verandah hurried indoors, and from the crowd that had
kept discreetly in distant parts of the courtyard a couple of men ran
with armfuls of dry fuel, which they cast upon the fire. One of them, at
a sign from Babalatchi, approached and, after getting his orders, went
towards the little gate and entered Omar’s enclosure. While waiting
for his return, Lakamba, Abdulla, and Babalatchi talked together in low
tones. Sahamin sat by himself chewing betel-nut sleepily with a slight
and indolent motion of his heavy jaw. Bahassoen, his hand on the hilt
of his short sword, strutted backwards and forwards in the full light of
the fire, looking very warlike and reckless; the envy and admiration of
Lakamba’s retainers, who stood in groups or flitted about noiselessly in
the shadows of the courtyard.

The messenger who had been sent to Omar came back and stood at a
distance, waiting till somebody noticed him. Babalatchi beckoned him
close.

“What are his words?” asked Babalatchi.

“He says that Syed Abdulla is welcome now,” answered the man.

Lakamba was speaking low to Abdulla, who listened to him with deep
interest.

“. . . We could have eighty men if there was need,” he was
saying--“eighty men in fourteen canoes. The only thing we want is
gunpowder . . .”

“Hai! there will be no fighting,” broke in Babalatchi. “The fear of your
name will be enough and the terror of your coming.”

“There may be powder too,” muttered Abdulla with great nonchalance, “if
only the ship enters the river safely.”

“If the heart is stout the ship will be safe,” said Babalatchi. “We will
go now and see Omar el Badavi and the white man I have here.”

Lakamba’s dull eyes became animated suddenly.

“Take care, Tuan Abdulla,” he said, “take care. The behaviour of that
unclean white madman is furious in the extreme. He offered to
strike . . .”

“On my head, you are safe, O Giver of alms!” interrupted Babalatchi.

Abdulla looked from one to the other, and the faintest flicker of a
passing smile disturbed for a moment his grave composure. He turned to
Babalatchi, and said with decision--

“Let us go.”

“This way, O Uplifter of our hearts!” rattled on Babalatchi, with fussy
deference. “Only a very few paces and you shall behold Omar the brave,
and a white man of great strength and cunning. This way.”

He made a sign for Lakamba to remain behind, and with respectful touches
on the elbow steered Abdulla towards the gate at the upper end of the
court-yard. As they walked on slowly, followed by the two Arabs, he kept
on talking in a rapid undertone to the great man, who never looked at
him once, although appearing to listen with flattering attention. When
near the gate Babalatchi moved forward and stopped, facing Abdulla, with
his hand on the fastenings.

“You shall see them both,” he said. “All my words about them are true.
When I saw him enslaved by the one of whom I spoke, I knew he would be
soft in my hand like the mud of the river. At first he answered my
talk with bad words of his own language, after the manner of white
men. Afterwards, when listening to the voice he loved, he hesitated.
He hesitated for many days--too many. I, knowing him well, made Omar
withdraw here with his . . . household. Then this red-faced man raged
for three days like a black panther that is hungry. And this evening,
this very evening, he came. I have him here. He is in the grasp of one
with a merciless heart. I have him here,” ended Babalatchi, exultingly
tapping the upright of the gate with his hand.

“That is good,” murmured Abdulla.

“And he shall guide your ship and lead in the fight--if fight there be,”
 went on Babalatchi. “If there is any killing--let him be the slayer. You
should give him arms--a short gun that fires many times.”

“Yes, by Allah!” assented Abdulla, with slow thoughtfulness.

“And you will have to open your hand, O First amongst the generous!”
 continued Babalatchi. “You will have to satisfy the rapacity of a
white man, and also of one who is not a man, and therefore greedy of
ornaments.”

“They shall be satisfied,” said Abdulla; “but . . .” He hesitated,
looking down on the ground and stroking his beard, while Babalatchi
waited, anxious, with parted lips. After a short time he spoke again
jerkily in an indistinct whisper, so that Babalatchi had to turn his
head to catch the words. “Yes. But Omar is the son of my father’s uncle
. . . and all belonging to him are of the Faith . . . while that man is
an unbeliever. It is most unseemly . . . very unseemly. He cannot live
under my shadow. Not that dog. Penitence! I take refuge with my God,” he
mumbled rapidly. “How can he live under my eyes with that woman, who is
of the Faith? Scandal! O abomination!”

He finished with a rush and drew a long breath, then added dubiously--

“And when that man has done all we want, what is to be done with him?”

They stood close together, meditative and silent, their eyes roaming
idly over the courtyard. The big bonfire burned brightly, and a wavering
splash of light lay on the dark earth at their feet, while the lazy
smoke wreathed itself slowly in gleaming coils amongst the black boughs
of the trees. They could see Lakamba, who had returned to his place,
sitting hunched up spiritlessly on the cushions, and Sahamin, who had
got on his feet again and appeared to be talking to him with dignified
animation. Men in twos or threes came out of the shadows into the light,
strolling slowly, and passed again into the shadows, their faces turned
to each other, their arms moving in restrained gestures. Bahassoen, his
head proudly thrown back, his ornaments, embroideries, and sword-hilt
flashing in the light, circled steadily round the fire like a planet
round the sun. A cool whiff of damp air came from the darkness of the
riverside; it made Abdulla and Babalatchi shiver, and woke them up from
their abstraction.

“Open the gate and go first,” said Abdulla; “there is no danger?”

“On my life, no!” answered Babalatchi, lifting the rattan ring. “He is
all peace and content, like a thirsty man who has drunk water after many
days.”

He swung the gate wide, made a few paces into the gloom of the
enclosure, and retraced his steps suddenly.

“He may be made useful in many ways,” he whispered to Abdulla, who had
stopped short, seeing him come back.

“O Sin! O Temptation!” sighed out Abdulla, faintly. “Our refuge is with
the Most High. Can I feed this infidel for ever and for ever?” he added,
impatiently.

“No,” breathed out Babalatchi. “No! Not for ever. Only while he serves
your designs, O Dispenser of Allah’s gifts! When the time comes--and
your order . . .”

He sidled close to Abdulla, and brushed with a delicate touch the hand
that hung down listlessly, holding the prayer-beads.

“I am your slave and your offering,” he murmured, in a distinct and
polite tone, into Abdulla’s ear. “When your wisdom speaks, there may be
found a little poison that will not lie. Who knows?”



CHAPTER FOUR


Babalatchi saw Abdulla pass through the low and narrow entrance into the
darkness of Omar’s hut; heard them exchange the usual greetings and
the distinguished visitor’s grave voice asking: “There is no
misfortune--please God--but the sight?” and then, becoming aware of
the disapproving looks of the two Arabs who had accompanied Abdulla,
he followed their example and fell back out of earshot. He did it
unwillingly, although he did not ignore that what was going to happen
in there was now absolutely beyond his control. He roamed irresolutely
about for awhile, and at last wandered with careless steps towards the
fire, which had been moved, from under the tree, close to the hut and a
little to windward of its entrance. He squatted on his heels and began
playing pensively with live embers, as was his habit when engrossed in
thought, withdrawing his hand sharply and shaking it above his head when
he burnt his fingers in a fit of deeper abstraction. Sitting there
he could hear the murmur of the talk inside the hut, and he could
distinguish the voices but not the words. Abdulla spoke in deep tones,
and now and then this flowing monotone was interrupted by a querulous
exclamation, a weak moan or a plaintive quaver of the old man. Yes. It
was annoying not to be able to make out what they were saying, thought
Babalatchi, as he sat gazing fixedly at the unsteady glow of the fire.
But it will be right. All will be right. Abdulla inspired him with
confidence. He came up fully to his expectation. From the very first
moment when he set his eye on him he felt sure that this man--whom he
had known by reputation only--was very resolute. Perhaps too resolute.
Perhaps he would want to grasp too much later on. A shadow flitted over
Babalatchi’s face. On the eve of the accomplishment of his desires he
felt the bitter taste of that drop of doubt which is mixed with the
sweetness of every success.

When, hearing footsteps on the verandah of the big house, he lifted his
head, the shadow had passed away and on his face there was an expression
of watchful alertness. Willems was coming down the plankway, into the
courtyard. The light within trickled through the cracks of the badly
joined walls of the house, and in the illuminated doorway appeared
the moving form of Aissa. She also passed into the night outside and
disappeared from view. Babalatchi wondered where she had got to, and for
the moment forgot the approach of Willems. The voice of the white man
speaking roughly above his head made him jump to his feet as if impelled
upwards by a powerful spring.

“Where’s Abdulla?”

Babalatchi waved his hand towards the hut and stood listening intently.
The voices within had ceased, then recommenced again. He shot an oblique
glance at Willems, whose indistinct form towered above the glow of dying
embers.

“Make up this fire,” said Willems, abruptly. “I want to see your face.”

With obliging alacrity Babalatchi put some dry brushwood on the coals
from a handy pile, keeping all the time a watchful eye on Willems.
When he straightened himself up his hand wandered almost involuntarily
towards his left side to feel the handle of a kriss amongst the folds of
his sarong, but he tried to look unconcerned under the angry stare.

“You are in good health, please God?” he murmured.

“Yes!” answered Willems, with an unexpected loudness that caused
Babalatchi to start nervously. “Yes! . . . Health! . . . You . . .”

He made a long stride and dropped both his hands on the Malay’s
shoulders. In the powerful grip Babalatchi swayed to and fro limply, but
his face was as peaceful as when he sat--a little while ago--dreaming by
the fire. With a final vicious jerk Willems let go suddenly, and turning
away on his heel stretched his hands over the fire. Babalatchi stumbled
backwards, recovered himself, and wriggled his shoulders laboriously.

“Tse! Tse! Tse!” he clicked, deprecatingly. After a short silence he
went on with accentuated admiration: “What a man it is! What a strong
man! A man like that”--he concluded, in a tone of meditative wonder--“a
man like that could upset mountains--mountains!”

He gazed hopefully for a while at Willems’ broad shoulders, and
continued, addressing the inimical back, in a low and persuasive voice--

“But why be angry with me? With me who think only of your good? Did I
not give her refuge, in my own house? Yes, Tuan! This is my own house.
I will let you have it without any recompense because she must have a
shelter. Therefore you and she shall live here. Who can know a woman’s
mind? And such a woman! If she wanted to go away from that other place,
who am I--to say no! I am Omar’s servant. I said: ‘Gladden my heart by
taking my house.’ Did I say right?”

“I’ll tell you something,” said Willems, without changing his position;
“if she takes a fancy to go away from this place it is you who shall
suffer. I will wring your neck.”

“When the heart is full of love there is no room in it for justice,”
 recommenced Babalatchi, with unmoved and persistent softness. “Why slay
me? You know, Tuan, what she wants. A splendid destiny is her desire--as
of all women. You have been wronged and cast out by your people. She
knows that. But you are brave, you are strong--you are a man; and,
Tuan--I am older than you--you are in her hand. Such is the fate of
strong men. And she is of noble birth and cannot live like a slave. You
know her--and you are in her hand. You are like a snared bird, because
of your strength. And--remember I am a man that has seen much--submit,
Tuan! Submit! . . . Or else . . .”

He drawled out the last words in a hesitating manner and broke off his
sentence. Still stretching his hands in turns towards the blaze and
without moving his head, Willems gave a short, lugubrious laugh, and
asked--

“Or else what?”

“She may go away again. Who knows?” finished Babalatchi, in a gentle and
insinuating tone.

This time Willems spun round sharply. Babalatchi stepped back.

“If she does it will be the worse for you,” said Willems, in a menacing
voice. “It will be your doing, and I . . .”

Babalatchi spoke, from beyond the circle of light, with calm disdain.

“Hai--ya! I have heard before. If she goes--then I die. Good! Will that
bring her back do you think--Tuan? If it is my doing it shall be well
done, O white man! and--who knows--you will have to live without her.”

Willems gasped and started back like a confident wayfarer who, pursuing
a path he thinks safe, should see just in time a bottomless chasm
under his feet. Babalatchi came into the light and approached Willems
sideways, with his head thrown back and a little on one side so as to
bring his only eye to bear full on the countenance of the tall white
man.

“You threaten me,” said Willems, indistinctly.

“I, Tuan!” exclaimed Babalatchi, with a slight suspicion of irony in the
affected surprise of his tone. “I, Tuan? Who spoke of death? Was it
I? No! I spoke of life only. Only of life. Of a long life for a lonely
man!”

They stood with the fire between them, both silent, both aware, each
in his own way, of the importance of the passing minutes. Babalatchi’s
fatalism gave him only an insignificant relief in his suspense, because
no fatalism can kill the thought of the future, the desire of success,
the pain of waiting for the disclosure of the immutable decrees of
Heaven. Fatalism is born of the fear of failure, for we all believe that
we carry success in our own hands, and we suspect that our hands are
weak. Babalatchi looked at Willems and congratulated himself upon his
ability to manage that white man. There was a pilot for Abdulla--a
victim to appease Lingard’s anger in case of any mishap. He would take
good care to put him forward in everything. In any case let the white
men fight it out amongst themselves. They were fools. He hated them--the
strong fools--and knew that for his righteous wisdom was reserved the
safe triumph.

Willems measured dismally the depth of his degradation. He--a white man,
the admired of white men, was held by those miserable savages whose tool
he was about to become. He felt for them all the hate of his race, of
his morality, of his intelligence. He looked upon himself with dismay
and pity. She had him. He had heard of such things. He had heard of
women who . . . He would never believe such stories. . . . Yet they
were true. But his own captivity seemed more complete, terrible, and
final--without the hope of any redemption. He wondered at the wickedness
of Providence that had made him what he was; that, worse still,
permitted such a creature as Almayer to live. He had done his duty by
going to him. Why did he not understand? All men were fools. He gave
him his chance. The fellow did not see it. It was hard, very hard on
himself--Willems. He wanted to take her from amongst her own people.
That’s why he had condescended to go to Almayer. He examined himself.
With a sinking heart he thought that really he could not--somehow--live
without her. It was terrible and sweet. He remembered the first days.
Her appearance, her face, her smile, her eyes, her words. A savage
woman! Yet he perceived that he could think of nothing else but of the
three days of their separation, of the few hours since their reunion.
Very well. If he could not take her away, then he would go to her. . . .
He had, for a moment, a wicked pleasure in the thought that what he had
done could not be undone. He had given himself up. He felt proud of it.
He was ready to face anything, do anything. He cared for nothing, for
nobody. He thought himself very fearless, but as a matter of fact he was
only drunk; drunk with the poison of passionate memories.

He stretched his hands over the fire, looked round and called out--

“Aissa!”

She must have been near, for she appeared at once within the light of
the fire. The upper part of her body was wrapped up in the thick folds
of a head covering which was pulled down over her brow, and one end of
it thrown across from shoulder to shoulder hid the lower part of her
face. Only her eyes were visible--sombre and gleaming like a starry
night.

Willems, looking at this strange, muffled figure, felt exasperated,
amazed and helpless. The ex-confidential clerk of the rich Hudig would
hug to his breast settled conceptions of respectable conduct. He sought
refuge within his ideas of propriety from the dismal mangroves, from
the darkness of the forests and of the heathen souls of the savages that
were his masters. She looked like an animated package of cheap cotton
goods! It made him furious. She had disguised herself so because a man
of her race was near! He told her not to do it, and she did not obey.
Would his ideas ever change so as to agree with her own notions of what
was becoming, proper and respectable? He was really afraid they
would, in time. It seemed to him awful. She would never change! This
manifestation of her sense of proprieties was another sign of their
hopeless diversity; something like another step downwards for him. She
was too different from him. He was so civilized! It struck him suddenly
that they had nothing in common--not a thought, not a feeling; he could
not make clear to her the simplest motive of any act of his . . . and he
could not live without her.

The courageous man who stood facing Babalatchi gasped unexpectedly with
a gasp that was half a groan. This little matter of her veiling
herself against his wish acted upon him like a disclosure of some
great disaster. It increased his contempt for himself as the slave of
a passion he had always derided, as the man unable to assert his will.
This will, all his sensations, his personality--all this seemed to be
lost in the abominable desire, in the priceless promise of that woman.
He was not, of course, able to discern clearly the causes of his misery;
but there are none so ignorant as not to know suffering, none so simple
as not to feel and suffer from the shock of warring impulses. The
ignorant must feel and suffer from their complexity as well as the
wisest; but to them the pain of struggle and defeat appears strange,
mysterious, remediable and unjust. He stood watching her, watching
himself. He tingled with rage from head to foot, as if he had been
struck in the face. Suddenly he laughed; but his laugh was like a
distorted echo of some insincere mirth very far away.

From the other side of the fire Babalatchi spoke hurriedly--

“Here is Tuan Abdulla.”



CHAPTER FIVE


Directly on stepping outside Omar’s hut Abdulla caught sight of Willems.
He expected, of course, to see a white man, but not that white man, whom
he knew so well. Everybody who traded in the islands, and who had any
dealings with Hudig, knew Willems. For the last two years of his stay in
Macassar the confidential clerk had been managing all the local trade
of the house under a very slight supervision only on the part of the
master. So everybody knew Willems, Abdulla amongst others--but he was
ignorant of Willems’ disgrace. As a matter of fact the thing had been
kept very quiet--so quiet that a good many people in Macassar were
expecting Willems’ return there, supposing him to be absent on some
confidential mission. Abdulla, in his surprise, hesitated on the
threshold. He had prepared himself to see some seaman--some old officer
of Lingard’s; a common man--perhaps difficult to deal with, but still
no match for him. Instead, he saw himself confronted by an individual
whose reputation for sagacity in business was well known to him. How did
he get here, and why? Abdulla, recovering from his surprise, advanced in
a dignified manner towards the fire, keeping his eyes fixed steadily on
Willems. When within two paces from Willems he stopped and lifted his
right hand in grave salutation. Willems nodded slightly and spoke after
a while.

“We know each other, Tuan Abdulla,” he said, with an assumption of easy
indifference.

“We have traded together,” answered Abdulla, solemnly, “but it was far
from here.”

“And we may trade here also,” said Willems.

“The place does not matter. It is the open mind and the true heart that
are required in business.”

“Very true. My heart is as open as my mind. I will tell you why I am
here.”

“What need is there? In leaving home one learns life. You travel.
Travelling is victory! You shall return with much wisdom.”

“I shall never return,” interrupted Willems. “I have done with my
people. I am a man without brothers. Injustice destroys fidelity.”

Abdulla expressed his surprise by elevating his eyebrows. At the same
time he made a vague gesture with his arm that could be taken as an
equivalent of an approving and conciliating “just so!”

Till then the Arab had not taken any notice of Aissa, who stood by the
fire, but now she spoke in the interval of silence following Willems’
declaration. In a voice that was much deadened by her wrappings she
addressed Abdulla in a few words of greeting, calling him a kinsman.
Abdulla glanced at her swiftly for a second, and then, with perfect
good breeding, fixed his eyes on the ground. She put out towards him her
hand, covered with a corner of her face-veil, and he took it, pressed it
twice, and dropping it turned towards Willems. She looked at the two
men searchingly, then backed away and seemed to melt suddenly into the
night.

“I know what you came for, Tuan Abdulla,” said Willems; “I have been
told by that man there.” He nodded towards Babalatchi, then went on
slowly, “It will be a difficult thing.”

“Allah makes everything easy,” interjected Babalatchi, piously, from a
distance.

The two men turned quickly and stood looking at him thoughtfully, as
if in deep consideration of the truth of that proposition. Under their
sustained gaze Babalatchi experienced an unwonted feeling of shyness,
and dared not approach nearer. At last Willems moved slightly, Abdulla
followed readily, and they both walked down the courtyard, their voices
dying away in the darkness. Soon they were heard returning, and the
voices grew distinct as their forms came out of the gloom. By the fire
they wheeled again, and Babalatchi caught a few words. Willems was
saying--

“I have been at sea with him many years when young. I have used my
knowledge to observe the way into the river when coming in, this time.”

Abdulla assented in general terms.

“In the variety of knowledge there is safety,” he said; and then they
passed out of earshot.

Babalatchi ran to the tree and took up his position in the solid
blackness under its branches, leaning against the trunk. There he was
about midway between the fire and the other limit of the two men’s walk.
They passed him close. Abdulla slim, very straight, his head high, and
his hands hanging before him and twisting mechanically the string of
beads; Willems tall, broad, looking bigger and stronger in contrast to
the slight white figure by the side of which he strolled carelessly,
taking one step to the other’s two; his big arms in constant motion as
he gesticulated vehemently, bending forward to look Abdulla in the face.

They passed and repassed close to Babalatchi some half a dozen times,
and, whenever they were between him and the fire, he could see them
plain enough. Sometimes they would stop short, Willems speaking
emphatically, Abdulla listening with rigid attention, then, when the
other had ceased, bending his head slightly as if consenting to some
demand, or admitting some statement. Now and then Babalatchi caught
a word here and there, a fragment of a sentence, a loud exclamation.
Impelled by curiosity he crept to the very edge of the black shadow
under the tree. They were nearing him, and he heard Willems say--

“You will pay that money as soon as I come on board. That I must have.”

He could not catch Abdulla’s reply. When they went past again, Willems
was saying--

“My life is in your hand anyway. The boat that brings me on board your
ship shall take the money to Omar. You must have it ready in a sealed
bag.”

Again they were out of hearing, but instead of coming back they stopped
by the fire facing each other. Willems moved his arm, shook his hand
on high talking all the time, then brought it down jerkily--stamped his
foot. A short period of immobility ensued. Babalatchi, gazing intently,
saw Abdulla’s lips move almost imperceptibly. Suddenly Willems seized
the Arab’s passive hand and shook it. Babalatchi drew the long breath of
relieved suspense. The conference was over. All well, apparently.

He ventured now to approach the two men, who saw him and waited in
silence. Willems had retired within himself already, and wore a look of
grim indifference. Abdulla moved away a step or two. Babalatchi looked
at him inquisitively.

“I go now,” said Abdulla, “and shall wait for you outside the river,
Tuan Willems, till the second sunset. You have only one word, I know.”

“Only one word,” repeated Willems.

Abdulla and Babalatchi walked together down the enclosure, leaving the
white man alone by the fire. The two Arabs who had come with Abdulla
preceded them and passed at once through the little gate into the light
and the murmur of voices of the principal courtyard, but Babalatchi and
Abdulla stopped on this side of it. Abdulla said--

“It is well. We have spoken of many things. He consents.”

“When?” asked Babalatchi, eagerly.

“On the second day from this. I have promised every thing. I mean to
keep much.”

“Your hand is always open, O Most Generous amongst Believers! You will
not forget your servant who called you here. Have I not spoken the
truth? She has made roast meat of his heart.”

With a horizontal sweep of his arm Abdulla seemed to push away that last
statement, and said slowly, with much meaning--

“He must be perfectly safe; do you understand? Perfectly safe--as if he
was amongst his own people--till . . .”

“Till when?” whispered Babalatchi.

“Till I speak,” said Abdulla. “As to Omar.” He hesitated for a moment,
then went on very low: “He is very old.”

“Hai-ya! Old and sick,” murmured Babalatchi, with sudden melancholy.

“He wanted me to kill that white man. He begged me to have him killed at
once,” said Abdulla, contemptuously, moving again towards the gate.

“He is impatient, like those who feel death near them,” exclaimed
Babalatchi, apologetically.

“Omar shall dwell with me,” went on Abdulla, “when . . . But no matter.
Remember! The white man must be safe.”

“He lives in your shadow,” answered Babalatchi, solemnly. “It is
enough!” He touched his forehead and fell back to let Abdulla go first.

And now they are back in the courtyard wherefrom, at their appearance,
listlessness vanishes, and all the faces become alert and interested
once more. Lakamba approaches his guest, but looks at Babalatchi, who
reassures him by a confident nod. Lakamba clumsily attempts a smile,
and looking, with natural and ineradicable sulkiness, from under his
eyebrows at the man whom he wants to honour, asks whether he would
condescend to visit the place of sitting down and take food. Or perhaps
he would prefer to give himself up to repose? The house is his, and what
is in it, and those many men that stand afar watching the interview are
his. Syed Abdulla presses his host’s hand to his breast, and informs him
in a confidential murmur that his habits are ascetic and his temperament
inclines to melancholy. No rest; no food; no use whatever for those
many men who are his. Syed Abdulla is impatient to be gone. Lakamba is
sorrowful but polite, in his hesitating, gloomy way. Tuan Abdulla must
have fresh boatmen, and many, to shorten the dark and fatiguing road.
Hai-ya! There! Boats!

By the riverside indistinct forms leap into a noisy and disorderly
activity. There are cries, orders, banter, abuse. Torches blaze sending
out much more smoke than light, and in their red glare Babalatchi comes
up to say that the boats are ready.

Through that lurid glare Syed Abdulla, in his long white gown, seems
to glide fantastically, like a dignified apparition attended by two
inferior shades, and stands for a moment at the landing-place to
take leave of his host and ally--whom he loves. Syed Abdulla says so
distinctly before embarking, and takes his seat in the middle of the
canoe under a small canopy of blue calico stretched on four sticks.
Before and behind Syed Abdulla, the men squatting by the gunwales hold
high the blades of their paddles in readiness for a dip, all together.
Ready? Not yet. Hold on all! Syed Abdulla speaks again, while Lakamba
and Babalatchi stand close on the bank to hear his words. His words are
encouraging. Before the sun rises for the second time they shall meet,
and Syed Abdulla’s ship shall float on the waters of this river--at
last! Lakamba and Babalatchi have no doubt--if Allah wills. They are in
the hands of the Compassionate. No doubt. And so is Syed Abdulla, the
great trader who does not know what the word failure means; and so is
the white man--the smartest business man in the islands--who is lying
now by Omar’s fire with his head on Aissa’s lap, while Syed Abdulla
flies down the muddy river with current and paddles between the sombre
walls of the sleeping forest; on his way to the clear and open sea where
the Lord of the Isles (formerly of Greenock, but condemned, sold, and
registered now as of Penang) waits for its owner, and swings erratically
at anchor in the currents of the capricious tide, under the crumbling
red cliffs of Tanjong Mirrah.

For some time Lakamba, Sahamin, and Bahassoen looked silently into the
humid darkness which had swallowed the big canoe that carried Abdulla
and his unvarying good fortune. Then the two guests broke into a talk
expressive of their joyful anticipations. The venerable Sahamin, as
became his advanced age, found his delight in speculation as to the
activities of a rather remote future. He would buy praus, he would send
expeditions up the river, he would enlarge his trade, and, backed by
Abdulla’s capital, he would grow rich in a very few years. Very few.
Meantime it would be a good thing to interview Almayer to-morrow and,
profiting by the last day of the hated man’s prosperity, obtain some
goods from him on credit. Sahamin thought it could be done by skilful
wheedling. After all, that son of Satan was a fool, and the thing was
worth doing, because the coming revolution would wipe all debts out.
Sahamin did not mind imparting that idea to his companions, with much
senile chuckling, while they strolled together from the riverside
towards the residence. The bull-necked Lakamba, listening with pouted
lips without the sign of a smile, without a gleam in his dull, bloodshot
eyes, shuffled slowly across the courtyard between his two guests. But
suddenly Bahassoen broke in upon the old man’s prattle with the generous
enthusiasm of his youth. . . . Trading was very good. But was the
change that would make them happy effected yet? The white man should be
despoiled with a strong hand! . . . He grew excited, spoke very loud,
and his further discourse, delivered with his hand on the hilt of his
sword, dealt incoherently with the honourable topics of throat-cutting,
fire-raising, and with the far-famed valour of his ancestors.

Babalatchi remained behind, alone with the greatness of his conceptions.
The sagacious statesman of Sambir sent a scornful glance after his noble
protector and his noble protector’s friends, and then stood meditating
about that future which to the others seemed so assured. Not so to
Babalatchi, who paid the penalty of his wisdom by a vague sense of
insecurity that kept sleep at arm’s length from his tired body. When he
thought at last of leaving the waterside, it was only to strike a path
for himself and to creep along the fences, avoiding the middle of the
courtyard where small fires glimmered and winked as though the sinister
darkness there had reflected the stars of the serene heaven. He slunk
past the wicket-gate of Omar’s enclosure, and crept on patiently along
the light bamboo palisade till he was stopped by the angle where it
joined the heavy stockade of Lakamba’s private ground. Standing there,
he could look over the fence and see Omar’s hut and the fire before its
door. He could also see the shadow of two human beings sitting between
him and the red glow. A man and a woman. The sight seemed to inspire the
careworn sage with a frivolous desire to sing. It could hardly be called
a song; it was more in the nature of a recitative without any rhythm,
delivered rapidly but distinctly in a croaking and unsteady voice; and
if Babalatchi considered it a song, then it was a song with a purpose
and, perhaps for that reason, artistically defective. It had all the
imperfections of unskilful improvisation and its subject was gruesome.
It told a tale of shipwreck and of thirst, and of one brother killing
another for the sake of a gourd of water. A repulsive story which might
have had a purpose but possessed no moral whatever. Yet it must have
pleased Babalatchi for he repeated it twice, the second time even in
louder tones than at first, causing a disturbance amongst the white
rice-birds and the wild fruit-pigeons which roosted on the boughs of
the big tree growing in Omar’s compound. There was in the thick foliage
above the singer’s head a confused beating of wings, sleepy remarks in
bird-language, a sharp stir of leaves. The forms by the fire moved; the
shadow of the woman altered its shape, and Babalatchi’s song was cut
short abruptly by a fit of soft and persistent coughing. He did not try
to resume his efforts after that interruption, but went away stealthily
to seek--if not sleep--then, at least, repose.



CHAPTER SIX


As soon as Abdulla and his companions had left the enclosure, Aissa
approached Willems and stood by his side. He took no notice of her
expectant attitude till she touched him gently, when he turned furiously
upon her and, tearing off her face-veil, trampled upon it as though
it had been a mortal enemy. She looked at him with the faint smile of
patient curiosity, with the puzzled interest of ignorance watching the
running of a complicated piece of machinery. After he had exhausted his
rage, he stood again severe and unbending looking down at the fire, but
the touch of her fingers at the nape of his neck effaced instantly the
hard lines round his mouth; his eyes wavered uneasily; his lips trembled
slightly. Starting with the unresisting rapidity of a particle of
iron--which, quiescent one moment, leaps in the next to a powerful
magnet--he moved forward, caught her in his arms and pressed her
violently to his breast. He released her as suddenly, and she stumbled a
little, stepped back, breathed quickly through her parted lips, and said
in a tone of pleased reproof--

“O Fool-man! And if you had killed me in your strong arms what would you
have done?”

“You want to live . . . and to run away from me again,” he said gently.
“Tell me--do you?”

She moved towards him with very short steps, her head a little on one
side, hands on hips, with a slight balancing of her body: an approach
more tantalizing than an escape. He looked on, eager--charmed. She spoke
jestingly.

“What am I to say to a man who has been away three days from me? Three!”
 she repeated, holding up playfully three fingers before Willems’ eyes.
He snatched at the hand, but she was on her guard and whisked it behind
her back.

“No!” she said. “I cannot be caught. But I will come. I am coming myself
because I like. Do not move. Do not touch me with your mighty hands, O
child!”

As she spoke she made a step nearer, then another. Willems did not stir.
Pressing against him she stood on tiptoe to look into his eyes, and
her own seemed to grow bigger, glistening and tender, appealing and
promising. With that look she drew the man’s soul away from him through
his immobile pupils, and from Willems’ features the spark of reason
vanished under her gaze and was replaced by an appearance of physical
well-being, an ecstasy of the senses which had taken possession of his
rigid body; an ecstasy that drove out regrets, hesitation and doubt,
and proclaimed its terrible work by an appalling aspect of idiotic
beatitude. He never stirred a limb, hardly breathed, but stood in stiff
immobility, absorbing the delight of her close contact by every pore.

“Closer! Closer!” he murmured.

Slowly she raised her arms, put them over his shoulders, and clasping
her hands at the back of his neck, swung off the full length of her
arms. Her head fell back, the eyelids dropped slightly, and her thick
hair hung straight down: a mass of ebony touched by the red gleams of
the fire. He stood unyielding under the strain, as solid and motionless
as one of the big trees of the surrounding forests; and his eyes
looked at the modelling of her chin, at the outline of her neck, at
the swelling lines of her bosom, with the famished and concentrated
expression of a starving man looking at food. She drew herself up to him
and rubbed her head against his cheek slowly and gently. He sighed. She,
with her hands still on his shoulders, glanced up at the placid stars
and said--

“The night is half gone. We shall finish it by this fire. By this
fire you shall tell me all: your words and Syed Abdulla’s words; and
listening to you I shall forget the three days--because I am good. Tell
me--am I good?”

He said “Yes” dreamily, and she ran off towards the big house.

When she came back, balancing a roll of fine mats on her head, he had
replenished the fire and was ready to help her in arranging a couch
on the side of it nearest to the hut. She sank down with a quick but
gracefully controlled movement, and he threw himself full length with
impatient haste, as if he wished to forestall somebody. She took his
head on her knees, and when he felt her hands touching his face, her
fingers playing with his hair, he had an expression of being taken
possession of; he experienced a sense of peace, of rest, of happiness,
and of soothing delight. His hands strayed upwards about her neck, and
he drew her down so as to have her face above his. Then he whispered--“I
wish I could die like this--now!” She looked at him with her big sombre
eyes, in which there was no responsive light. His thought was so remote
from her understanding that she let the words pass by unnoticed, like
the breath of the wind, like the flight of a cloud. Woman though
she was, she could not comprehend, in her simplicity, the tremendous
compliment of that speech, that whisper of deadly happiness, so
sincere, so spontaneous, coming so straight from the heart--like every
corruption. It was the voice of madness, of a delirious peace, of
happiness that is infamous, cowardly, and so exquisite that the debased
mind refuses to contemplate its termination: for to the victims of such
happiness the moment of its ceasing is the beginning afresh of that
torture which is its price.

With her brows slightly knitted in the determined preoccupation of her
own desires, she said--

“Now tell me all. All the words spoken between you and Syed Abdulla.”

Tell what? What words? Her voice recalled back the consciousness that
had departed under her touch, and he became aware of the passing minutes
every one of which was like a reproach; of those minutes that falling,
slow, reluctant, irresistible into the past, marked his footsteps on the
way to perdition. Not that he had any conviction about it, any notion of
the possible ending on that painful road. It was an indistinct feeling,
a threat of suffering like the confused warning of coming disease,
an inarticulate monition of evil made up of fear and pleasure, of
resignation and of revolt. He was ashamed of his state of mind. After
all, what was he afraid of? Were those scruples? Why that hesitation to
think, to speak of what he intended doing? Scruples were for imbeciles.
His clear duty was to make himself happy. Did he ever take an oath of
fidelity to Lingard? No. Well then--he would not let any interest of
that old fool stand between Willems and Willems’ happiness. Happiness?
Was he not, perchance, on a false track? Happiness meant money. Much
money. At least he had always thought so till he had experienced those
new sensations which . . .

Aissa’s question, repeated impatiently, interrupted his musings, and
looking up at her face shining above him in the dim light of the fire
he stretched his limbs luxuriously and obedient to her desire, he spoke
slowly and hardly above his breath. She, with her head close to his
lips, listened absorbed, interested, in attentive immobility. The many
noises of the great courtyard were hushed up gradually by the sleep that
stilled all voices and closed all eyes. Then somebody droned out a song
with a nasal drawl at the end of every verse. He stirred. She put her
hand suddenly on his lips and sat upright. There was a feeble coughing,
a rustle of leaves, and then a complete silence took possession of the
land; a silence cold, mournful, profound; more like death than peace;
more hard to bear than the fiercest tumult. As soon as she removed her
hand he hastened to speak, so insupportable to him was that stillness
perfect and absolute in which his thoughts seemed to ring with the
loudness of shouts.

“Who was there making that noise?” he asked.

“I do not know. He is gone now,” she answered, hastily. “Tell me, you
will not return to your people; not without me. Not with me. Do you
promise?”

“I have promised already. I have no people of my own. Have I not told
you, that you are everybody to me?”

“Ah, yes,” she said, slowly, “but I like to hear you say that
again--every day, and every night, whenever I ask; and never to be angry
because I ask. I am afraid of white women who are shameless and have
fierce eyes.” She scanned his features close for a moment and added:

“Are they very beautiful? They must be.”

“I do not know,” he whispered, thoughtfully. “And if I ever did know,
looking at you I have forgotten.”

“Forgotten! And for three days and two nights you have forgotten me
also! Why? Why were you angry with me when I spoke at first of Tuan
Abdulla, in the days when we lived beside the brook? You remembered
somebody then. Somebody in the land whence you come. Your tongue is
false. You are white indeed, and your heart is full of deception. I know
it. And yet I cannot help believing you when you talk of your love for
me. But I am afraid!”

He felt flattered and annoyed by her vehemence, and said--

“Well, I am with you now. I did come back. And it was you that went
away.”

“When you have helped Abdulla against the Rajah Laut, who is the first
of white men, I shall not be afraid any more,” she whispered.

“You must believe what I say when I tell you that there never was
another woman; that there is nothing for me to regret, and nothing but
my enemies to remember.”

“Where do you come from?” she said, impulsive and inconsequent, in a
passionate whisper. “What is that land beyond the great sea from which
you come? A land of lies and of evil from which nothing but misfortune
ever comes to us--who are not white. Did you not at first ask me to go
there with you? That is why I went away.”

“I shall never ask you again.”

“And there is no woman waiting for you there?”

“No!” said Willems, firmly.

She bent over him. Her lips hovered above his face and her long hair
brushed his cheeks.

“You taught me the love of your people which is of the Devil,” she
murmured, and bending still lower, she said faintly, “Like this?”

“Yes, like this!” he answered very low, in a voice that trembled
slightly with eagerness; and she pressed suddenly her lips to his while
he closed his eyes in an ecstasy of delight.

There was a long interval of silence. She stroked his head with gentle
touches, and he lay dreamily, perfectly happy but for the annoyance of
an indistinct vision of a well-known figure; a man going away from him
and diminishing in a long perspective of fantastic trees, whose every
leaf was an eye looking after that man, who walked away growing smaller,
but never getting out of sight for all his steady progress. He felt a
desire to see him vanish, a hurried impatience of his disappearance, and
he watched for it with a careful and irksome effort. There was something
familiar about that figure. Why! Himself! He gave a sudden start and
opened his eyes, quivering with the emotion of that quick return from so
far, of finding himself back by the fire with the rapidity of a flash of
lightning. It had been half a dream; he had slumbered in her arms for
a few seconds. Only the beginning of a dream--nothing more. But it was
some time before he recovered from the shock of seeing himself go away
so deliberately, so definitely, so unguardedly; and going away--where?
Now, if he had not woke up in time he would never have come back again
from there; from whatever place he was going to. He felt indignant. It
was like an evasion, like a prisoner breaking his parole--that thing
slinking off stealthily while he slept. He was very indignant, and was
also astonished at the absurdity of his own emotions.

She felt him tremble, and murmuring tender words, pressed his head
to her breast. Again he felt very peaceful with a peace that was as
complete as the silence round them. He muttered--

“You are tired, Aissa.”

She answered so low that it was like a sigh shaped into faint words.

“I shall watch your sleep, O child!”

He lay very quiet, and listened to the beating of her heart. That sound,
light, rapid, persistent, and steady; her very life beating against his
cheek, gave him a clear perception of secure ownership, strengthened his
belief in his possession of that human being, was like an assurance of
the vague felicity of the future. There were no regrets, no doubts,
no hesitation now. Had there ever been? All that seemed far away, ages
ago--as unreal and pale as the fading memory of some delirium. All the
anguish, suffering, strife of the past days; the humiliation and anger
of his downfall; all that was an infamous nightmare, a thing born in
sleep to be forgotten and leave no trace--and true life was this: this
dreamy immobility with his head against her heart that beat so steadily.

He was broad awake now, with that tingling wakefulness of the tired body
which succeeds to the few refreshing seconds of irresistible sleep, and
his wide-open eyes looked absently at the doorway of Omar’s hut. The
reed walls glistened in the light of the fire, the smoke of which, thin
and blue, drifted slanting in a succession of rings and spirals across
the doorway, whose empty blackness seemed to him impenetrable and
enigmatical like a curtain hiding vast spaces full of unexpected
surprises. This was only his fancy, but it was absorbing enough to make
him accept the sudden appearance of a head, coming out of the gloom, as
part of his idle fantasy or as the beginning of another short dream,
of another vagary of his overtired brain. A face with drooping eyelids,
old, thin, and yellow, above the scattered white of a long beard that
touched the earth. A head without a body, only a foot above the ground,
turning slightly from side to side on the edge of the circle of light
as if to catch the radiating heat of the fire on either cheek in
succession. He watched it in passive amazement, growing distinct, as if
coming nearer to him, and the confused outlines of a body crawling
on all fours came out, creeping inch by inch towards the fire, with
a silent and all but imperceptible movement. He was astounded at the
appearance of that blind head dragging that crippled body behind,
without a sound, without a change in the composure of the sightless
face, which was plain one second, blurred the next in the play of the
light that drew it to itself steadily. A mute face with a kriss between
its lips. This was no dream. Omar’s face. But why? What was he after?

He was too indolent in the happy languor of the moment to answer the
question. It darted through his brain and passed out, leaving him
free to listen again to the beating of her heart; to that precious and
delicate sound which filled the quiet immensity of the night. Glancing
upwards he saw the motionless head of the woman looking down at him in
a tender gleam of liquid white between the long eyelashes, whose shadow
rested on the soft curve of her cheek; and under the caress of that
look, the uneasy wonder and the obscure fear of that apparition,
crouching and creeping in turns towards the fire that was its guide,
were lost--were drowned in the quietude of all his senses, as pain is
drowned in the flood of drowsy serenity that follows upon a dose of
opium.

He altered the position of his head by ever so little, and now could see
easily that apparition which he had seen a minute before and had nearly
forgotten already. It had moved closer, gliding and noiseless like the
shadow of some nightmare, and now it was there, very near, motionless
and still as if listening; one hand and one knee advanced; the neck
stretched out and the head turned full towards the fire. He could see
the emaciated face, the skin shiny over the prominent bones, the black
shadows of the hollow temples and sunken cheeks, and the two patches of
blackness over the eyes, over those eyes that were dead and could not
see. What was the impulse which drove out this blind cripple into
the night to creep and crawl towards that fire? He looked at him,
fascinated, but the face, with its shifting lights and shadows, let out
nothing, closed and impenetrable like a walled door.

Omar raised himself to a kneeling posture and sank on his heels, with
his hands hanging down before him. Willems, looking out of his dreamy
numbness, could see plainly the kriss between the thin lips, a bar
across the face; the handle on one side where the polished wood caught a
red gleam from the fire and the thin line of the blade running to a dull
black point on the other. He felt an inward shock, which left his body
passive in Aissa’s embrace, but filled his breast with a tumult of
powerless fear; and he perceived suddenly that it was his own death that
was groping towards him; that it was the hate of himself and the hate of
her love for him which drove this helpless wreck of a once brilliant and
resolute pirate, to attempt a desperate deed that would be the glorious
and supreme consolation of an unhappy old age. And while he looked,
paralyzed with dread, at the father who had resumed his cautious
advance--blind like fate, persistent like destiny--he listened with
greedy eagerness to the heart of the daughter beating light, rapid, and
steady against his head.

He was in the grip of horrible fear; of a fear whose cold hand robs its
victim of all will and of all power; of all wish to escape, to resist,
or to move; which destroys hope and despair alike, and holds the empty
and useless carcass as if in a vise under the coming stroke. It was not
the fear of death--he had faced danger before--it was not even the fear
of that particular form of death. It was not the fear of the end, for he
knew that the end would not come then. A movement, a leap, a shout would
save him from the feeble hand of the blind old man, from that hand that
even now was, with cautious sweeps along the ground, feeling for his
body in the darkness. It was the unreasoning fear of this glimpse
into the unknown things, into those motives, impulses, desires he had
ignored, but that had lived in the breasts of despised men, close by his
side, and were revealed to him for a second, to be hidden again behind
the black mists of doubt and deception. It was not death that frightened
him: it was the horror of bewildered life where he could understand
nothing and nobody round him; where he could guide, control, comprehend
nothing and no one--not even himself.

He felt a touch on his side. That contact, lighter than the caress of a
mother’s hand on the cheek of a sleeping child, had for him the force of
a crushing blow. Omar had crept close, and now, kneeling above him, held
the kriss in one hand while the other skimmed over his jacket up towards
his breast in gentle touches; but the blind face, still turned to
the heat of the fire, was set and immovable in its aspect of stony
indifference to things it could not hope to see. With an effort Willems
took his eyes off the deathlike mask and turned them up to Aissa’s head.
She sat motionless as if she had been part of the sleeping earth, then
suddenly he saw her big sombre eyes open out wide in a piercing stare
and felt the convulsive pressure of her hands pinning his arms along
his body. A second dragged itself out, slow and bitter, like a day of
mourning; a second full of regret and grief for that faith in her which
took its flight from the shattered ruins of his trust. She was holding
him! She too! He felt her heart give a great leap, his head slipped down
on her knees, he closed his eyes and there was nothing. Nothing! It was
as if she had died; as though her heart had leaped out into the night,
abandoning him, defenceless and alone, in an empty world.

His head struck the ground heavily as she flung him aside in her sudden
rush. He lay as if stunned, face up and, daring not move, did not see
the struggle, but heard the piercing shriek of mad fear, her low angry
words; another shriek dying out in a moan. When he got up at last he
looked at Aissa kneeling over her father, he saw her bent back in the
effort of holding him down, Omar’s contorted limbs, a hand thrown up
above her head and her quick movement grasping the wrist. He made an
impulsive step forward, but she turned a wild face to him and called out
over her shoulder--

“Keep back! Do not come near! Do not. . . .”

And he stopped short, his arms hanging lifelessly by his side, as if
those words had changed him into stone. She was afraid of his possible
violence, but in the unsettling of all his convictions he was struck
with the frightful thought that she preferred to kill her father all
by herself; and the last stage of their struggle, at which he looked
as though a red fog had filled his eyes, loomed up with an unnatural
ferocity, with a sinister meaning; like something monstrous and
depraved, forcing its complicity upon him under the cover of that awful
night. He was horrified and grateful; drawn irresistibly to her--and
ready to run away. He could not move at first--then he did not want
to stir. He wanted to see what would happen. He saw her lift, with
a tremendous effort, the apparently lifeless body into the hut, and
remained standing, after they disappeared, with the vivid image in his
eyes of that head swaying on her shoulder, the lower jaw hanging down,
collapsed, passive, meaningless, like the head of a corpse.

Then after a while he heard her voice speaking inside, harshly, with an
agitated abruptness of tone; and in answer there were groans and
broken murmurs of exhaustion. She spoke louder. He heard her saying
violently--“No! No! Never!”

And again a plaintive murmur of entreaty as of some one begging for a
supreme favour, with a last breath. Then she said--

“Never! I would sooner strike it into my own heart.”

She came out, stood panting for a short moment in the doorway, and then
stepped into the firelight. Behind her, through the darkness came the
sound of words calling the vengeance of heaven on her head, rising
higher, shrill, strained, repeating the curse over and over again--till
the voice cracked in a passionate shriek that died out into hoarse
muttering ending with a deep and prolonged sigh. She stood facing
Willems, one hand behind her back, the other raised in a gesture
compelling attention, and she listened in that attitude till all was
still inside the hut. Then she made another step forward and her hand
dropped slowly.

“Nothing but misfortune,” she whispered, absently, to herself. “Nothing
but misfortune to us who are not white.” The anger and excitement died
out of her face, and she looked straight at Willems with an intense and
mournful gaze.

He recovered his senses and his power of speech with a sudden start.

“Aissa,” he exclaimed, and the words broke out through his lips with
hurried nervousness. “Aissa! How can I live here? Trust me. Believe in
me. Let us go away from here. Go very far away! Very far; you and I!”

He did not stop to ask himself whether he could escape, and how, and
where. He was carried away by the flood of hate, disgust, and contempt
of a white man for that blood which is not his blood, for that race
which is not his race; for the brown skins; for the hearts false like
the sea, blacker than night. This feeling of repulsion overmastered his
reason in a clear conviction of the impossibility for him to live with
her people. He urged her passionately to fly with him because out of all
that abhorred crowd he wanted this one woman, but wanted her away from
them, away from that race of slaves and cut-throats from which she
sprang. He wanted her for himself--far from everybody, in some safe and
dumb solitude. And as he spoke his anger and contempt rose, his hate
became almost fear; and his desire of her grew immense, burning,
illogical and merciless; crying to him through all his senses;
louder than his hate, stronger than his fear, deeper than his
contempt--irresistible and certain like death itself.

Standing at a little distance, just within the light--but on the
threshold of that darkness from which she had come--she listened, one
hand still behind her back, the other arm stretched out with the hand
half open as if to catch the fleeting words that rang around her,
passionate, menacing, imploring, but all tinged with the anguish of his
suffering, all hurried by the impatience that gnawed his breast. And
while she listened she felt a slowing down of her heart-beats as the
meaning of his appeal grew clearer before her indignant eyes, as she saw
with rage and pain the edifice of her love, her own work, crumble slowly
to pieces, destroyed by that man’s fears, by that man’s falseness. Her
memory recalled the days by the brook when she had listened to other
words--to other thoughts--to promises and to pleadings for other things,
which came from that man’s lips at the bidding of her look or her smile,
at the nod of her head, at the whisper of her lips. Was there then in
his heart something else than her image, other desires than the desires
of her love, other fears than the fear of losing her? How could that be?
Had she grown ugly or old in a moment? She was appalled, surprised and
angry with the anger of unexpected humiliation; and her eyes looked
fixedly, sombre and steady, at that man born in the land of violence
and of evil wherefrom nothing but misfortune comes to those who are not
white. Instead of thinking of her caresses, instead of forgetting all
the world in her embrace, he was thinking yet of his people; of that
people that steals every land, masters every sea, that knows no mercy
and no truth--knows nothing but its own strength. O man of strong arm
and of false heart! Go with him to a far country, be lost in the throng
of cold eyes and false hearts--lose him there! Never! He was mad--mad
with fear; but he should not escape her! She would keep him here a slave
and a master; here where he was alone with her; where he must live for
her--or die. She had a right to his love which was of her making, to the
love that was in him now, while he spoke those words without sense. She
must put between him and other white men a barrier of hate. He must not
only stay, but he must also keep his promise to Abdulla, the fulfilment
of which would make her safe.

“Aissa, let us go! With you by my side I would attack them with my naked
hands. Or no! Tomorrow we shall be outside, on board Abdulla’s ship.
You shall come with me and then I could . . . If the ship went ashore by
some chance, then we could steal a canoe and escape in the confusion.
. . . You are not afraid of the sea . . . of the sea that would give me
freedom . . .”

He was approaching her gradually with extended arms, while he pleaded
ardently in incoherent words that ran over and tripped each other in the
extreme eagerness of his speech. She stepped back, keeping her distance,
her eyes on his face, watching on it the play of his doubts and of his
hopes with a piercing gaze, that seemed to search out the innermost
recesses of his thought; and it was as if she had drawn slowly the
darkness round her, wrapping herself in its undulating folds that made
her indistinct and vague. He followed her step by step till at last they
both stopped, facing each other under the big tree of the enclosure.
The solitary exile of the forests, great, motionless and solemn in his
abandonment, left alone by the life of ages that had been pushed away
from him by those pigmies that crept at his foot, towered high and
straight above their heads. He seemed to look on, dispassionate and
imposing, in his lonely greatness, spreading his branches wide in a
gesture of lofty protection, as if to hide them in the sombre shelter
of innumerable leaves; as if moved by the disdainful compassion of the
strong, by the scornful pity of an aged giant, to screen this struggle
of two human hearts from the cold scrutiny of glittering stars.

The last cry of his appeal to her mercy rose loud, vibrated under the
sombre canopy, darted among the boughs startling the white birds that
slept wing to wing--and died without an echo, strangled in the dense
mass of unstirring leaves. He could not see her face, but he heard
her sighs and the distracted murmur of indistinct words. Then, as he
listened holding his breath, she exclaimed suddenly--

“Have you heard him? He has cursed me because I love you. You brought
me suffering and strife--and his curse. And now you want to take me far
away where I would lose you, lose my life; because your love is my
life now. What else is there? Do not move,” she cried violently, as he
stirred a little--“do not speak! Take this! Sleep in peace!”

He saw a shadowy movement of her arm. Something whizzed past and struck
the ground behind him, close to the fire. Instinctively he turned round
to look at it. A kriss without its sheath lay by the embers; a sinuous
dark object, looking like something that had been alive and was now
crushed, dead and very inoffensive; a black wavy outline very distinct
and still in the dull red glow. Without thinking he moved to pick it up,
stooping with the sad and humble movement of a beggar gathering the
alms flung into the dust of the roadside. Was this the answer to his
pleading, to the hot and living words that came from his heart? Was this
the answer thrown at him like an insult, that thing made of wood and
iron, insignificant and venomous, fragile and deadly? He held it by the
blade and looked at the handle stupidly for a moment before he let
it fall again at his feet; and when he turned round he faced only the
night:--the night immense, profound and quiet; a sea of darkness in
which she had disappeared without leaving a trace.

He moved forward with uncertain steps, putting out both his hands before
him with the anguish of a man blinded suddenly.

“Aissa!” he cried--“come to me at once.”

He peered and listened, but saw nothing, heard nothing. After a while
the solid blackness seemed to wave before his eyes like a curtain
disclosing movements but hiding forms, and he heard light and hurried
footsteps, then the short clatter of the gate leading to Lakamba’s
private enclosure. He sprang forward and brought up against the rough
timber in time to hear the words, “Quick! Quick!” and the sound of the
wooden bar dropped on the other side, securing the gate. With his arms
thrown up, the palms against the paling, he slid down in a heap on the
ground.

“Aissa,” he said, pleadingly, pressing his lips to a chink between the
stakes. “Aissa, do you hear me? Come back! I will do what you want, give
you all you desire--if I have to set the whole Sambir on fire and put
that fire out with blood. Only come back. Now! At once! Are you there?
Do you hear me? Aissa!”

On the other side there were startled whispers of feminine voices; a
frightened little laugh suddenly interrupted; some woman’s admiring
murmur--“This is brave talk!” Then after a short silence Aissa cried--

“Sleep in peace--for the time of your going is near. Now I am afraid of
you. Afraid of your fear. When you return with Tuan Abdulla you shall
be great. You will find me here. And there will be nothing but love.
Nothing else!--Always!--Till we die!”

He listened to the shuffle of footsteps going away, and staggered to his
feet, mute with the excess of his passionate anger against that being
so savage and so charming; loathing her, himself, everybody he had
ever known; the earth, the sky, the very air he drew into his oppressed
chest; loathing it because it made him live, loathing her because she
made him suffer. But he could not leave that gate through which she had
passed. He wandered a little way off, then swerved round, came back and
fell down again by the stockade only to rise suddenly in another attempt
to break away from the spell that held him, that brought him back there,
dumb, obedient and furious. And under the immobilized gesture of lofty
protection in the branches outspread wide above his head, under the
high branches where white birds slept wing to wing in the shelter of
countless leaves, he tossed like a grain of dust in a whirlwind--sinking
and rising--round and round--always near that gate. All through the
languid stillness of that night he fought with the impalpable; he fought
with the shadows, with the darkness, with the silence. He fought without
a sound, striking futile blows, dashing from side to side; obstinate,
hopeless, and always beaten back; like a man bewitched within the
invisible sweep of a magic circle.




