PART III


CHAPTER ONE

“Yes! Cat, dog, anything that can scratch or bite; as long as it is
harmful enough and mangy enough. A sick tiger would make you happy--of
all things. A half-dead tiger that you could weep over and palm upon
some poor devil in your power, to tend and nurse for you. Never mind
the consequences--to the poor devil. Let him be mangled or eaten up, of
course! You haven’t any pity to spare for the victims of your infernal
charity. Not you! Your tender heart bleeds only for what is poisonous
and deadly. I curse the day when you set your benevolent eyes on him. I
curse it . . .”

“Now then! Now then!” growled Lingard in his moustache. Almayer, who had
talked himself up to the choking point, drew a long breath and went on--

“Yes! It has been always so. Always. As far back as I can remember.
Don’t you recollect? What about that half-starved dog you brought on
board in Bankok in your arms. In your arms by . . . ! It went mad next
day and bit the serang. You don’t mean to say you have forgotten? The
best serang you ever had! You said so yourself while you were helping
us to lash him down to the chain-cable, just before he died in his fits.
Now, didn’t you? Two wives and ever so many children the man left. That
was your doing. . . . And when you went out of your way and risked
your ship to rescue some Chinamen from a water-logged junk in Formosa
Straits, that was also a clever piece of business. Wasn’t it? Those
damned Chinamen rose on you before forty-eight hours. They were
cut-throats, those poor fishermen. You knew they were cut-throats before
you made up your mind to run down on a lee shore in a gale of wind
to save them. A mad trick! If they hadn’t been scoundrels--hopeless
scoundrels--you would not have put your ship in jeopardy for them, I
know. You would not have risked the lives of your crew--that crew you
loved so--and your own life. Wasn’t that foolish! And, besides, you were
not honest. Suppose you had been drowned? I would have been in a pretty
mess then, left alone here with that adopted daughter of yours. Your
duty was to myself first. I married that girl because you promised to
make my fortune. You know you did! And then three months afterwards you
go and do that mad trick--for a lot of Chinamen too. Chinamen! You have
no morality. I might have been ruined for the sake of those murderous
scoundrels that, after all, had to be driven overboard after killing
ever so many of your crew--of your beloved crew! Do you call that
honest?”

“Well, well!” muttered Lingard, chewing nervously the stump of his
cheroot that had gone out and looking at Almayer--who stamped wildly
about the verandah--much as a shepherd might look at a pet sheep in
his obedient flock turning unexpectedly upon him in enraged revolt. He
seemed disconcerted, contemptuously angry yet somewhat amused; and also
a little hurt as if at some bitter jest at his own expense. Almayer
stopped suddenly, and crossing his arms on his breast, bent his body
forward and went on speaking.

“I might have been left then in an awkward hole--all on account of your
absurd disregard for your safety--yet I bore no grudge. I knew your
weaknesses. But now--when I think of it! Now we are ruined. Ruined!
Ruined! My poor little Nina. Ruined!”

He slapped his thighs smartly, walked with small steps this way and
that, seized a chair, planted it with a bang before Lingard, and sat
down staring at the old seaman with haggard eyes. Lingard, returning his
stare steadily, dived slowly into various pockets, fished out at last a
box of matches and proceeded to light his cheroot carefully, rolling it
round and round between his lips, without taking his gaze for a moment
off the distressed Almayer. Then from behind a cloud of tobacco smoke he
said calmly--

“If you had been in trouble as often as I have, my boy, you wouldn’t
carry on so. I have been ruined more than once. Well, here I am.”

“Yes, here you are,” interrupted Almayer. “Much good it is to me. Had
you been here a month ago it would have been of some use. But now! . .
You might as well be a thousand miles off.”

“You scold like a drunken fish-wife,” said Lingard, serenely. He got up
and moved slowly to the front rail of the verandah. The floor shook and
the whole house vibrated under his heavy step. For a moment he stood
with his back to Almayer, looking out on the river and forest of the
east bank, then turned round and gazed mildly down upon him.

“It’s very lonely this morning here. Hey?” he said.

Almayer lifted up his head.

“Ah! you notice it--don’t you? I should think it is lonely! Yes, Captain
Lingard, your day is over in Sambir. Only a month ago this verandah
would have been full of people coming to greet you. Fellows would be
coming up those steps grinning and salaaming--to you and to me. But our
day is over. And not by my fault either. You can’t say that. It’s all
the doing of that pet rascal of yours. Ah! He is a beauty! You should
have seen him leading that hellish crowd. You would have been proud of
your old favourite.”

“Smart fellow that,” muttered Lingard, thoughtfully. Almayer jumped up
with a shriek.

“And that’s all you have to say! Smart fellow! O Lord!”

“Don’t make a show of yourself. Sit down. Let’s talk quietly. I want to
know all about it. So he led?”

“He was the soul of the whole thing. He piloted Abdulla’s ship in. He
ordered everything and everybody,” said Almayer, who sat down again,
with a resigned air.

“When did it happen--exactly?”

“On the sixteenth I heard the first rumours of Abdulla’s ship being in
the river; a thing I refused to believe at first. Next day I could not
doubt any more. There was a great council held openly in Lakamba’s place
where almost everybody in Sambir attended. On the eighteenth the Lord of
the Isles was anchored in Sambir reach, abreast of my house. Let’s see.
Six weeks to-day, exactly.”

“And all that happened like this? All of a sudden. You never heard
anything--no warning. Nothing. Never had an idea that something was up?
Come, Almayer!”

“Heard! Yes, I used to hear something every day. Mostly lies. Is there
anything else in Sambir?”

“You might not have believed them,” observed Lingard. “In fact you ought
not to have believed everything that was told to you, as if you had been
a green hand on his first voyage.”

Almayer moved in his chair uneasily.

“That scoundrel came here one day,” he said. “He had been away from the
house for a couple of months living with that woman. I only heard about
him now and then from Patalolo’s people when they came over. Well one
day, about noon, he appeared in this courtyard, as if he had been jerked
up from hell-where he belongs.”

Lingard took his cheroot out, and, with his mouth full of white smoke
that oozed out through his parted lips, listened, attentive. After a
short pause Almayer went on, looking at the floor moodily--

“I must say he looked awful. Had a bad bout of the ague probably. The
left shore is very unhealthy. Strange that only the breadth of the river
. . .”

He dropped off into deep thoughtfulness as if he had forgotten his
grievances in a bitter meditation upon the unsanitary condition of the
virgin forests on the left bank. Lingard took this opportunity to expel
the smoke in a mighty expiration and threw the stump of his cheroot over
his shoulder.

“Go on,” he said, after a while. “He came to see you . . .”

“But it wasn’t unhealthy enough to finish him, worse luck!” went on
Almayer, rousing himself, “and, as I said, he turned up here with his
brazen impudence. He bullied me, he threatened vaguely. He wanted
to scare me, to blackmail me. Me! And, by heaven--he said you would
approve. You! Can you conceive such impudence? I couldn’t exactly make
out what he was driving at. Had I known, I would have approved him. Yes!
With a bang on the head. But how could I guess that he knew enough to
pilot a ship through the entrance you always said was so difficult. And,
after all, that was the only danger. I could deal with anybody here--but
when Abdulla came. . . . That barque of his is armed. He carries twelve
brass six-pounders, and about thirty men. Desperate beggars. Sumatra
men, from Deli and Acheen. Fight all day and ask for more in the
evening. That kind.”

“I know, I know,” said Lingard, impatiently.

“Of course, then, they were cheeky as much as you please after he
anchored abreast of our jetty. Willems brought her up himself in
the best berth. I could see him from this verandah standing forward,
together with the half-caste master. And that woman was there too. Close
to him. I heard they took her on board off Lakamba’s place. Willems said
he would not go higher without her. Stormed and raged. Frightened them,
I believe. Abdulla had to interfere. She came off alone in a canoe, and
no sooner on deck than she fell at his feet before all hands, embraced
his knees, wept, raved, begged his pardon. Why? I wonder. Everybody in
Sambir is talking of it. They never heard tell or saw anything like it.
I have all this from Ali, who goes about in the settlement and brings me
the news. I had better know what is going on--hadn’t I? From what I
can make out, they--he and that woman--are looked upon as something
mysterious--beyond comprehension. Some think them mad. They live alone
with an old woman in a house outside Lakamba’s campong and are greatly
respected--or feared, I should say rather. At least, he is. He is very
violent. She knows nobody, sees nobody, will speak to nobody but him.
Never leaves him for a moment. It’s the talk of the place. There are
other rumours. From what I hear I suspect that Lakamba and Abdulla are
tired of him. There’s also talk of him going away in the Lord of the
Isles--when she leaves here for the southward--as a kind of Abdulla’s
agent. At any rate, he must take the ship out. The half-caste is not
equal to it as yet.”

Lingard, who had listened absorbed till then, began now to walk with
measured steps. Almayer ceased talking and followed him with his eyes as
he paced up and down with a quarter-deck swing, tormenting and twisting
his long white beard, his face perplexed and thoughtful.

“So he came to you first of all, did he?” asked Lingard, without
stopping.

“Yes. I told you so. He did come. Came to extort money, goods--I don’t
know what else. Wanted to set up as a trader--the swine! I kicked his
hat into the courtyard, and he went after it, and that was the last of
him till he showed up with Abdulla. How could I know that he could do
harm in that way? Or in any way at that! Any local rising I could put
down easy with my own men and with Patalolo’s help.”

“Oh! yes. Patalolo. No good. Eh? Did you try him at all?”

“Didn’t I!” exclaimed Almayer. “I went to see him myself on the twelfth.
That was four days before Abdulla entered the river. In fact, same day
Willems tried to get at me. I did feel a little uneasy then. Patalolo
assured me that there was no human being that did not love me in Sambir.
Looked as wise as an owl. Told me not to listen to the lies of wicked
people from down the river. He was alluding to that man Bulangi, who
lives up the sea reach, and who had sent me word that a strange ship was
anchored outside--which, of course, I repeated to Patalolo. He would not
believe. Kept on mumbling ‘No! No! No!’ like an old parrot, his head all
of a tremble, all beslobbered with betel-nut juice. I thought there was
something queer about him. Seemed so restless, and as if in a hurry to
get rid of me. Well. Next day that one-eyed malefactor who lives with
Lakamba--what’s his name--Babalatchi, put in an appearance here! Came
about mid-day, casually like, and stood there on this verandah chatting
about one thing and another. Asking when I expected you, and so on.
Then, incidentally, he mentioned that they--his master and himself--were
very much bothered by a ferocious white man--my friend--who was hanging
about that woman--Omar’s daughter. Asked my advice. Very deferential and
proper. I told him the white man was not my friend, and that they had
better kick him out. Whereupon he went away salaaming, and protesting
his friendship and his master’s goodwill. Of course I know now the
infernal nigger came to spy and to talk over some of my men. Anyway,
eight were missing at the evening muster. Then I took alarm. Did not
dare to leave my house unguarded. You know what my wife is, don’t you?
And I did not care to take the child with me--it being late--so I sent
a message to Patalolo to say that we ought to consult; that there were
rumours and uneasiness in the settlement. Do you know what answer I
got?”

Lingard stopped short in his walk before Almayer, who went on, after an
impressive pause, with growing animation.

“All brought it: ‘The Rajah sends a friend’s greeting, and does not
understand the message.’ That was all. Not a word more could Ali get
out of him. I could see that Ali was pretty well scared. He hung about,
arranging my hammock--one thing and another. Then just before going
away he mentioned that the water-gate of the Rajah’s place was heavily
barred, but that he could see only very few men about the courtyard.
Finally he said, ‘There is darkness in our Rajah’s house, but no sleep.
Only darkness and fear and the wailing of women.’ Cheerful, wasn’t it?
It made me feel cold down my back somehow. After Ali slipped away I
stood here--by this table, and listened to the shouting and drumming in
the settlement. Racket enough for twenty weddings. It was a little past
midnight then.”

Again Almayer stopped in his narrative with an abrupt shutting of lips,
as if he had said all that there was to tell, and Lingard stood staring
at him, pensive and silent. A big bluebottle fly flew in recklessly into
the cool verandah, and darted with loud buzzing between the two men.
Lingard struck at it with his hat. The fly swerved, and Almayer dodged
his head out of the way. Then Lingard aimed another ineffectual blow;
Almayer jumped up and waved his arms about. The fly buzzed desperately,
and the vibration of minute wings sounded in the peace of the early
morning like a far-off string orchestra accompanying the hollow,
determined stamping of the two men, who, with heads thrown back and
arms gyrating on high, or again bending low with infuriated lunges, were
intent upon killing the intruder. But suddenly the buzz died out in a
thin thrill away in the open space of the courtyard, leaving Lingard
and Almayer standing face to face in the fresh silence of the young day,
looking very puzzled and idle, their arms hanging uselessly by their
sides--like men disheartened by some portentous failure.

“Look at that!” muttered Lingard. “Got away after all.”

“Nuisance,” said Almayer in the same tone. “Riverside is overrun with
them. This house is badly placed . . . mosquitos . . . and these big
flies . . . . last week stung Nina . . . been ill four days . . . poor
child. . . . I wonder what such damned things are made for!”



CHAPTER TWO

After a long silence, during which Almayer had moved towards the table
and sat down, his head between his hands, staring straight before him,
Lingard, who had recommenced walking, cleared his throat and said--

“What was it you were saying?”

“Ah! Yes! You should have seen this settlement that night. I don’t think
anybody went to bed. I walked down to the point, and could see them.
They had a big bonfire in the palm grove, and the talk went on there
till the morning. When I came back here and sat in the dark verandah in
this quiet house I felt so frightfully lonely that I stole in and took
the child out of her cot and brought her here into my hammock. If it
hadn’t been for her I am sure I would have gone mad; I felt so utterly
alone and helpless. Remember, I hadn’t heard from you for four months.
Didn’t know whether you were alive or dead. Patalolo would have nothing
to do with me. My own men were deserting me like rats do a sinking hulk.
That was a black night for me, Captain Lingard. A black night as I sat
here not knowing what would happen next. They were so excited and rowdy
that I really feared they would come and burn the house over my head.
I went and brought my revolver. Laid it loaded on the table. There were
such awful yells now and then. Luckily the child slept through it, and
seeing her so pretty and peaceful steadied me somehow. Couldn’t believe
there was any violence in this world, looking at her lying so quiet and
so unconscious of what went on. But it was very hard. Everything was at
an end. You must understand that on that night there was no government
in Sambir. Nothing to restrain those fellows. Patalolo had collapsed. I
was abandoned by my own people, and all that lot could vent their spite
on me if they wanted. They know no gratitude. How many times haven’t I
saved this settlement from starvation? Absolute starvation. Only three
months ago I distributed again a lot of rice on credit. There was
nothing to eat in this infernal place. They came begging on their
knees. There isn’t a man in Sambir, big or little, who is not in debt to
Lingard & Co. Not one. You ought to be satisfied. You always said
that was the right policy for us. Well, I carried it out. Ah! Captain
Lingard, a policy like that should be backed by loaded rifles . . .”

“You had them!” exclaimed Lingard in the midst of his promenade, that
went on more rapid as Almayer talked: the headlong tramp of a man
hurrying on to do something violent. The verandah was full of dust,
oppressive and choking, which rose under the old seaman’s feet, and made
Almayer cough again and again.

“Yes, I had! Twenty. And not a finger to pull a trigger. It’s easy to
talk,” he spluttered, his face very red.

Lingard dropped into a chair, and leaned back with one hand stretched
out at length upon the table, the other thrown over the back of his
seat. The dust settled, and the sun surging above the forest flooded
the verandah with a clear light. Almayer got up and busied himself in
lowering the split rattan screens that hung between the columns of the
verandah.

“Phew!” said Lingard, “it will be a hot day. That’s right, my boy. Keep
the sun out. We don’t want to be roasted alive here.”

Almayer came back, sat down, and spoke very calmly--

“In the morning I went across to see Patalolo. I took the child with me,
of course. I found the water-gate barred, and had to walk round through
the bushes. Patalolo received me lying on the floor, in the dark, all
the shutters closed. I could get nothing out of him but lamentations
and groans. He said you must be dead. That Lakamba was coming now with
Abdulla’s guns to kill everybody. Said he did not mind being killed,
as he was an old man, but that the wish of his heart was to make a
pilgrimage. He was tired of men’s ingratitude--he had no heirs--he
wanted to go to Mecca and die there. He would ask Abdulla to let him go.
Then he abused Lakamba--between sobs--and you, a little. You prevented
him from asking for a flag that would have been respected--he was right
there--and now when his enemies were strong he was weak, and you were
not there to help him. When I tried to put some heart into him, telling
him he had four big guns--you know the brass six-pounders you left here
last year--and that I would get powder, and that, perhaps, together we
could make head against Lakamba, he simply howled at me. No matter which
way he turned--he shrieked--the white men would be the death of him,
while he wanted only to be a pilgrim and be at peace. My belief is,”
 added Almayer, after a short pause, and fixing a dull stare upon
Lingard, “that the old fool saw this thing coming for a long time, and
was not only too frightened to do anything himself, but actually
too scared to let you or me know of his suspicions. Another of your
particular pets! Well! You have a lucky hand, I must say!”

Lingard struck a sudden blow on the table with his clenched hand. There
was a sharp crack of splitting wood. Almayer started up violently, then
fell back in his chair and looked at the table.

“There!” he said, moodily, “you don’t know your own strength. This table
is completely ruined. The only table I had been able to save from
my wife. By and by I will have to eat squatting on the floor like a
native.”

Lingard laughed heartily. “Well then, don’t nag at me like a woman at a
drunken husband!” He became very serious after awhile, and added, “If
it hadn’t been for the loss of the Flash I would have been here three
months ago, and all would have been well. No use crying over that. Don’t
you be uneasy, Kaspar. We will have everything ship-shape here in a very
short time.”

“What? You don’t mean to expel Abdulla out of here by force! I tell you,
you can’t.”

“Not I!” exclaimed Lingard. “That’s all over, I am afraid. Great pity.
They will suffer for it. He will squeeze them. Great pity. Damn it! I
feel so sorry for them if I had the Flash here I would try force. Eh!
Why not? However, the poor Flash is gone, and there is an end of it.
Poor old hooker. Hey, Almayer? You made a voyage or two with me. Wasn’t
she a sweet craft? Could make her do anything but talk. She was better
than a wife to me. Never scolded. Hey? . . . And to think that it should
come to this. That I should leave her poor old bones sticking on a reef
as though I had been a damned fool of a southern-going man who must have
half a mile of water under his keel to be safe! Well! well! It’s only
those who do nothing that make no mistakes, I suppose. But it’s hard.
Hard.”

He nodded sadly, with his eyes on the ground. Almayer looked at him with
growing indignation.

“Upon my word, you are heartless,” he burst out; “perfectly
heartless--and selfish. It does not seem to strike you--in all
that--that in losing your ship--by your recklessness, I am sure--you
ruin me--us, and my little Nina. What’s going to become of me and of
her? That’s what I want to know. You brought me here, made me your
partner, and now, when everything is gone to the devil--through your
fault, mind you--you talk about your ship . . . ship! You can get
another. But here. This trade. That’s gone now, thanks to Willems. . . .
Your dear Willems!”

“Never you mind about Willems. I will look after him,” said Lingard,
severely. “And as to the trade . . . I will make your fortune yet, my
boy. Never fear. Have you got any cargo for the schooner that brought me
here?”

“The shed is full of rattans,” answered Almayer, “and I have about
eighty tons of guttah in the well. The last lot I ever will have, no
doubt,” he added, bitterly.

“So, after all, there was no robbery. You’ve lost nothing actually.
Well, then, you must . . . Hallo! What’s the matter! . . . Here! . . .”

“Robbery! No!” screamed Almayer, throwing up his hands.

He fell back in the chair and his face became purple. A little white
foam appeared on his lips and trickled down his chin, while he lay back,
showing the whites of his upturned eyes. When he came to himself he saw
Lingard standing over him, with an empty water-chatty in his hand.

“You had a fit of some kind,” said the old seaman with much concern.
“What is it? You did give me a fright. So very sudden.”

Almayer, his hair all wet and stuck to his head, as if he had been
diving, sat up and gasped.

“Outrage! A fiendish outrage. I . . .”

Lingard put the chatty on the table and looked at him in attentive
silence. Almayer passed his hand over his forehead and went on in an
unsteady tone:

“When I remember that, I lose all control,” he said. “I told you he
anchored Abdulla’s ship abreast our jetty, but over to the other shore,
near the Rajah’s place. The ship was surrounded with boats. From here it
looked as if she had been landed on a raft. Every dugout in Sambir was
there. Through my glass I could distinguish the faces of people on the
poop--Abdulla, Willems, Lakamba--everybody. That old cringing scoundrel
Sahamin was there. I could see quite plain. There seemed to be much talk
and discussion. Finally I saw a ship’s boat lowered. Some Arab got into
her, and the boat went towards Patalolo’s landing-place. It seems
they had been refused admittance--so they say. I think myself that
the water-gate was not unbarred quick enough to please the exalted
messenger. At any rate I saw the boat come back almost directly. I
was looking on, rather interested, when I saw Willems and some more go
forward--very busy about something there. That woman was also amongst
them. Ah, that woman . . .”

Almayer choked, and seemed on the point of having a relapse, but by a
violent effort regained a comparative composure.

“All of a sudden,” he continued--“bang! They fired a shot into
Patalolo’s gate, and before I had time to catch my breath--I was
startled, you may believe--they sent another and burst the gate open.
Whereupon, I suppose, they thought they had done enough for a while, and
probably felt hungry, for a feast began aft. Abdulla sat amongst
them like an idol, cross-legged, his hands on his lap. He’s too great
altogether to eat when others do, but he presided, you see. Willems kept
on dodging about forward, aloof from the crowd, and looking at my house
through the ship’s long glass. I could not resist it. I shook my fist at
him.”

“Just so,” said Lingard, gravely. “That was the thing to do, of course.
If you can’t fight a man the best thing is to exasperate him.”

Almayer waved his hand in a superior manner, and continued, unmoved:
“You may say what you like. You can’t realize my feelings. He saw me,
and, with his eye still at the small end of the glass, lifted his arm
as if answering a hail. I thought my turn to be shot at would come next
after Patalolo, so I ran up the Union Jack to the flagstaff in the yard.
I had no other protection. There were only three men besides Ali that
stuck to me--three cripples, for that matter, too sick to get away. I
would have fought singlehanded, I think, I was that angry, but there was
the child. What to do with her? Couldn’t send her up the river with the
mother. You know I can’t trust my wife. I decided to keep very quiet,
but to let nobody land on our shore. Private property, that; under a
deed from Patalolo. I was within my right--wasn’t I? The morning was
very quiet. After they had a feed on board the barque with Abdulla most
of them went home; only the big people remained. Towards three o’clock
Sahamin crossed alone in a small canoe. I went down on our wharf with
my gun to speak to him, but didn’t let him land. The old hypocrite said
Abdulla sent greetings and wished to talk with me on business; would I
come on board? I said no; I would not. Told him that Abdulla may write
and I would answer, but no interview, neither on board his ship nor on
shore. I also said that if anybody attempted to land within my fences
I would shoot--no matter whom. On that he lifted his hands to heaven,
scandalized, and then paddled away pretty smartly--to report, I suppose.
An hour or so afterwards I saw Willems land a boat party at the Rajah’s.
It was very quiet. Not a shot was fired, and there was hardly any
shouting. They tumbled those brass guns you presented to Patalolo last
year down the bank into the river. It’s deep there close to. The channel
runs that way, you know. About five, Willems went back on board, and
I saw him join Abdulla by the wheel aft. He talked a lot, swinging his
arms about--seemed to explain things--pointed at my house, then down the
reach. Finally, just before sunset, they hove upon the cable and dredged
the ship down nearly half a mile to the junction of the two branches of
the river--where she is now, as you might have seen.”

Lingard nodded.

“That evening, after dark--I was informed--Abdulla landed for the first
time in Sambir. He was entertained in Sahamin’s house. I sent Ali to the
settlement for news. He returned about nine, and reported that Patalolo
was sitting on Abdulla’s left hand before Sahamin’s fire. There was a
great council. Ali seemed to think that Patalolo was a prisoner, but
he was wrong there. They did the trick very neatly. Before midnight
everything was arranged as I can make out. Patalolo went back to his
demolished stockade, escorted by a dozen boats with torches. It appears
he begged Abdulla to let him have a passage in the Lord of the Isles to
Penang. From there he would go to Mecca. The firing business was alluded
to as a mistake. No doubt it was in a sense. Patalolo never meant
resisting. So he is going as soon as the ship is ready for sea. He went
on board next day with three women and half a dozen fellows as old as
himself. By Abdulla’s orders he was received with a salute of seven
guns, and he has been living on board ever since--five weeks. I doubt
whether he will leave the river alive. At any rate he won’t live to
reach Penang. Lakamba took over all his goods, and gave him a draft on
Abdulla’s house payable in Penang. He is bound to die before he gets
there. Don’t you see?”

He sat silent for a while in dejected meditation, then went on:

“Of course there were several rows during the night. Various fellows
took the opportunity of the unsettled state of affairs to pay off old
scores and settle old grudges. I passed the night in that chair there,
dozing uneasily. Now and then there would be a great tumult and yelling
which would make me sit up, revolver in hand. However, nobody was
killed. A few broken heads--that’s all. Early in the morning Willems
caused them to make a fresh move which I must say surprised me not a
little. As soon as there was daylight they busied themselves in setting
up a flag-pole on the space at the other end of the settlement, where
Abdulla is having his houses built now. Shortly after sunrise there was
a great gathering at the flag-pole. All went there. Willems was standing
leaning against the mast, one arm over that woman’s shoulders. They had
brought an armchair for Patalolo, and Lakamba stood on the right hand
of the old man, who made a speech. Everybody in Sambir was there: women,
slaves, children--everybody! Then Patalolo spoke. He said that by the
mercy of the Most High he was going on a pilgrimage. The dearest wish
of his heart was to be accomplished. Then, turning to Lakamba, he begged
him to rule justly during his--Patalolo’s--absence There was a bit
of play-acting there. Lakamba said he was unworthy of the honourable
burden, and Patalolo insisted. Poor old fool! It must have been bitter
to him. They made him actually entreat that scoundrel. Fancy a man
compelled to beg of a robber to despoil him! But the old Rajah was
so frightened. Anyway, he did it, and Lakamba accepted at last. Then
Willems made a speech to the crowd. Said that on his way to the west the
Rajah--he meant Patalolo--would see the Great White Ruler in Batavia
and obtain his protection for Sambir. Meantime, he went on, I, an Orang
Blanda and your friend, hoist the flag under the shadow of which there
is safety. With that he ran up a Dutch flag to the mast-head. It was
made hurriedly, during the night, of cotton stuffs, and, being heavy,
hung down the mast, while the crowd stared. Ali told me there was a
great sigh of surprise, but not a word was spoken till Lakamba advanced
and proclaimed in a loud voice that during all that day every one
passing by the flagstaff must uncover his head and salaam before the
emblem.”

“But, hang it all!” exclaimed Lingard--“Abdulla is British!”

“Abdulla wasn’t there at all--did not go on shore that day. Yet Ali, who
has his wits about him, noticed that the space where the crowd stood
was under the guns of the Lord of the Isles. They had put a coir warp
ashore, and gave the barque a cant in the current, so as to bring the
broadside to bear on the flagstaff. Clever! Eh? But nobody dreamt of
resistance. When they recovered from the surprise there was a little
quiet jeering; and Bahassoen abused Lakamba violently till one of
Lakamba’s men hit him on the head with a staff. Frightful crack, I
am told. Then they left off jeering. Meantime Patalolo went away, and
Lakamba sat in the chair at the foot of the flagstaff, while the crowd
surged around, as if they could not make up their minds to go. Suddenly
there was a great noise behind Lakamba’s chair. It was that woman, who
went for Willems. Ali says she was like a wild beast, but he twisted her
wrist and made her grovel in the dust. Nobody knows exactly what it was
about. Some say it was about that flag. He carried her off, flung her
into a canoe, and went on board Abdulla’s ship. After that Sahamin
was the first to salaam to the flag. Others followed suit. Before noon
everything was quiet in the settlement, and Ali came back and told me
all this.”

Almayer drew a long breath. Lingard stretched out his legs.

“Go on!” he said.

Almayer seemed to struggle with himself. At last he spluttered out:

“The hardest is to tell yet. The most unheard-of thing! An outrage! A
fiendish outrage!”



CHAPTER THREE


“Well! Let’s know all about it. I can’t imagine . . .” began Lingard,
after waiting for some time in silence.

“Can’t imagine! I should think you couldn’t,” interrupted Almayer. “Why!
. . . You just listen. When Ali came back I felt a little easier in my
mind. There was then some semblance of order in Sambir. I had the Jack
up since the morning and began to feel safer. Some of my men turned up
in the afternoon. I did not ask any questions; set them to work as if
nothing had happened. Towards the evening--it might have been five or
half-past--I was on our jetty with the child when I heard shouts at the
far-off end of the settlement. At first I didn’t take much notice. By
and by Ali came to me and says, ‘Master, give me the child, there is
much trouble in the settlement.’ So I gave him Nina and went in, took
my revolver, and passed through the house into the back courtyard. As
I came down the steps I saw all the serving girls clear out from the
cooking shed, and I heard a big crowd howling on the other side of
the dry ditch which is the limit of our ground. Could not see them on
account of the fringe of bushes along the ditch, but I knew that crowd
was angry and after somebody. As I stood wondering, that Jim-Eng--you
know the Chinaman who settled here a couple of years ago?”

“He was my passenger; I brought him here,” exclaimed Lingard. “A
first-class Chinaman that.”

“Did you? I had forgotten. Well, that Jim-Eng, he burst through the bush
and fell into my arms, so to speak. He told me, panting, that they were
after him because he wouldn’t take off his hat to the flag. He was not
so much scared, but he was very angry and indignant. Of course he had to
run for it; there were some fifty men after him--Lakamba’s friends--but
he was full of fight. Said he was an Englishman, and would not take off
his hat to any flag but English. I tried to soothe him while the crowd
was shouting on the other side of the ditch. I told him he must take one
of my canoes and cross the river. Stop on the other side for a couple of
days. He wouldn’t. Not he. He was English, and he would fight the whole
lot. Says he: ‘They are only black fellows. We white men,’ meaning me
and himself, ‘can fight everybody in Sambir.’ He was mad with passion.
The crowd quieted a little, and I thought I could shelter Jim-Eng
without much risk, when all of a sudden I heard Willems’ voice. He
shouted to me in English: ‘Let four men enter your compound to get that
Chinaman!’ I said nothing. Told Jim-Eng to keep quiet too. Then after
a while Willems shouts again: ‘Don’t resist, Almayer. I give you good
advice. I am keeping this crowd back. Don’t resist them!’ That beggar’s
voice enraged me; I could not help it. I cried to him: ‘You are a liar!’
and just then Jim-Eng, who had flung off his jacket and had tucked up
his trousers ready for a fight; just then that fellow he snatches the
revolver out of my hand and lets fly at them through the bush. There was
a sharp cry--he must have hit somebody--and a great yell, and before I
could wink twice they were over the ditch and through the bush and on
top of us! Simply rolled over us! There wasn’t the slightest chance to
resist. I was trampled under foot, Jim-Eng got a dozen gashes about his
body, and we were carried halfway up the yard in the first rush. My eyes
and mouth were full of dust; I was on my back with three or four fellows
sitting on me. I could hear Jim-Eng trying to shout not very far from
me. Now and then they would throttle him and he would gurgle. I could
hardly breathe myself with two heavy fellows on my chest. Willems came
up running and ordered them to raise me up, but to keep good hold. They
led me into the verandah. I looked round, but did not see either Ali or
the child. Felt easier. Struggled a little. . . . Oh, my God!”

Almayer’s face was distorted with a passing spasm of rage. Lingard moved
in his chair slightly. Almayer went on after a short pause:

“They held me, shouting threats in my face. Willems took down my hammock
and threw it to them. He pulled out the drawer of this table, and found
there a palm and needle and some sail-twine. We were making awnings for
your brig, as you had asked me last voyage before you left. He knew, of
course, where to look for what he wanted. By his orders they laid me out
on the floor, wrapped me in my hammock, and he started to stitch me in,
as if I had been a corpse, beginning at the feet. While he worked he
laughed wickedly. I called him all the names I could think of. He
told them to put their dirty paws over my mouth and nose. I was nearly
choked. Whenever I moved they punched me in the ribs. He went on taking
fresh needlefuls as he wanted them, and working steadily. Sewed me up to
my throat. Then he rose, saying, ‘That will do; let go.’ That woman had
been standing by; they must have been reconciled. She clapped her hands.
I lay on the floor like a bale of goods while he stared at me, and the
woman shrieked with delight. Like a bale of goods! There was a grin on
every face, and the verandah was full of them. I wished myself
dead--‘pon my word, Captain Lingard, I did! I do now whenever I think
of it!”

Lingard’s face expressed sympathetic indignation. Almayer dropped
his head upon his arms on the table, and spoke in that position in an
indistinct and muffled voice, without looking up.

“Finally, by his directions, they flung me into the big rocking-chair.
I was sewed in so tight that I was stiff like a piece of wood. He was
giving orders in a very loud voice, and that man Babalatchi saw that
they were executed. They obeyed him implicitly. Meantime I lay there in
the chair like a log, and that woman capered before me and made faces;
snapped her fingers before my nose. Women are bad!--ain’t they? I never
saw her before, as far as I know. Never done anything to her. Yet she
was perfectly fiendish. Can you understand it? Now and then she would
leave me alone to hang round his neck for awhile, and then she would
return before my chair and begin her exercises again. He looked on,
indulgent. The perspiration ran down my face, got into my eyes--my arms
were sewn in. I was blinded half the time; at times I could see better.
She drags him before my chair. ‘I am like white women,’ she says, her
arms round his neck. You should have seen the faces of the fellows in
the verandah! They were scandalized and ashamed of themselves to see her
behaviour. Suddenly she asks him, alluding to me: ‘When are you going
to kill him?’ Imagine how I felt. I must have swooned; I don’t remember
exactly. I fancy there was a row; he was angry. When I got my wits again
he was sitting close to me, and she was gone. I understood he sent her
to my wife, who was hiding in the back room and never came out during
this affair. Willems says to me--I fancy I can hear his voice, hoarse
and dull--he says to me: ‘Not a hair of your head shall be touched.’ I
made no sound. Then he goes on: ‘Please remark that the flag you have
hoisted--which, by the by, is not yours--has been respected. Tell
Captain Lingard so when you do see him. But,’ he says, ‘you first fired
at the crowd.’ ‘You are a liar, you blackguard!’ I shouted. He winced, I
am sure. It hurt him to see I was not frightened. ‘Anyways,’ he says, ‘a
shot had been fired out of your compound and a man was hit. Still, all
your property shall be respected on account of the Union Jack. Moreover,
I have no quarrel with Captain Lingard, who is the senior partner in
this business. As to you,’ he continued, ‘you will not forget this
day--not if you live to be a hundred years old--or I don’t know your
nature. You will keep the bitter taste of this humiliation to the last
day of your life, and so your kindness to me shall be repaid. I shall
remove all the powder you have. This coast is under the protection of
the Netherlands, and you have no right to have any powder. There are the
Governor’s Orders in Council to that effect, and you know it. Tell me
where the key of the small storehouse is?’ I said not a word, and he
waited a little, then rose, saying: ‘It’s your own fault if there is any
damage done.’ He ordered Babalatchi to have the lock of the office-room
forced, and went in--rummaged amongst my drawers--could not find the
key. Then that woman Aissa asked my wife, and she gave them the key.
After awhile they tumbled every barrel into the river. Eighty-three
hundredweight! He superintended himself, and saw every barrel roll into
the water. There were mutterings. Babalatchi was angry and tried to
expostulate, but he gave him a good shaking. I must say he was perfectly
fearless with those fellows. Then he came back to the verandah, sat down
by me again, and says: ‘We found your man Ali with your little daughter
hiding in the bushes up the river. We brought them in. They are
perfectly safe, of course. Let me congratulate you, Almayer, upon the
cleverness of your child. She recognized me at once, and cried “pig”
 as naturally as you would yourself. Circumstances alter feelings. You
should have seen how frightened your man Ali was. Clapped his hands over
her mouth. I think you spoil her, Almayer. But I am not angry. Really,
you look so ridiculous in this chair that I can’t feel angry.’ I made
a frantic effort to burst out of my hammock to get at that scoundrel’s
throat, but I only fell off and upset the chair over myself. He laughed
and said only: ‘I leave you half of your revolver cartridges and take
half myself; they will fit mine. We are both white men, and should back
each other up. I may want them.’ I shouted at him from under the chair:
‘You are a thief,’ but he never looked, and went away, one hand round
that woman’s waist, the other on Babalatchi’s shoulder, to whom he was
talking--laying down the law about something or other. In less than five
minutes there was nobody inside our fences. After awhile Ali came to
look for me and cut me free. I haven’t seen Willems since--nor anybody
else for that matter. I have been left alone. I offered sixty dollars to
the man who had been wounded, which were accepted. They released Jim-Eng
the next day, when the flag had been hauled down. He sent six cases of
opium to me for safe keeping but has not left his house. I think he is
safe enough now. Everything is very quiet.”

Towards the end of his narrative Almayer lifted his head off the table,
and now sat back in his chair and stared at the bamboo rafters of the
roof above him. Lingard lolled in his seat with his legs stretched out.
In the peaceful gloom of the verandah, with its lowered screens, they
heard faint noises from the world outside in the blazing sunshine: a
hail on the river, the answer from the shore, the creak of a pulley;
sounds short, interrupted, as if lost suddenly in the brilliance of
noonday. Lingard got up slowly, walked to the front rail, and holding
one of the screens aside, looked out in silence. Over the water and the
empty courtyard came a distinct voice from a small schooner anchored
abreast of the Lingard jetty.

“Serang! Take a pull at the main peak halyards. This gaff is down on the
boom.”

There was a shrill pipe dying in long-drawn cadence, the song of the men
swinging on the rope. The voice said sharply: “That will do!” Another
voice--the serang’s probably--shouted: “Ikat!” and as Lingard dropped
the blind and turned away all was silent again, as if there had been
nothing on the other side of the swaying screen; nothing but the light,
brilliant, crude, heavy, lying on a dead land like a pall of fire.
Lingard sat down again, facing Almayer, his elbow on the table, in a
thoughtful attitude.

“Nice little schooner,” muttered Almayer, wearily. “Did you buy her?”

“No,” answered Lingard. “After I lost the Flash we got to Palembang in
our boats. I chartered her there, for six months. From young Ford, you
know. Belongs to him. He wanted a spell ashore, so I took charge myself.
Of course all Ford’s people on board. Strangers to me. I had to go to
Singapore about the insurance; then I went to Macassar, of course. Had
long passages. No wind. It was like a curse on me. I had lots of trouble
with old Hudig. That delayed me much.”

“Ah! Hudig! Why with Hudig?” asked Almayer, in a perfunctory manner.

“Oh! about a . . . a woman,” mumbled Lingard.

Almayer looked at him with languid surprise. The old seaman had twisted
his white beard into a point, and now was busy giving his moustaches a
fierce curl. His little red eyes--those eyes that had smarted under the
salt sprays of every sea, that had looked unwinking to windward in the
gales of all latitudes--now glared at Almayer from behind the lowered
eyebrows like a pair of frightened wild beasts crouching in a bush.

“Extraordinary! So like you! What can you have to do with Hudig’s women?
The old sinner!” said Almayer, negligently.

“What are you talking about! Wife of a friend of . . . I mean of a man I
know . . .”

“Still, I don’t see . . .” interjected Almayer carelessly.

“Of a man you know too. Well. Very well.”

“I knew so many men before you made me bury myself in this hole!”
 growled Almayer, unamiably. “If she had anything to do with Hudig--that
wife--then she can’t be up to much. I would be sorry for the man,”
 added Almayer, brightening up with the recollection of the scandalous
tittle-tattle of the past, when he was a young man in the second capital
of the Islands--and so well informed, so well informed. He laughed.
Lingard’s frown deepened.

“Don’t talk foolish! It’s Willems’ wife.”

Almayer grasped the sides of his seat, his eyes and mouth opened wide.

“What? Why!” he exclaimed, bewildered.

“Willems’--wife,” repeated Lingard distinctly. “You ain’t deaf, are you?
The wife of Willems. Just so. As to why! There was a promise. And I did
not know what had happened here.”

“What is it. You’ve been giving her money, I bet,” cried Almayer.

“Well, no!” said Lingard, deliberately. “Although I suppose I shall have
to . . .”

Almayer groaned.

“The fact is,” went on Lingard, speaking slowly and steadily, “the fact
is that I have . . . I have brought her here. Here. To Sambir.”

“In heaven’s name! why?” shouted Almayer, jumping up. The chair tilted
and fell slowly over. He raised his clasped hands above his head and
brought them down jerkily, separating his fingers with an effort, as if
tearing them apart. Lingard nodded, quickly, several times.

“I have. Awkward. Hey?” he said, with a puzzled look upwards.

“Upon my word,” said Almayer, tearfully. “I can’t understand you at all.
What will you do next! Willems’ wife!”

“Wife and child. Small boy, you know. They are on board the schooner.”

Almayer looked at Lingard with sudden suspicion, then turning away
busied himself in picking up the chair, sat down in it turning his back
upon the old seaman, and tried to whistle, but gave it up directly.
Lingard went on--

“Fact is, the fellow got into trouble with Hudig. Worked upon my
feelings. I promised to arrange matters. I did. With much trouble. Hudig
was angry with her for wishing to join her husband. Unprincipled old
fellow. You know she is his daughter. Well, I said I would see her
through it all right; help Willems to a fresh start and so on. I spoke
to Craig in Palembang. He is getting on in years, and wanted a manager
or partner. I promised to guarantee Willems’ good behaviour. We settled
all that. Craig is an old crony of mine. Been shipmates in the forties.
He’s waiting for him now. A pretty mess! What do you think?”

Almayer shrugged his shoulders.

“That woman broke with Hudig on my assurance that all would be well,”
 went on Lingard, with growing dismay. “She did. Proper thing, of course.
Wife, husband . . . together . . . as it should be . . . Smart fellow
. . . Impossible scoundrel . . . Jolly old go! Oh! damn!”

Almayer laughed spitefully.

“How delighted he will be,” he said, softly. “You will make two people
happy. Two at least!” He laughed again, while Lingard looked at his
shaking shoulders in consternation.

“I am jammed on a lee shore this time, if ever I was,” muttered Lingard.

“Send her back quick,” suggested Almayer, stifling another laugh.

“What are you sniggering at?” growled Lingard, angrily. “I’ll work it
out all clear yet. Meantime you must receive her into this house.”

“My house!” cried Almayer, turning round.

“It’s mine too--a little isn’t it?” said Lingard. “Don’t argue,”
 he shouted, as Almayer opened his mouth. “Obey orders and hold your
tongue!”

“Oh! If you take it in that tone!” mumbled Almayer, sulkily, with a
gesture of assent.

“You are so aggravating too, my boy,” said the old seaman, with
unexpected placidity. “You must give me time to turn round. I can’t keep
her on board all the time. I must tell her something. Say, for instance,
that he is gone up the river. Expected back every day. That’s it. D’ye
hear? You must put her on that tack and dodge her along easy, while I
take the kinks out of the situation. By God!” he exclaimed, mournfully,
after a short pause, “life is foul! Foul like a lee forebrace on a dirty
night. And yet. And yet. One must see it clear for running before going
below--for good. Now you attend to what I said,” he added, sharply, “if
you don’t want to quarrel with me, my boy.”

“I don’t want to quarrel with you,” murmured Almayer with unwilling
deference. “Only I wish I could understand you. I know you are my
best friend, Captain Lingard; only, upon my word, I can’t make you out
sometimes! I wish I could . . .”

Lingard burst into a loud laugh which ended shortly in a deep sigh. He
closed his eyes, tilting his head over the back of his armchair; and on
his face, baked by the unclouded suns of many hard years, there appeared
for a moment a weariness and a look of age which startled Almayer, like
an unexpected disclosure of evil.

“I am done up,” said Lingard, gently. “Perfectly done up. All night on
deck getting that schooner up the river. Then talking with you. Seems to
me I could go to sleep on a clothes-line. I should like to eat something
though. Just see about that, Kaspar.”

Almayer clapped his hands, and receiving no response was going to call,
when in the central passage of the house, behind the red curtain of the
doorway opening upon the verandah, they heard a child’s imperious voice
speaking shrilly.

“Take me up at once. I want to be carried into the verandah. I shall be
very angry. Take me up.”

A man’s voice answered, subdued, in humble remonstrance. The faces of
Almayer and Lingard brightened at once. The old seaman called out--

“Bring the child. Lekas!”

“You will see how she has grown,” exclaimed Almayer, in a jubilant tone.

Through the curtained doorway Ali appeared with little Nina Almayer in
his arms. The child had one arm round his neck, and with the other she
hugged a ripe pumelo nearly as big as her own head. Her little pink,
sleeveless robe had half slipped off her shoulders, but the long black
hair, that framed her olive face, in which the big black eyes looked out
in childish solemnity, fell in luxuriant profusion over her shoulders,
all round her and over Ali’s arms, like a close-meshed and delicate net
of silken threads. Lingard got up to meet Ali, and as soon as she caught
sight of the old seaman she dropped the fruit and put out both her hands
with a cry of delight. He took her from the Malay, and she laid hold of
his moustaches with an affectionate goodwill that brought unaccustomed
tears into his little red eyes.

“Not so hard, little one, not so hard,” he murmured, pressing with an
enormous hand, that covered it entirely, the child’s head to his face.

“Pick up my pumelo, O Rajah of the sea!” she said, speaking in a
high-pitched, clear voice with great volubility. “There, under the
table. I want it quick! Quick! You have been away fighting with many
men. Ali says so. You are a mighty fighter. Ali says so. On the great
sea far away, away, away.”

She waved her hand, staring with dreamy vacancy, while Lingard looked at
her, and squatting down groped under the table after the pumelo.

“Where does she get those notions?” said Lingard, getting up cautiously,
to Almayer, who had been giving orders to Ali.

“She is always with the men. Many a time I’ve found her with her fingers
in their rice dish, of an evening. She does not care for her mother
though--I am glad to say. How pretty she is--and so sharp. My very
image!”

Lingard had put the child on the table, and both men stood looking at
her with radiant faces.

“A perfect little woman,” whispered Lingard. “Yes, my dear boy, we shall
make her somebody. You’ll see!”

“Very little chance of that now,” remarked Almayer, sadly.

“You do not know!” exclaimed Lingard, taking up the child again,
and beginning to walk up and down the verandah. “I have my plans. I
have--listen.”

And he began to explain to the interested Almayer his plans for the
future. He would interview Abdulla and Lakamba. There must be some
understanding with those fellows now they had the upper hand. Here
he interrupted himself to swear freely, while the child, who had been
diligently fumbling about his neck, had found his whistle and blew a
loud blast now and then close to his ear--which made him wince and laugh
as he put her hands down, scolding her lovingly. Yes--that would be
easily settled. He was a man to be reckoned with yet. Nobody knew that
better than Almayer. Very well. Then he must patiently try and keep some
little trade together. It would be all right. But the great thing--and
here Lingard spoke lower, bringing himself to a sudden standstill before
the entranced Almayer--the great thing would be the gold hunt up the
river. He--Lingard--would devote himself to it. He had been in the
interior before. There were immense deposits of alluvial gold there.
Fabulous. He felt sure. Had seen places. Dangerous work? Of course! But
what a reward! He would explore--and find. Not a shadow of doubt. Hang
the danger! They would first get as much as they could for themselves.
Keep the thing quiet. Then after a time form a Company. In Batavia or
in England. Yes, in England. Much better. Splendid! Why, of course. And
that baby would be the richest woman in the world. He--Lingard--would
not, perhaps, see it--although he felt good for many years yet--but
Almayer would. Here was something to live for yet! Hey?

But the richest woman in the world had been for the last five minutes
shouting shrilly--“Rajah Laut! Rajah Laut! Hai! Give ear!” while the old
seaman had been speaking louder, unconsciously, to make his deep bass
heard above the impatient clamour. He stopped now and said tenderly--

“What is it, little woman?”

“I am not a little woman. I am a white child. Anak Putih. A white child;
and the white men are my brothers. Father says so. And Ali says so too.
Ali knows as much as father. Everything.”

Almayer almost danced with paternal delight.

“I taught her. I taught her,” he repeated, laughing with tears in his
eyes. “Isn’t she sharp?”

“I am the slave of the white child,” said Lingard, with playful
solemnity. “What is the order?”

“I want a house,” she warbled, with great eagerness. “I want a house,
and another house on the roof, and another on the roof--high. High!
Like the places where they dwell--my brothers--in the land where the sun
sleeps.”

“To the westward,” explained Almayer, under his breath. “She remembers
everything. She wants you to build a house of cards. You did, last time
you were here.”

Lingard sat down with the child on his knees, and Almayer pulled out
violently one drawer after another, looking for the cards, as if the
fate of the world depended upon his haste. He produced a dirty double
pack which was only used during Lingard’s visit to Sambir, when he would
sometimes play--of an evening--with Almayer, a game which he called
Chinese bezique. It bored Almayer, but the old seaman delighted in it,
considering it a remarkable product of Chinese genius--a race for which
he had an unaccountable liking and admiration.

“Now we will get on, my little pearl,” he said, putting together with
extreme precaution two cards that looked absurdly flimsy between his big
fingers. Little Nina watched him with intense seriousness as he went on
erecting the ground floor, while he continued to speak to Almayer with
his head over his shoulder so as not to endanger the structure with his
breath.

“I know what I am talking about. . . . Been in California in forty-nine.
. . . Not that I made much . . . then in Victoria in the early days
. . . . I know all about it. Trust me. Moreover a blind man could . . .
Be quiet, little sister, or you will knock this affair down. . . . My hand
pretty steady yet! Hey, Kaspar? . . . Now, delight of my heart, we shall
put a third house on the top of these two . . . keep very quiet. . . .
As I was saying, you got only to stoop and gather handfuls of gold . . .
dust . . . there. Now here we are. Three houses on top of one another.
Grand!”

He leaned back in his chair, one hand on the child’s head, which he
smoothed mechanically, and gesticulated with the other, speaking to
Almayer.

“Once on the spot, there would be only the trouble to pick up the stuff.
Then we shall all go to Europe. The child must be educated. We shall be
rich. Rich is no name for it. Down in Devonshire where I belong, there
was a fellow who built a house near Teignmouth which had as many windows
as a three-decker has ports. Made all his money somewhere out here in
the good old days. People around said he had been a pirate. We boys--I
was a boy in a Brixham trawler then--certainly believed that. He went
about in a bath-chair in his grounds. Had a glass eye . . .”

“Higher, Higher!” called out Nina, pulling the old seaman’s beard.

“You do worry me--don’t you?” said Lingard, gently, giving her a tender
kiss. “What? One more house on top of all these? Well! I will try.”

The child watched him breathlessly. When the difficult feat was
accomplished she clapped her hands, looked on steadily, and after a
while gave a great sigh of content.

“Oh! Look out!” shouted Almayer.

The structure collapsed suddenly before the child’s light breath.
Lingard looked discomposed for a moment. Almayer laughed, but the little
girl began to cry.

“Take her,” said the old seaman, abruptly. Then, after Almayer went
away with the crying child, he remained sitting by the table, looking
gloomily at the heap of cards.

“Damn this Willems,” he muttered to himself. “But I will do it yet!”

He got up, and with an angry push of his hand swept the cards off the
table. Then he fell back in his chair.

“Tired as a dog,” he sighed out, closing his eyes.



CHAPTER FOUR


Consciously or unconsciously, men are proud of their firmness,
steadfastness of purpose, directness of aim. They go straight towards
their desire, to the accomplishment of virtue--sometimes of crime--in an
uplifting persuasion of their firmness. They walk the road of life, the
road fenced in by their tastes, prejudices, disdains or enthusiasms,
generally honest, invariably stupid, and are proud of never losing their
way. If they do stop, it is to look for a moment over the hedges that
make them safe, to look at the misty valleys, at the distant peaks, at
cliffs and morasses, at the dark forests and the hazy plains where other
human beings grope their days painfully away, stumbling over the bones
of the wise, over the unburied remains of their predecessors who died
alone, in gloom or in sunshine, halfway from anywhere. The man of
purpose does not understand, and goes on, full of contempt. He never
loses his way. He knows where he is going and what he wants. Travelling
on, he achieves great length without any breadth, and battered,
besmirched, and weary, he touches the goal at last; he grasps the
reward of his perseverance, of his virtue, of his healthy optimism: an
untruthful tombstone over a dark and soon forgotten grave.

Lingard had never hesitated in his life. Why should he? He had been
a most successful trader, and a man lucky in his fights, skilful in
navigation, undeniably first in seamanship in those seas. He knew it.
Had he not heard the voice of common consent?

The voice of the world that respected him so much; the whole world to
him--for to us the limits of the universe are strictly defined by those
we know. There is nothing for us outside the babble of praise and blame
on familiar lips, and beyond our last acquaintance there lies only
a vast chaos; a chaos of laughter and tears which concerns us not;
laughter and tears unpleasant, wicked, morbid, contemptible--because
heard imperfectly by ears rebellious to strange sounds. To
Lingard--simple himself--all things were simple. He seldom read. Books
were not much in his way, and he had to work hard navigating, trading,
and also, in obedience to his benevolent instincts, shaping stray
lives he found here and there under his busy hand. He remembered the
Sunday-school teachings of his native village and the discourses of
the black-coated gentleman connected with the Mission to Fishermen and
Seamen, whose yawl-rigged boat darting through rain-squalls amongst the
coasters wind-bound in Falmouth Bay, was part of those precious pictures
of his youthful days that lingered in his memory. “As clever a sky-pilot
as you could wish to see,” he would say with conviction, “and the best
man to handle a boat in any weather I ever did meet!” Such were the
agencies that had roughly shaped his young soul before he went away to
see the world in a southern-going ship--before he went, ignorant and
happy, heavy of hand, pure in heart, profane in speech, to give himself
up to the great sea that took his life and gave him his fortune. When
thinking of his rise in the world--commander of ships, then shipowner,
then a man of much capital, respected wherever he went, Lingard in a
word, the Rajah Laut--he was amazed and awed by his fate, that seemed to
his ill-informed mind the most wondrous known in the annals of men.
His experience appeared to him immense and conclusive, teaching him the
lesson of the simplicity of life. In life--as in seamanship--there were
only two ways of doing a thing: the right way and the wrong way. Common
sense and experience taught a man the way that was right. The other
was for lubbers and fools, and led, in seamanship, to loss of spars and
sails or shipwreck; in life, to loss of money and consideration, or
to an unlucky knock on the head. He did not consider it his duty to
be angry with rascals. He was only angry with things he could not
understand, but for the weaknesses of humanity he could find a
contemptuous tolerance. It being manifest that he was wise and
lucky--otherwise how could he have been as successful in life as he had
been?--he had an inclination to set right the lives of other people,
just as he could hardly refrain--in defiance of nautical etiquette--from
interfering with his chief officer when the crew was sending up a new
topmast, or generally when busy about, what he called, “a heavy job.” He
was meddlesome with perfect modesty; if he knew a thing or two there was
no merit in it. “Hard knocks taught me wisdom, my boy,” he used to say,
“and you had better take the advice of a man who has been a fool in his
time. Have another.” And “my boy” as a rule took the cool drink, the
advice, and the consequent help which Lingard felt himself bound in
honour to give, so as to back up his opinion like an honest man. Captain
Tom went sailing from island to island, appearing unexpectedly
in various localities, beaming, noisy, anecdotal, commendatory or
comminatory, but always welcome.

It was only since his return to Sambir that the old seaman had for the
first time known doubt and unhappiness, The loss of the Flash--planted
firmly and for ever on a ledge of rock at the north end of Gaspar
Straits in the uncertain light of a cloudy morning--shook him
considerably; and the amazing news which he heard on his arrival
in Sambir were not made to soothe his feelings. A good many years
ago--prompted by his love of adventure--he, with infinite trouble, had
found out and surveyed--for his own benefit only--the entrances to that
river, where, he had heard through native report, a new settlement of
Malays was forming. No doubt he thought at the time mostly of personal
gain; but, received with hearty friendliness by Patalolo, he soon came
to like the ruler and the people, offered his counsel and his help,
and--knowing nothing of Arcadia--he dreamed of Arcadian happiness for
that little corner of the world which he loved to think all his own.
His deep-seated and immovable conviction that only he--he, Lingard--knew
what was good for them was characteristic of him and, after all, not so
very far wrong. He would make them happy whether or no, he said, and he
meant it. His trade brought prosperity to the young state, and the fear
of his heavy hand secured its internal peace for many years.

He looked proudly upon his work. With every passing year he loved more
the land, the people, the muddy river that, if he could help it, would
carry no other craft but the Flash on its unclean and friendly surface.
As he slowly warped his vessel up-stream he would scan with knowing
looks the riverside clearings, and pronounce solemn judgment upon the
prospects of the season’s rice-crop. He knew every settler on the banks
between the sea and Sambir; he knew their wives, their children; he
knew every individual of the multi-coloured groups that, standing on
the flimsy platforms of tiny reed dwellings built over the water, waved
their hands and shouted shrilly: “O! Kapal layer! Hai!” while the Flash
swept slowly through the populated reach, to enter the lonely stretches
of sparkling brown water bordered by the dense and silent forest,
whose big trees nodded their outspread boughs gently in the faint, warm
breeze--as if in sign of tender but melancholy welcome. He loved it all:
the landscape of brown golds and brilliant emeralds under the dome of
hot sapphire; the whispering big trees; the loquacious nipa-palms that
rattled their leaves volubly in the night breeze, as if in haste to tell
him all the secrets of the great forest behind them. He loved the heavy
scents of blossoms and black earth, that breath of life and of death
which lingered over his brig in the damp air of tepid and peaceful
nights. He loved the narrow and sombre creeks, strangers to sunshine:
black, smooth, tortuous--like byways of despair. He liked even the
troops of sorrowful-faced monkeys that profaned the quiet spots with
capricious gambols and insane gestures of inhuman madness. He loved
everything there, animated or inanimated; the very mud of the riverside;
the very alligators, enormous and stolid, basking on it with impertinent
unconcern. Their size was a source of pride to him. “Immense fellows!
Make two of them Palembang reptiles! I tell you, old man!” he would
shout, poking some crony of his playfully in the ribs: “I tell you,
big as you are, they could swallow you in one gulp, hat, boots and all!
Magnificent beggars! Wouldn’t you like to see them? Wouldn’t you! Ha!
ha! ha!” His thunderous laughter filled the verandah, rolled over the
hotel garden, overflowed into the street, paralyzing for a short moment
the noiseless traffic of bare brown feet; and its loud reverberations
would even startle the landlord’s tame bird--a shameless mynah--into
a momentary propriety of behaviour under the nearest chair. In the big
billiard-room perspiring men in thin cotton singlets would stop the
game, listen, cue in hand, for a while through the open windows, then
nod their moist faces at each other sagaciously and whisper: “The old
fellow is talking about his river.”

His river! The whispers of curious men, the mystery of the thing,
were to Lingard a source of never-ending delight. The common talk of
ignorance exaggerated the profits of his queer monopoly, and, although
strictly truthful in general, he liked, on that matter, to mislead
speculation still further by boasts full of cold raillery. His river!
By it he was not only rich--he was interesting. This secret of his which
made him different to the other traders of those seas gave intimate
satisfaction to that desire for singularity which he shared with the
rest of mankind, without being aware of its presence within his breast.
It was the greater part of his happiness, but he only knew it after its
loss, so unforeseen, so sudden and so cruel.

After his conversation with Almayer he went on board the schooner, sent
Joanna on shore, and shut himself up in his cabin, feeling very unwell.
He made the most of his indisposition to Almayer, who came to visit him
twice a day. It was an excuse for doing nothing just yet. He wanted to
think. He was very angry. Angry with himself, with Willems. Angry at
what Willems had done--and also angry at what he had left undone.
The scoundrel was not complete. The conception was perfect, but
the execution, unaccountably, fell short. Why? He ought to have cut
Almayer’s throat and burnt the place to ashes--then cleared out. Got
out of his way; of him, Lingard! Yet he didn’t. Was it impudence,
contempt--or what? He felt hurt at the implied disrespect of his
power, and the incomplete rascality of the proceeding disturbed him
exceedingly. There was something short, something wanting, something
that would have given him a free hand in the work of retribution. The
obvious, the right thing to do, was to shoot Willems. Yet how could he?
Had the fellow resisted, showed fight, or ran away; had he shown any
consciousness of harm done, it would have been more possible, more
natural. But no! The fellow actually had sent him a message. Wanted
to see him. What for? The thing could not be explained. An unexampled,
cold-blooded treachery, awful, incomprehensible. Why did he do it? Why?
Why? The old seaman in the stuffy solitude of his little cabin on board
the schooner groaned out many times that question, striking with an open
palm his perplexed forehead.

During his four days of seclusion he had received two messages from the
outer world; from that world of Sambir which had, so suddenly and so
finally, slipped from his grasp. One, a few words from Willems written
on a torn-out page of a small notebook; the other, a communication
from Abdulla caligraphed carefully on a large sheet of flimsy paper
and delivered to him in a green silk wrapper. The first he could not
understand. It said: “Come and see me. I am not afraid. Are you? W.”
 He tore it up angrily, but before the small bits of dirty paper had the
time to flutter down and settle on the floor, the anger was gone and was
replaced by a sentiment that induced him to go on his knees, pick up
the fragments of the torn message, piece it together on the top of his
chronometer box, and contemplate it long and thoughtfully, as if he had
hoped to read the answer of the horrible riddle in the very form of the
letters that went to make up that fresh insult. Abdulla’s letter he read
carefully and rammed it into his pocket, also with anger, but with anger
that ended in a half-resigned, half-amused smile. He would never give in
as long as there was a chance. “It’s generally the safest way to stick
to the ship as long as she will swim,” was one of his favourite sayings:
“The safest and the right way. To abandon a craft because it leaks is
easy--but poor work. Poor work!” Yet he was intelligent enough to know
when he was beaten, and to accept the situation like a man, without
repining. When Almayer came on board that afternoon he handed him the
letter without comment.

Almayer read it, returned it in silence, and leaning over the taffrail
(the two men were on deck) looked down for some time at the play of the
eddies round the schooner’s rudder. At last he said without looking up--

“That’s a decent enough letter. Abdulla gives him up to you. I told you
they were getting sick of him. What are you going to do?”

Lingard cleared his throat, shuffled his feet, opened his mouth with
great determination, but said nothing for a while. At last he murmured--

“I’ll be hanged if I know--just yet.”

“I wish you would do something soon . . .”

“What’s the hurry?” interrupted Lingard. “He can’t get away. As it
stands he is at my mercy, as far as I can see.”

“Yes,” said Almayer, reflectively--“and very little mercy he deserves
too. Abdulla’s meaning--as I can make it out amongst all those
compliments--is: ‘Get rid for me of that white man--and we shall live in
peace and share the trade.”’

“You believe that?” asked Lingard, contemptuously.

“Not altogether,” answered Almayer. “No doubt we will share the trade
for a time--till he can grab the lot. Well, what are you going to do?”

He looked up as he spoke and was surprised to see Lingard’s discomposed
face.

“You ain’t well. Pain anywhere?” he asked, with real solicitude.

“I have been queer--you know--these last few days, but no pain.” He
struck his broad chest several times, cleared his throat with a powerful
“Hem!” and repeated: “No. No pain. Good for a few years yet. But I am
bothered with all this, I can tell you!”

“You must take care of yourself,” said Almayer. Then after a pause he
added: “You will see Abdulla. Won’t you?”

“I don’t know. Not yet. There’s plenty of time,” said Lingard,
impatiently.

“I wish you would do something,” urged Almayer, moodily. “You know, that
woman is a perfect nuisance to me. She and her brat! Yelps all day. And
the children don’t get on together. Yesterday the little devil wanted to
fight with my Nina. Scratched her face, too. A perfect savage! Like
his honourable papa. Yes, really. She worries about her husband, and
whimpers from morning to night. When she isn’t weeping she is furious
with me. Yesterday she tormented me to tell her when he would be
back and cried because he was engaged in such dangerous work. I said
something about it being all right--no necessity to make a fool of
herself, when she turned upon me like a wild cat. Called me a brute,
selfish, heartless; raved about her beloved Peter risking his life for
my benefit, while I did not care. Said I took advantage of his generous
good-nature to get him to do dangerous work--my work. That he was worth
twenty of the likes of me. That she would tell you--open your eyes as
to the kind of man I was, and so on. That’s what I’ve got to put up with
for your sake. You really might consider me a little. I haven’t robbed
anybody,” went on Almayer, with an attempt at bitter irony--“or sold
my best friend, but still you ought to have some pity on me. It’s like
living in a hot fever. She is out of her wits. You make my house a
refuge for scoundrels and lunatics. It isn’t fair. ‘Pon my word
it isn’t! When she is in her tantrums she is ridiculously ugly and
screeches so--it sets my teeth on edge. Thank God! my wife got a fit of
the sulks and cleared out of the house. Lives in a riverside hut since
that affair--you know. But this Willems’ wife by herself is almost more
than I can bear. And I ask myself why should I? You are exacting and no
mistake. This morning I thought she was going to claw me. Only think!
She wanted to go prancing about the settlement. She might have heard
something there, so I told her she mustn’t. It wasn’t safe outside our
fences, I said. Thereupon she rushes at me with her ten nails up to my
eyes. ‘You miserable man,’ she yells, ‘even this place is not safe, and
you’ve sent him up this awful river where he may lose his head. If he
dies before forgiving me, Heaven will punish you for your crime . . .’
My crime! I ask myself sometimes whether I am dreaming! It will make me
ill, all this. I’ve lost my appetite already.”

He flung his hat on deck and laid hold of his hair despairingly. Lingard
looked at him with concern.

“What did she mean by it?” he muttered, thoughtfully.

“Mean! She is crazy, I tell you--and I will be, very soon, if this
lasts!”

“Just a little patience, Kaspar,” pleaded Lingard. “A day or so more.”

Relieved or tired by his violent outburst, Almayer calmed down, picked
up his hat and, leaning against the bulwark, commenced to fan himself
with it.

“Days do pass,” he said, resignedly--“but that kind of thing makes a
man old before his time. What is there to think about?--I can’t imagine!
Abdulla says plainly that if you undertake to pilot his ship out and
instruct the half-caste, he will drop Willems like a hot potato and be
your friend ever after. I believe him perfectly, as to Willems. It’s so
natural. As to being your friend it’s a lie of course, but we need
not bother about that just yet. You just say yes to Abdulla, and then
whatever happens to Willems will be nobody’s business.”

He interrupted himself and remained silent for a while, glaring about
with set teeth and dilated nostrils.

“You leave it to me. I’ll see to it that something happens to him,” he
said at last, with calm ferocity. Lingard smiled faintly.

“The fellow isn’t worth a shot. Not the trouble of it,” he whispered, as
if to himself. Almayer fired up suddenly.

“That’s what you think,” he cried. “You haven’t been sewn up in your
hammock to be made a laughing-stock of before a parcel of savages. Why!
I daren’t look anybody here in the face while that scoundrel is alive. I
will . . . I will settle him.”

“I don’t think you will,” growled Lingard.

“Do you think I am afraid of him?”

“Bless you! no!” said Lingard with alacrity. “Afraid! Not you. I know
you. I don’t doubt your courage. It’s your head, my boy, your head that
I . . .”

“That’s it,” said the aggrieved Almayer. “Go on. Why don’t you call me a
fool at once?”

“Because I don’t want to,” burst out Lingard, with nervous irritability.
“If I wanted to call you a fool, I would do so without asking your
leave.” He began to walk athwart the narrow quarter-deck, kicking ropes’
ends out of his way and growling to himself: “Delicate gentleman . . .
what next? . . . I’ve done man’s work before you could toddle.
Understand . . . say what I like.”

“Well! well!” said Almayer, with affected resignation. “There’s no
talking to you these last few days.” He put on his hat, strolled to
the gangway and stopped, one foot on the little inside ladder, as if
hesitating, came back and planted himself in Lingard’s way, compelling
him to stand still and listen.

“Of course you will do what you like. You never take advice--I know
that; but let me tell you that it wouldn’t be honest to let that fellow
get away from here. If you do nothing, that scoundrel will leave in
Abdulla’s ship for sure. Abdulla will make use of him to hurt you and
others elsewhere. Willems knows too much about your affairs. He will
cause you lots of trouble. You mark my words. Lots of trouble. To
you--and to others perhaps. Think of that, Captain Lingard. That’s all
I’ve got to say. Now I must go back on shore. There’s lots of work. We
will begin loading this schooner to-morrow morning, first thing. All the
bundles are ready. If you should want me for anything, hoist some kind
of flag on the mainmast. At night two shots will fetch me.” Then
he added, in a friendly tone, “Won’t you come and dine in the house
to-night? It can’t be good for you to stew on board like that, day after
day.”

Lingard did not answer. The image evoked by Almayer; the picture of
Willems ranging over the islands and disturbing the harmony of
the universe by robbery, treachery, and violence, held him silent,
entranced--painfully spellbound. Almayer, after waiting for a little
while, moved reluctantly towards the gangway, lingered there, then
sighed and got over the side, going down step by step. His head
disappeared slowly below the rail. Lingard, who had been staring at him
absently, started suddenly, ran to the side, and looking over, called
out--

“Hey! Kaspar! Hold on a bit!”

Almayer signed to his boatmen to cease paddling, and turned his head
towards the schooner. The boat drifted back slowly abreast of Lingard,
nearly alongside.

“Look here,” said Lingard, looking down--“I want a good canoe with four
men to-day.”

“Do you want it now?” asked Almayer.

“No! Catch this rope. Oh, you clumsy devil! . . . No, Kaspar,” went on
Lingard, after the bow-man had got hold of the end of the brace he had
thrown down into the canoe--“No, Kaspar. The sun is too much for me. And
it would be better to keep my affairs quiet, too. Send the canoe--four
good paddlers, mind, and your canvas chair for me to sit in. Send it
about sunset. D’ye hear?”

“All right, father,” said Almayer, cheerfully--“I will send Ali for a
steersman, and the best men I’ve got. Anything else?”

“No, my lad. Only don’t let them be late.”

“I suppose it’s no use asking you where you are going,” said Almayer,
tentatively. “Because if it is to see Abdulla, I . . .”

“I am not going to see Abdulla. Not to-day. Now be off with you.”

He watched the canoe dart away shorewards, waved his hand in response
to Almayer’s nod, and walked to the taffrail smoothing out Abdulla’s
letter, which he had pulled out of his pocket. He read it over
carefully, crumpled it up slowly, smiling the while and closing his
fingers firmly over the crackling paper as though he had hold there
of Abdulla’s throat. Halfway to his pocket he changed his mind, and
flinging the ball overboard looked at it thoughtfully as it spun round
in the eddies for a moment, before the current bore it away down-stream,
towards the sea.




