CHAPTER LVI


Considerably sobered--Power of writing--The tempter--Hungry talent--Work
concluded.

Rather late in the morning I awoke; for a few minutes I lay still,
perfectly still; my imagination was considerably sobered; the scenes and
situations which had pleased me so much over night appeared to me in a
far less captivating guise that morning.  I felt languid and almost
hopeless--the thought, however, of my situation soon roused me--I must
make an effort to improve the posture of my affairs; there was no time to
be lost; so I sprang out of bed, breakfasted on bread and water, and then
sat down doggedly to write the life of Joseph Sell.

It was a great thing to have formed my plan, and to have arranged the
scenes in my head, as I had done on the preceding night.  The chief thing
requisite at present was the mere mechanical act of committing them to
paper.  This I did not find at first so easy as I could wish--I wanted
mechanical skill; but I persevered, and before evening I had written ten
pages.  I partook of some bread and water; and before I went to bed that
night, I had completed fifteen pages of my life of Joseph Sell.

The next day I resumed my task--I found my power of writing considerably
increased; my pen hurried rapidly over the paper--my brain was in a
wonderfully teeming state; many scenes and visions which I had not
thought of before were evolved, and, as fast as evolved, written down;
they seemed to be more pat to my purpose, and more natural to my history,
than many others which I had imagined before, and which I made now give
place to these newer creations: by about midnight I had added thirty
fresh pages to my _Life and Adventures of Joseph Sell_.

The third day arose--it was dark and dreary out of doors, and I passed it
drearily enough within; my brain appeared to have lost much of its former
glow, and my pen much of its power; I, however, toiled on, but at
midnight had only added seven pages to my history of Joseph Sell.

On the fourth day the sun shone brightly--I arose, and, having
breakfasted as usual, I fell to work.  My brain was this day wonderfully
prolific, and my pen never before or since glided so rapidly over the
paper; towards night I began to feel strangely about the back part of my
head, and my whole system was extraordinarily affected.  I likewise
occasionally saw double--a tempter now seemed to be at work within me.

'You had better leave off now for a short space,' said the tempter, 'and
go out and drink a pint of beer; you have still one shilling left--if you
go on at this rate, you will go mad--go out and spend sixpence, you can
afford it, more than half your work is done.'  I was about to obey the
suggestion of the tempter, when the idea struck me that, if I did not
complete the work whilst the fit was on me, I should never complete it;
so I held on. I am almost afraid to state how many pages I wrote that day
of the life of Joseph Sell.

From this time I proceeded in a somewhat more leisurely manner; but, as I
drew nearer and nearer to the completion of my task, dreadful fears and
despondencies came over me.--It will be too late, thought I; by the time
I have finished the work, the bookseller will have been supplied with a
tale or a novel.  Is it probable that, in a town like this, where talent
is so abundant--hungry talent too--a bookseller can advertise for a tale
or a novel, without being supplied with half a dozen in twenty-four
hours?  I may as well fling down my pen--I am writing to no purpose.  And
these thoughts came over my mind so often, that at last, in utter
despair, I flung down the pen.  Whereupon the tempter within me
said--'And, now you have flung down the pen, you may as well fling
yourself out of the window; what remains for you to do?'  Why, to take it
up again, thought I to myself, for I did not like the latter suggestion
at all--and then forthwith I resumed the pen, and wrote with greater
vigour than before, from about six o'clock in the evening until I could
hardly see, when I rested for a while, when the tempter within me again
said, or appeared to say--'All you have been writing is stuff, it will
never do--a drug--a mere drug'; and methought these last words were
uttered in the gruff tones of the big publisher.  'A thing merely to be
sneezed at,' a voice like that of Taggart added; and then I seemed to
hear a sternutation,--as I probably did, for, recovering from a kind of
swoon, I found myself shivering with cold.  The next day I brought my
work to a conclusion.

But the task of revision still remained; for an hour or two I shrank from
it, and remained gazing stupidly at the pile of paper which I had written
over.  I was all but exhausted, and I dreaded, on inspecting the sheets,
to find them full of absurdities which I had paid no regard to in the
furor of composition.  But the task, however trying to my nerves, must be
got over; at last, in a kind of desperation, I entered upon it.  It was
far from an easy one; there were, however, fewer errors and absurdities
than I had anticipated.  About twelve o'clock at night I had got over the
task of revision.  'To-morrow for the bookseller,' said I, as my head
sank on the pillow.  'Oh me!'




CHAPTER LVII


Nervous look--The bookseller's wife--The last stake--Terms--God
forbid!--Will you come to tea?--A light heart.

On arriving at the bookseller's shop, I cast a nervous look at the
window, for the purpose of observing whether the paper had been removed
or not.  To my great delight the paper was in its place; with a beating
heart I entered, there was nobody in the shop; as I stood at the counter,
however, deliberating whether or not I should call out, the door of what
seemed to be a back-parlour opened, and out came a well-dressed lady-like
female, of about thirty, with a good-looking and intelligent countenance.
'What is your business, young man?' said she to me, after I had made her
a polite bow.  'I wish to speak to the gentleman of the house,' said I.
'My husband is not within at present,' she replied; 'what is your
business?'  'I have merely brought something to show him,' said I, 'but I
will call again.'  'If you are the young gentleman who has been here
before,' said the lady, 'with poems and ballads, as, indeed, I know you
are,' she added, smiling, 'for I have seen you through the glass door, I
am afraid it will be useless; that is,' she added with another smile, 'if
you bring us nothing else.'  'I have not brought you poems and ballads
now,' said I, 'but something widely different; I saw your advertisement
for a tale or a novel, and have written something which I think will
suit; and here it is,' I added, showing the roll of paper which I held in
my hand.  'Well,' said the bookseller's wife, 'you may leave it, though I
cannot promise you much chance of its being accepted.  My husband has
already had several offered to him; however, you may leave it; give it
me.  Are you afraid to intrust it to me?' she demanded somewhat hastily,
observing that I hesitated.  'Excuse me,' said I, 'but it is all I have
to depend upon in the world; I am chiefly apprehensive that it will not
be read.'  'On that point I can reassure you,' said the good lady,
smiling, and there was now something sweet in her smile.  'I give you my
word that it shall be read; come again to-morrow morning at eleven, when,
if not approved, it shall be returned to you.'

I returned to my lodging, and forthwith betook myself to bed,
notwithstanding the earliness of the hour.  I felt tolerably tranquil; I
had now cast my last stake, and was prepared to abide by the result.
Whatever that result might be, I could have nothing to reproach myself
with; I had strained all the energies which nature had given me in order
to rescue myself from the difficulties which surrounded me.  I presently
sank into a sleep, which endured during the remainder of the day, and the
whole of the succeeding night.  I awoke about nine on the morrow, and
spent my last threepence on a breakfast somewhat more luxurious than the
immediately preceding ones, for one penny of the sum was expended on the
purchase of milk.

At the appointed hour I repaired to the house of the bookseller; the
bookseller was in his shop.  'Ah,' said he, as soon as I entered, 'I am
glad to see you.'  There was an unwonted heartiness in the bookseller's
tones, an unwonted benignity in his face.  'So,' said he, after a pause,
'you have taken my advice, written a book of adventure; nothing like
taking the advice, young man, of your superiors in age.  Well, I think
your book will do, and so does my wife, for whose judgment I have a great
regard; as well I may, as she is the daughter of a first-rate novelist,
deceased.  I think I shall venture on sending your book to the press.'
'But,' said I, 'we have not yet agreed upon terms.'  'Terms, terms,' said
the bookseller; 'ahem! well, there is nothing like coming to terms at
once.  I will print the book, and give you half the profit when the
edition is sold.'  'That will not do,' said I; 'I intend shortly to leave
London: I must have something at once.'  'Ah, I see,' said the
bookseller, 'in distress; frequently the case with authors, especially
young ones.  Well, I don't care if I purchase it of you, but you must be
moderate; the public are very fastidious, and the speculation may prove a
losing one after all.  Let me see, will five--hem--' he stopped.  I
looked the bookseller in the face; there was something peculiar in it.
Suddenly it appeared to me as if the voice of him of the thimble sounded
in my ear, 'Now is your time, ask enough, never such another chance of
establishing yourself; respectable trade, pea and thimble.'  'Well,' said
I at last, 'I have no objection to take the offer which you were about to
make, though I really think five-and-twenty guineas to be scarcely
enough, everything considered.'  'Five-and-twenty guineas!' said the
bookseller; 'are you--what was I going to say--I never meant to offer
half as much--I mean a quarter; I was going to say five guineas--I mean
pounds; I will, however, make it up guineas.'  'That will not do,' said
I; 'but, as I find we shall not deal, return me my manuscript, that I may
carry it to some one else.'  The bookseller looked blank.  'Dear me,'
said he, 'I should never have supposed that you would have made any
objection to such an offer; I am quite sure that you would have been glad
to take five pounds for either of the two huge manuscripts of songs and
ballads that you brought me on a former occasion.'  'Well,' said I, 'if
you will engage to publish either of those two manuscripts, you shall
have the present one for five pounds.'  'God forbid that I should make
any such bargain!' said the bookseller; 'I would publish neither on any
account; but, with respect to this last book, I have really an
inclination to print it, both for your sake and mine; suppose we say ten
pounds.'  'No,' said I, 'ten pounds will not do; pray restore me my
manuscript.'  'Stay,' said the bookseller, 'my wife is in the next room,
I will go and consult her.'  Thereupon he went into his back room, where
I heard him conversing with his wife in a low tone; in about ten minutes
he returned.  'Young gentleman,' said he, 'perhaps you will take tea with
us this evening, when we will talk further over the matter.'

That evening I went and took tea with the bookseller and his wife, both
of whom, particularly the latter, overwhelmed me with civility.  It was
not long before I learned that the work had been already sent to the
press, and was intended to stand at the head of a series of entertaining
narratives, from which my friends promised themselves considerable
profit.  The subject of terms was again brought forward.  I stood firm to
my first demand for a long time; when, however, the bookseller's wife
complimented me on my production in the highest terms, and said that she
discovered therein the germs of genius, which she made no doubt would
some day prove ornamental to my native land, I consented to drop my
demand to twenty pounds, stipulating, however, that I should not be
troubled with the correction of the work.

Before I departed, I received the twenty pounds, and departed with a
light heart to my lodgings.

Reader, amidst the difficulties and dangers of this life, should you ever
be tempted to despair, call to mind these latter chapters of the life of
Lavengro.  There are few positions, however difficult, from which dogged
resolution and perseverance may not liberate you.




