Chapter II) on the way in which the scientific interrogation of nature
has deliberately limited itself, draws attention to the fact that a
full knowledge of the science of optics in its present form might be
acquired merely through theoretical study by one born blind, yet
without his ever getting to know what light is. Heisenberg could, of
course, have said the same of the science of acoustics in regard to one
born deaf. But we can go a step further by asking how far a deaf and a
blind person could get towards establishing the respective science. The
answer must be that, whereas the person lacking sight would not of
himself be in a position to establish a science of optics, it would be
well within the scope of the deaf man to establish a science of
acoustics. For all the processes essential to a physical acoustics are
accessible to the eye and other senses.

In order to make our experience of hearing a finger-post pointing the
way to an understanding of the faculty of Inspiration innate in man, we
must first of all seek to transform acoustics from a 'deaf into a
'hearing' science, just as Goethe turned the theory of colour from a
colour-blind into a colour-seeing science.

*

Following our procedure in the case of optics, we select from the total
field of acoustic phenomena a defined realm specially suited to our
purpose. As it was then the spectrum, so it will be now the so-called
quality of sound, or tone-colour.

By this term in acoustics is understood a property possessed by sound
apart from pitch and volume, and dependent on the nature of the source
from which a tone is derived. It is the tone-colour by which the tone
of a violin, for instance, is distinguished from a tone of equal
intensity and pitch produced by a flute. Similarly, two musical
instruments of the same kind are distinguished from each other by
tone-colour.

Tone-colour plays a specially significant part in human and animal
voices. Not only has each individual voice its unique colour, but the
colour varies in one and the same person or animal, according to the
prevailing mood. Moreover, by uttering the various vowels of his
language, man is able to impart varying colour to the sounds of his
speech. For the difference we experience when a tone is sung on the
vowel 'a' or the vowel 'e', etc., derives from the particular colour
given by the vowel to that tone.

Among the discoveries of the last century in the realm of acoustics,
there is one which especially helped to establish a purely kinematic
conception of sound. Helmholtz showed that tones which to our ears seem
to have a clear and definite pitch may be split up by a series of
resonators into a number of different tones, each of them sounding at a
different pitch. The lowest of these has the pitch which our ears
attach to the entire tone. Thus in any ordinary tone there may be
distinguished a 'fundamental' tone and a series of 'overtones'.
Helmholtz further showed that the particular series of overtones into
which a tone can be resolved is responsible for the colour of that tone
as a whole. Naturally, this meant for the prevailing mode of thinking
that the experience of the colour of a tone had to be interpreted as
the effect of a kind of acoustical adding together of a number of
single tone perceptions (very much as Newton had interpreted 'white'
light as the outcome of an optical adding together of a certain number
of single colour perceptions).

The picture becomes different if we apply to the aural experience
Goethe's theorem that, in so far as we are deluded, it is not by our
senses but by our own reasoning. For we then realize that sounds never
occur of themselves without some tone-colour, whilst physically 'pure'
tones - those that represent simple harmonic motions - exist only as an
artificial laboratory product. The colour of a tone, therefore, is an
integral part of it, and must not be conceived of as an additional
attribute resulting from a summing up of a number of colourless tone
experiences.

Further, if we compare our experiences of the two kinds of tone, they
tell us that through the quality or colour of the natural tone
something of a soul-nature, pleasant or unpleasant, speaks to us,
whereas 'pure' tones have a soulless character.

Resolving normal tones by Helmholtz's method (useful as it is for
certain purposes) amounts to something like dissecting a living,
ensouled organism into its members; only the parts of the corpse

remain in our hands.

*

Having thus established that the psychic content of aural experience
forms an integral part of the tone-phenomenon as such, we must seek to
understand how the kinetic process which is indispensable for its
appearance comes to be the vehicle for the manifestation of 'soul' in
the manner described.

To this end we must first of all heed the fact that the movement which
mediates aural sensation is one of alternating expansion and
contraction. Expressed in the language of the four Elements, this means
that the air thus set in vibration approaches alternately the condition
of the watery element beneath it and of the element of fire (heat)
above it. Thus, in a regular rhythm, the air comes near the border of
its ponderable existence. Purely physical considerations make us
realize that this entails another rhythmic occurrence in the realm of
heat. For with each expansion of the air heat is absorbed by it and
thereby rendered space-bound, while with every contraction of the air
heat is set free and returns to its indigenous condition - that is, it
becomes free from spatial limitations.

This picture of the complete happenings during an acoustic event
enables us to understand how such a process can be the vehicle for
conveying certain astral impulses in such a way that, when met by them,
we grow aware of them in the form of a direct sensation. Taking as a
model the expression 'transparent' for the perviousness of a substance
to light, we may say that the air, when in a state of acoustic
vibration, becomes 'trans-audient' for astral impulses, and that the
nature of these vibrations determines which particular impulses are let
through.

What we have here found to be the true role of the kinetic part of the
acoustic process applies equally to sounds which are emitted by living
beings, and to those that arise when lifeless material is set
mechanically in motion, as in the case of ordinary noises or the
musical production of tone. There is only this difference: in the first
instance the vibrations of the sound-producing organs have their origin
in the activity of the astral part of the living being, and it is this
activity which comes to the recipient's direct experience in the form
of aural impressions; in the second instance the air, by being brought
externally into a state of vibration, exerts a kind of suction on the
astral realm which pervades the air, with the result that parts of this
realm become physically audible. For we are constantly surrounded by
supersensible sounds, and the state of motion of the air determines
which of them become perceptible to us in our present state of
consciousness.

At this point our mind turns to a happening in the macrotelluric sphere
of the earth, already considered in another connexion, which now
assumes the significance of an ur-phenomenon revealing the astral
generation of sound. This is the thunder-storm, constituted for our
external perception by the two events: lightning and thunder.

Remembering what we have found earlier (Chapter X) to be the nature of
lightning, we are now in a position to say: a supraterrestrial astral
impulse obtains control of the earth's etheric and physical spheres of
force in such a way that etheric substance is thrown into the condition
of space-bound physical matter. This substance is converted by stages
from the state of light and heat via that of air into the liquid and,
in certain cases, into the solid state (hail). To this we now add that,
while in lightning the first effect of the etheric-physical
interference of the astral impulse appears before our eyes, our ears
give us direct awareness of this impulse in the form of thunder. It is
this fact which accounts for the awe-inspiring character of
thunderstorms.

*

The picture we have thus received of the outer part of the acoustic
process has a counterpart in the processes inside the organ of hearing.
Hearing, like seeing, depends upon the co-operation of both poles of
the human organism-nerve and blood. In the case of hearing, however,
they play a reversed role. In the eye, the primary effect of
light-impressions is on the nervous part; a secondary response to them
comes from the blood organization. In the ear, the receptive organ for
the astral impulses pressing in upon it is a part which belongs to the
body's limb system, while it is the nervous organization which
functions as the organ of response. For in the ear the sound-waves are
first of all taken over by the so-called ossicles, three small bones in
the middle ear which, when examined with the Goethean eye, appear to be
a complete metamorphosis of ah arm or a leg. They are instrumental in
transferring the outer acoustic movements to the fluid contained in the
inner ear, whence these are communicated to the entire fluid system of
the body and lastly to the muscular system.9 We shall speak of this in
detail later on. Let it be stated here that the peculiar role played by
the larynx in hearing, already referred to by us in Chapter XVI, is one
of the symptoms which tells of the participation of the muscular system
in the internal acoustic process.

Psychologically, the difference between ear and eye is that aural
perceptions work much more directly on the human will - that is, on the
part of our astral organization connected with the limb system. Whereas
eye-impressions stimulate us in the first place to think,
ear-impressions stimulate us to ... dance. The whole art of dancing,
from its original sacred character up to its degenerate modern forms,
is based upon the limb system being the recipient of acoustic
impressions.

In order to understand how the muscles respond to the outer astral
impulses which reach us through our ear, we must first understand what
happens in the muscles when our will makes use of them for bodily
motion. In this case, too, the muscular system is the organ through
which certain astral impulses, this time arising out of the body's own
astral member, come to expression. Moreover, the movement of the
muscles, though not outwardly perceptible, is quite similar to acoustic
movements outside the body. For whenever a muscle is caused to alter
its length, it will perform some kind of vibration - a vibration
characterized even by a definite pitch, which differs in different
people. Since throughout life our body is never entirely without
movement, we are thus in a constant state of inward sounding. The
muscular system is capable of this vibration because during the body's
initial period of growth the bones increase in length to a much greater
extent than do the sinews and muscles. Hence the latter arrive at a
condition of elastic tension not unlike that of the strings of a
musical instrument.10

In the case of bodily movement, therefore, the muscles are
tone-producers, whereas in acoustic perceptions they are
tone-receivers. What, then, is it that prevents an acoustic perception
from actually setting the limbs in motion, and, instead, enables our
sentient being to take hold of the astral impulse invading our muscles?

This impediment comes from the contribution made by the nervous system
to the auditory process. In order to understand the nature of this
contribution we must remember the role played by the blood in seeing.
It was found by us to consist in the bringing about of that state of
equilibrium without which we should experience light merely as a
pain-producing agent. Similarly, the perception of sound requires the
presence of a certain state of equilibrium between the nerve-system and
the limb-system. In this case, however, a lack of equilibrium would
result not in pain, but in ecstasy. For if acoustic impressions played
directly into our limb-system, with nothing to hold them in check,
every tone we encounter would compel us to an outward manifestation of
astral activity. We should become part of the tone-process itself,
forced to transform it by the volitional part of our astral
organization into spatial movement. That this does not happen is
because the participation of the nervous system serves to damp down the
potential ecstasy. Hence it is more or less left to the sentient part
of the astral organization - that is, the part free from the physical
body - to partake in the astral processes underlying the tone
occurrences.

*

Our discussion has reached a point where we are able to answer a
question which first arose in the course of our study of the four
ethers, and which arises here anew.

In studying the chemical or sound ether we were faced with the fact
that part of the etheric realm, although in itself accessible to the
spiritual part of the sense of sight, offers supersensible experience
comparable to the perception of sound. Conversely, we are now met by
the fact that it is spiritual hearing which gives access to the
immediate perception of a realm of forces which is not only the source
of acoustic phenomena, but the origin of all that manifests in nature
in the form of sulphurous, saline and mercurial events, such as the
world of colours, electricity, magnetism, the manifold rhythmic
occurrences on the earth (both taken as a whole .and in single
organisms), etc. - all of which are taken hold of by quite other senses
than that of hearing.

At our first encounter with this problem we remarked that in the
supersensible no such sharp distinctions exist between different
sense-spheres as are found in body-bound sense-perception. At the same
time we remembered that even in physical perception we are inclined to
attach acoustic attributes to colours and optical attributes to tones.
In fact, it was precisely an instance of this kind of experience,
namely, our conception of tone-colour, which gave us our lead in
discussing the acoustic sphere in general. Our picture of the
particular interaction of the two polar bodily systems in the acts of
seeing and hearing now enables us to understand more clearly how these
two spheres of perception overlap in man. For we have seen how the
system which in seeing is the receiving organ, works in hearing as the
responding one, and vice versa. As a result, optical impressions are
accompanied by dim sensations of sound, and aural impressions by dim
sensations of colour.

What we are thus dimly aware of in physical sense activity, becomes
definite experience when the supersensible part of the senses concerned
can work unfettered by the bodily organ. Clear testimony of this is
again given to us by Traherne in a poem entitled Dumnesse. This poem
contains an account of Traherne's recollection of the significant fact
that the transition from the cosmic to the earthly condition of his
consciousness was caused by his learning to speak. The following is a
passage from the description of the impressions which were his before
his soul was overcome by this change:

'Then did I dwell within a World of Light
Distinct and Seperat from all Mens Sight,
Where I did feel strange Thoughts, and such Things see
That were, or seemd, only reveald to Me ...

'... A Pulpit in my Mind
A Temple, and a Teacher I did find,
With a large Text to comment on. No Ear,
But Eys them selvs were all the Hearers there.
And evry Stone, and Evry Star a Tongue,
And evry Gale of Wind a Curious Song.'11

*

We have obtained a sufficiently clear picture of the organization of
our sense of hearing to see where the way lies that leads from hearing
with the ears of the body to hearing with the ears of the spirit, that
is, to the inspirative perception of the astral world.

In the psycho-physical condition which is characteristic of our present
day-consciousness, the participation of our astral organization in any
happenings of the outer astral world depends on our corporeal motor
system being stimulated by the acoustic motions of the air, or of some
other suitable medium contacting our body. For it is only in this way
that our astral organization is brought into the sympathetic vibrations
necessary for perceiving outer astral happenings. In order that astral
events other than those manifesting acoustically may become accessible
to our consciousness, our own astral being must become capable of
vibrating in tune with them, just as if we were hearing them - that is,
we must be able to rouse our astral forces to an activity similar to
that of hearing, yet without any physical stimulus. The way to this
consists in training ourselves to experience the deeds and sufferings
of nature as if they were the deeds and sufferings of a beloved friend.

It is thus that we shall learn to hear the soul of the universe
directly speaking to us, as Lorenzo divined it, when his love for
Jessica made him feel in love with all the world, and he exclaimed:

'There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
But in his motion like an angel sings,
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubim, -
Such harmony is in immortal souls.
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.'

* *
 *
(c) KEPLER AND THE 'MUSIC OF THE SPHERES'

'One must choose one's saints .. . and so I have chosen mine, and
before all others, Kepler. In my ante-room he has ever a niche of his
own, with his bust in it.'

This opinion of Goethe's must surprise us in view of the fact that
Kepler was the discoverer of the three laws called after him, one of
which is supposed to have laid the foundation for Newton's mechanical
conception of the universe. In what follows it will be shown how wrong
it is to see in Kepler a forerunner of the mechanistic conception of
the world; how near, in reality, his world-picture is to the one to
which we are led by working along Goetheanistic lines; and how right
therefore Goethe was in his judgment on Kepler.

Goethe possessed a sensitive organ for the historical appropriateness
of human ideas. As an illustration of this it may be mentioned how he
reacted when someone suggested to him that Joachim Jungius - an
outstanding German thinker, contemporary of Bacon, Van Helmont, etc. -
had anticipated his idea of the metamorphosis of the plant. This remark
worried Goethe, not because he could not endure the thought of being
anticipated (see his treatment of K. F. Wolff), but because this would
have run counter to the meaning of man's historical development as he
saw it. 'Why do I regard as essential the question whether Jungius
conceived the idea of metamorphosis as we know it? My answer is, that
it is most significant in the history of the sciences, when a
penetrating and vitalizing maxim comes to be uttered. Therefore it is
not only of importance that Jungius has not expressed this maxim; but
it is of highest significance that he was positively unable to express
it - as we boldly assert.'12

For the same reason Goethe knew it would be historically unjustified to
expect that Kepler could have conceived an aspect of the universe
implicit in his own conception of nature. Hence it did not disturb him
in his admiration for Kepler, that through him the Copernican aspect of
the universe had become finally established in the modern mind - that
is, an aspect which, as we have seen, is invalid as a means of forming
a truly dynamic conception of the world.

In forming his picture of the universe, it is true, Copernicus was
concerned with nothing but the spatial movements of the luminous
entities discernible in the sky, without any regard to their actual
nature and dynamic interrelationships. Hence his world-picture - as
befits the spectator-form of human consciousness which was coming to
birth in his own time - is a purely kinematic one. As such it has
validity for a certain sphere of human observation.

When Kepler, against the hopes of his forerunner and friend, Tycho
Brahe, accepted the heliocentric standpoint and made it the basis of
his observations, he did so out of his understanding of what was the
truth for his own time. Kepler's ideal was to seek after knowledge
through pure observation. In this respect Goethe took him as his model.
Kepler's discoveries were a proof that man's searching mind is given
insight into great truths at any stage of its development, provided it
keeps to the virtue of practising pure observation.

It has been the error of Newton and his successors up to our own day,
to try to conceive the world dynamically within the limits of their
spectator-consciousness and thus to form a dynamic interpretation of
the universe based on its heliocentric aspect. This was just as
repellent to Goethe as Kepler's attitude was attractive.

But by so sharply distinguishing between Newton and Kepler, do we not
do injustice to the fact that, as the world believes, Kepler's third
law is the parent of Newton's law of gravitation? The following will
show that this belief is founded on an illusory conception of the kind
we met before. As we shall see, Kepler's discovery, when treated in a
Keplerian way, instead of leading to Newton, is found to be in full
agreement with the very world-picture to which our own observations
have led us.

*

It is an established conviction of the mathematical scientist that,
once an observed regularity in nature has been expressed as a
mathematical equation, this equation may be transformed in any
mathematically valid way, and the resulting formula will still apply to
some existing fact in the world. On innumerable occasions this
principle has been used in the expectation of providing further insight
into the secrets of nature. We came across a typical instance of this
in discussing the basic theorem of kinematics and dynamics (Chapter
VIII). Another example is Newton's treatment of Kepler's third law, or
- more precisely - the way in which Newton's law of gravitation has
been held to confirm Kepler's observations, and vice versa,

It will be our task to analyse the Kepler-Newton case on the very lines
of our treatment of the two parallelogram theorems. This analysis will
give us insight into a truth which we have to regard as one of the
basic maxims of the new science. It says that whether a given formula,
derived mathematically from one that was first read from nature, still
expresses some fact of nature, cannot be decided by pure mathematical
logic, but only by testing it against truly observable phenomena.

Through Kepler's third law a certain relation is expressed between the
spatial dimensions of the different planetary spheres and the time
needed by the relevant planet to circle once round the circumference of
its own sphere. It says: 'The squares of the periodic times of the
planets are always in the same proportion as the cubes of their mean
distances from the sun.' In mathematical symbols this reads:
t12 / t22 = r13 / r23
We shall see later how Kepler arrived at this law. The point is that
there is nothing in it which is not accessible to pure observation.
Spatial distances and lengths of time are measured and the results
compared. Nothing, for instance, is said about the dynamic cause of the
movements. The assertion is restricted - and this is true also of the
first and second law - to a purely kinematic content, and so precisely
to what the earthly onlooker can apprehend. Now it is said that
Kepler's third law is a necessary consequence of Newton's law of
gravitation, and that - since it is based on pure observation - it
therefore establishes the truth of Newton's conception. In this
assertion we encounter a misconception exactly like the one in the
statement that the theorem of the parallelogram of forces follows by
logical necessity from the theorem of the parallelogram of velocities.
For:

(a) The law of gravitation itself derives from Newton's formula for the
centripetal force acting at a point which moves along a circle, this
formula being itself the result of an amplification of the formula for
centripetal acceleration by the factor 'mass' (as if the latter were a
pure number):

Centripetal acceleration:
a = 4(π^2)r / t2

Centripetal force:
P = am = 4(π^2)mr / t2

(b) The formula for centripetal acceleration - and the concept of such
acceleration itself - is the result of splitting circular movement into
two rectilinear movements, one in the direction of the tangent, the
other in the direction of the radius, and of regarding it - by a mode
of reasoning typical of spectator-thinking - as composed of the two.
This procedure, however, useful as it may be for the purpose of
calculation, is contrary to observation. For, as we have pointed out
earlier, observation tells us that all original movement - and what can
be more original than the movements of the planetary bodies - is
curvilinear. No insight into the dynamic reality of cosmic movement,
therefore, can ever be gained by handling it mathematically in this
way.

(c) The transformation of Kepler's formula which is necessary in order
to give it a form representing the nucleus of Newton's formula, is one
which, though mathematically justified, deprives Kepler's formula of
any significance as expression of an observed fact. The following
analysis will show this.

Kepler's formula-
r1^3 / r2^3 = t1^2 / t2^2
may be written also
r1^3 / t1^2 = r2^3 / t2^2
and this again in the generalized form:
r3 / t2 = c.
Obviously, by each of these steps we diminish the reality-value of the
formula. In its original form, we find spatial extension compared with
spatial extension, and temporal extension with temporal extension. Each
of the two comparisons is a fully concrete one, because we compare
entities of like nature, and only then test the ratios of the two -
that is, two pure numbers against each other - to find that they are
identical. To compare a spatial and a temporal magnitude, as is done by
the formula in its second form, requires already a certain degree of
abstraction. Still, it is all spectator's work, and for the spectator
time is conceivable and measurable only as a rate of spatial
displacement. Hence the constant number c, by representing the ratio
between the spatial extension of the realm inside a planet's orbit and
the time needed by it to perform one round on this orbit - a ratio
which is the same for all planets - represents a definite structural
element of our cosmic system.

By this last operation our equation has now achieved a form which
requires only one more transformation to bring it into line with
Newton's formula. Instead of writing:
r3 / t2 = c
we write:
r / t2 = c (1 / r2)
All that now remains to be done amounts to an amplification of this
equation by the factor 4(π^2)m, and a gathering of the constant product
4(π^2)c under a new symbol, for which we choose the letter f. In this way
we arrive at:
4(π^2)mr / t2 = 4(π^2)cm / r2
and finally:
P = ... = fm / r2
which is the expression of the gravitational pull believed to be
exerted by the sun on the various planetary bodies. Nothing can be said
against this procedure from the point of view

of mathematical logic. For the latter the equation
r / t2 = c (1 / r2)
is still an expression of Kepler's observation. Not so for a logic
which tries to keep in touch with concrete reality. For what meaning,
relevant to the phenomenal universe as it manifests in space and time
to physical perception, is there in stating - as the equation in this
form does - that: the ratio between a planet's distance from the sun
and the square of its period is always proportional to the reciprocal
value of the area lying inside its orbit?

*

Once we have rid ourselves of the false conception that Kepler's law
implies Newton's interpretation of the physical universe as a dynamic
entity ruled by gravity, and gravity alone, we are free to ask what
this law can tell us about the nature of the universe if in examining
it we try to remain true to Kepler's own approach.

To behave in a Keplerian (and thus in a Goethean) fashion regarding a
mathematical formula which expresses an observed fact of nature, does
not mean that to submit such a formula to algebraic transformation is
altogether impermissible. All we have to make sure of is that the
transformation is required by the observed facts themselves: for
instance, by the need for an even clearer manifestation of their ideal
content. Such is indeed the case with the equation which embodies
Kepler's third law. We said that in its original form this equation
contains a concrete statement because it expresses comparisons between
spatial extensions, on the one hand, and between temporal extensions,
on the other. Now, in the form in which the spatial magnitudes occur,
they express something which is directly conceivable. The third power
of a spatial distance (r^3) represents the measure of a volume in
three-dimensional space. The same cannot be said of the temporal
magnitudes on the other side of the equation (t^2). For our conception
of time forbids us to connect any concrete idea with 'squared time'. We
are therefore called upon to find out what form we can give this side
of the equation so as to express the time-factor in a manner which is
in accord with our conception of time, that is, in linear form.13 This
form readily suggests itself if we consider that we have here to do
with a ratio of squares. For such a ratio may be resolved into a ratio
of two simple ratios.

In this way the equation -
r1^3 / r2^3 = t1^2 / t2^2
assumes the form-
r1^3 / r2^3 = (t1 / t2) / (t2 / t1)
The right-hand side of the equation is now constituted by the double
ratio of the linear values of the periods of two planets, and this is
something with which we can connect a quite concrete idea.

To see this, let us choose the periods of two definite planets - say,
Earth and Jupiter. For these the equation assumes the following form
('J' and 'E' indicating 'Jupiter' and 'Earth' respectively):
rJ^3 / rE^3 = (tJ / tE) / (tE / tJ)
Let us now see what meaning we can attach to the two expressions
tJ / tE and tE / tJ.

During one rotation of Jupiter round the sun the earth circles 12 times
round it. This we are wont to express by saying that Jupiter needs 12
earth-years for one rotation; in symbols:
tJ / tE = 12 / 1
To find the analogous expression for the reciprocal ratio:
tE / tJ = 1 / 12
we must obviously form the concept 'Jupiter-year', which covers one
rotation of Jupiter, just as the concept 'earth-year' covers one
rotation of the earth (always round the sun). Measured in this
time-scale, the earth needs for one of her rotations 1 / 12 of a
Jupiter-year.

With the help of these concepts we are now able to express the double
ratio of the planetary periods in the following simplified way. If we
suppose the measuring of the two planetary periods to be carried out
not by the same time-scale, but each by the time-scale of the other,
the formula becomes:
rJ3 / rE3 = (tJ / tE) / (tE / tJ) = period of Jupiter measured in
Earth-years / period of Earth measured in Jupiter-years.
Interpreted in this manner, Kepler's third law discloses an intimate
interrelatedness of each planet to all the others as co-members of the
same cosmic whole. For the equation now tells us that the solar times
of the various planets are regulated in such a way that for any two of
them the ratio of these times, measured in their mutual time-units, is
the same as the ratio of the spaces swept out by their (solar) orbits.

Further, by having the various times of its members thus tuned to one
another, our cosmic system shows itself to be ordered on a principle
which is essentially musical. To see this, we need only recall that the
musical value of a given tone is determined by its relation to other
tones, whether they sound together in a chord, or in succession as
melody. A 'C' alone is musically undefined. It receives its character
from its interval-relation to some other tone, say, 'G', together with
which it forms a Fifth. As the lower tone of this interval, 'C' bears a
definite character; and so does 'G' as the upper tone.

Now we know that each interval represents a definite ratio between the
periodicities of its two tones. In the case of the Fifth the ratio is
2:3 (in the natural scale). This means that the lower tone receives its
character from being related to the upper tone by the ratio 2:3.
Similarly, the upper tone receives its character from the ratio 3:2.
The specific character of an interval arising out of the merging of its
two tones, therefore, is determined by the ratio of their ratios. In
the case of the Fifth this is 4:9. It is this ratio, therefore, which
underlies our experience of a Fifth.

The cosmic factor corresponding to the periodicity of the single tone
in music is the orbital period of the single planet. To the musical
interval formed by two tones corresponds the double ratio of the
periods of any two planets. Regarded thus, Kepler's law can be
expressed as follows: The spatial ordering of our planetary system is
determined by the interval-relation in which the different planets
stand to each other.

By thus unlocking the ideal content hidden in Kepler's third law, we
are at the same time enabled to do justice to the way in which he
himself announced his discovery. In textbooks and encyclopaedias it is
usually said that the discovery of the third law was the surprising
result of Kepler's fantastic attempt to prove by external observation
what was once taught in the school of Pythagoras, namely, that (in
Wordsworth's language):

'By one pervading spirit
Of tones and numbers all things are controlled.'

Actually, Kepler's great work, Harmonices Mundi, in the last part of
which he announces his third law, is entirely devoted to proving the
truth of the Pythagorean doctrine that the universe is ordered
according to the laws of music. This doctrine sprang from the gift of
spiritual hearing still possessed by Pythagoras, by which he could
perceive the harmonies of the spheres. It was the aim of his school to
keep this faculty alive as long as possible, and with its aid to
establish a communicable world-conception. The Pythagorean teaching
became the foundation of all later cosmological thinking, right up to
the age which was destined to bring to birth the spectator-relationship
of man's consciousness with the world. Thus it was left to Copernicus
to give mankind the first truly non-Pythagorean picture of the
universe.

When Kepler declared himself in favour of the heliocentric aspect, as
indicated by Copernicus, he acknowledged that the universe had grown
dumb for man's inner ear. Yet, besides his strong impulse to meet the
true needs of his time, there were inner voices telling him of secrets
that were hidden behind the veil woven by man's physical perceptions.
One of these secrets was the musical order of the world. Such
knowledge, however, could not induce him to turn to older
world-conceptions in his search for truth. He had no need of them,
because there was yet another voice in him which told him that the
spiritual order of the world must somehow manifest itself in the body
of the world as it lay open to physical perception. Just as a musical
instrument, if it is to be a perfect means of bringing forth music,
must bear in its build the very laws of music, so must the body of the
universe, as the instrument on which the harmonies of the spheres play
their spiritual music, bear in its proportions a reflexion of these
harmonies. Kepler was sure that investigation of the world's body,
provided it was carried out by means of pure observation, must needs
lead to a re-establishment of the ancient truth in a form appropriate
to the modern mind. Thus Kepler, guided by an ancient spiritual
conception of the world, could devote himself to confirming its truth
by the most up-to-date methods of research. That his search was not in
vain, our examination of the third law has shown.

One thing, however, remains surprising - that Kepler announced his
discovery in the form in which it has henceforth engraved itself in the
modern mind, while refraining from that analysis of it which we have
applied to it here. Yet, in this respect also Kepler proves to have
remained true to himself. There is, on the one hand, the form in which
Kepler pronounced his discovery; there is, on the other, the context in
which he made this pronouncement. We have already pointed out that the
third law forms part of Kepler's comprehensive work, Harmonices Mundi.
To the modern critic's understanding it appears there like an erratic
block. For Kepler this was different. While publishing his discovery in
precisely the form in which it is conceived by a mind bent on pure
observation, he gave it a setting by which he left no doubt as to his
own conception of its ideal content. And as a warning to the future
reader not to overlook the message conveyed by this arrangement, he
introduced the section of his book which contains the announcement of
the law, with the mysterious words about himself: 'I have stolen the
golden vessels of the Egyptians from which to furnish for my God a holy
shrine far from Egypt's confines.'

1 We must here distinguish sensation from feeling proper, in which
sensation and motion merge in mercurial balance.

2 Note how for Ruskin the gulf which for the onlooker-consciousness
lies between subject and object is bridged here - as it was for Goethe
in his representation of the physico-moral effect of colour.

3 De motu animalium and Theoria mediceorum planetarum ex causis
physicis deducta.

4 Knowledge of this biological rhythm is still preserved among native
peoples to-day and leads them to take account of the phases of the moon
in their treatment of plants. A cosmic nature-wisdom of this kind has
been reopened for us in modern form by Rudolf Steiner, and has since
found widespread practical application in agriculture. See L. Kolisko,
The Moon and Plant Growth.

5 In the order of names given above we follow the ancient usage for the
two planets nearest to the sun, not the reversed order in which they
are used to-day. This is necessary in a cosmology which aspires at a
qualitative understanding of the universe, in view of the qualities
represented by these names. Note also the absence of the three most
distant planets, Uranus, Neptune and Pluto. They are not to be
considered as parts of the indigenous astral structure of our cosmic
system - any more than radioactivity is an original feature of the
earth.

6 Note the 'Venus' character of Ruskin's description of the plant's
state of florescence quoted above (p. 336).

7 As to the time-scale of the processes brought about by Mercury and
Venus respectively, experience shows that they reveal the cosmic
rhythms less clearly than those for which the Moon-activity is
responsible. The same is found at the opposite pole. There it is the
Saturn - generated processes which show the cosmic rhythm more
conspicuously than those engendered by Jupiter and Mars. To learn to
recognize rhythmic events in nature and man as reflexions of
corresponding planetary rhythms is one of the tasks which future
scientific research has to tackle. A practical example of this kind
will appear in the further course of this chapter.

8 See L. Kolisko: Working of the Stars in Earthly Substances, and other
publications by the same author.

9 The close connexion between the ear and the motor system of the body
is shown in another way by the fact that part of the ear serves as an
organ for the sense of balance.

10 The muscle-tone can be made audible by the following means. In a
room guarded against noise, press the thumbs lightly upon the ears and
tense the muscles of the hands and arms - say by pressure of the
fingers against the palms or by contracting the muscle of the upper
arms. If this is done repeatedly, the muscle-tone will be heard after
some practice with increasing distinctness. It is easily distinguished
from the sound of the circulating blood as it is much higher. (As an
example: the author's muscular pitch, not a particularly high one, has
a frequency of approx. 630 per sec., which puts it between Treble D
sharp and E.)

11 Compare also the beginning of Traherne's poem Wonder, quoted in
