Chapter VI (p. 110), where he says that everything he saw 'did with me
talk'.

12 For the particular reasons by which Goethe justifies his assertion,
see his essay Leben und Verdienste des Doktor Joachim Jungius.

13 The natural question why Kepler himself did not take this step, will
be answered later on.


CHAPTER XXI

Know Thyself

Our inquiries have led us to a picture of man as a
sensible-supersensible organism composed of three dynamic aggregates -
physical, etheric, astral. As three rungs of a spiritual ladder they
point to a fourth, which represents that particular power in man by
which he distinguishes himself from all other beings in nature. For
what makes man differ from all these is that he is not only fitted, as
they are, with a once-for-all given mode of spiritual-physical
existence peculiar to himself, but that he is endowed with the
possibility of transforming his existence by dint of his free will -
that indeed his manhood is based on this capacity for self-willed
Becoming.

To this fourth principle in man we can give no better name than that
which every human being can apply to himself alone and to no other, and
which no other can apply to him. This is the name, I. In truth, we
describe man in his entirety only if we ascribe to him, in addition to
a physical, etheric and astral body, the possession of an I (Ego).

Naturally, our previous studies have afforded many opportunities for
observing the nature and mode of activity of the I. Still, at the
conclusion of these studies it is not redundant to form a concise
picture of this part of man's being, with particular regard to how it
works within the three other principles as its sheaths. For in modern
psychology, not excluding the branch of it where efforts are made to
penetrate into deeper regions of man's being, nothing is less well
understood than the true nature of man's egoity.

*

In order to recognize the peculiar function of the I in man, we must
first be clear as to how he differs from the other kingdoms of nature,
and how they differ from one another with respect to the mode of action
of the physical, etheric and astral forces.

The beings of all the kingdoms of nature are endowed with an aggregate
of physical forces in the form of a material body subject to gravity.
The same cannot be said of the etheric forces. Only where life is
present as an inherent principle - that is, in plant, animal and man -
is ether at work in the form of an individual etheric organization,
while the mineral is formed by the universal ether from outside. Where
life prevails, we are met by the phenomena of birth and death. When a
living organism comes to birth, an individual ether-body is formed out
of the general etheric substance of the universe.1 The death of such an
organism consists in the separation of the etheric from the physical
body and the dissolution of both in their respective mother-realms. So
long as an organism is alive, its form is maintained by the ether-body
present in it.

Our studies have shown that the plant is not devoid of the operation of
astral forces. In the plant's life-cycle this comes to clearest
expression in its florescence. But it is a working of the astral forces
from outside, very much as the ether works on the mineral. As a symptom
of this fact we may recall the dependence of the plant on the various
outer astronomical rhythms.

It is only in animal and man that we find the astral forces working in
the form of separate astral bodies. This accounts for their capacity
for sensation and volition. Besides the alternation of birth and death,
they experience the rhythm of sleeping and waking. Sleep occurs when
the astral body leaves the physical and etheric bodies in order to
expand into its planetary mother-sphere, whence it gathers new energy.
During this time its action on the physical-etheric aggregate remaining
upon earth is similar to that of the astral cosmos upon the plant.

Again, in the animal kingdom the ego-principle works as an external
force in the form of various group-soul activities which control and
regulate the life of the different animal species. It is in the
group-ego of the species that we have to look for the source of the
wisdom-filled instincts which we meet in the single animals.

Only in man does the ego-principle enter as an individual entity into
the single physico-etheric-astral organism. Here, however, the
succession of stages we have outlined comes to a conclusion. For with
the appearance of the I as an individual principle, the preceding
evolutionary process - or, more correctly, the involutionary process -
begins to be reversed. In moving up from one kingdom to the next, we
find always one more dynamic principle appearing in a state of
separation from its mother-sphere; this continues to the point where
the I, through uniting itself with a thus emancipated
physico-etheric-astral organism, arrives at the stage of
self-consciousness. Once this stage has been reached, however, it falls
to the I to reverse the process of isolation, temporarily sanctioned by
the cosmos for the sake of man.

That it is not in the nature of the I to leave its sheaths in the
condition in which it finds them when entering them at the beginning of
life, can be seen from the activities it performs in them during the
first period after birth. Indeed, in man's early childhood we meet a
number of events in which we can perceive something like ur-deeds of
the I. They are the acquisition of the faculties of walking, speaking
and thinking. What we shall here say about them has, in essentials,
already been touched upon in earlier pages. Here, however, we are
putting it forward in a new light.

Once again we find our attention directed to the threefold structure of
man's physical organism. For the faculty of upright walking is a result
of the I's activity in the limb-system of the body; the acquisition of
speech takes place in the rhythmic system; and thinking is a faculty
based on the nerve-system. Consequently, each of the three achievements
comes to pass at a different level of consciousness-sleeping, dreaming,
waking. All through the struggle of erecting the body against the pull
of gravity, the child is entirely unaware of the activities of his own
I. In the course of acquiring speech he gains a dim awareness, as
though in dream, of his efforts. Some capacity of thinking has to
unfold before the first glimmer of true self-consciousness is kindled.
(Note that the word 'I' is the only one that is not added to the
child's vocabulary by way of imitation. Otherwise he would, as some
mentally inhibited children do, call all other people 'I' and himself
'you'.)

This picture of the three ur-deeds of the I can now be amplified in the
following way. We know that the region of the bodily limbs is that in
which physical, etheric and astral forces interpenetrate most deeply.
Consequently, the I can here press forward most powerfully into the
physical body and on into the dynamic sphere to which the body is
subject. Here the I is active in a way that is 'magic' in the highest
degree. Moreover, there is no other action for which the I receives so
little stimulus from outside. For, in comparison, the activity that
leads to the acquisition of speech is much more of the nature of a
reaction to stimuli coming from outside - the sounds reaching the child
from his environment. And it is also with the first words of the
language that the first thoughts enter the child's mind. Nothing of the
kind happens at the first stage. On the contrary: everything that
confronts the I here is of the nature of an obstacle that is to be
overcome.

There is no learning to speak without the hearing of uttered sounds. As
these sounds approach the human being they set the astral body in
movement, as we have seen. The movements of the astral body flow
towards the larynx, where they are seized by the I; through their help
the I imbues the larynx with the faculty of producing these sounds
itself. Here, therefore, the I is active essentially within the astral
body which has received its stimulus from outside. In order to
understand what impels the I to such action, we must remember the role
played by speech in human life: without speech there would be no
community among human individuals on earth.

An illustration of what the I accomplishes as it enters upon the third
stage is provided by the following episode, actually observed. Whilst
all the members of a family were sitting at table taking their soup,
the youngest member suddenly cried out: 'Daddy spoon ... mummy spoon.
... ' (everyone in turn spoon) ' ... all spoon!' At this moment, from
merely designating single objects by names learnt through imitation,
the child's consciousness had awakened to connective thinking. That
this achievement was a cause of inner satisfaction could be heard in
the joyful crescendo with which these ejaculations were made.

We know that the presence of waking consciousness within the
nerves-and-senses organism rests upon the fact that the connexion
between physical body and etheric body is there the most external of
all. But precisely because this is so, the etheric body is dominated
very strongly by the forces to which the physical head owes its
formation. This, too, is not fundamentally new to us. What can now be
added is that, in consequence, the physical brain and the part of the
etheric body belonging to it - the etheric brain - assume a function
comparable with that of a mirror, the physical organ representing the
reflecting mass and the etheric organ its metallic gloss. When, within
the head, the etheric body reflects back the impressions received from
the astral body, the I becomes aware of them in the form of mental
images (the 'ideas' of the onlooker-philosopher). It is also by way of
such reflexion that the I first grows aware of itself - but as nothing
more than an image among images. Here, therefore, it is itself least
active.

If, once again, we compare the three happenings of learning to walk, to
speak and to think, we find ourselves faced with the remarkable fact
that the progressive lighting up of consciousness from one stage to the
next, goes hand in hand with a retrogression in the activity of the I
itself. At the first stage, where the I knows least of itself, it is
alive in the most direct sense out of its own being; at the second
stage, where it is in the dreaming state, it receives the impetus of
action through the astral body; at the third stage, where the I wakens
to clear self-consciousness, it assumes merely the role of onlooker at
the pictures moving within the etheric body.

Compare with this the paths to higher faculties of knowledge,
Imagination and Inspiration, as we learnt to know them in our previous
studies. The comparison shows that exactly the same forces come into
play at the beginning of life, when the I endeavours to descend from
its pre-earthly, cosmic environment to its earthly existence, as have
to be made use of for the ascending of the I from earthly to cosmic
consciousness. Only, as is natural, the sequence of steps is reversed.
For on the upward way the first deed of the I is that which leads to a
wakening in the etheric world: it is a learning to set in motion the
etheric forces in the region of the head in such a way that the usual
isolation of this part of the etheric body is overcome. Regarded thus,
the activity of the I at this stage reveals a striking similarity to
the activity applied in the earliest period of childhood at the
opposite pole of the organism. To be capable of imaginative sight
actually means to be able to move about in etheric space by means of
the etheric limbs of the eyes just as one moves about in physical space
by means of the physical limbs.

Similarly, the acquisition of Inspiration is a resuming on a higher
level of the activity exercised by the I with the help of the astral
body when learning to speak. And here, too, the functions are reversed.
For while the child is stimulated by the spoken sounds he hears to
bring his own organ of speech into corresponding movements, and so
gradually learns to produce speech, the acquisition of Inspiration, as
we have seen, depends on learning to bring the supersensible forces of
the speech-organ into movement in such a way that these forces become
the organ for hearing the supersensible language of the universe.

Our knowledge of the threefold structure of man's organism leads us to
seek, besides the stages of Imagination and Inspiration, a third stage
which is as much germinally present in the body's region of movement,
as the two others are in the regions of thought and speech. After what
we have learnt in regard to these three, we may assume that the path
leading to this third stage consists in producing a condition of
wide-awake, tranquil contemplation in the very region where the I is
wont to unfold its highest degree of initiative on the lowest level of
consciousness.

In an elementary manner this attitude of soul was practised by us when,
in our earlier studies, we endeavoured to become inner observers of the
activity of our own limbs, with the aim of discovering the origin of
our concept of mass. It was in this way that a line of observation
opened up to us which led to the recognition of the physical substances
of the earth as congealed spiritual functions or, we may say, congealed
utterances of cosmic will.

Cosmic Will, however, does not work into our existence only in such a
way that, in the form of old and therefore rigid Will, it puts up
resistance against the young will-power of the I, so that in overcoming
this resistance the I may waken to self-activity. Cosmic Will is also
present in us in an active form. We point here to the penetration by
the higher powers of the universe into the forming of the destiny of
humanity and of individual man. And here Rudolf Steiner has shown that
to a man who succeeds in becoming a completely objective observer of
his own existence while actively functioning within it (as in an
elementary way we endeavoured to become observers of our limb actions
while engaged in performing them) the world begins to reveal itself as
an arena of the activities of divine-spiritual Beings, whose reality
and acts he is now able to apprehend through inner awareness. Herewith
a third stage of man's faculty of cognition is added to the stages of
Imagination and Inspiration. When Rudolf Steiner chose for it the word
Intuition he applied this word, also, in its truest meaning.

*

While through Imagination man comes to know of his ether-body as part
of his make-up, and correspondingly through Inspiration of his astral
body, and thereby recognizes himself as participant in the
supersensible forces of the universe, it is through Intuition that he
grows into full awareness of his I as a spirit-being among
spirit-beings -

God-begotten, God-companioned,
for ever God-ward striving.

1 The word 'body' is here used in a sense no different from our earlier
use of it, when in connexion with our study of combustion (Chapter XI)
we referred to the 'warmth-body' as a characteristic of the higher
animals and man. Such a warmth-body is nothing else but the
warmth-ether part of an ether-body. To use the word body for
aggregations of etheric or astral forces is legitimate if one considers
the fact that the physical body also is really a purely dynamic entity,
that is, a certain aggregate of forces more or less self-contained.





