CHAPTER XVIII

The Spectrum as a Script of the Spirit

The realization that Newton's explanation of the spectrum fails to meet
the facts prompted Goethe to engage in all those studies which made him
the founder of a modern optics based on intuitive participation in the
phenomena. In spite of all that he achieved, however, he never reached
a real solution of the riddle of the colour-phenomenon produced when
light passes through a transparent body of prismatic shape. For his
assumption of certain 'double images', which are supposed to appear as
a result of the optical displacement of the boundaries between the
Light-filled and the Dark-filled parts of space and the mutual
superposition of which he believed to be responsible for the appearance
of the respective colours, does not solve the problem.1

What hindered Goethe in this field was his limited insight into the
nature of the two distinct kinds of forces which, as we have noted in
the course of our own inquiries, correspond to his concepts of Licht
and Finsternis.

With the aid of this distinction - which we have indeed established
through a consistent application of Goethe's method - we shall now be
able to develop precisely that insight into the coming-into-being of
the spectral colours which Goethe sought.2

*

Dynamically, the process of the formation of the spectrum by light that
passes through a prism divides into two clearly distinguishable parts.
The first consists in the influence which the light undergoes inside
the prism as a result of the latter's special shape, the other, in what
happens outside the prism at the boundary between the Light-space -
influenced by the shape of the prism - and the surrounding Dark-space.
Accordingly, we shall study these two parts of the process separately.

As an aid to distinguishing clearly one process from the other, we
shall suppose the prism experiment to be so arranged that the light
area is larger than the width of the prism, which will then lie
completely within it. We shall further suppose the dimensions of the
whole to be such that the part observable on the screen represents only
a portion of the total light-realm situated between the boundaries of
the prism. The result is that the screen depicts a light-phenomenon in
which there is no trace of colour. For normal eyesight, the phenomenon
on the screen differs in no way from what it would be if no prism
intervened in the path of the light.

These two seemingly identical light-phenomena reveal at once their
inner dynamic difference if we narrow the field of light from either
side by introducing into it an object capable of casting shadow. If
there is no prism we see simply a black shadow move into the illumined
area on the screen, no matter from which side the narrowing comes. If,
however, the light has come through a prism (arranged as described
above) certain colours appear on the boundary between the regions of
light and shadow, and these differ according to the side from which the
darkening is effected. The same part of the light area may thus be made
to display either the colours of the blue pole of the colour-scale, or
those of the yellow pole. This shows that the inner dynamic condition
of the light-realm is altered in some way by being exposed to an
optically resistant medium of prismatic shape. If we are to find the
cause and nature of this alteration we must revert to the prism itself,
and inquire what effect it has on light in the part of space occupied
by it. By proceeding in this way we follow Goethe's model: first, to
keep the two border-phenomena separate, and, secondly, not to ascribe
to the light itself what is in fact due to certain boundary conditions.

In order to realize what happens to the light in passing through the
prism, let us remember that it is a characteristic of an ordinary
light-beam to direct itself through space in a straight line if not
interfered with, and to illuminate equally any cross-section of the
area it fills. Both these features are altered when the light is
exposed to a transparent medium of prismatic shape - that is, to an
optically resistant medium so shaped that the length of the light's
passage through it changes from one side of the beam to the other,
being least at the so-called refracting edge of the prism, greatest at
the base opposite to that. The dimming effect of the medium, therefore,
has a different magnitude at each point of the width of the beam.
Obviously, the ratio between levity and gravity inside such a
light-realm, instead of being constant, varies from one side to the
other. The result is a transverse dynamic impulse which acts from that
part of the light-realm where the weakening influence of the prism is
least towards the part where it is strongest (see long arrow in Plate
C, Fig. i).3 This impulse manifests in the deflection of the light from
its original course. Apart from this, nothing is noticeable in the
light itself when caught by an observation screen, the reason being
that the transverse impulse now immanent in the light-realm has no
effect on the reflecting surface.

The situation changes when the light-realm is narrowed down from one
side or the other - in other words, when an abrupt change of the
field-conditions, that is, a sudden leap from light to dark or from
dark to light, is introduced within this realm. In this case, clearly,
the effect of the transverse field-gradient on such a leap will be
different, depending on the relation between the directions of the two
(see small arrows in Fig. i). Our eyes witness to this difference by
seeing the colours of the blue pole of the colour-scale appear when the
field-gradient is directed towards the leap (a), and the colours of the
yellow pole when the gradient is directed away from it (b).

For our further investigation it is very important to observe how the
colours spread when they emerge at the edge of the shadow-casting
object thus introduced into the light-realm from the one side or the
other. Figs, ii and iii on Plate C show, closely enough for our
purpose, the position of the colour-bearing areas in each case, with
the dotted line indicating the direction which the light would have at
the place of origin of the colours if there were no object interfering
with its free expansion.4 We observe a distinct difference in the
widening out of the two colour-areas on both sides of the original
direction of the light: in each case the angle which the boundary of
the colour-area forms with this direction is smaller on the side of the
colours nearest the light-realm (blue and yellow respectively) than on
the opposite side (violet and red).

Remembering what we have learnt about the dynamic characteristics of
the two colour-poles, we are now in a position to state the following.
When a light-area subject to a lateral gradient is narrowed down, so
that the gradient is directed towards the narrowing object, colours
arise in which the interaction between the two polarically opposite
forms of density is such that positive density makes for lightness, and
negative density for darkness. Whereas, when the border is so situated
that the gradient is directed away from it, the interaction is such
that positive density makes for darkness, and negative density for
lightness. Further, the fact that on both occasions the darkness
element in the colour-band increases in the outward direction tells us
that in this direction there is on the blue-violet side a gradual
decrease in positive, and increase in negative, density, while on the
opposite side we find just the reverse. We note again that both
processes occupy a considerable part of the space originally outside
the boundaries of the light-area - that is, at the violet end the part
towards which the light-beam is deflected, and at the red end the part
from which it turns away.

The visual ray, when penetrating actively into the two colour-phenomena
thus described, receives evidence of a dynamic happening which may be
expressed as follows.

Where the transverse impulse, which is due to the varying degree of
Trübung in the light-realm, is directed towards the latter's edge, the
intermingling of the Dark-ingredient and the Light-ingredient,
contained in that realm, is such that Dark follows Light along its
already existing gradient, thereby diminishing steadily. Hence our
visual ray, meeting conditions quite similar to those occurring when we
look across the light-filled atmosphere into universal space, notifies
us of the presence of the blue-violet colour-pole. If, on the other
hand, the edge is in the wake of the transverse impulse, then a kind of
dynamic vacuum arises in that part of space from which the beam is
deflected, with the effect that the Dark-ingredient, imprinted on the
light within the prism, is drawn into this vacuum by following a kind
of suctional influence. Consequently Dark and Light here come to oppose
one another, and the former, on its way out of the light-area, gains in
relative strength. On this side our visual ray meets conditions
resembling those which occur when we look across the darkening
atmosphere into the sun. Accordingly our optical experience tells us of
the presence of the yellow-red colour-pole.

From our description of the two kinds of dynamic co-ordination of
positive and negative density at the two ends of the spectrum it
follows that the spatial conditions prevailing at one end must be quite
different from those at the other. To see this by way of actual
perception is indeed not difficult. In fact, if we believe that we see
both ends of the spectrum lying, as it were, flatly on the surface of
the observation screen, this is merely an illusion due to our
superficial way of using our eyes. If we gaze with our visual ray
(activated in the manner previously described) into the two sides of
the spectrum, while turning our eyes alternately in one or other
direction, we soon notice that the colours of the yellow-red rise
towards the eye so as to give the impression of protruding almost
corporeally from the surface of the screen. We feel: Density obtains
here in a state of fiery radiation. When turning to the other side we
feel our visual ray, instead of being as before caught up in the
colours, passing freely across the colours as if carried by them into
the infinite. On the blue-violet side, space itself seems to fluoresce
mysteriously5. Following Goethe's conception of the physical-moral
effect of colours, we may describe the experience received thus from
the two poles of the spectrum by saying that an 'other-worldly'
character belongs to the colours of the blue-violet pole; an 'earthly'
character to those of the yellow-red; while that of green, which
appears when both sides are made to overlap, witnesses to its mediating
nature between the two.

*

In our endeavour to view the fundamental experiment of Newtonian optics
with the eyes of Goethe we have been led from the wide expanse of the
earth's sunlit periphery into the confines of the darkened experimental
chamber. With the aid of the results gained from studying the
artificially produced spectrum phenomenon, we shall now return to our
original field of observation in order to study the same phenomenon in
nature. There it meets us in the form of the rainbow, which we shall
now be able to read as a chapter in the great book of nature.

From what we have learnt already we can say at once that the rainbow
must represent some sort of border-phenomenon, thus pointing to the
existence of a boundary between two space-regions of differing
illumination. Our question therefore must be: what is the light-image
whose boundary comes to coloured manifestation in the phenomenon of the
rainbow? There can be no doubt that the image is that of the sun-disk,
shining in the sky. When we see a rainbow, what we are really looking
at is the edge of an image of the sun-disk, caught and reflected, owing
to favourable conditions, in the atmosphere. (Observe in this respect
that the whole area inside the rainbow is always considerably brighter
than the space outside.)

Once we realize this to be the true nature of the rainbow, the peculiar
order of its colours begins to speak a significant language. The
essential point to observe is that the blue-violet part of the spectrum
lies on the inner side of the rainbow-arch - the side immediately
adjoining the outer rim of the sun-image - while the yellow-red part
lies on the outer side of the arch - the side turned away from the
sun-image. What can we learn from this about the distribution of
positive and negative density inside and outside the realm occupied by
the sun-disk itself in the cosmos?

We remember that along the gradient from blue to violet, negative
density (Light) increases and positive density (Dark) decreases, while
from yellow to red it is just the reverse-positive density increases
and negative density decreases. The rainbow therefore indicates a
steady increase of Dark towards the outer rim, and of Light towards the
inner. Evidently, what the optical image of the sun in the atmosphere
thus reveals concerning the gradation of the ratio between Light and
Dark in the radial direction, is an attribute of the entire light-realm
which stretches from the sun to that image. And again, the attribute of
this realm is but an effect of the dynamic relation between the sun
itself and the surrounding cosmic space.

The rainbow thus becomes a script to us in which we read the remarkable
fact that the region occupied by the sun in the cosmos is a region of
negative density, in relation to which the region surrounding the sun
is one of positive density. Far from being an accumulation of
ponderable matter in a state of extremely high temperature, as science
supposes, the sun represents the very opposite of ponderability. (It
would be beyond the scope of this book to show how in the light of this
fact one learns to re-read the various solar phenomena known to
science.)

Once we realize this, our judgment of all that our terrestrially
devised optical instruments, such as the telescope and spectroscope,
tell us about the nature of the sun and its surroundings, will change
accordingly. For it becomes clear that for the interpretation of solar
phenomena shown by these instruments we cannot properly use concepts
derived from observations within the earth's realm of positive density.

To compare adequately solar and terrestrial phenomena, we must keep in
mind that they are in every respect polar opposites. For instance, the
fact that the spectroscope reveals phenomena in the sun's light which
are strikingly similar to others occurring when earthly matter is first
caused to emit light - that is, brought near the upper border of its
ponderable existence - and then studied spectroscopically, should not
impose on us the illusion that the sun consists of matter in this same
condition. On the contrary, the similarity should tell us that
imponderable substance, while on its way between sun and earth to
ponderable existence, assumes, at the point of transition, aspects
exactly like those revealed by ponderable substance at the
corresponding point in its upward transformation.

What we observe, when we study the sun through a spectroscope, is not
the sun itself, but the conditions obtaining in this border-region,
where imponderable substance enters the earth-realm.

The rainbow, directly we learn to see it as the border-phenomenon that
it is, tells us something of itself which revives in modern form a
conception held generally in former ages, when it was seen as a
mediator between the cosmic-divine and the earthly-human worlds. Thus
the Bible speaks of it as a symbol of God's reconciliation with the
human race after the great Flood. Thus the Greeks beheld it when they
saw it as the bridge of Iris, messenger of the Gods; and similarly the
Germanic mythology speaks of it as the pathway along which the souls of
the fallen warriors draw near to Valhalla. By recovering this old
conception in a new and scientifically grounded form we are enabled
also to rectify the misunderstanding from which the ancient
bridge-conception of the rainbow has suffered in later days, when
tradition had begun to replace direct insight into the truth.

When with the rise of man's onlooker-relation to the world of the
senses, the rainbow could appear to him only as a form flattened
against the sky, people began to think that the ancient picture of it
as a bridge had been derived from its likeness to the latter's arched
form. Representations of the rainbow from these times indeed show
supersensible beings, such as the souls of the dead, moving upwards and
downwards along the two halves of the arch. It is not in this abstract
way that ancient man formed his cosmic imagery. What was seen going on
between the upper and nether worlds when a rainbow appeared in the
heights of the atmosphere was no traffic over the arch, but an
interplay across the rainbow between the realm of levity, glimmering
down in the rainbow's violet border, and the realm of gravity glowing
up from the red. And this is how we have now learnt to see it again.

*

At one point in our optical studies (page 259) we referred to some
words of Ruskin in which he deplored the influence exerted on the
soul-life of modern man by the world-conception of science. He
illustrated this by showing how much less inspiration a man trained in
the science of optics receives from the sight of a rainbow than does a
'simple peasant'. One lesson of our studies is that training in optics,
if it proceeds on Goethean lines, has no such detrimental effect. There
is, however, a further problem, outside Ruskin's scope, which we are
now able to approach in the same healthy way.

Ruskin distinguishes between three possible stages in man's relation to
the world of the senses. The first stage he calls that of 'inactive
reverie'; the second - in a certain respect more advanced - that of
'useful thought', the stage of scientifically awakened man to whom all
things disintegrate into countable and nothing but countable parts.
Beyond this, Ruskin conceives of a third, still higher stage, in which
man becomes capable of raising himself through 'higher contemplation'
into an artistic-ethical relation to the content of the sense-world.
Now, in the way Ruskin represents the second and third stages they seem
to be exclusive of one another. That was as far as he could go, in his
own day. Natural observation along Goethean lines leads to a form of
higher contemplation which unites the second and third stages by
nourishing man's ethical being and at the same time furnishing him with
useful knowledge-knowledge, that is, which enables him to improve the
conditions of the human race on the earth. The following is an example
of the practical possibilities that open up in the field we are
discussing if we apply the knowledge gained through our new approach to
the forces working in nature.

We shall speak here of a task of experimental research which was
mentioned by Rudolf Steiner in connexion with the renewal of natural
science.

Rudolf Steiner felt the need for pioneers who, by advancing along the
paths opened up by Goethe, would press forward into the realm of
undiscovered phenomena on the upper border of nature, and this prompted
him to give to those who were ready to listen various pointers towards
new ways of experimental research. In so far as practical results have
already been reached along these lines, they lie in the fields of
biology and physiology (and of chemistry, in a certain respect) rather
than in that of physics. Now, among the indications given in this
latter field, and not yet worked out, there is one which deals with a
way, unknown to-day, of influencing the spectrum by the magnet.

The possibility of a magnetic influence on the spectrum is, in itself,
not unknown to modern physics. It was the Dutchman, Zeeman, who first
observed a change in the appearance of certain spectral lines as a
result of light passing through a magnetic field. This discovery,
however, is in two respects typical of modern science. The Zeeman
effect consists in the splitting up of certain spectral lines into
other lines - hence, of a breaking up of a whole into parts. And by
seemingly providing a decisive confirmation of contemporary views
concerning the electromagnetic nature of light, Zeeman's discovery has
formed one of the milestones in the progress of modern physical thought
- with the usual result that an enlargement of man's knowledge of the
behaviour of natural forces has served to entangle his conception of
nature still more deeply in illusion.

Apart from the fact that our own way of combining observation and
thought guards us against drawing theoretical conclusions from Zeeman's
discovery, Rudolf Steiner's indication opens up the prospect of
achieving quite practical results, opposite in character to those of
the Zeeman effect. For in contradistinction to the use of a magnetic
field for splitting the spectrum, Rudolf Steiner has made us aware of
the possibility of uniting into a higher synthesis parts of the
spectrum which normally appear in separated form. His indication points
to nothing less than a leading over of the optically produced spectrum
from its usual linear form, with two boundaries on either side, into a
closed circular form, and of doing this by an adequate application - as
yet undiscovered - of magnetic force. Further, according to his
statement, the point where the two ends of the spectrum meet will prove
to be a fountain-head of certain higher natural forces which otherwise
are not directly accessible.

In order to understand how this is possible, we must remember that in
two respects the spectrum is not a complete phenomenon. There is, to
begin with, the fact that the colour-band visible on the observation
screen is only apparently confined to the surface of the screen. For,
as we have seen, because of the differing co-ordination of levity and
gravity at the two ends of the spectrum, the conditions of space
prevailing at each are polarically opposite. Negative space opens up
spherically behind the blue-violet colours on one side, while positive
space, filled by the radially shining yellow-red colours, arises on the
other. So we see that what we found earlier for the two poles of
magnetism and electricity holds good also for the spectrum. That is,
the two processes bringing about the relevant phenomena are not
confined to the part of space which these phenomena seem to occupy; for
the whole positive and negative realms of the universe share in them.
Hence the spectrum, though apparently bounded at its two ends, proves
by its very nature to be part of a greater whole.

Once before we were led to recognize - though from a different aspect -
that the spectrum is a phenomenon which, when rightly viewed, calls for
a certain completion. In following Goethe's initial observations we
realized that the known spectrum, extending from red via green to
violet, has a counterpart extending from violet via peach-blossom to
red. The reader may have wondered why we never returned to this other
spectrum, in spite of the role it played in making Goethe aware of
Newton's error. The reason was that in order to gain the understanding
we needed of the spectrum, we had to observe the two border-phenomena
independently - that is, without regard to their relative positions.
Moreover, with ordinary optical means it is possible to produce only
one type of spectrum at a time, so that each is left in need of being
complemented by the other. In order to have both together in finite
space, as part of one and the same phenomenon, space itself must be
dynamically transformed in such a way that the continuation of the
finite spectral band running through infinity enters into the finite as
well.

Our understanding of magnetism as a specific representation of the
polarity of the second order enables us to comprehend, at least in
principle, how magnetism might influence - not light itself, as
present-day physics erroneously believes - but the secondary polarity
of the spectral colours formed out of the primary polarity Light and
Dark. To see this in all necessary detail is a task of the future,
beyond the scope of this book. We have here to continue our account of
Rudolf Steiner's statement by communicating what he indicated
concerning the particular nature of the new source of force which would
appear in the normally infinite part of the spectrum, if this were
brought into the region of the finite.

In order to understand the significance of this indication we must turn
our attention to parts of the ordinary spectrum, well known in
themselves, which we have purposely left out of our study so far. These
are the regions of the ultra-violet and the infra-red, invisible in
themselves, but forming part of the spectrum as a whole. The
ultraviolet manifests through chemical effects, the infra-red through
thermal effects. We have left them out of our considerations because
these regions of the spectrum differ from the visible part not only
quantitatively, as present-day science believes, but qualitatively
also, and in a fundamental way. We must regard them as dynamic realms
of particularly extreme spherical and radial activities. As such they
represent metamorphoses, in the Goethean sense, of the levity-gravity
interaction represented by the optically visible part of the spectrum.
In this way the spectrum discloses a threefold differentiation of that
region of force, which up to now we have called simply levity, into
activities producing chemical, optical and thermal effects.

So far physical investigation is able to lead us, but no further. If,
however, we let nature herself speak to us, while holding this
differentiated concept of levity in mind, she tells us that beyond the
three metamorphoses envisaged so far, there must be a fourth.

Let us remember that it was certain phenomena of life which first made
us aware of the existence of a realm of forces with the attributes of
anti-gravity, and that these forces revealed themselves first as
creators of form. Now it is obvious that warmth, light and chemical
energy, though they all play an essential part in living organisms,
could never by themselves bring about that 'catching from chaos,
carbon, water, lime and what not and fastening them into a given form'
which Ruskin describes as the activity of the spirit in the plant. In
order to be in this sense an instrument of the spirit active in nature,
levity must be capable of yet another metamorphosis into an activity
which controls the other three, so that through their action,
definitely shaped organic structures may come into being.

The reason why this fourth and highest metamorphosis of Light does not
appear in the ordinary spectrum is because it is of too spiritual a
quality to be caught by the optical apparatus. In nature herself a
creative life-process requires always the presence of a germ already
imbued with life. And so, in order to call this fourth metamorphosis of
Light into the spectrum, stronger means are needed than the mere
optical transformation of light-filled spaces. This stronger agent,
according to Rudolf Steiner, is magnetism. With the aid of this it will
be possible to organize together round a common spatial centre that
part of the activity of levity which escapes the optical instrument and
thus remains cosmic, and that part which appears by itself in
terrestrial space.

Once this is practically carried out, we may expect a complete
colour-circle to appear as already divined by Goethe. The full circle
consists of twelve discernible colours, with the Goethean peach-blossom
diametrically opposite the green. It is in this region of the
peach-blossom that - again according to Rudolf Steiner - we shall find
a source of actively working life-forces, springing from the fourth
metamorphosis of levity. Such is the prospect for research work guided
on the new lines.

POSTSCRIPT

The fact of our having disclosed here one of Rudolf Steiner's
indications concerning as yet undetected possibilities of scientific
research, makes it necessary to deal with an objection which may be
raised, particularly by some readers who already know this indication
through their own relation to Rudolf Steiner's work. They may object to
a discussion of the subject in a publication such as this, feeling it
dangerous to hand over to the world information which in the economic
battles of to-day might be used in a sense contrary to the social-moral
aims to which the work of Rudolf Steiner was dedicated.

In reply it may be said that all we have gone through in this book has
shown that concrete knowledge of the world cannot be gained without a
certain ethical effort by the seeker. Therefore, anyone who receives
such knowledge with a passive attitude of soul will find it
meaningless, and will be quite unable to turn it to practical account.
We may therefore rest assured that the solution of the problem related
here, as of any other experimental task set by Rudolf Steiner, will
contain in itself a guarantee that no use will be made of it
detrimental to the true progress of mankind.

On the other hand, the present world-situation, which to so high a
degree is determined by the vast liberation of the sub-physical forces
of the earth, makes one feel it is essential not to close the
considerations of the fields of knowledge dealt with in these chapters,
without a hint at the practical possibilities which arise from a
continuation of Goethe's strivings in this field.

1 See, in Rudolf Steiner's edition of Goethe's scientific writings, his
footnote to Goethe's criticism of Nuguet's theory of the spectrum in
the historical part of the Farbenlehre (Vol. IV, p. 248, in Kürschner's
edition).

2 It is obvious that the reader who wishes to appreciate fully the
significance of the observations described in the following paragraphs,
must, as in previous cases, carry out these observations himself.

3 In this and the two following diagrams the light-realm has been
represented as being less wide than the space obtained by the prism. To
avoid unnecessary complexity the colours which, in such a case,
actually appear at the border of the light-realm where it emerges from
the prism are not shown in any of the diagrams.

4 This direction can be established with sufficient exactitude by
holding a very thin object right in front of the prism and marking with
a stretched thread the direction which leads from the object to its
shadow on the screen. The colour-producing edge must then be introduced
from either side so that it just touches the thread.

5 The difference in character of the various parts of the spectrum, as
described above, comes out particularly impressively if for capturing
the colour-phenomenon one uses instead of a flat white surface, a clear
crystal of not too small size, or else a cluster of crystals - moving
it slowly along the coloured band from one end to the other. (I am
indebted to Fr. Julius, teacher of Natural Science at the Free School
in The Hague, for this suggestion.)


