CHAPTER XX

Pro Anima

Thy functions are ethereal,
As if within thee dwelt a glancing mind,
Organ of vision! And a Spirit aëreal
Informs the cell of Hearing, dark and blind.
W. WORDSWORTH

(a) THE WELL-SPRINGS OF NATURE'S DEEDS AND SUFFERINGS

As our observations have shown, gravity and levity not only exist side
by side as a primary polarity; the manifold interaction of their fields
gives rise to all sorts of secondary polarities. Obviously, this
interaction must be brought about by a further kind of force to which
gravity and levity are subordinate.

In what follows we shall try, so far as is possible within the scope of
this book, to throw light on the nature of this force. Since the direct
experience of the dynamic realm constituted by it is based on faculties
of the mind other than those needed for the Imaginative perception of
the etheric realm, we shall have to examine also the nature and origin
of these faculties. This will lead us again to the study of one of
man's higher senses, this time his sense of hearing, with the aim of
finding the spiritual function that is hidden in it. But our order of
procedure will have to differ from the one followed in the last
chapter, because it will be necessary first to make ourselves
acquainted with the nature of the new force and then to turn to an
examination of the sense-activity concerned.

*

Let our first object of observation be man himself in so far as he
illustrates a polarity of the second order.

When studying man's nature with the idea of understanding the genesis
of his onlooker-consciousness, it will be remembered, we had to examine
the ordering of his consciousness into waking, dreaming and sleeping in
the different members of his organism. We recognized three different
organic systems, the sensory-nerve system, the rhythmic system and the
metabolic-limb system, as the bodily foundation of three different soul
activities. These are the thought-forming activity which belongs to
waking consciousness; the feeling activity which belongs to dream
consciousness; and the willing activity which belongs to sleep
consciousness. We then saw in these three systems representatives of
the three alchemical functions - 'sulphurous' in the metabolic,
'saline' in the nervous, 'mercurial' in the mediating rhythmic system.

Regarded thus, man's nature reveals itself as being endowed with a
physical organization, and an etheric organization, which are brought
into different relationships by being acted upon by a third
organization consisting of forces of the kind here to be studied. At
his lower pole these forces co-ordinate the ether and physical
organizations in a manner corresponding to the function of the
'sulphur'-pole of the alchemical triad. Here, therefore, the
warmth-ether takes the lead and acts in such a way that the higher
kinds of ether are able to come to expression in material processes of
the body. At the upper pole corresponding forces co-ordinate the
physical and ether organizations in a way characteristic of the
'salt'-pole. This gives the lead to the life-ether, so that the
physical organism provides the foundation for the activity of the
ether-forces without, however, being actually penetrated by them (at
least after completion of the embryonic and first post-embryonic
development). As a result, consciousness lights up in this part of the
body. The rhythmic sphere, being the 'mercurial' middle, is
distinguished by an alternation of the two conditions described. With
each diastole it becomes more akin to the pole below, and with each
systole more akin to the pole above. Here, therefore, the lighting up
of consciousness is only partial.

By means of these observations we realize that the third type of force,
in so far as it is active in man, has the capacity, by co-ordinating
the physical and etheric parts of the organism in one way or another,
to promote happenings either of a more corporeal or a more psychical
nature - namely, motion at one pole, sensation at the other, and
feeling in the middle between them.1 Remembering Goethe's formula,
'colours are deeds and sufferings of light', we realize how deeply true
the concepts were to which he was led by his way of developing
observation and thought.

What we have now brought to our awareness by studying man, holds good
in some sense also for the animal. The animal, too, is polarized into
motion and sensation. (What makes the animal differ from man need not
concern us here, for it belongs to a dynamic realm other than the one
we are now studying. This other realm will come under consideration in
the next chapter.) Quite a different picture arises when we turn to the
plant. The plant, too, is characterized by a threefold structure, root,
stem with leaves, and florescence, which in their way represent the
three alchemical functions. Consequently, there is also motion in the
plant, although this is confined to internal movements leading to
growth and formation. And at the opposite pole there is sensation,
though again very different from the sensation experienced by higher
living beings. What we mean here by 'sensation' can be best expressed
by quoting the following passage from Ruskin's The Queen of the Air, in
which the dual activity of the dynamic which we seek to understand is
brought out particularly clearly.

In describing the forming of blossom in the plant as the climax of the
'spirit' active in it, Ruskin says: 'Its (the plant's) form becomes
invested with aspects that are chiefly delightful to our own human
passions; namely, first, with the loveliest outlines of shape and,
secondly, with the most brilliant phases of the primary colours, blue,
yellow, red or white, the unison of all; and to make it more strange,
this time of peculiar and perfect glory is associated with relations of
the plants or blossoms to each other, correspondent to the joy of love
in human creatures and having the same object in the continuance of the
race.'2

If we wish to understand why the same dynamic action working on the
physical and etheric organisms of the plant, on the one hand, and of
man and the animal, on the other, brings about effects so different, we
must turn to the realm whence this action originates in both cases. For
the animal and for man this realm is situated within their organisms
because in addition to their individual physical and etheric
organizations they are endowed also with an individual organization of
the higher kind. Not so with the plant. For the rhythms of its growth,
the successive formation of its various organs, the production of its
colours, etc., the plant depends on outer conditions.

What strikes us first in this respect is the plant's dependence on the
succession of the seasons. These in turn are an outcome of the changing
mutual positions of earth and sun. That which forms part of the
individual organism in higher living beings is located in the cosmic
surroundings of the plant. In fact, it is our planetary system which
provides the forces that stir the etheric and physical forces of the
earth to their various interactions, thus bringing about all the
manifold secondary polarities.

*

Before we embark on a description of further phenomena which testify to
the cosmic nature of the forces with which we are here concerned, it
will be well (following a principle applied before) to establish the
historical antecedents of the conception of the universe we are about
to develop.

We realize that the type of force with which we are here seeking to
become familiar is the one responsible for the existence of what we
commonly call 'soul'. The creation of a body-bound soul, however, is
only one particular form of the activity of these forces. Another is
the one which we have just seen manifest in the plant. In yet another
way the same forces function as movers and stirrers of the
macro-telluric processes of the earth, and beyond this of the
happenings in the body of our planetary system, including the movements
of the various planets.

This is an aspect which was by no means unfamiliar to ancient man. It
was naturally lost when the onlooker-consciousness awoke. In this
respect it is of historical significance that the same man, G. A.
Borelli (1608-79), a member of the Florentine Academy, who was the
first to inquire into the movements of the animal and human body from a
purely mechanical point of view, made the first attempt to deduce the
planetary movements from a purely physical cause.3 Through this fact an
impulse comes to expression which we may term Contra Animam, and
against which we have to put our Pro Anima, in much the same way that
we put our Pro Levitate against the Contra Levitatem call of the
Florentine Academicians.

*

It will help our further descriptions if we introduce at this point the
name which Rudolf Steiner adopted for the type of forces we are
concerned with here. In view of the fact that their origin lies in the
extra-terrestrial realm of the universe, he called them 'astral'
forces, thereby giving back to this term, also, its true and original
meaning. It is under this name that we shall speak of them henceforth.
To make ourselves more familiar with the character of the astral
forces, it will be well to observe them first of all in their
macrotelluric form of activity.

There is, as already mentioned, the rhythmic occurrence of the seasons
in connexion with the varying relative positions of earth and sun.
Alongside this we may put the rhythm of the tides, coincident with the
phases of the moon. Just as the solar rhythm manifests in an
alternating rise and fall of the saps in the plants, so also does the
lunar rhythm.4 (Note how this fact actually vitiates the usual
explanation that the tidal rhythm of the sea is caused by a
gravitational pull exerted by the moon's body on the oceanic water.) In
neither instance is the change of position of the relevant cosmic body
- in our examples that of the sun or moon in relation to the earth -
the 'cause' of the corresponding rhythmic events on the earth. Together
with all other rhythmic events of equal periodicity, it is itself the
effect of the activity of a force-sphere constituting the cosmic realm
to which the relevant planetary body belongs.

From this statement three major questions arise, which need to be
answered before we can carry on our description of the astral forces
themselves:

Firstly, by the way we have spoken of the varying relations of the sun
and moon to the earth, seeing in them the effects of certain astral
activities, we have treated them as if they were of like nature,
namely, resulting from a movement of the relevant heavenly body round
the earth. According to the Copernican conception, however, only the
moon rotates round the earth, whereas the apparent yearly progression
of the sun is actually caused by the earth's motion round the sun. This
raises the question of how far the Copernican, heliocentric aspect is
valid in a science which strives to embrace the astral realm of the
universe in its inquiries.

Secondly, what roles do the other members of our planetary system play
as compared with those of the sun and the moon?

Thirdly, if it is true that the essential solar and lunar effects - and
presumably the effects of the other planets - on the earth do not
spring from physical influence exerted by the visible bodies of the
planets concerned, but from certain astral force-fields of which these
bodies themselves form part, what is the significance of such a body
within the planet's dynamic whole?

Starting with the answer to the first question, we shall quote the
following passage from a lecture on theoretical physics given by
Professor Planck in 1909 at the Columbia University, New York:

'Only the hypothesis of the general value of the principle of
Relativity in mechanics could admit the Copernican system into physics,
since this principle guarantees the independence of all processes on
the earth from the progressive motion of the earth. For, if we had to
make allowance for this motion, then I should, for instance, have to
reckon with the fact that the piece of chalk in my hand possesses the
enormous kinetic energy corresponding to a velocity of about 30
km/sec.'

The implications for us of these remarks by an eminent physicist can be
expressed as follows:

In a science which knows how to deal with movement as an event of
absolute dynamic reality, the Copernican aspect loses its significance
as the only valid aspect of our cosmic system. For its application as a
means of describing the dynamic happenings within this system
presupposes the acceptance of Einstein's relativistic conception of
motion. Indeed, for the building up of a picture of the dynamic
structure of our system, the Copernican view-point is inadequate.

This statement must not be taken to deny all justification to the
heliocentric view-point. There is, after all, the fact that the orbits
which the heavenly bodies appear to follow when viewed in this way,
assume a particular geometrical character which cannot be accidental.
And more than that, when the heliocentric aspect is seen in its true
setting, it forms (as will be shown later) an extremely revealing part
of the script which tells us of the nature of the astral forces. All
that is required is that the heliocentric picture be taken for what it
is, namely, a purely kinematic aspect of the true dynamic ordering of
our cosmic system, which in itself calls for quite other means of
conceptual representation.

From the point of view of the astral order of the universe, the earth
appears in the centre of a number of force-fields which penetrate each
other and in their peripheral region extend beyond one another in
accordance with the respective orbits of the various planetary bodies.
How many force-fields there are, and what is the respective character
of each, will become clear from the following consideration, which will
also provide the answer to the second of our three questions.

As the originator of the secondary polarities in earthly nature the
astral realm must undoubtedly itself be structured polarically, one
part of it forming the cause of all the happenings by which levity is
brought into interaction with gravity, the other of all the happenings
by which gravity is brought into interaction with levity. There must be
a further part which is responsible for the establishment of the
'mercurial' mean between the two poles of the secondary polarity. This
leads us to a threefold aspect of the astral realm.

Closer inspection reveals a repetition of this threefold order within
each of the two polar regions. In Chapter XII we learnt to distinguish
the material happenings at the two poles of the secondary polarity by
observing their appearance in the plant as 'sublimation', on the one
hand, and 'assimilation' on the other. Of the former process, by which
matter is carried from its gravity-bound to its gravity-free condition,
we know that it takes place in three stages, of which the first implies
the lifting of matter from the solid to the liquid condition, the
second from the liquid to the aeriform condition, and the third to the
condition of pure heat. There are three corresponding stages by which
ether becomes susceptible to gravity. It is in their nature that they
are not in the same degree manifest as are their polar opposites.
Still, properly guided observation is able to detect them and enables
us to describe them as follows. At the first stage, ether, which in
itself has a purely peripheral orientation, becomes linked to some
all-relating point; at the second stage, the various ether-activities,
already point-related, are brought into some characteristic
interrelationship so as to become the cause of a particular formative
action in the material realm; at the third stage, the etheric aggregate
thus organized receives the impulse to link itself with some particular
portion of ponderable matter.

In these six forms of astral activity, observation, if guided by modern
spiritual science, recognizes the characteristics of the six planetary
spheres, known as 'Moon', 'Mercury', 'Venus', on the one hand,
'Saturn', 'Jupiter', 'Mars', on the other. In the same way the dynamic
sphere of the 'Sun' is found to provide the astral activity which
mediates between the two groups of planetary spheres.5 The following
observations may help us to become familiar with the different modes of
activity of the force-spheres.

Let us start with the astral forces corresponding to the three cosmic
bodies nearest to the earth - Moon, Mercury, Venus. Their activity can
be discerned, for example, by watching the successive stages of plant
development - the formation of the sap-bearing parts; the
flower-substance already partly transformed into aeriform condition;
finally the propagating processes which belong essentially to the
sphere of activity of the warmth-ether.6 In the human organism we find
the same sequence in the step-by-step transformation of nutriment right
up to the moment when earthly form passes into chaos, as we learnt
previously. The so-called enzyme action, ascribed by physiology to the
various digestive juices, is in reality the product of an activity of
the lower part of man's astral organization, for which the relevant
juices exercise the function of physical 'carriers'. In the field of
macrotelluric phenomena, the metamorphosis of the atmospheric moisture
extending beyond the different cloud-stages up to the stage of pure
warmth is an example of the activity of the same forces.

Within all three-stage transitions of this kind, the astral forces
connected with the Moon preponderate during the first stage, those
connected with Mercury during the second, those connected with Venus
during the third. We have already come across some examples of the
outstanding share taken by the Moon in the events of the earth's watery
sphere. To these phenomena, which show by their rhythm their connexion
with the Moon, we may add the fertility rhythm in the female human
organism which coincides, not in phase but in duration, with the rhythm
set by the Moon's course in the heavens. If we consider that the
formation of a new human body in the womb needs the play of formative
forces from out of the whole world environment, and that for this
purpose matter must be brought into a receptive condition for these
forces, then we can better understand the preparatory part played by
the Moon-forces. In order, however, that the substance of the female
germ should reach that condition of chaos suitable for embryonic
development, there is still necessary the influence of the supra-lunar
astral forces. Entry for these is provided by the union of the
germ-cell with the male sperm-cell.7

As the three sub-solar planetary spheres are responsible for events of
a 'sulphurous' (radial) character, so are the three supra-solar spheres
responsible for those of a 'saline' (spherical) character. For example,
we meet with Saturn-activity in everything which radiates from the
human head and brings about the hardening both of the head itself and
of the entire skeleton. Observation has shown that, even if the human
being, as usually happens, stops growing in the early twenties, so that
the skeleton undergoes no further lengthening, it nevertheless reaches
its final shape and its final hardening only between the twenty-eighth
and thirtieth years. This is the time in man's life when Saturn returns
for the first time to the position in which it stood relatively to the
earth at his birth, or, more correctly, at his conception.

If the activity of the Saturn-force is most clearly manifest in the
formation of the hard skull, that of Jupiter, the planet of 'Wisdom',
is shown in the formation of the complicated structure of the brain,
which enables it to co-ordinate the bodily and psychic functions of the
entire man. In the realm of physical nature, man's brain is indeed the
most perfect example of cosmic Intelligence at work in a manner
resembling that activity of human intelligence which one usually
understands by 'organizing'.

In order that Form should come about, the forces of Saturn are
required; for the formative process to take place in Wisdom-filled
order, Jupiter's forces are necessary. If form and order are to become
manifest in the realm of earthly substance, both require the assistance
of Mars. We can best form an idea of the part which Mars contributes to
the coming into being of the world of Form in nature if we observe what
takes place when we make use of speech as a medium for expressing our
thoughts. In order to be able to shape a thought we have to participate
in the formative force of Saturn. We depend upon Jupiter to bring about
logical connexion between the single thoughts. To announce them to the
world, we need the motive force of Mars, which enables us so to set
external matter in motion that it becomes a carrier and relayer of our
thoughts. (We here touch upon the field of the acoustic movements of
the air which will occupy us more closely later on.)

Many examples of the activity of the force-spheres represented by the
three exterior planets are to be found also in nature external to man.
From the realm of plant life we may take the woody and bark-like
formation of the trees as representing the operation of Saturn-forces.
Similarly, all that goes on in the organizing of the single leaf, and
particularly in the organization of the countless separate leaves which
make up the foliage of a tree into a unified whole, the characteristic
crown of a tree, is an example of the work of Jupiter. Both activities
are assisted by the force of Mars, which directs them from the cosmic
periphery toward the single physical object.

Between the two groups of astral force operating in this manner, the
Sun acts as a mediating element through its double function of
supporting the activity of the three lower planets by means of its heat
and of conveying to the earth, through its light, the forces of the
three higher planets. In the human microcosm the Sun-forces accomplish
a corresponding task by means of the influences which radiate from the
heart through the body along the paths taken by the blood.

*

In what follows we shall point to a group of phenomena which show the
astral interconnexion between earth and universe; we owe our knowledge
of them to Rudolf Steiner. It is due to him, also, that experimental
research into the relevant facts became possible. They concern the
reflexion of the various planetary movements, observable in the sky, in
the behaviour of certain mineral substances of the earth.

In connexion with our discussion of electricity (Chapter XIII) we spoke
of the special function of the metals as bearers of the 'mercurial'
quality (in the alchemical sense of the term). As one of the
characteristics which reveal this function we mentioned the peculiar
capacity of metals to behave as 'solid fluids'. This exceptional place
among the mineral substances of the earth, the metals owe to their
close association with the extra-terrestrial astral forces of the
world. In this field, too, modern spiritual investigation has recovered
something which was known to people of old - that among the metals
there are seven which have a distinctive character, for each stands in
a special relation to one of the seven planets (that is, the planetary
force-spheres) of our cosmic system. This is shown in the following
table:

Saturn	Lead
Jupiter	Tin
Mars	Iron
Sun	Gold
Venus	Copper
Mercury	Quicksilver
Moon	Silver

As compared with these seven, the other metals are products of
combinations of various planetary forces. A comparison of the role of
Saturn as the outermost planet of our cosmic system with the role
played by its metal, lead, as a final product of radioactive
disintegration, leads one to conceive of the radioactive sphere of the
earth as being related especially to the planets outside the orbit of
Saturn, namely, Uranus, Neptune, Pluto.

Thanks to the work of L. Kolisko who, in following Rudolf Steiner's
indications, observed for many years the behaviour of the seven metals
singly and in combination by submitting their salts to certain
capillary effects, we know to-day that the" earth bears in her womb
substances whose dynamic condition follows exactly the events in the
planetary realm of the universe.8

*

The picture of the universe which has thus arisen before our mind's eye
is a startling one only so long as we keep comparing it with its
heliocentric predecessor. How wrong it would be to regard it as
something inconceivable for the modern mind, is shown by the fact that
the modern physiologist has already been driven to form quite a similar
picture of the human organism, as far as it concerns glandular action
in this organism. His observations have taught him to distinguish
between the gland as a spatially limited physical organ and the gland
as a functional sphere, and to conceive of the latter as the essential
gland. Seen thus, 'the spatial and temporal dimensions of each gland
are equal to those of the entire organism' (A. Carrel). In this way we
come to see the human organism as a realm of interpenetrating spheres
of distinctive physiological activities. Each of these activities is
anchored somewhere in the physical body by the anatomically discernible
gland-body, and the latter's relationship to the functional sphere is
such that a gland's 'physiological individuality is far more
comprehensive than its anatomical individuality'.

We need only translate this statement into its macrocosmic counterpart
to obtain another statement which expresses fittingly the relationship
of the visible body of a planet to the functional (astral) sphere
indicated by its orbit. Then we shall say that 'a planet's astral
individuality is far more comprehensive than its astronomical
individuality'.

It should be observed that the step we have here taken, by using a
conception obtained through microcosmic observation to help us to find
the answer to a question put to us by the macrocosm, complies with one
of the fundamentals of our method of research, namely, to allow 'the
heavens to explain the earth, and the earth the heavens' (R. St.).

* *
 *
(b) HEARING AS DEED

In the introductory part of the last chapter we said that we have the
right to employ results of investigation carried out by higher
faculties of spiritual perception without contradicting our principle
of seeking to understand the phenomenal world by reading it, provided
our doing so helps to enhance our own reading activity, and provided it
can be shown that the acquisition of the higher faculties of perception
is a direct continuation of the training we have to apply to our mind
and senses to make them capable of such reading. As regards the forces
of astral character, the first of these two conditions has been
fulfilled by the observations we have already worked through in this
chapter. We have still to show that the second condition is equally
fulfilled.

The faculty of the mind which permits direct investigation of the
astral realm was called (spiritual) Inspiration by Rudolf Steiner, who
thereby restored to this term, also, its proper meaning. We have
already indicated that this faculty resides in the sense of hearing in
the same way that the faculty of Imagination - as we have found -
resides in the sense of seeing. In order to understand why it is this
particular sense which comes into consideration here, we have to
consider that the phenomena through which the astral world manifests
most directly are all of a rhythmic nature. Now, the sense through
which our soul penetrates with direct experience into some outer
rhythmic activity is the sense of hearing, our aural perceptions being
conveyed by certain rhythmic movements of the air. In what follows we
shall see how the study of both the outer acoustic phenomena and our
own psycho-physical make-up in the region of the acoustic sense, leads
to an understanding of the nature of Inspiration and of how it can be
trained.

*

Among all our sense-perceptions, sound is unique in making itself
perceptible in two quite different ways - via the ear as a direct sense
experience and via the eye (potentially also via the senses of touch
and movement) in the form of certain mechanical movements, such as
those of a string or a tuning fork. Hence the world-spectator, as soon
as he began to investigate acoustic phenomena scientifically, found
himself in a unique position. In all other fields of perception, with
the exception of the purely mechanical processes, the transition to
non-stereoscopic colourless observation had the effect that the
world-content of the naive consciousness simply ceased to exist,
leaving the ensuing hiatus to be filled in by a pattern of imagined
kinematic happenings - for example, colour by 'ether'-vibrations, heat
by molecular movements. Not so in the sphere of acoustics. For here a
part of the entire event, on account of its genuine kinetic character,
remains a content of actual observation.

In consequence, the science of acoustics became for the scientific mind
of man a model of the required division between the 'subjective' (that
is, for scientific considerations non-existent) and the 'objective'
(that is, the purely kinematic) part of observation. The field of aural
perception seemed to justify the procedure of collecting a mass of
phenomena, stripped of all that is experienced by man's soul in meeting
them, and of assembling them under a purely abstract concept, 'sound'.

Professor Heisenberg, in his lecture (quoted at the beginning of
