PART III

Towards a New Cosmosophy


CHAPTER XIX

The Country in which Man is not a Stranger

I question not my Corporeal or Vegetative Eye any more than I question
a window concerning sight. I look through it and not with it.
WILLIAM BLAKE.

(a) INTRODUCTORY NOTE

A fundamental achievement along our path of study was the recognition
that a force of levity exists, polar to that of gravity, and that these
two together represent a primary polarity in nature which in turn is
the source of nature's manifold secondary polarities.

In the last part of these studies a vista opened up of an inner
differentiation of levity itself into warmth, light, chemical action
and the formative activity of life. Our next task will be to develop a
clearer conception of these four modes of action of levity.

In undertaking this task, however, we shall have to extend our
observations of nature beyond the frontier that can be reached by using
only what we can learn from Goethe. It is here that Rudolf Steiner
comes to our aid by what he was able to impart through his researches
in the realm of the supersensible itself.

This turning to information given by another mind, whose sources of
knowledge are beyond our own immediate reach, seems at first sight to
be incompatible with the principles guiding all our studies hitherto;
for in gaining insight into the How and Whence of a phenomenon of the
sense-world we have up to now admitted only what is yielded by an
observation of the phenomenon per se (though with the aid of the 'eye
of the spirit') and of other phenomena related to it. This is what we
have called 'reading in the book of nature', and we have found it to be
the method on which a science aspiring to overcome the onlooker-picture
of the universe must be based. So we must first make sure that the step
we now propose to take does not violate

this principle.

*

The assurance we want will be found in two characteristics of the
communications made by Rudolf Steiner from his researches. The content
of these communications was acquired by way of a 'reading' which is
nothing but a higher metamorphosis of the reading first employed by
Goethe; and the acceptance of this content by another mind is itself
nothing but another act of reading, save that the direction of the
reading gaze differs from the usual one.

In order to understand this we must go back to what we learnt in the
course of our optical studies as to the two forms of vision arising
from the activity of the eye's inner light - the dream-vision and the
seeing of after-images. Of these two, seeing in dream is in a certain
sense the purer form of inner seeing in that it arises without any
outer stimulus exercised upon the physical organ of sight. On the other
hand, it lacks that objective conformity to law characteristic of the
after-images which mirror the order of the external world. There is an
arbitrary, enigmatic element in dream-pictures, and their logic often
seems to run counter to that of waking consciousness. A further
characteristic of dream-perception is that we are tied to the level of
consciousness prevailing in the dream. While we are dreaming we cannot
awaken to the extent of being able to make the pictures the object of
conscious observation.

With the after-images it is different. Although to begin with they are
present in our consciousness with a clarity no greater than that of the
dream-pictures, nevertheless we are able so to enhance our
consciousness of them as to bring them under observation like any
external phenomenon. As previously shown, it is possible, even while
the eye is riveted on an impression from outside, to develop such
awareness in the activity of the inner light called forth by this
impression, that together with the results of the deeds and sufferings
of the light we can perceive something of these deeds and sufferings
themselves. Perception of the after-images thus turns into what we may
call perception of simultaneous images. (This activity of the eye
corresponds with what Goethe, in a different connexion, called an
'alliance of the eyes of spirit with the eyes of the body'.)

These two forms of visual perception - which we may briefly call: (1)
perception of post-images, and (2) perception of co-images - represent
successive rungs on a 'spiritual ladder' pointing beyond themselves to
a further rung. By the logic of succession this may be expected to
consist in some sort of seeing of pre-images, with the characteristic
of being a still less physical mode of seeing than the two others. This
seeing must be based on an activity of the inner light which will be
similar to that in dream by its arising without any stimulus from
external light-impressions, yet at the same time there must be no
arbitrariness in the contents of this perception. Further, our
consciousness in this perceptive activity must be such as to allow us
to be in full control of it, as we are of ordinary day-waking seeing.

This kind of pure sense-free perception does indeed exist, and it can
be aroused by means of a well-ordered training from the dormant state
in which it is present in every human being. Anyone who learns to see
in this way gains perception of the activity of cosmic light,
contacting it directly with his own inner light - that is to say,
without mediation of his corporeal eye which is subject to gravity. So
this eye-of-the-spirit becomes capable of perceiving the levity-woven
archetypes (ur-images), which underlie all that the physical eye
discerns in the world of ordinary space.

In respect of the intrinsic character of the world-content thus
perceived, Rudolf Steiner called this mode of perception, Imaginative
perception, or, simply, Imagination. By so doing he invested this word
with its due and rightful meaning.

From what we found in our optical studies concerning the nature of
after-images (Chapter XV), it is clear that the acquisition of
Imaginative perception rests on a re-awakening in the eye (and thus in
the total organism behind the eye) of certain 'infant' forces which
have grown dormant in the course of the growing up of the human being.
It thus represents a fulfilment of Thomas Reid's philosophic demand.
Consequently we find among the descriptions which Traherne gives of the
mode of perception peculiar to man when the inner light, brought into
this world at birth, is not yet absorbed by the physical eye, many
helpful characterizations of the nature of Imaginative perception, some
of which may be quoted here.

Consider, in this respect, the following passage from Traherne's poem
The Praeparative, quoted earlier. In describing the state of soul at a
time when the physical senses are not yet in operation, Traherne says:

'Then was my Soul my only All to me,

A living, endless Ey, Whose Power, and Act, and Essence was to see:

I was an inward Sphere of Light Or an interminable Orb of Sight,
Exceeding that which makes the Days,
A vital sun that shed abroad its Rays:
All Life, all Sense,
A naked, simple, pure Intelligence.''

This is the condition of soul of which Traherne says in the same poem
that through it a man is still a recipient of the 'true Ideas of all
things'. In this condition the object of sight is not the corporeal
world which reflects the light, but light itself, engaged in the
weaving of the archetypal images. In a later passage of the same poem
Traherne expresses this by saying:

'Tis not the Object, but the Light
That maketh Hev'n. ...'

And more clearly still in the following part of his poem An Infant Eye:
'A simple Light from all Contagion free,
A Beam that's purely Spiritual, an Ey
That's altogether Virgin, Things doth see
Ev'n like unto the Deity;
That is, it shineth in an hevenly Sense,
And round about (Unmov'd) its Light dispense.

'The visiv Rays are Beams of Light indeed,
Refined, subtil, piercing, quick and pure;
And as they do the sprightly winds exceed,
Are worthy longer to endure;
They far out-shoot the Reach of Grosser Air,
With which such Excellence may not compare.
But being once debas'd, they soon becom
Less activ than they were before.'

How at this stage the soul experiences the act of perception in itself
is shown in the following passage from the poem Wonder:

'A Nativ Health and Innocence
Within my Bones did grow
And while my God did all his Glories show
I felt a vigour in my Sense
That was all SPIRIT: I within did flow
With seas of Life like Wine.'

Utterances of this kind illustrate the fact that perception of the
ur-images of the world consists in a reading with the
eye-of-the-spirit, which has been rendered so strong that for its
action no support from the physical eye is any longer required. This
faculty of spiritual Imagination (which Rudolf Steiner was able to
exercise in advance of other human beings) is acquired on a path of
training which is the direct continuation of the Goethean path.1

It remains to show that acceptance of information obtained through
spiritual Imagination, without ourselves being as yet in actual command
of it, is not in contradiction with the principles of 'reading'. Let
us, to this end, think of reading in the ordinary sense of this word,
calling to mind that for the acquisition of this faculty we depend on
someone who can teach it because he already has it. Exactly the same
holds good for the reading with which we are here concerned. Here, too,
a teacher already possessing this faculty is required. Thus Goethe
became for us a teacher of reading, and it would be a mistake to
imagine that he, for his part, needed no teacher. In his case this
function was fulfilled partly by what he learned through his studies of
the earlier fruits of man's spiritual activity, that is, from an epoch
when vestiges at least of the original, instinctive faculty of
spiritual Imagination were still extant. A similar function on our own
path of study was performed by our occupation with the old doctrine of
the four elements and the basic concepts of alchemy.

Indispensable as is such a training in reading by turning to past
conceptions of man, it does not suffice to meet the present-day demands
of a scientific understanding of the universe. For this, we need a
'technique' of reading that cannot be attained along these lines alone.
Awareness of this fact led Rudolf Steiner to pursue his
spiritual-scientific investigations and to communicate the results in
such a way that they can be a 'school of reading' for those who study
them.2 In point of fact we have already made use in this sense of one
of the results of Rudolf Steiner's researches, for at the very
beginning of this book his picture of the threefold psycho-physical
organism of man was taken as the basis of our own investigations. The
reason why the present remarks were not then included is that the
relevant results of higher research were in that case of such a nature
that, once known, they could be confirmed by the simplest kind of
self-observation. The fact, however, remains that from the very
beginning we have called upon one fully trained in reading, to help in
deciphering certain facts of nature - in this case of human nature.

A similar need, though now in an amplified form, arises at the present
stage of our studies. And here, out of the wealth of knowledge conveyed
by Rudolf Steiner from the realm of supersensible Imagination, it is
his characterization of the four modifications of levity which will now
give the guidance necessary for our own observation. Adopting the
terminology chosen by him for the description of this sphere, we shall
in future speak of it as of the 'Ether' pervading the universe (thus
using this word also in its true and original meaning). Accordingly, we
shall refer to its fourfold differentiation as to the four kinds of
ether: Warmth-Ether, Light-Ether, Chemical Ether and Life-Ether.

* *
 *
(b) WARMTH

We begin with the warmth-ether as the only modification of ether which
combines certain etheric with certain physical properties. Constituting
as it does a border-condition between the two worlds, the warmth-ether
has, on the one hand, the function of receiving the picture-weaving
transmitted to it by the higher ethers, and, on the other, of bringing
physical matter into the state where it becomes receptive to the
working of the etheric forces. The warmth-ether achieves this by
freeing matter from being controlled one-sidedly by the centre-bound
forces of the earth. It thus calls forth, when acting physically, the
processes of melting of solids and of evaporation of liquids: phenomena
which yielded the initial observations for our introduction of the
concept of levity. In processes of this kind we now recognize the
physical manifestation of a universal function of the warmth-ether,
namely, to divest matter of all form and to lead it over from the realm
dominated by gravity into that of levity. Provided we attach the right
meaning to the word, we may say that the function of the warmth-ether
is to bring about chaos at the upper border of physical nature. It is
thus that we have already found it working in the plant, when through
the union of the pollen with the seed a state of chaos is produced
within the seed, which enables the type to impress anew its
form-principle into it.

Another instance of the warmth-ether's anti-gravitational effect, also
discussed earlier, is the earth's seismic activity. True, it appears at
first sight as if little were gained by speaking of warmth-ether,
instead, as we did previously, of levity in general. But it must not be
forgotten that in the ether-realm as a whole, warmth - that is, the
overcoming of earthly gravity - is only one of the four modes of
etheric action, albeit the one which enables the other three to work
into the physical world. We shall see, later on, that only by taking
into account the action of the higher modifications of the ether is it
possible to gain insight into the true causes of the apparently so
arbitrary occurrences of volcanic and kindred phenomena. Here, too, it
is the function of the warmth-ether to produce in the physical sphere
the chaos which is necessary to make the physical sphere receptive to
the activities going on in higher spheres.

In view of this universal function of the warmth-ether, which
distinguishes it from the other modifications of ether, we may give it
as a second name that of 'chaoticizing ether'.

* *
 *
(c) LIGHT

The function of the light-ether, the second of the four modes of ether,
can best be envisaged by thinking of the difference between a plant
growing in darkness (perhaps a potato sprouting in a cellar) and
another of the same species exposed to the influence of the light. On
Plates VII and VIII two kinds of unicellular organisms are shown, of
one which - the green algae - is accustomed to live in light, the other
- the bacilli - in darkness. These things are, of course, well-known
facts. Our purpose here, however, is not merely to record them as
'fact', but, by re-creating them within ourselves, to use them to gain
an experience of the function of the light-ether.

The following passages from Goethe's Metamorphosis of Plants are a
classical example of observation of the activity of the light-ether in
the plant. They are taken from the second part of the essay, where
Goethe is describing leaf-development:

'While the leaves owe their first nourishment principally to the more
or less modified watery parts, which they draw from the stem, they are
indebted for their increased perfection and refinement to the light and
air. The cotyledons which are formed beneath the closed seed-sheath are
charged, so to speak, with only a crude sap; they are scarcely and but
rudely organized and quite undeveloped. In the same way the leaves are
more rudely organized in plants which grow under water than in others
which are exposed to the open air. Indeed, even the same species of
plant develops smoother and less intricately formed leaves when growing
in low damp places, whereas, if transplanted to a higher region, it
will produce leaves which are rough, hairy and more delicately
finished.'

'So it is also with the anastomosis of the vessels which spring forth
from the larger veins, seeking each other with their ends and
coalescing, and thus providing the necessary basis for the leaf-skin or
cuticle. All this, if not entirely caused by subtle forms of air, is at
least very much furthered by them. If the leaves of many water-plants
are thread-like or assume the form of antlers, we are inclined to
attribute it to lack of complete anastomosis. The growth of the water
buttercup, Ranunculus aquatilis, shows this quite obviously, with its
aquatic leaves consisting of mere thread-like veins, while in the
leaves developed above water the anastomosis is complete and a
connected plane is formed. Occasionally, indeed, in this plant, the
transition may be still more definitely observed, in leaves which are
half anastomosed and half thread-like.'

The second of these paragraphs describes the phenomenon of vascular
anastomosis which, having already been more than once an object of our
study, here reveals a new meaning. If, following Goethe's method, we
re-create in our mind the repeated separations and reunions of the
sap-vessels, while keeping in view the fact that the leaf's outer form
is the result of a purposive, many times repeated anastomosis, then the
picture of the activity of weaving arises before our mind's eye. (Hence
the word 'tissue' for the flesh of a living being.) In truth all
nature's forms are woven of light, including the crystals.3

How clear a picture Goethe had of the conformity of man's act of
thinking with nature's way of producing her forms - both being an act
of supersensible weaving - is shown by the following two verses. That
on the left is a passage from Faust, from the scene in which Mephisto
(disguised as Faust) instructs the young Scholar. The other is an
altered version of it, written by Goethe at a later time to conclude an
essay (Bedenken und Ergebung) in which he deals with the problem of the
relation between Experience and Idea:

Truly, when men their thoughts conceive
'Tis as if some masterpiece they weave.
One thread, and a thousand strands take flight,
Swift to and fro the shuttles going,
All unseen the threads a-flowing,
One stroke, and a thousand close unite.1

So with a modest eye perceive
Her masterpiece Dame Nature weave.
One thread, and a thousand strands take flight,
Swift to and fro the shuttles going,
Each to the other the threads a-flowing,
One stroke, and a thousand close unite.4 -

What Goethe wants to show here by applying to the activity of nature
the same image which he used originally to depict the act of thinking,
we can express to-day by saying that it is the identity of the activity
of the light-ether in human thinking and in external nature which is
responsible for the fact that the objective ideas operating in nature
can become the content of man's consciousness in the form of thoughts.5

Following our previous procedure when we gave the warmth-ether a second
name by calling it chaoticizing ether, we can denote the light-ether
also as 'weaving ether'.

*

If at this point in our discussion we revert once more to the realm of
physical manifestations of light, dealt with in the preceding chapters,
we do so because by studying them in the present context we shall gain
further insight into the fact that one plane of nature provides
illustrations of processes which on another plane remain more or less
veiled. At the same time this will help us to learn more about the
properties of levity-space. The optical phenomenon which we shall
discuss in this sense is that of the so-called pin-hole camera. (The
pin-hole camera effect is easily produced by a keyhole in a closed door
which on one side faces a window and on the other leads to a
comparatively dark room.)

The usual explanation of the appearance of the optical image on the
back inside wall of such a camera is that light-rays, emanating from
every point outside, cross each other in the aperture of the camera and
so - again point by point - create the inverted image. No such
explanation, clearly, is open to us. For the world of external objects
is a whole, and so is its image appearing in the camera. Equally, the
light entering the camera is not a sum of single rays. Pure observation
leads to the following description of the optical process.

By surveying the path which the light takes from the illuminated
surface of the outer objects via the pin-hole to the optical image
inside the camera, we realize that the light-realm engaged in this
process has the shape of a double cone, with its apex in the opening of
the camera. Within this cone the light carries the image across the
space stretching in front of the light-reflecting objects up to the
point where the image becomes visible by being caught on the back wall
of the camera.

Thus in every section of the cone the image is present in its totality
- even in the very apex of the cone. There, too, the image in all its
details is present as a whole, though without (ideally) any spatial
extension. Seen thus, on this level of its action the light-ether
reveals as one of its characteristics the faculty of making present in
a spaceless point an image originally expanded in space, and of letting
it emerge from this point in spatial expansion.

Further, there is the fact that, wherever we set up a pin-hole camera,
the aperture in its front will cause the formation of an optical image
inside it. This shows that each point in space filled with light is the
bearer of an optical image, contracted to a point, of the entire world
of light-reflecting objects surrounding it. All we do with such a
camera is to select a particular image and bring it to separate
visibility.

Through these observations we grow aware of light's faculty of
communicating simultaneously to space as a whole, and to each point in
it, a potential image of the light-reflecting object.

What we observe here in the sphere of physical light-activity is
exactly what the light-ether performs on a higher level of nature when
with its help the spiritual archetype of a plant takes on spatial
appearance. For to this end the archetype, itself without spatial
limitations, imprints its image into the tiny seed, whence the growing
plant organism carries it again into space. And there is in principle
no limitation to the number of such seeds, each of which will bear the
complete image of the archetype.

* *
 *
(d) SOUND

The characteristics of the third modification of ether are such that
they prompted Rudolf Steiner to give it as a second name, besides
chemical ether, that of sound-ether. In view of the fact, stressed at
the beginning of this chapter, that perception of the ether is achieved
by a heightening of the power of the spirit-eye, it must cause surprise
to learn that a certain mode of activity of the ether has a quality
which makes appeal to aural experiences. The full answer to this riddle
must await the discussion that follows this chapter. Two points,
however, may be brought forward at once. Firstly, where gravity, with
its tendency to individualize, is absent, no such sharp distinctions
exist between one form of perception and another as are found in the
sphere of the physical senses.6 Secondly, even in ordinary
sense-perception a certain overlapping of visual and aural experiences
is known to us. We need only think how common it is to give musical
attributes, such as 'consonant' and 'dissonant' to colours, and to
describe tones as 'light' and 'dark'. The reason is that subconsciously
we accompany visual experiences with tone-sensations, and vice versa.
Cases are even known of human beings in whom the secondary sensation
occurs with such intensity as to equal the primary one. Such people say
that they 'see' sounds and 'hear' colours.

*

Everything that is true of the supersensible sphere we may expect to
come to expression in some form in the world of sense-perception. The
sphere of the ether is the sphere of the creative archetypes of the
world, and when we learn that to one part of this world the character
of sound is attributed, we must search for a phenomenon, perceptible to
our senses, which reveals to us the secret of the sound's form-creating
power. This we have in the so-called sound-figures, discovered by the
German physicist Chladni (1756-1827) and called after him 'Chladni's
sound-figures'. A short description of how they are produced will not
be out of place.

A round or square plate of glass or brass, fixed at its centre so that
it can vibrate freely at its edges, is required. It is evenly and not
too thickly covered with fine sand or lycopodium powder and then caused
to vibrate acoustically by the repeated drawing of a violin-bow with
some pressure across the edge of the plate until a steady note becomes
audible. Through the vibrations thus caused within the plate, the
particles of sand or powder are set in movement and caused to collect
in certain stationary parts of the plate, thereby creating figures of
very regular and often surprising form. By stroking the plate at
different points on the edge, and at the same time damping the
vibrations by touching the edge at other points with the finger, notes
of different pitch can be produced, and for each of these notes a
characteristic figure will appear (Fig. 14).7

The significance for us of Chladni's experiment will emerge still more
clearly if we modify it in the following way. Instead of directly
setting the plate with the powder into vibration by stroking it with
the bow, we produce a corresponding movement on a second plate and let
it be transmitted to the other by resonance. For this purpose the two
plates must be acoustically tuned to each other and placed not too far
apart. Let us imagine, further, that the whole experiment was arranged
- as it well might be - in such a way that the second plate was hidden
from a spectator, who also lacked the faculty of hearing. This gives us
a picture of the situation in which we find ourselves whenever the
higher kinds of ether by way of a tone-activity inaudible to our
physical ear, cause shapeless matter to assume regularly ordered form.

*

This comparison of the activity of the sound-ether, as the
form-creating element in nature, with Chladni's phenomenon is drawn
correctly only if we recognize that the conception of form, as an
expression of that which is called forth through the etheric forces in
nature, comprises more than the external spatially bounded shape of an
organic or inorganic entity. Apart from the fact already indicated,
that for the formation of such entities the co-operation also of
life-ether is necessary, we can judge the activity of sound-ether
correctly only if we conceive it as a much more inward activity,
compared with the formation in external space of Chladni's figures. In
the latter case, the reason why the influence of sound causes nothing
beyond the ordering of form in outer space is because on this plane of
nature the only changes that can occur are changes in the positions of
separate physical bodies. Where the forces of sound in ether-form are
able to take hold of matter from within, they can produce changes of
form of a quite different kind. This effect of the activity of
sound-ether has given it its other name: chemical ether.

We have mentioned once before that our conception of 'form' in
organically active nature must not be limited merely to that of a
body's spatial outline. This was in connexion with Ruskin's definition
of the spiritual principle active in plant-formation as 'the power that
catches out of chaos charcoal, water, lime and what not, and fastens
them down into a given form'. Besides the external order of matter
revealed in space-form, there exists also an inner qualitative order
expressed in a body's chemical composition. Upon this inner chemical
order is based all that we encounter as colour, smell, taste, etc., of
a substance, as well as its nourishing, healing or harmful properties.
Accordingly, all these parts of an organism, both in the plant-kingdom
and within the higher organisms, have a certain inner material order,
apart from their characteristic space-structure. The one is never
present without the other, and in some way they are causally connected.

In this inner order of substance we must see in the very first place
the work of the sound or chemical ether. And we should be aware that by
the word 'chemistry' in this connexion we mean something much more
far-reaching than those chemical reactions which we can bring about by
the reciprocal affinity of physical substances, however complicated
these reactions may be. A few examples will illustrate the difference
between chemical processes caused by direct influence of the chemical
ether, and others in which only the physical consequences of the ether
are effective.

In his book, Man the Unknown, Professor Carrel shows very impressively,
by an example from the human organism, the difference of quantitative
ratio in externally similar processes, one of which occurs within the
domain of life, the other, outside it. He compares the quantity of
liquid necessary to keep artificially alive a piece of living tissue
which has been reduced to pulp, with the quantity of blood doing the
same within the living organism. If all the tissues of a human body
were treated in this way, it would take 45,000 gallons of circulating
fluid to keep them from being poisoned in a few days by their own waste
products. Within the living organism the blood achieves the same task
with 1J gallons.

Very many chemical changes within living organisms are effected by the
two polar processes of oxidation and reduction. We have discussed them
repeatedly as hieroglyphs of much that occurs in nature by way of
polarity. In accordance with the principle ruling the physical plane of
nature, that differences of level tend to disappear, oxidation can
occur by itself, whereas reduction requires the expenditure of energy.
Let us from this point of view compare the transformation of oxidized
into reduced iron, as it takes place inside and outside the realm of
life.

An example of this process in its purely physical form is the reduction
of iron-ore to metallic iron in blast-furnaces, where, with the help of
high temperature and high pressure, carbon is made to combine with the
oxygen ingredient of the ore and to impart to it its own imponderable
energy. Precisely the same process is going on continuously and
unobtrusively within the human body under normal bodily conditions of
temperature and pressure, when the oxy-haemoglobin of the arterial
blood changes over into the haemoglobin of the venous blood. A
macrotelluric counterpart of this is the transformation of the red
river-mud into the blue-black continental mud at the bottom of the sea,
around the continental shores. Here, again, reduction takes place
without those preliminaries that are necessary for carrying through the
process by technical means.

Through examples of this kind we gain insight into the nature of the
chemical ether as a 'magic' force (in the sense in which we have
introduced this term at the beginning of the book). What the chemical
ether is capable of effecting in a gentle manner, so to speak, in
cooperation with the inertness-overcoming power of the warmth-ether,
can be imitated physically only by an extraordinary concentration of
external energy and the use of masses of material substance. At the
same time the imitation is never complete. For to all that happens
through the action of the chemical ether there belongs the quality of
cosmic youth, while everything brought about in a purely physical
manner is of necessity cosmically old.8

Of all the provinces of nature towards which man's exploring eye has
turned since the dawn of the onlooker-consciousness, none has furthered
his purely quantitative thinking more than chemistry, ever since the
discovery that the chemical reactions of the various substances are
conditioned by a quite definite and constant numerical relationship. It
was these relationships which impelled the rise of the atomic
conception of matter and all its consequences. For since the
onlooker-consciousness is quite unable to conceive the existence of
numerical relationships in the physical world except as sums of
computable units in space, it was natural for this type of
consciousness to reduce all empirically established numerical
relationships to correspending relationships among quantities of the
smallest possible material or matter-like units.

Scientific thinking, if guided by knowledge of the existence of etheric
forces and their action, has no need of such an interpretation of the
numerical relationships revealed in the physical world; for it knows
them to be nothing but the last expression of the action of the
chemical ether (hence occasionally also called 'number-ether' by Rudolf
Steiner). To do justice to the appearance of measurable numerical
relationships in nature, in whatever sphere, it is necessary to free
ourselves from the abstract conception of number which governs modern
scientific thought and to replace it by a more concrete one. We shall
rind that for the existence of a certain number there may be two quite
different reasons, although the method of establishing the number
itself is the same in each case. A simple example will illustrate this.

Let us look at a number of similar objects, say a group of five apples.
We observe that the relation of the number five to the group of objects
in front of us is purely external and accidental. In applying to it the
conception 'five' we combine the single objects into a group and give
it a name, or numerical label, which has nothing to do with the nature
of the items making up the group. This way of thinking, we may observe,
is of exactly the kind which the nominalists of the Middle Ages
attributed to every conception formed by the human mind. In fact, the
process of counting is a process of pure abstraction. The more
differentiated are the things which we want to combine into a group
through the process of counting, the further this abstraction has to
go. We can count apples and pears together under the collective
conception of 'fruit'; if turnips are added, we must help ourselves out
with the conception 'vegetable products'; until finally we deal only
with 'things', without considering any qualitative differentiation.
Thus the conception of number is created solely within the human mind,
which applies it to things from outside.

From the moment when human consciousness was unable to attribute to
itself any other than a purely nominalistic mode of comprehension it
was inevitable that all explanations of natural phenomena would have
two results: (1) the exclusion from observation of everything that
could not be conceived in terms of numbers, and (2) an endeavour to
find for every numerical relationship capable of empirical proof an
explanation which could be interpreted as the result of taking
qualitatively identical units and counting them. For this method of
forming conceptions is the only one which nominalism can accept with a
good conscience. The fact that in so doing it is led ad absurdum has
only quite lately occurred to it. For if by the logical following of
this path - as in modern theoretical physics - the whole universe is
dissolved into units which can no longer be distinguished from each
other, then it will become impossible to count these parts, for it
cannot be established whether any given one of these hypothetical
elemental particles has been counted or not. None the less, Eddington
claimed to have found the exact number of particles composing the
universe - a number with 80 figures - by using a special calculus, but
this number is valid only on the supposition that the particles cannot
be counted because they are indistinguishable!9

However correct the nominalistic conception of number may be in such a
case as that of numbering the five apples, it is wholly incorrect to
restrict the concept of number itself to one valid for this kind of
occurrence. We shall see this immediately if we take one of the apples
and cut it across. There we find the number five confronting us in the
well-known star-like figure, represented by the fivefold pericarp in
the centre of the apple. What man, restricted as he was to the mode of
understanding, has completely overlooked is this: although the act of
counting, by which we establish the number five, is the same in both
cases, the quality of the number five is totally different. For in the
case of the five pericarps this number is a quality immanent in the
apple, which it shares with the whole species of Rosaceae. The apple
itself is just as much 'five' as it is 'round', 'sweet', etc. In the
supersensible type which creates in the plant its own organ of
manifestation, the creation of a number - in the apple the number five
- is part of the form-creating activities characteristic of the type.
The numerical relationships which appear between natural phenomena
depend upon the way in which the chemical ether participates. This is
true equally of those discovered by chemistry in the sphere of
inorganic matter and used to-day with such great success.

Let us be quite clear that the relationship of unity to plurality in
the case of the five apples is totally different from what it is in the
fivefold pericarp. In the first case unity is the smallest quantity
represented by each of the five apples. There, the step from one to two
is made by joining together two units from outside. The path from one
to many is by way of continuous addition. In the second case the unity
is represented by the pericarp - i.e. by the one comprising the many,
the latter appearing as parts of the whole. In such a case two is part
of one and so are three, four, five, etc. Plurality arises from a
continuous process of division of unity.

The ancient world knew the idea of number only in the last-mentioned
form. There unity appeared as an all-embracing magnitude, revealed
through the Universe. The world's manifoldness was felt to be not a
juxtaposition of single things, externally connected, but the content
of this unity, and therefore derived from it. This was expressed by the
pre-Socratic Greek philosophers in the formula έν και παν (the One and the All).

With the appearance of the Arabs on the scene of history, human thought
turned to the additive concept of number, and the original distributive
concept receded gradually into oblivion. The acceptance of the new
concept made it possible for the first time to conceive the zero. It is
clear that by a continuous division of unity one is carried to a
constantly growing number of constantly diminishing parts, but without
ever reaching the nothing represented by the number zero. To-day we
should say that in this way we can reach zero only by an infinite
series of steps. Yet the idea of the infinite did not exist in this
form for ancient man. On the other hand, in the arabic conception of
number the steps necessary to reach zero are finite. For just as by the
external addition of unities we can step forward from one number to the
next, so we can also step back on the same path by repeated
subtractions of unities. Having thus reached One, nothing can stop us
from going beyond it by one more such step. The arabic numeral system,
therefore, is the only one to possess its own symbol for zero.

It has been correctly noted that the penetration into European thought
of this additive concept of number was responsible for developing the
idea of the machine; for it accustomed human beings to think calmly of
zero as a quantity existing side by side with the others. In ancient
man the idea of nothingness, the absolute void, created fear; he judged
nature's relation to the void accordingly, as the phrase 'natura
abhorret vacuum' indicates. His capacity to think fearlessly of this
vacuum and to handle it thus had to be developed in order to bring
about the Machine Age, and particularly the development of efficient
steam engines. Consider also the decisive part played by the vacuum in
Crookes's researches, through which the path to the sub-physical realm
of nature was laid open.

Yet nature makes use of number as a regulating factor in quite a
different way from its appearance in the purely electrical and
gravitational connexions of inorganic matter, namely where sound-ether
from the upper boundary of nature so regulates nature's dynamic that
the manifold sense-qualities appear in their time-and-space order. When
we interpret the arrangement of numbers found there on a nominalistic
basis, as is done when the axis- and angle-relationships of crystals
are reduced to a mere propinquity of the atoms distributed like a grid
in space, or when the difference in angle of the position of the
various colours in the spectrum is reduced to mere differences in
frequency of the electromagnetic oscillations in a hypothetical ether -
then we bar the way to the comprehension not only of number itself, as
a quality among qualities, but also of all other qualities in nature.

*

(e) LIFE

As already mentioned, the three kinds of ether, warmth, light and
sound, are not sufficient in themselves to bring into existence what in
its proper sense we call 'life' in nature, i.e. the formation of single
living organisms. This requires the action of a fourth kind of ether,
the life-ether, ranged above the other three. We can best comprehend
the life-ether's contribution to the total activity of the ether in
nature by considering the interaction of the four kinds of ether with
the four physical elements.



We have seen that the warmth-ether has the double function of being at
once the lowest ether and the highest physical element, thus acting as
a sphere of reflexion for the other kinds of ether and the elements
respectively. Each stage in the etheric has its reflexion in the
physical, as the above table shows. Thus to the physical air the
etheric light is related. (The affinity of light and air is best seen
in the plant and its leaf-formation.) To bring about real changes in
the material composition of the physical world requires the stronger
powers of the chemical ether. Therefore it is also the first ether of
which we had to speak as 'magical' ether. Its effects reach into the
watery element which is already bound up with gravity, but by its own
strength it cannot penetrate beyond that. The causation of material
changes in the liquid sphere would in fact be all that these three
kinds of ether could achieve together.

Only when the power of the life-ether is added to the three others can
etheric action reach as far as the sphere of solid matter. Thus the
life-ether is responsible for all solid formation in nature, both in
her organic and inorganic fields (the latter-crystal-formation-being
the effect of external ether-action).10 It is to the action of the
life-ether that nature owes the existence in her different realms of
multitudes of separate solid forms. To mention an instance from our
previous studies: in the same way as volcanic phenomena manifest the
warmth-ether's gravity-overcoming power on a macrotelluric scale, so
snow-formation illustrates the life-ether's matter-shaping might.

Through its power to bind flowing action into solid form, the
life-ether is related to the sound-ether in the same way as the
articulated word formed by human speaking is related to the mere
musical tone. The latter by itself is as it were fluid. In human speech
this fluidity is represented by the vowels. With a language consisting
only of vowels man would be able to express feelings, but not thoughts.
To let the word as carrier of thought arise out of sound, human speech
possesses the consonants, which represent the solid element in it.

The emergence of the sense-bearing word from the merely ringing sound
is an exact counterpart to what takes place in nature when the play of
organic liquids, regulated by the chemical ether, is caused by the
life-ether to solidify into outwardly perceptible form. By reading in
this way the special function of the life-ether among the other three,
we are led to the term ' Word-ether' as an appropriate second name for
it, corresponding to the term sound-ether for the chemical ether.

*

Thus Levity presents itself to us as being engaged in the fourfold
activity of Chaoticizing, Weaving, Sounding and, lastly, Speaking the
form-creative Cosmic Word into the realm of Gravity.

1 To avoid misunderstandings, it should be emphasized that spiritual
Imagination is not attained by any exercise involving directly the
sense of sight and its organ, the eye, but by purely mental exercises
designed to increase the 'seeing' faculty of the mind.

2 Indeed, it is a misunderstanding of the whole meaning of
Anthroposophy when its contents are quoted - as they sometimes are even
by adherents - in such a way as to suggest that by their help a better
'explanation' may be gained of matters for which there is otherwise no,
or at least no satisfactory, explanation. The question: 'How does
Anthroposophy explain this or that?' is quite wrongly put. We ought
rather to ask: 'How does Anthroposophy help us to read more clearly
this or that otherwise enigmatical chapter of the script of existence?'

3 See Space and the Light of Creation, by G. Adams, where this
'weaving' is shown with the help of projective geometry.

4 Translation by J. Darrell.

5 We may recall here also the passage from Ruskin's The Queen of the
Air, quoted earlier, p. 118).

6 That the ether, apart from being supersensibly seen, is also heard,
was empirically known to Goethe. See the opening words of the 'Prologue
in Heaven" (Faust, I) and the call of the Spirit of the Elements in the
first scene of the Second Part of the drama, which follow upon the
stage direction: 'The sun announces his approach with overwhelming
noise.'

7 By attending Chladni's lectures on his discovery in Paris the French
physicist Savart became acquainted with this phenomenon and devoted
himself to its study. Chladni and Savart together published a great
number of these figures.

8 Understanding the attributes of the chemical ether enables us to see
in their right perspective Rudolf Steiner's suggestions to farmers for
the preparation of the soil and for keeping healthy the crops growing
on it. Attempts have been made to dismiss these suggestions by calling
them 'mysticism' and 'mediaeval magic'. Both terms are titles of honour
if we understand by the one the form of insight into the supersensible
realm of nature acquired by the higher mode of reading, and by the
other a faculty of nature herself, whose magic wand is the chemical or
sound-ether.

9 See Eddington's humorous and at the same time serious treatment of
this problem in his Philosophy of Physical Science.

10 Of the difference between external and internal ether-action more
will be said in the concluding chapter.


