CHAPTER III

The Onlooker's Philosophic Malady

In his isolation as world spectator, the modern philosopher was bound
to reach two completely opposite views regarding the objective value of
human thought. One of these was given expression in Descartes' famous
words: Cogito ergo sum ('I think, therefore I am'). Descartes
(1596-1650), rightly described as the inaugurator of modern philosophy,
thus held the view that only in his own thought-activity does man find
a guarantee of his own existence.

In coming to this view, Descartes took as his starting-point his
experience that human consciousness contains only the thought pictures
evoked by sense-perception, and yet knows nothing of the how and why of
the things responsible for such impressions. He thus found himself
compelled, in the first place, to doubt whether any of these things had
any objective existence, at all. Hence, there remained over for him
only one indubitable item in the entire content of the universe - his
own thinking; for were he to doubt even this, he could do so only by
again making use of it. From the 'I doubt, therefore I am', he was led
in this way to the 'I think, therefore I am'.

The other conception of human thought reached by the
onlooker-consciousness was diametrically opposed to that of Descartes,
and entirely cancelled its conceptual significance. It was put forward
- not long afterwards - by Robert Hooke (1635-1703), the first
scientist to make systematic use of the newly invented microscope by
means of which he made the fundamental discovery of the cellular
structure of plant tissues. It was, indeed, on the strength of his
microscopic studies that he boldly undertook to determine the
relationship of human thought to objective reality. He published his
views in the introduction to his Micrographia, the great work in which,
with the lavish help of carefully executed copper engravings, he made
his microscopic observations known to the world.

Hooke's line of thought is briefly as follows: In past ages men
subscribed to the naive belief that what they have in their
consciousness as thought pictures of the world, actually reproduces the
real content of that world. The microscope now demonstrates, however,
how much the familiar appearance of the world depends on the structure
of our sense apparatus; for it reveals a realm just as real as that
already known to us, but hitherto concealed from us because it is not
accessible to the natural senses. Accordingly, if the microscope can
penetrate through the veil of illusion which normally hides a whole
world of potentially visible phenomena, it may be that it can even
teach us something about the ideas we have hitherto formed concerning
the nature of things. Perhaps it can bring us a step nearer the truth
in the sphere of thought, as it so obviously has done in that of
observation.

Of all the ideas that human reason can form, Hooke considered the
simplest and the most fundamental to be the geometrical concepts of
point and straight line. Undoubtedly we are able to think these, but
the naïve consciousness takes for granted that it also perceives them as
objective realities outside itself, so that thoughts and facts
correspond to each other. We must now ask, however, if this belief is
not due to an optical deception. Let us turn to the microscope and see
what point and line in the external world look like through it.

For his investigation Hooke chose the point of a needle and a
knife-edge, as providing the best representatives among physical
objects of point and straight line. In the sketches here reproduced we
may see how Hooke made clear to his readers how little these two
things, when observed through the microscope, resemble what is seen by
the unaided eye. This fact convinced Hooke that the apparent agreement
between the world of perception and the world of ideas rests on nothing
more solid than an optical limitation (Plate I).

Compared with the more refined methods of present-day thought, Hooke's
procedure may strike us as somewhat primitive. Actually he did nothing
more than has since been done times without number; for the scientist
has become more and more willing to allow artificially evoked
sense-perceptions to dictate the thoughts he uses in forming a
scientific picture of the world.

In the present context we are concerned with the historical import of
Hooke's procedure. This lies in the fact that, immediately after
Descartes had satisfied himself that in thinking man had the one sure
guarantee of his own existence, Hooke proved in a seemingly indubitable
manner that thinking was entirely divorced from reality. It required
only another century for philosophy to draw from this the unavoidable
consequence. It appeared in the form of Hume's philosophic system, the
outcome of which was universal scepticism.

As we shall see in due course, Hume's mode of reasoning continues to
rule scientific thought even to-day, quite irrespective of the fact
that science itself claims to have its philosophical parent in Kant,
the very thinker who devoted his life's work to the refutation of Hume.

*

On the basis of his investigations into human consciousness Hume felt
obliged to reason thus: My consciousness, as I know it, has no contact
with the external world other than that of a mere outside onlooker.
What it wins for its own content from the outer world is in the nature
of single, mutually unrelated parts. Whatever may unite these parts
into an objective whole within the world itself can never enter my
consciousness; and any such unifying factor entertained by my thought
can be only a self-constructed, hypothetical picture. Hume summed up
his view in two axioms which he himself described as the alpha and
omega of his whole philosophy. The first runs: 'All our distinct
perceptions are distinct existences.' The other: 'The Mind never
perceives any real connexions between distinct existences.' (Treatise
of Human Nature.)

If once we agree that we can know of nothing but unrelated thought
pictures, because our consciousness is not in a position to relate
these pictures to a unifying reality, then we have no right to ascribe,
with Descartes and his school, an objective reality to the self. Even
though the self may appear to us as the unifying agent among our
thoughts, it must itself be a mental picture among mental pictures ;
and man can have no knowledge of any permanent reality outside this
fluctuating picture-realm. So, with Hume, the onlooker-consciousness
came to experience its own utter inability to achieve a knowledge of
the objective existence either of a material world be - behind all
external phenomena, or of a spiritual self behind all the details of
its own internal content.

Accordingly, human consciousness found itself hurled into the abyss of
universal scepticism. Hume himself suffered unspeakably under the
impact of what he considered inescapable ideas - rightly described from
another side as the 'suicide of human intelligence' - and his
philosophy often seemed to him like a malady, as he himself called it,
against whose grip he could see no remedy. The only thing left to him,
if he was to prevent philosophical suicide from ending in physical
suicide, was to forget in daily life his own conclusions as far as
possible.

What Hume experienced as his philosophical malady, however, was the
result not of a mental abnormality peculiar to himself, but of that
modern form of consciousness which still prevails in general today.
This explains why, despite all attempts to disprove Hume's philosophy,
scientific thought has not broken away from its alpha and omega in the
slightest degree.

A proof of this is to be found, for example, in the principle of
Indeterminacy which has arisen in modern physics.

*

The conception of Indeterminacy as an unavoidable consequence of the
latest phase of physical research is due to Professor W. Heisenberg.
Originally this conception forced itself upon Heisenberg as a result of
experimental research. In the meantime the same idea has received its
purely philosophical foundation. We shall here deal with both lines of
approach.

After the discovery by Galileo of the parallelogram of forces, it
became the object of classical physics - unexpressed, indeed, until
Newton wrote his Principia - to bring the unchanging laws ruling nature
into the light of human consciousness, and to give them conceptual
expression in the language of mathematical formulae. Since, however,
science was obliged to restrict itself to what could be observed with a
single, colour-blind eye, physics has taken as its main object of
research the spatio-temporal relationships, and their changes, between
discrete, ideally conceived, point-like particles. Accordingly, the
mathematically formulable laws holding sway in nature came to mean the
laws according to which the smallest particles in the material
foundation of the world change their position with regard to each
other. A science of this kind could logically maintain that, if ever it
succeeded in defining both the position and the state of motion, in one
single moment, of the totality of particles composing the universe, it
would have discovered the law on which universal existence depends.
This necessarily rested on the presupposition that it really was the
ultimate particles of the physical world which were under observation.
In the search for these, guided chiefly by the study of electricity,
the physicists tracked down ever smaller and smaller units; and along
this path scientific research has arrived at the following peculiar
situation.

To observe any object in the sense world we need an appropriate medium
of observation. For ordinary things, light provides this. In the sense
in which light is understood to-day, this is possible because the
spatial extension of the single light impulses, their so-called
wavelength, is immeasurably smaller than the average magnitude of all
microscopically visible objects. This ensures that they can be observed
clearly by the human eye. Much smaller objects, however, will require a
correspondingly shorter wave-length in the medium of observation. Now
shorter wave-lengths than those of visible light have been found in
ultra-violet light and in X-rays; and these, accordingly, are now often
used for minute physical research.

In this way, however, we are led by nature to a definite boundary; for
we now find ourselves in a realm where the dimensions of the
observation medium and the observed object are more or less the same.
The result, unfortunately, is that when the 'light' meets the object,
it changes the latter's condition of movement. On the other hand, if a
'light' is used whose wave-length is too big to have any influence on
the object's condition of movement, it precludes any exact
determination of the object's location.

Thus, having arrived at the very ground of the world - that is, where
the cosmic laws might be expected to reveal themselves directly - the
scientist finds himself in the remarkable situation of only being able
to determine accurately either the position of an observed object and
not its state of motion, or its state of motion and not its position.
The law he seeks, however, requires that both should be known at the
same time. Nor is this situation due to the imperfection of the
scientific apparatus employed, but to its very perfection, so that it
appears to arise from the nature of the foundation of the world - in so
far, at least, as modern science is bound to conceive it.

If it is true that a valid scientific knowledge of nature is possible
only in the sphere open to a single-eyed, colour-blind observation, and
if it is true - as a science of this kind, at any rate, is obliged to
believe - that all processes within the material foundation of the
world depend on nothing but the movements of certain elementary
particles of extremely small size, then the fact must be faced that the
very nature of these processes rules out the discovery of any stable
ordering of things in the sense of mathematically formulable laws. The
discovery of such laws will then always be the last step but one in
scientific investigation; the last will inevitably be the dissolution
of such laws into chaos. For a consistent scientific thinking that goes
this way, therefore, nothing is left but to recognize chaos as the only
real basis of an apparently ordered world, a chaos on whose surface the
laws that seem to hold sway are only the illusory picturings of the
human mind. This, then, is the principle of Indeterminacy as it has
been encountered in the course of practical investigation into the
electrical processes within physical matter.

In the following way Professor Schrödinger, another leading thinker among
modern theoretical physicists, explains the philosophical basis for the
principle of Indeterminacy, which scientists have established in the
meantime:1

'Every quantitative observation, every observation making use of
measurement, is by nature discontinuous. ... However far we go in the
pursuit of accuracy we shall never get anything other than a finite
series of discrete results. ... The raw material of our quantitative
cognition of nature will always have this primitive and discontinuous
character. ... It is possible that a physical system might be so simple
that this meagre information would suffice to settle its fate; in that
case nature would not be more complicated than a game of chess. To
determine a position of a game of chess thirty-three facts suffice. ...
If nature is more complicated than a game of chess, a belief to which
one tends to incline, then a physical system cannot be determined by a
finite number of observations. But in practice a finite number of
observations is all that we could make.'

Classical physics, the author goes on to show, held that it was
possible to gain a real insight into the laws of the universe, because
in principle an infinite number of such discrete observations would
enable us to fill in the gaps sufficiently to allow us to determine the
system of the physical world. Against this assumption modern physics
must hold the view that an infinite number of observations cannot in
any case be carried out in practice, and that nothing compels us to
assume that even this would suffice to furnish us with the means for a
complete determination, which alone would allow us to speak of 'law' in
nature. 'This is the direction in which modern physics has led us
without really intending it.'

What we have previously said will make it clear enough that in these
words of a modern physicist we meet once more the two fundamentals of
Hume's philosophy. It is just as obvious, however, that the very
principle thus re-affirmed at the latest stage of modern physical
science was already firmly established by Hooke, when he sought to
prove to his contemporaries the unreality of human ideas.

Let us recall Hooke's motives and results. The human reason discovers
that certain law-abiding forms of thought dwell within itself; these
are the rules of mathematical thinking. The eye informs the reason that
the same kind of law and order is present also in the outer world. The
mind can think point and line; the eye reports that the same forms
exist in nature outside. (Hooke could just as well have taken as his
examples the apex and edge of a crystal.) The reason mistrusts the eye,
however, and with the help of the microscope 'improves' on it. What
hitherto had been taken for a compact, regulated whole now collapses
into a heap of unordered parts; behind the illusion of law a finer
observation detects the reality of chaos!

Had science in its vehement career from discovery to discovery not
forgotten its own beginnings so completely, it would not have needed
its latest researches to bring out a principle which it had in fact
been following from the outset - a principle which philosophy had
already recognized, if not in quite the same formulation, in the
eighteenth century. Indeterminacy, as we have just seen it explained by
Schrödinger, is nothing but the exact continuation of Humean scepticism.

1 In his book, Science and the Human Temperament (Dublin, 1935).


