
  _PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE_
  on the Study of
  NATURAL PHILOSOPHY

  BY
  SIR JOHN F. W. HERSCHEL, BART. K.H.
  _M.A.--D.C.L.--F.R.S.L&E.--M.R.I.A.--F.R.A.S.
  F.G.S.--M.C.U.P.S.--&c. &c._


  NEW EDITION.
  1851.

[Illustration:

  _H. Corbould del._      _E. Finden. sculp._

NATURÆ MINISTER ET INTERPRES.]


  NEW EDITION.

  London:
  PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN & LONGMANS, PATERNOSTER ROW




CONTENTS.


                                                                    Page
                                PART I.

        OF THE GENERAL NATURE AND ADVANTAGES OF THE STUDY OF THE
                           PHYSICAL SCIENCES.


  CHAP. I.

  Of Man regarded as a Creature of Instinct, of Reason, and
    Speculation.--General Influence of Scientific Pursuits on
    the Mind.                                                          1


  CHAP. II.

  Of abstract Science as a Preparation for the Study of Physics.--
    A profound Acquaintance with it not indispensable for a
    clear Understanding of Physical Laws.--How a Conviction
    of their Truth may be obtained without it.--Instances.--
    Further Division of the Subject.                                  18


  CHAP. III.

  Of the Nature and Objects, immediate and collateral, of
    Physical Science, as regarded in itself, and in its
    Application to the practical Purposes of Life, and its
    Influence on the Well-being and Progress of Society.              35


                                PART II.

  OF THE PRINCIPLES ON WHICH PHYSICAL SCIENCE RELIES FOR ITS
    SUCCESSFUL PROSECUTION, AND THE RULES BY WHICH A SYSTEMATIC
    EXAMINATION OF NATURE SHOULD BE CONDUCTED, WITH ILLUSTRATIONS
    OF THEIR INFLUENCE AS EXEMPLIFIED IN THE HISTORY OF ITS
    PROGRESS.


  CHAP. I.

  Of Experience as the Source of our Knowledge.--Of the
    Dismissal of Prejudices.--Of the Evidence of our Senses.          75


  CHAP. II.

  Of the Analysis of Phenomena.                                       85


  CHAP. III.

  Of the State of Physical Science in General, previous to the
    Age of Galileo and Bacon.                                        104


  CHAP. IV.

  Of the Observation of Facts and the Collection of Instances.       118


  CHAP. V.

  Of the Classification of Natural Objects and Phenomena, and of
    Nomenclature.                                                    135


  CHAP. VI.

  Of the First Stage of Induction.--The Discovery of Proximate
    Causes, and Laws of the lowest Degree of Generality, and
    their Verification.                                              144


  CHAP. VII.

  Of the higher Degrees of Inductive Generalization, and of the
    Formation and Verification of Theories.                          190


                               PART III.

    OF THE SUBDIVISION OF PHYSICS INTO DISTINCT BRANCHES, AND THEIR
                           MUTUAL RELATIONS.


  CHAP. I.

  Of the Phenomena of Force, and of the Constitution of Natural
    Bodies.                                                          221


  CHAP. II.

  Of the Communication of Motion through Bodies.--Of Sound and
    Light.                                                           246


  CHAP. III.

  Of Cosmical Phenomena.                                             265


  CHAP. IV.

  Of the Examination of the material Constituents of the World.
                                                                     290


  CHAP. V.

  Of the Imponderable Forms of Matter.                               310


  CHAP. VI.

  Of the Causes of the actual rapid Advance of the Physical
    Sciences compared with their Progress at an earlier Period.      347




    “In primis, hominis est propria VERI inquisitio atque
    investigatio. Itaque cum sumus negotiis necessariis, curisque
    vacui, tum avemus aliquid videre, audire, ac dicere,
    cognitionemque rerum, aut occultarum aut admirabilium, ad benè
    beatéque vivendum necessariam ducimus;--ex quo intelligitur,
    quod VERUM, simplex, sincerumque sit, id esse naturæe hominis
    aptissimum. Huic veri videndi cupiditati adjuncta est appetitio
    quædam principatûs, ut nemini parere animus benè a naturâ
    informatus velit, nisi præcipienti, aut docenti, aut utilitatis
    causa justè et legitimè imperanti: ex quo animi magnitudo
    existit, et humanararum rerum contemtio.”

                                  CICERO, DE OFFICIIS, Lib. 1. § 13.


    Before all other things, man is distinguished by his pursuit
    and investigation of TRUTH. And hence, when free from needful
    business and cares, we delight to see, to hear, and to
    communicate, and consider a knowledge of many admirable and
    abstruse things necessary to the good conduct and happiness of
    our lives: whence it is clear that whatsoever is TRUE, simple,
    and direct, the same is most congenial to our nature as men.
    Closely allied with this earnest longing to see and know the
    truth, is a kind of dignified and princely sentiment which
    forbids a mind, naturally well constituted, to submit its
    faculties to any but those who announce it in precept or in
    doctrine, or to yield obedience to any orders but such as are
    at once just, lawful, and founded on utility. From this source
    spring greatness of mind and contempt of worldly advantages and
    troubles.




                         PRELIMINARY DISCOURSE
                                   ON
                               THE STUDY
                                   OF
                          NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.




                                PART I.

          OF THE GENERAL NATURE AND ADVANTAGES OF THE STUDY OF
                         THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES




CHAPTER I.

  OF MAN REGARDED AS A CREATURE OF INSTINCT, OF REASON, AND
    SPECULATION.--GENERAL INFLUENCE OF SCIENTIFIC PURSUITS ON THE
    MIND.


(1.) The situation of man on the globe he inhabits, and over which he
has obtained the control, is in many respects exceedingly remarkable.
Compared with its other denizens, he seems, if we regard only his
physical constitution, in almost every respect their inferior, and
equally unprovided for the supply of his natural wants and his defence
against the innumerable enemies which surround him. No other animal
passes so large a portion of its existence in a state of absolute
helplessness, or falls in old age into such protracted and lamentable
imbecility. To no other warm-blooded animal has nature denied that
indispensable covering without which the vicissitudes of a temperate
and the rigours of a cold climate are equally insupportable; and to
scarcely any has she been so sparing in external weapons, whether for
attack or defence. Destitute alike of speed to avoid and of arms to
repel the aggressions of his voracious foes; tenderly susceptible of
atmospheric influences; and unfitted for the coarse aliments which the
earth affords spontaneously during at least two thirds of the year,
even in temperate climates,--man, if abandoned to mere instinct, would
be of all creatures the most destitute and miserable. Distracted by
terror and goaded by famine; driven to the most abject expedients
for concealment from his enemies, and to the most cowardly devices
for the seizure and destruction of his nobler prey, his existence
would be one continued subterfuge or stratagem;--his dwelling would
be in dens of the earth, in clefts of rocks, or in the hollows of
trees; his food worms, and the lower reptiles, or such few and crude
productions of the soil as his organs could be brought to assimilate,
varied with occasional relics, mangled by more powerful beasts of prey,
or contemned by their more pampered choice. Remarkable only for the
absence of those powers and qualities which obtain for other animals a
degree of security and respect, he would be disregarded by some, and
hunted down by others, till after a few generations his species would
become altogether extinct, or, at best, would be restricted to a few
islands in tropical regions, where the warmth of the climate, the
paucity of enemies, and the abundance of vegetable food, might permit
it to linger.

(2.) Yet man is the undisputed lord of the creation. The strongest
and fiercest of his fellow-creatures,--the whale, the elephant, the
eagle, and the tiger,--are slaughtered by him to supply his most
capricious wants, or tamed to do him service, or imprisoned to make
him sport. The spoils of all nature are in daily requisition for his
most common uses, yielded with more or less readiness, or wrested with
reluctance, from the mine, the forest, the ocean, and the air. Such
are the first fruits of reason. Were they the only or the principal
ones, were the mere acquisition of power over the materials, and the
less gifted animals which surround us, and the consequent increase
of our external comforts, and our means of preservation and sensual
enjoyment, the sum of the privileges which the possession of this
faculty conferred, we should after all have little to plume ourselves
upon. But this is so far from being the case, that every one who passes
his life in tolerable ease and comfort, or rather whose whole time
is not anxiously consumed in providing the absolute necessaries of
existence, is conscious of wants and cravings in which the senses have
no part, of a series of pains and pleasures totally distinct in kind
from any which the infliction of bodily misery or the gratification
of bodily appetites has ever afforded him; and if he has experienced
these pleasures and these pains in any degree of intensity, he will
readily admit them to hold a much higher rank, and to deserve much
more attention, than the former class. Independent of the pleasures
of fancy and imagination, and social converse, man is constituted a
speculative being; he contemplates the world, and the objects around
him, not with a passive, indifferent gaze, as a set of phenomena in
which he has no further interest than as they affect his immediate
situation, and can be rendered subservient to his comfort, but as
a system disposed with order and design. He approves and feels the
highest admiration for the harmony of its parts, the skill and
efficiency of its contrivances. Some of these which he can best trace
and understand he attempts to imitate, and finds that to a certain
extent, though rudely and imperfectly, he can succeed,--in others, that
although he can comprehend the nature of the contrivance, he is totally
destitute of all means of imitation;--while in others, again, and those
evidently the most important, though he sees the effect produced,
yet the means by which it is done are alike beyond his knowledge
and his control. Thus he is led to the conception of a Power and an
Intelligence superior to his own, and adequate to the production and
maintenance of all that he sees in nature,--a Power and Intelligence to
which he may well apply the term infinite, since he not only sees no
actual limit to the instances in which they are manifested, but finds,
on the contrary, that the farther he enquires, and the wider his sphere
of observation extends, they continually open upon him in increasing
abundance; and that as the study of one prepares him to understand and
appreciate another, refinement follows on refinement, wonder on wonder,
till his faculties become bewildered in admiration, and his intellect
falls back on itself in utter hopelessness of arriving at an end.

(3.) When from external objects he turns his view upon himself, on his
own vital and intellectual faculties, he finds that he possesses a
power of examining and analysing his own nature to a certain extent,
but no farther. In his corporeal frame he is sensible of a power to
communicate a certain moderate amount of motion to himself and other
objects; that this power depends on his will, and that its exertion
can be suspended or increased at pleasure within certain limits; but
_how_ his will acts on his limbs he has no consciousness: and whence he
derives the power he thus exercises, there is nothing to assure him,
however he may long to know. His senses, too, inform him of a multitude
of particulars respecting the external world, and he perceives an
apparatus by which impressions from without may be transmitted, as a
sort of signals to the interior of his person, and ultimately to his
brain, wherein he is obscurely sensible that the thinking, feeling,
reasoning being he calls _himself_, more especially resides; but by
what means he becomes conscious of these impressions, and what is the
nature of the immediate communication between that inward sentient
being, and that machinery, his outward man, he has not the slightest
conception.

(4.) Again, when he contemplates still more attentively the thoughts,
acts, and passions of this his sentient intelligent self, he finds,
indeed, that he can remember, and by the aid of memory can compare
and discriminate, can judge and resolve, and, above all, that he is
irresistibly impelled, from the perception of any phenomenon without
or within him, to infer the existence of something prior which stands
to it in the relation of a _cause_, without which it would not be, and
that this knowledge of causes and their consequences is what, in almost
every instance, determines his choice and will, in cases where he is
nevertheless conscious of perfect freedom to act or not to act. He
finds, too, that it is in his power to acquire more or less knowledge
of causes and effects according to the degree of attention he bestows
upon them, which attention is again in great measure a voluntary act;
and often when his choice has been decided on imperfect knowledge or
insufficient attention, he finds reason to correct his judgment, though
perhaps too late to influence his decision by after consideration. A
world within him is thus opened to his intellectual view, abounding
with phenomena and relations, and of the highest immediate interest.
But while he cannot help perceiving that the insight he is enabled to
obtain into this internal sphere of thought and feeling is in reality
the source of all his power, the very fountain of his predominance over
external nature, he yet feels himself capable of entering only very
imperfectly into these recesses of his own bosom, and analysing the
operations of his mind,--in this as in all other things, in short, “_a
being darkly wise_;” seeing that all the longest life and most vigorous
intellect can give him power to discover by his own research, or time
to know by availing himself of that of others, serves only to place
him on the very frontier of knowledge, and afford a distant glimpse
of boundless realms beyond, where no human thought has penetrated,
but which yet he is sure must be no less familiarly known to that
Intelligence which he traces throughout creation than the most obvious
truths which he himself daily applies to his most trifling purposes.
Is it wonderful that a being so constituted should first encourage a
hope, and by degrees acknowledge an assurance, that his intellectual
existence will not terminate with the dissolution of his corporeal
frame, but rather that in a future state of being, disencumbered of
a thousand obstructions which his present situation throws in his
way, endowed with acuter senses, and higher faculties, he shall drink
deep at that fountain of beneficent wisdom for which the slight taste
obtained on earth has given him so keen a relish?

(5.) Nothing, then, can be more unfounded than the objection which has
been taken, _in limine_, by persons, well meaning perhaps, certainly
narrow-minded, against the study of natural philosophy, and indeed
against all science,--that it fosters in its cultivators an undue and
overweening self-conceit, leads them to doubt the immortality of the
soul, and to scoff at revealed religion. Its natural effect, we may
confidently assert, on every well constituted mind is and must be
the direct contrary. No doubt, the testimony of natural reason, on
whatever exercised, must of necessity stop short of those truths which
it is the object of revelation to make known; but, while it places
the existence and principal attributes of a Deity on such grounds as
to render doubt impossible, it unquestionably opposes no natural or
necessary obstacle to further progress: on the contrary, by cherishing
as a vital principle an unbounded spirit of enquiry, and ardency of
expectation, it unfetters the mind from prejudices of every kind, and
leaves it open and free to every impression of a higher nature which
it is susceptible of receiving, guarding only against enthusiasm and
self-deception by a habit of strict investigation, but encouraging,
rather than suppressing, every thing that can offer a prospect or a
hope beyond the present obscure and unsatisfactory state. The character
of the true philosopher is to hope all things not impossible, and to
believe all things not unreasonable. He who has seen obscurities which
appeared impenetrable in physical and mathematical science suddenly
dispelled, and the most barren and unpromising fields of enquiry
converted, as if by inspiration, into rich and inexhaustible springs
of knowledge and power on a simple change of our point of view, or
by merely bringing to bear on them some principle which it never
occurred before to try, will surely be the very last to acquiesce in
any dispiriting prospects of either the present or future destinies of
mankind; while, on the other hand, the boundless views of intellectual
and moral as well as material relations which open on him on all hands
in the course of these pursuits, the knowledge of the trivial place he
occupies in the scale of creation, and the sense continually pressed
upon him of his own weakness and incapacity to suspend or modify the
slightest movement of the machinery he sees in action around him, must
effectually convince him that humility of pretension, no less than
confidence of hope, is what best becomes his character.

(6.) But while we thus vindicate the study of natural philosophy from a
charge at one time formidable, owing to the pertinacity and acrimony
with which it was urged, and still occasionally brought forward to
the distress and disgust of every well constituted mind, we must
take care that the testimony afforded by science to religion, be its
extent or value what it may, shall be at least independent, unbiassed,
and spontaneous. We do not here allude to such reasoners as would
make all nature bend to their narrow interpretations of obscure and
difficult passages in the sacred writings: such a course might well
become the persecutors of Galileo and the other bigots of the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, but can only be adopted by dreamers in the
present age. But, without going these lengths, it is no uncommon thing
to find persons, earnestly attached to science and anxious for its
promotion, who yet manifest a morbid sensibility on points of this
kind,--who exult and applaud when any fact starts up explanatory (as
they suppose) of some scriptural allusion and who feel pained and
disappointed when the general course of discovery in any department
of science runs wide of the notions with which particular passages in
the Bible may have impressed themselves. To persons of such a frame of
mind it ought to suffice to remark, on the one hand, that truth can
never be opposed to truth, and, on the other, that error is only to be
effectually confounded by searching deep and tracing it to its source.
Nevertheless, it were much to be wished that such persons, estimable
and excellent as many of them are, before they throw the weight of
their applause or discredit into the scale of scientific opinion on
such grounds, would reflect, first, that the credit and respectability
of _any_ evidence may be destroyed by tampering with its _honesty_;
and, secondly, that this very disposition of mind implies a lurking
mistrust in its own principles, since the grand and indeed only
character of truth is its capability of enduring the test of universal
experience, and coming unchanged out of every possible form of _fair_
discussion.

(7.) But if science may be vilified by representing it as opposed to
religion, or trammelled by mistaken notions of the danger of free
enquiry, there is yet another mode by which it may be degraded from
its native dignity, and that is by placing it in the light of a mere
appendage to and caterer for our pampered appetites. The question
“_cui bono_” to what practical end and advantage do your researches
tend? is one which the speculative philosopher who loves knowledge
for its own sake, and enjoys, as a rational being should enjoy, the
mere contemplation of harmonious and mutually dependent truths, can
seldom hear without a sense of humiliation. He feels that there is a
lofty and disinterested pleasure in his speculations which ought to
exempt them from such questioning; communicating as they do to his own
mind the purest happiness (after the exercise of the benevolent and
moral feelings) of which human nature is susceptible, and tending to
the injury of no one, he might surely allege _this_ as a sufficient
and direct reply to those who, having themselves little capacity, and
less relish for intellectual pursuits, are constantly repeating upon
him this enquiry. But if he can bring himself to descend from this
high but fair ground, and justify himself, his pursuits, and his
pleasures in the eyes of those around him, he has only to point to the
history of all science, where speculations, apparently unprofitable,
have, in innumerable instances, been those from which great practical
applications have emanated. What, for instance, could be more so than
the dry speculations of the ancient geometers on the properties of the
conic sections, or than the dreams of Kepler (as they would naturally
appear to his contemporaries) about the numerical harmonies of the
universe? Yet these are the steps by which we have risen to a knowledge
of the elliptic motions of the planets and the law of gravitation,
with all its splendid theoretical consequences, and its inestimable
practical results. The ridicule attached to “_Swing-swangs_” in
Hooke’s time[1] did not prevent him from reviving the proposal of the
_pendulum_ as a standard of measure, since so effectually wrought into
practice by the genius and perseverance of Captain Kater;--nor did
that which Boyle encountered in his researches on the elasticity and
pressure of the air act as any obstacle to the train of discovery which
terminated in the steam-engine. The dreams of the alchemists led them
on in the path of experiment, and drew attention to the wonders of
chemistry, while they brought their advocates (it must be admitted) to
merited contempt and ruin. But in this case it was moral dereliction
which gave to ridicule a weight and power not necessarily or naturally
belonging to it: but among the alchemists were men of superior minds,
who reasoned while they worked, and who, not content to grope always in
the dark, and blunder on their object, sought carefully in the observed
nature of their agents for guides in their pursuit. To these we owe the
creation of experimental philosophy.

(8.) Not that it is meant, by any thing above said, to assert
that there is no such thing as a great or a little in speculative
philosophy, or to place the solution of an enigma on a level with
the developement of a law of nature, still less to adopt the homely
definition of Smith[2], that a philosopher is a person whose trade it
is to do nothing, and speculate on every thing. The speculations of
the natural philosopher, however remote they may for a time lead him
from beaten tracks and every-day uses, being grounded in the realities
of nature, have all, of necessity, a practical application,--nay
more, such applications form the very criterions of their truth,
they afford the readiest and completest verifications of his
theories;--verifications which he will no more neglect to test them by
than an arithmetician would omit to _prove_ his sums, or a cautious
geometer to try his general theorems by particular cases.[3]

(9.) After all, however, it must be confessed, that to minds
unacquainted with science, and unused to consider the mutual
dependencies of its various branches, there is something neither
unnatural nor altogether blamable in the ready occurrence of this
question of direct advantage. It requires some habit of abstraction,
some penetration of the mind with a tincture of scientific enquiry,
some conviction of the value of those estimable and treasured
principles which lie concealed in the most common and homely
facts,--some experience, in fine, of success in developing and placing
them in evidence, announcing them in precise terms, and applying them
to the explanation of other facts of a less familiar character, or to
the accomplishment of some obviously useful purpose:--to cure the mind
of this tendency to rush at once upon its object, to undervalue the
means in over-estimation of the end, and while gazing too intently at
the goal which alone it has been accustomed to desire, to lose sight
of the richness and variety of the prospects that offer themselves on
either hand on the road.

(10.) We must never forget that it is principles, not phenomena,--the
interpretation, not the mere knowledge of facts,--which are the
objects of enquiry to the natural philosopher. As truth is single,
and consistent with itself, a principle may be as completely and as
plainly elucidated by the most familiar and simple fact, as by the
most imposing and uncommon phenomenon. The colours which glitter on
a soap-bubble are the immediate consequence of a principle the most
important from the variety of phenomena it explains, and the most
beautiful, from its simplicity and compendious neatness, in the whole
science of optics. If the nature of periodical colours can be made
intelligible by the contemplation of such a trivial object, from that
moment it becomes a noble instrument in the eye of correct judgment;
and to blow a large, regular, and durable soap-bubble may become the
serious and praiseworthy endeavour of a sage, while children stand
round and scoff, or children of a larger growth hold up their hands
in astonishment at such waste of time and trouble. To the natural
philosopher there is no natural object unimportant or trifling. From
the least of nature’s works he may learn the greatest lessons. The fall
of an apple to the ground may raise his thoughts to the laws which
govern the revolutions of the planets in their orbits; or the situation
of a pebble may afford him evidence of the state of the globe he
inhabits, myriads of ages ago, before his species became its denizens.

(11.) And this is, in fact, one of the great sources of delight
which the study of natural science imparts to its votaries. A mind
which has once imbibed a taste for scientific enquiry, and has
learnt the habit of applying its principles readily to the cases
which occur, has within itself an inexhaustible source of pure and
exciting contemplations:--one would think that Shakspeare had such
a mind in view when he describes a contemplative man as finding all
nature eloquent--the very trees, the brooks, and the stones reading
to him lessons of deep and serious import. Accustomed to trace the
operation of general causes, and the exemplification of general laws,
in circumstances where the uninformed and unenquiring eye perceives
neither novelty nor beauty, he walks in the midst of wonders: every
object which falls in his way elucidates some principle, affords some
instruction, and impresses him with a sense of harmony and order. Nor
is it a mere passive pleasure which is thus communicated. A thousand
questions are continually arising in his mind, a thousand subjects of
enquiry presenting themselves, which keep his faculties in constant
exercise, and his thoughts perpetually on the wing, so that lassitude
is excluded from his life, and that craving after artificial excitement
and dissipation of mind, which leads so many into frivolous, unworthy,
and destructive pursuits, is altogether eradicated from his bosom.

(12.) It is not one of the least advantages of these pursuits, which,
however, they possess in common with every class of intellectual
pleasures, that they are altogether independent of external
circumstances, and are to be enjoyed in every situation in which a man
can be placed in life. The highest degrees of worldly prosperity are so
far from being incompatible with them, that they supply inestimable
advantages for their pursuit, and that sort of fresh and renewed relish
which arises partly from the sense of contrast, partly from experience
of the peculiar pre-eminence they possess over the pleasures of sense
in their capability of unlimited increase and continual repetition
without satiety or distaste. They may be enjoyed, too, in the intervals
of the most active business; and the calm and dispassionate interest
with which they fill the mind renders them a most delightful retreat
from the agitations and dissensions of the world, and from the conflict
of passions, prejudices, and interests in which the man of business
finds himself involved. There is something in the contemplation of
general laws which powerfully induces and persuades us to merge
individual feeling, and to commit ourselves unreservedly to their
disposal; while the observation of the calm, energetic regularity of
nature, the immense scale of her operations, and the certainty with
which her ends are attained, tends, irresistibly, to tranquillize and
re-assure the mind, and render it less accessible to repining, selfish,
and turbulent emotions. And this it does, not by debasing our nature
into weak compliances and abject submission to circumstances, but by
filling us, as from an inward spring, with a sense of nobleness and
power which enables us to rise superior to them; by showing us our
strength and innate dignity, and by calling upon us for the exercise
of those powers and faculties by which we are susceptible of the
comprehension of so much greatness, and which form, as it were, a link
between ourselves and the best and noblest benefactors of our species,
with whom we hold communion in thoughts and participate in discoveries
which have raised them above their fellow-mortals, and brought them
nearer to their Creator.




CHAP. II.

  OF ABSTRACT SCIENCE AS A PREPARATION FOR THE STUDY OF PHYSICS.--A
    PROFOUND ACQUAINTANCE WITH IT NOT INDISPENSABLE FOR A CLEAR
    UNDERSTANDING OF PHYSICAL LAWS.--HOW A CONVICTION OF THEIR TRUTH
    MAY BE OBTAINED WITHOUT IT.--INSTANCES.--FURTHER DIVISION OF THE
    SUBJECT.


(13.) Science is the knowledge of many, orderly and methodically
digested and arranged, so as to become attainable by one. The knowledge
of reasons and their conclusions constitutes _abstract_, that of causes
and their effects, and of the laws of nature, _natural science_.

(14.) Abstract science is independent of a system of nature,--of a
creation,--of every thing, in short, except memory, thought, and
reason. Its objects are, first, those primary existences and relations
which we cannot even conceive not to _be_, such as space, time,
number, order, &c.; and, secondly, those artificial forms, or symbols,
which thought has the power of creating for itself at pleasure, and
substituting as representatives, by the aid of memory, for combinations
of those primary objects and of its own conceptions,--either to
facilitate the act of reasoning respecting them, or as convenient
deposits of its own conclusions, or for their communication to others.
Such are, first, _language_, oral or written; its conventional forms,
which constitute grammar, and the rules for its use in argument,
in which consists the logic of the schools; secondly, _notation_,
which, applied to _number_, is _arithmetic_,--and, to the more general
relations of abstract quantity or order, is _algebra_; and, thirdly,
that higher kind of logic, which teaches us to use our reason in the
most advantageous manner for the discovery of truth; which points
out the criterions by which we may be sure we have attained it; and
which, by detecting the sources of error, and exposing the haunts where
fallacies are apt to lurk, at once warns us of their danger, and shows
us how to avoid them. This greater logic may be termed _rational_[4];
while, to that inferior department which is conversant with words
alone, the epithet _verbal_[5] may, for distinction, be applied.

(15.) A certain moderate degree of acquaintance with abstract science
is highly desirable to every one who would make any considerable
progress in physics. As the universe exists in time and place; and as
motion, velocity, quantity, number, and order, are main elements of
our knowledge of external things and their changes, an acquaintance
with these, abstractedly considered, (that is to say, independent of
any consideration of the particular things moved, measured, counted,
or arranged,) must evidently be a useful preparation for the more
complex study of nature. But there is yet another recommendation of
such sciences as a preparation for the study of natural philosophy.
Their objects are so definite, and our notions of them so distinct,
that we can reason about them with an assurance, that the words and
signs used in our reasonings are full and true representatives of the
things signified; and, consequently, that when we use language or signs
in argument, we neither, by their use, introduce extraneous notions,
nor exclude any part of the case before us from consideration. For
example: the words space, square, circle, a hundred, &c., convey to
the mind notions so complete in themselves, and so distinct from every
thing else, that we are sure when we use them we know and have in
view the whole of our own meaning. It is widely different with words
expressing natural objects and mixed relations. Take, for instance,
iron. Different persons attach very different ideas to this word. One
who has never heard of magnetism has a widely different notion of
_iron_ from one in the contrary predicament. The vulgar, who regard
this metal as incombustible, and the chemist, who sees it burn with the
utmost fury, and who has other reasons for regarding it as one of the
most combustible bodies in nature;--the poet, who uses it as an emblem
of rigidity; and the smith and engineer, in whose hands it is plastic,
and moulded like wax into every form;--the jailer, who prizes it as
an obstruction, and the electrician, who sees in it only a channel of
open communication by which that most impassable of obstacles, the
air, may be traversed by his imprisoned fluid, have all different, and
all imperfect, notions of the same word. The meaning of such a term
is like a rainbow--every body sees a different one, and all maintain
it to be the same. So it is with nearly all our terms of sense. Some
are indefinite, as hard or soft, light or heavy (terms which were at
one time the sources of innumerable mistakes and controversies); some
excessively complex, as man, life, instinct. But, what is worst of
all, some, nay most, have two or three meanings; sufficiently distinct
from each other to make a proposition true in one sense and false in
another, or even false altogether; yet not distinct enough to keep us
from confounding them in the process by which we arrived at it, or
to enable us immediately to recognise the fallacy when led to it by
a train of reasoning, each step of which we _think_ we have examined
and approved. Surely those who thus attach two senses to one word, or
superadd a new meaning to an old one, act as absurdly as colonists who
distribute themselves over the world, naming every place they come
to by the names of those they have left, till all distinctions of
geographical nomenclature are confounded, and till we are unable to
decide whether an occurrence stated to have happened at Windsor took
place in Europe, America, or Australia.[6]

(16.) It is, in fact, in this double or incomplete sense of words that
we must look for the origin of a very large portion of the errors
into which we fall. Now, the study of the abstract sciences, such as
arithmetic, geometry, algebra, &c., while they afford scope for the
exercise of reasoning about objects that are, or, at least, may be
conceived to be, external to us; yet, being free from these sources
of error and mistake, accustom us to the strict use of language as
an instrument of reason, and by familiarizing us, in our progress
towards truth, to walk uprightly and straight-forward on firm ground,
give us that proper and dignified carriage of mind which could never
be acquired by having always to pick our steps among obstructions
and loose fragments, or to steady them in the reeling tempest of
conflicting meanings.

(17.) But there is yet another point of view under which some
acquaintance with abstract science may be regarded as highly desirable
in general education, if not indispensably necessary, to impress on us
the distinction between strict and vague reasoning, to show us what
demonstration really _is_, and to give us thereby a full and intimate
sense of the nature and strength of the evidence on which our knowledge
of the actual system of nature, and the laws of natural phenomena,
rests. For this purpose, however, a very moderate acquaintance with the
more elementary branches of mathematics may suffice. The chain is laid
before us, and every link is submitted to our unreserved examination,
if we have patience and inclination to enter on such detail. Hundreds
have gone through it, and will continue to do so; but, for the
generality of mankind, it is enough to satisfy themselves of the
solidity and adamantine texture of its materials, and the unreserved
exposure of its weakest, as well as its strongest, parts. If, however,
we content ourselves with this general view of the matter, we must be
content also to take on trust, that is, on the authority of those who
have examined deeper, every conclusion which cannot be made apparent
to our senses. Now, among these there are many so very surprising,
indeed apparently so extravagant, that it is quite impossible for any
enquiring mind to rest contented with a mere hearsay statement of
them,--we feel irresistibly impelled to enquire further into their
truth. What mere assertion will make any man believe, that in one
second of time, in one beat of the pendulum of a clock, a ray of light
travels over 192,000 miles, and would therefore perform the tour of the
world in about the same time that it requires to wink with our eyelids,
and in much less than a swift runner occupies in taking a single
stride? What mortal can be made to believe, without demonstration, that
the sun is almost a million times larger than the earth? and that,
although so remote from us, that a cannon ball shot directly towards
it, and maintaining its full speed, would be twenty years in reaching
it, it yet affects the earth by its attraction in an inappreciable
instant of time?--a closeness of union of which we can form but a
feeble, and totally inadequate, idea, by comparing it to any material
connection; since the communication of an impulse to such a distance,
by any solid intermedium we are acquainted with, would require, not
moments, but whole years. And when, with pain and difficulty we have
strained our imagination to conceive a distance so vast, a force so
intense and penetrating, if we are told that the one dwindles to an
insensible point, and the other is unfelt at the nearest of the fixed
stars, from the mere effect of their remoteness, while among those
very stars are some whose actual splendour exceeds by many hundred
times that of the sun itself, although we may not deny the truth of the
assertion, we cannot but feel the keenest curiosity to know _how_ such
things were ever made out.

(18.) The foregoing are among those results of scientific research
which, by their magnitude, seem to transcend our powers of conception.
There are others, again, which, from their minuteness, would appear
to elude the grasp of thought, much more of distinct and accurate
measurement. Who would not ask for demonstration, when told that a
gnat’s wing, in its ordinary flight, beats many hundred times in a
second? or that there exist animated and regularly organized beings,
many thousands of whose bodies laid close together would not extend an
inch? But what are these to the astonishing truths which modern optical
enquiries have disclosed, which teach us that every point of a medium
through which a ray of light passes is affected with a succession of
periodical movements, regularly recurring at equal intervals, no less
than five hundred millions of millions of times in a single second!
that it is by such movements, communicated to the nerves of our eyes,
that we see:--nay more, that it is the _difference_ in the frequency of
their recurrence which affects us with the sense of the diversity of
colour; that, for instance, in acquiring the sensation of redness our
eyes are affected four hundred and eighty-two millions of millions of
times; of yellowness, five hundred and forty-two millions of millions
of times; and of violet, seven hundred and seven millions of millions
of times per second.[7] Do not such things sound more like the ravings
of madmen, than the sober conclusions of people in their waking senses?

(19.) They are, nevertheless, conclusions to which any one may most
certainly arrive, who will only be at the trouble of examining the
chain of reasoning by which they have been deduced; but, in order
to do this, something beyond the mere elements of abstract science
is required. Waving, however, such instances as these, which, after
all, are rather calculated to surprise and astound than for any other
purpose, it must be observed that it is not possible to satisfy
ourselves completely that we _have_ arrived at a true statement of any
law of nature, until, setting out from such statement, and making it
a foundation of reasoning, we can show, by strict argument, that the
facts observed must follow from it as necessary logical consequences,
and _this_, not vaguely and generally, but with all possible precision
in time, place, weight, and measure.

(20.) To do this, however, as we shall presently see, requires in many
cases a degree of knowledge of mathematics and geometry altogether
unattainable by the generality of mankind, who have not the leisure,
even if they all had the capacity, to enter into such enquiries,
some of which are indeed of that degree of difficulty that they can
be only successfully prosecuted by persons who devote to them their
whole attention, and make them the serious business of their lives.
But there is scarcely any person of good ordinary understanding,
however little exercised in abstract enquiries, who may not be readily
made to comprehend at least the general train of reasoning by which
any of the great truths of physics are deduced, and the essential
bearings and connections of the several parts of natural philosophy.
There are whole branches too and very extensive and important ones, to
which mathematical reasoning has never been at all applied; such as
chemistry, geology, and natural history in general, and many others,
in which it plays a very subordinate part, and of which the essential
principles, and the grounds of application to useful purposes, may
be perfectly well understood by a student who possesses no more
mathematical knowledge than the rules of arithmetic; so that no one
need be deterred from the acquisition of knowledge, or even from
active original research in such subjects, by a want of mathematical
information. Even in those branches which, like astronomy, optics, and
dynamics, are almost exclusively under the dominion of mathematics, and
in which no effectual progress can be made without _some_ acquaintance
with geometry, the principal _results_ may be perfectly understood
without it. To one incapable of following out the intricacies of
mathematical demonstration, the conviction afforded by verified
predictions must stand in the place of that purer and more satisfactory
reliance which a verification of every step in the process of reasoning
can alone afford, since every one will acknowledge the validity of
pretensions which he is in the daily habit of seeing brought to the
test of practice.

(21.) Among the verifications of this practical kind which abound
in every department of physics, there are none more imposing than
the precise prediction of the greater phenomena of astronomy; none,
certainly, which carry a broader conviction home to every mind from
their notoriety and unequivocal character. The prediction of eclipses
has accordingly from the earliest ages excited the admiration of
mankind, and been one grand instrument by which their allegiance (so
to speak) to natural science, and their respect for its professors,
has been maintained; and though strangely abused in unenlightened ages
by the supernatural pretensions of astrologers, the credence given
even to their absurdities shows the force of this kind of evidence on
men’s minds. The predictions of astronomers are, however, now far too
familiar to endanger the just equipoise of our judgment, since even the
return of comets, true to their paths and exact to the hour of their
appointment, has ceased to amaze, though it must ever delight all who
have souls capable of being penetrated by such beautiful instances of
accordance between theory and facts. But the age of mere wonder in
such things is past, and men prefer being guided and enlightened, to
being astonished and dazzled. Eclipses, comets, and the like, afford
but rare and transient displays of the powers of calculation, and of
the certainty of the principles on which it is grounded. A page of
“lunar distances” from the Nautical Almanack is worth all the eclipses
that have ever happened for inspiring this necessary confidence in the
conclusions of science. That a man, by merely measuring the moon’s
apparent distance from a star with a little portable instrument held
in his hand, and applied to his eye, even with so unstable a footing
as the deck of a ship, shall say positively, within five miles, where
he is, on a boundless ocean, cannot but appear to persons ignorant of
physical astronomy an approach to the miraculous. Yet, the alternatives
of life and death, wealth and ruin, are daily and hourly staked with
perfect confidence on these marvellous computations, which might
almost seem to have been devised on purpose to show how closely the
extremes of speculative refinement and practical utility can be brought
to approximate. We have before us an anecdote communicated to us by
a naval officer[8], distinguished for the extent and variety of his
attainments, which shows how impressive such results may become in
practice. He sailed from San Blas on the west coast of Mexico, and
after a voyage of 8000 miles, occupying 89 days, arrived off Rio de
Janeiro, having, in this interval, passed through the Pacific Ocean,
rounded Cape Horn, and crossed the South Atlantic, without making any
land, or even seeing a single sail, with the exception of an American
whaler off Cape Horn. Arrived within a week’s sail of Rio, he set
seriously about determining, by lunar observations, the precise line
of the ship’s course and its situation in it at a determinate moment,
and having ascertained this within from five to ten miles, ran the
rest of the way by those more ready and compendious methods, known to
navigators, which can be safely employed for short trips between one
known point and another, but which cannot be trusted in long voyages,
where the moon is the only sure guide. The rest of the tale we are
enabled by his kindness to state in his own words:--“We steered towards
Rio de Janeiro for some days after taking the lunars above described,
and having arrived within fifteen or twenty miles of the coast, I hove
to at four in the morning till the day should break, and then bore
up; for although it was very hazy, we could see before us a couple of
miles or so. About eight o’clock it became so foggy that I did not
like to stand in farther, and was just bringing the ship to the wind
again before sending the people to breakfast, when it suddenly cleared
off, and I had the satisfaction of seeing the great Sugar Loaf Rock,
which stands on one side of the harbour’s mouth, so nearly right ahead
that we had not to alter our course above a point in order to hit the
entrance of Rio. This was the first land we had seen for three months,
after crossing so many seas and being set backwards and forwards by
innumerable currents and foul winds.” The effect on all on board might
well be conceived to have been electric; and it is needless to remark
how essentially the authority of a commanding officer over his crew may
be strengthened by the occurrence of such incidents, indicative of a
degree of knowledge and consequent power beyond their reach.

(22.) But even such results as these, striking as they are, yet fall
short of the force with which conviction is urged upon us when,
through the medium of reasoning too abstract for common apprehension,
we arrive at conclusions which outrun experience, and describe
beforehand what will happen under new combinations, or even correct
imperfect experiments, and lead us to a knowledge of facts contrary
to received analogies drawn from an experience wrongly interpreted
or overhastily generalised. To give an example:--every body knows
that objects viewed through a transparent medium, such as water or
glass, appear distorted or displaced. Thus, a stick in water appears
bent, and an object seen through a prism or wedge of glass seems to
be thrown aside from its true place. This effect is owing to what is
called the _refraction_ of light; and a simple rule discovered by
Willebrod Snell enables any one to say exactly _how much_ the stick
will be bent, and _how far_, and in what _direction_, the apparent
situation of an object seen through the glass will deviate from the
real one. If a shilling be laid at the bottom of a basin of water
and viewed obliquely, it will appear to be raised by the water; if
instead of water spirits of wine be used it will appear more raised;
if oil, still more:--but in none of these cases will it appear to be
thrown _aside_ to the _right_ or _left_ of its true place, however
the eye be situated. The _plane_, in which are contained the eye,
the object, and the point in the surface of the liquid at which the
object is seen, is an upright or _vertical_ plane; and this is one of
the principal characters in the _ordinary refraction_ of light, viz.
that the ray by which we see an object through a refracting surface,
although it undergoes a bending, and is, as it were, broken at the
surface, yet, in pursuing its course to the eye, does not _quit a plane
perpendicular to the refracting surface_. But there are again other
substances, such as rock-crystal, and especially Iceland spar, which
possess the singular property of _doubling_ the image or appearance
of an object seen through them in certain directions; so that instead
of seeing one object we see two, side by side, when such a crystal or
spar is interposed between the object and the eye; and if a ray or
small sunbeam be thrown upon a surface of either of these substances,
it will be split into two, making an angle with each other, and each
pursuing its own separate course,--this is called _double refraction_.
Now, of these images or doubly refracted rays, one always follows
the same rule as if the substance were glass or water: its deviation
can be correctly calculated by Snell’s law above mentioned, and it
does not quit the plane perpendicular to the refracting surface. The
other ray, on the contrary, (which is therefore said to have undergone
_extraordinary refraction_) _does_ quit that plane, and the amount of
its deviation from its former course requires for its determination a
much more complicated rule, which cannot be understood or even stated
without a pretty intimate knowledge of geometry. Now, rock-crystal
and Iceland spar differ from glass in a very remarkable circumstance.
They affect naturally certain regular figures, not being found in
shapeless lumps, but in determinate geometrical forms; and they are
susceptible of being cleft or split much easier in certain directions
than in others--they have a _grain_ which glass has not. When other
substances having this peculiarity (and which are called _crystallized_
substances) were examined, they were all, or by far the greater part,
found to possess this singular property of _double refraction_; and
it was very natural to conclude, therefore, that the same thing took
place in all of them, viz. that of the two rays, into which any beam of
light falling on the surface of such a substance was split, or of the
two images of an object seen through it, _one_ only was turned aside
out of its _plane_ and _extraordinarily_ refracted, while the other
followed the _ordinary_ rule. Accordingly this was supposed to be the
case; and not only so, but from some trials and measurements purposely
made by a philosopher of great eminence, it was considered to be a fact
sufficiently established by experiment.

(23.) Perhaps we might have remained long under this impression, for
the measurements are delicate, and the subject very difficult. But
it has lately been demonstrated by an eminent French philosopher and
mathematician, M. Fresnel, that, granting certain _principles_ or
postulates, all the phenomena of double refraction, including perhaps
the greatest variety of facts that have ever yet been arranged under
one general head, may be satisfactorily explained and deduced from them
by strict mathematical calculation; and _that_, when applied to the
cases first mentioned, these principles give a satisfactory account
of the _want_ of the extraordinary image; _that_ when applied to such
cases as those of rock-crystal or Iceland spar, they also give a
correct account of both the images, and agree in their conclusions with
the rules before ascertained for them: but so far from coinciding with
that part of the previous statement, which would make these conclusions
extend to all crystallised substances, M. Fresnel’s principles lead
to a conclusion quite opposite, and point to a _fact_ which had never
been observed, viz. that in by far the greater number of crystallized
substances which possess the property of double refraction, _neither_
of the images follows the ordinary law, but both undergo a deviation
from their original plane. Now this had never been observed to be
the case in any previous trial, and all opinion was against it. But
when put to the test of experiment in a great variety of new and
ingenious methods, it was found to be fully verified; and to complete
the evidence, the substances on whose imperfect examination the
first erroneous conclusion was founded, having been lately subjected
to a fresh and more scrupulous examination, the result has shown
the insufficiency of the former measurements, and proved in perfect
accordance with the newly discovered laws. Now it will be observed
in this case, first, that, so far from the principles assumed by M.
Fresnel being at all obvious, they are extremely remote from ordinary
observation; and, secondly, that the chain of reasoning by which they
are brought to the test is one of such length and complexity, and the
purely mathematical difficulty of their application so great, that
no _mere_ good common sense, no general tact or ordinary practical
reasoning, would afford the slightest chance of threading their
mazes. Cases like this are the triumph of theories. They show at once
how large a part pure reason has to perform in our examination of
nature, and how implicit our reliance ought to be on that powerful and
methodical system of rules and processes which constitute the modern
mathematical analysis, in all the more difficult applications of exact
calculation to her phenomena.

(24.) To take an instance more within ordinary apprehension. An
eminent living geometer had proved by calculations, founded on strict
optical principles, that in the _centre of the shadow_ of a small
circular plate of metal, exposed in a dark room to a beam of light
emanating from a _very small brilliant point_, there ought to be no
darkness,--in fact, _no shadow_ at that place; but, on the contrary, a
degree of illumination precisely as bright as if the metal plate were
away. Strange and even impossible as this conclusion may seem, it has
been put to the trial, and found perfectly correct.[9]

(25.) We shall now proceed to consider more particularly, and in
detail,--

    I. The nature and objects immediate and collateral of physical
         science, as regarded in itself, and in its application to
         the practical purposes of life, and its influence on the
         well-being and progress of society.

   II. The principles on which it relies for its successful
         prosecution, and the rules by which a systematic examination
         of nature should be conducted, with examples illustrative of
         their influence.

  III. The subdivision of physical science into distinct branches,
         and their mutual relations.




CHAP. III.

  OF THE NATURE AND OBJECTS, IMMEDIATE AND COLLATERAL, OF PHYSICAL
    SCIENCE, AS REGARDED IN ITSELF, AND IN ITS APPLICATION TO THE
    PRACTICAL PURPOSES OF LIFE, AND ITS INFLUENCE ON THE WELL-BEING
    AND PROGRESS OF SOCIETY.


(26.) The first thing impressed on us from our earliest infancy is,
that events do not succeed one another at random, but with a certain
degree of order, regularity, and connection;--some constantly, and, as
we are apt to think, immutably,--as the alternation of day and night,
summer and winter,--others contingently, as the motion of a body from
its place, if pushed, or the burning of a stick if thrust into the
fire. The knowledge that the former class of events _has_ gone on,
uninterruptedly, for ages beyond all memory, impresses us with a strong
expectation that it will continue to do so in the same manner; and
thus our notion of an _order of nature_ is originated and confirmed.
If every thing were equally regular and periodical, and the succession
of events liable to no change depending on our own will, it may be
doubted whether we should ever think of looking for causes. No one
regards the night as the cause of the day, or the day of night. They
are alternate effects of a common cause, which their regular succession
alone gives us no sufficient clue for determining. It is chiefly,
perhaps entirely, from the other or contingent class of events that
we gain our notions of cause and effect. From them alone we gather
that there are such things as laws of nature. The very idea of a law
includes that of contingency. “_Si quis mala carmina condidisset, fuste
ferito_;” if such a case arise, such a course shall be followed,--if
the match be applied to the gunpowder, it will explode. Every law is a
provision for cases which _may_ occur, and has relation to an infinite
number of cases that never have occurred, and never will. Now, it is
this provision, _à priori_, for contingencies, this contemplation
of possible occurrences, and predisposal of what shall happen, that
impresses us with the notion of a _law_ and a _cause_. Among all the
possible combinations of the fifty or sixty elements which chemistry
shows to exist on the earth, it is likely, nay almost certain, that
_some_ have never been formed; that some elements, in some proportions,
and under some circumstances, have never yet been placed in relation
with one another. Yet no chemist can doubt that it is _already fixed_
what they will do when the case does occur. They will obey certain
laws, of which we know nothing at present, but which must _be_ already
fixed, or they could not be laws. It is not by habit, or by trial
and failure, that they will learn what to do. When the contingency
occurs, there will be no hesitation, no consultation;--their course
will at once be decided, and will always be the same if it occur ever
so often in succession, or in ever so many places at one and the same
instant. This is the perfection of a law, that it includes all possible
contingencies, and ensures implicit obedience,--and of this kind are
the laws of nature.

(27.) This use of the word _law_, however, our readers will of course
perceive has relation to us as understanding, rather than to the
materials of which the universe consists as obeying, certain rules.
To obey a law, to act in _compliance_ with a rule, supposes an
understanding and a will, a power of complying or not, in the being who
obeys and complies, which we do not admit as belonging to mere matter.
The Divine Author of the universe cannot be supposed to have laid down
particular laws, enumerating all individual contingencies, which his
materials have understood and obey,--this would be to attribute to
him the imperfections of human legislation;--but rather, by creating
them, endued with certain fixed qualities and powers, he has impressed
them in their origin with the _spirit_, not the _letter_, of his law,
and made all their subsequent combinations and relations inevitable
consequences of this first impression, by which, however, we would no
way be understood to deny the constant exercise of his direct power in
maintaining the system of nature, or the ultimate emanation of every
energy which material agents exert from his immediate will, acting in
conformity with his own laws.

(28.) The discoveries of modern chemistry have gone far to establish
the truth of an opinion entertained by some of the ancients, that
the universe consists of distinct, separate, indivisible _atoms_,
or individual beings so minute as to escape our senses, except when
united by millions, and by this aggregation making up bodies of even
the smallest visible bulk; and we have the strongest evidence that,
although there exist great and essential differences in individuals
among these atoms, they may yet all be arranged in a very limited
number of groups or classes, all the individuals of each of which
are, to all intents and purposes, _exactly alike_ in all their
properties. Now, when we see a great number of things precisely alike,
we do not believe this similarity to have originated except from a
common principle independent of them; and that we recognise this
likeness, chiefly by the identity of their deportment under similar
circumstances, strengthens rather than weakens the conclusion. A line
of spinning-jennies[10], or a regiment of soldiers dressed exactly
alike, and going through precisely the same evolutions, gives us no
idea of independent existence: we must see them act out of concert
before we can believe them to have independent wills and properties,
not impressed on them from without. And this conclusion, which would
be strong even were there only two individuals precisely alike in
_all_ respects and _for ever_, acquires irresistible force when their
number is multiplied beyond the power of imagination to conceive. If
we mistake not, then, the discoveries alluded to effectually destroy
the idea of an _eternal self-existent matter_, by giving to each of its
atoms the essential characters, at once, of a _manufactured article_,
and a _subordinate agent_.

(29.) But to ascend to the origin of things, and speculate on the
creation, is not the business of the natural philosopher. An humbler
field is sufficient for him in the endeavour to discover, as far
as our faculties will permit, what _are_ these primary qualities
originally and unalterably impressed on matter, and to discover the
_spirit_ of the laws of nature, which includes groups and classes of
relations and facts from the _letter_ which, as before observed, is
presented to us by single phenomena: or if, after all, this should
prove impossible; if such a step be beyond our faculties; and the
essential qualities of material agents be really _occult_, or incapable
of being expressed in any form intelligible to our understandings, at
least to approach as near to their comprehension as the nature of the
case will allow; and devise such forms of words as shall include and
_represent_ the greatest possible multitude and variety of phenomena.

(30.) Now, in this research there would seem one great question to
be disposed of before our enquiries can even be commenced with any
thing like a prospect of success, which is, whether the laws of
nature themselves _have_ that degree of permanence and fixity which
can render them subjects of systematic discussion; or whether, on the
other hand, the qualities of natural agents are subject to mutation
from the lapse of time. To the ancients, who lived in the infancy of
the world, or rather, in the infancy of man’s experience, this was a
very rational subject of question, and hence their distinctions between
corruptible and incorruptible matter. Thus, according to some among
them, the matter only of the celestial spaces is pure, immutable, and
incorruptible, while all sublunary things are in a constant state of
lapse and change; the world becoming paralysed and effete with age,
and man himself deteriorating in character, and diminishing at once in
intellectual and bodily stature. But to us, who have the experience
of some additional thousands of years, the question of permanence is
already, in a great measure, decided in the affirmative. The refined
speculations of modern astronomy, grounding their conclusions on
observations made at very remote periods, have proved to demonstration,
that one at least of the great powers of nature, the force of
gravitation, the main bond and support of the material universe, has
undergone no change in intensity from a high antiquity. The stature of
mankind is just what it was three thousand years ago, as the specimens
of mummies which have been examined at various times sufficiently
show. The intellect of Newton, Laplace, or Lagrange, may stand in
fair competition with that of Archimedes, Aristotle, or Plato; and the
virtues and patriotism of Washington with the brightest examples of
ancient history.

(31.) Again, the researches of chemists have shown that what the
vulgar call corruption, destruction, &c., is nothing but a change of
arrangement of the same ingredient elements, the disposition of the
same materials into other forms, without the loss or actual destruction
of a single atom; and thus any doubts of the permanence of natural
laws are discountenanced, and the whole weight of _appearances_ thrown
into the opposite scale. One of the most obvious cases of apparent
destruction is, when any thing is ground to dust and scattered to the
winds. But it is one thing to grind a fabric to powder, and another to
annihilate its materials: scattered as they may be, they must fall
somewhere, and continue, if only as ingredients of the soil, to perform
their humble but useful part in the economy of nature. The destruction
produced by fire is more striking: in many cases, as in the burning
of a piece of charcoal or a taper, there is no smoke, nothing visibly
dissipated and carried away; the burning body wastes and disappears,
while nothing _seems_ to be produced but warmth and light, which we
are not in the habit of considering as substances; and when all has
disappeared, except perhaps some trifling ashes, we naturally enough
suppose it is gone, lost, destroyed. But when the question is examined
more exactly, we detect, in the invisible stream of heated air which
ascends from the glowing coal or flaming wax, the _whole_ ponderable
matter, only united in a new combination with the air, and dissolved in
it. Yet, so far from being thereby destroyed, it is only become again
what it was before it existed in the form of charcoal or wax, an active
agent in the business of the world, and a main support of vegetable
and animal life, and is still susceptible of running again and again
the same round, as circumstances may determine; so that, for aught we
can see to the contrary, the same identical atom may lie concealed for
thousands of centuries in a limestone rock; may at length be quarried,
set free in the limekiln, mix with the air, be absorbed from it by
plants, and, in succession, become a part of the frames of myriads of
living beings, till some concurrence of events consigns it once more to
a long repose, which, however, no way unfits it from again resuming its
former activity.

(32.) Now, this absolute indestructibility of the ultimate materials
of the world, in periods commensurate to our experience, and their
obstinate retention of the same properties, under whatever variety of
circumstances we choose to place them, however violent and seemingly
contradictory to their natures, is, of itself, enough to render it
highly improbable that time alone should have any influence over
them. All that age or decay can do seems to be included in a wasting
of parts which are only dissipated, not destroyed, or in a change of
sensible properties, which chemistry demonstrates to arise only from
new combinations of the same ingredients. But, after all, the question
is one entirely of experience: we cannot be sure, _à priori_, that
the laws of nature are _immutable_; but we can ascertain, by enquiry,
_whether they change or not_; and to this enquiry all experience
answers in the negative. It is not, of course, intended here to
deny that great operations, productive of extensive changes in the
visible state of nature,--such as, for instance, those contemplated
by the geologists, and embracing for their completion vast periods
of time,--are constantly going on; but these are consequences and
fulfilments of the laws of nature, not contradictions or exceptions
to them. No theorist regards such changes as alterations in the
fundamental principles of nature; he only endeavours to reconcile them,
and show how they result from laws already known, and judges of the
correctness of his theory by their ultimate agreement.

(33.) But the laws of nature are not only permanent, but consistent,
intelligible, and discoverable with such a moderate degree of
research, as is calculated rather to stimulate than to weary curiosity.
If we were set down, as creatures of another world, in any existing
society of mankind, and began to speculate on their actions, we should
find it difficult at first to ascertain whether they were subject to
any laws at all: but when, by degrees, we had found out that they did
consider themselves to be so; and would then proceed to ascertain, from
their conduct and its consequences, what these laws were, and in what
spirit conceived; though we might not perhaps have much difficulty
in discovering single rules applicable to particular cases, yet, the
moment we came to generalize, and endeavour from these to ascend, step
by step, and discover any steady pervading principle, the mass of
incongruities, absurdities, and contradictions, we should encounter,
would either dishearten us from further enquiry or satisfy us that what
we were in search of did not exist. It is quite the contrary in nature;
there we find no contradictions, no incongruities, but all is harmony.
What once is learnt we never have to unlearn. As rules advance in
generality, apparent exceptions become regular; and equivoque, in her
sublime legislation, is as unheard of as maladministration.

(34.) Living, then, in a world where such laws obtain, and under their
immediate dominion, it is manifestly of the utmost importance to know
them, were it for no other reason than to be sure, in all we undertake,
to have, at least, the law on our side, so as not to struggle in vain
against some insuperable difficulty opposed to us by natural causes.
What pains and expense would not the alchemists, for instance, have
been spared by a knowledge of those simple laws of composition and
decomposition, which now preclude all idea of the attainment of their
declared object! what an amount of ingenuity, thrown away on the
pursuit of the perpetual motion, might have been turned to better
use, if the simplest laws of mechanics had been known and attended to
by the inventors of innumerable contrivances destined to that end!
What tortures, inflicted on patients by imaginary cures of incurable
diseases, might have been dispensed with, had a few simple principles
of physiology been earlier recognised!

(35.) But if the laws of nature, on the one hand, are invincible
opponents, on the other, they are irresistible auxiliaries; and it
will not be amiss if we regard them in each of those characters, and
consider the great importance of a knowledge of them to mankind,--

    I. _In showing us how to avoid attempting impossibilities._

   II. _In securing us from important mistakes in attempting what
        is, in itself, possible, by means either inadequate, or
        actually opposed, to the end in view._

  III. _In enabling us to accomplish our ends in the easiest,
        shortest, most economical, and most effectual manner._

   IV. _In inducing us to attempt, and enabling us to accomplish,
        objects which, but for such knowledge, we should never have
        thought of undertaking._

We shall therefore proceed to illustrate by examples the effect of
physical knowledge under each of these heads:--

(36.) Ex. 1. (35.) I. It is not many years since an attempt was made
to establish a colliery at Bexhill, in Sussex. The appearance of
thin seams and sheets of fossil-wood and wood-coal, with some other
indications similar to what occur in the neighbourhood of the great
coal-beds in the north of England, having led to the sinking of a
shaft, and the erection of machinery on a scale of vast expense, not
less than eighty thousand pounds are said to have been laid out on
this project, which, it is almost needless to add, proved completely
abortive, as every geologist would have at once declared it must, the
whole assemblage of geological facts being adverse to the existence
of a regular coal-bed _in_ the Hastings’ _sand_; while this, on which
Bexhill is situated, is separated from the _coal-strata_ by a series
of interposed beds of such enormous thickness as to render all idea of
penetrating _through_ them absurd. The history of mining operations
is full of similar cases, where a very moderate acquaintance with the
_usual order of nature_, to say nothing of theoretical views, would
have saved many a sanguine adventurer from utter ruin.

(37.) Ex. 2. (35.) II. The smelting of iron requires the application
of the most violent heat that can be raised, and is commonly performed
in tall furnaces, urged by great iron bellows driven by steam-engines.
Instead of employing this power to force _air_ into the furnace through
the intervention of bellows, it was, on one occasion, attempted to
employ the steam itself in, apparently, a much less circuitous manner;
viz. by directing the current of steam in a violent blast, from the
boiler at once into the fire. From one of the known ingredients of
steam being a highly inflammable body, and the other that essential
part of the air which supports combustion, it was imagined that this
would have the effect of increasing the fire to tenfold fury, whereas
it simply _blew it out_; a result which a slight consideration of the
laws of chemical combination, and the state in which the ingredient
elements exist in steam, would have enabled any one to predict without
a trial.

(38.) Ex. 3. (35.) II. After the invention of the diving-bell, and its
success in subaqueous processes, it was considered highly desirable
to devise some means of remaining for any length of time under water,
and rising at pleasure without assistance, so as either to examine,
at leisure, the bottom, or perform, at ease, any work that might be
required. Some years ago, an ingenious individual proposed a project
by which this end was to be accomplished. It consisted in sinking
the hull of a ship made quite water-tight, with the decks and sides
strongly supported by shores, and the only entry secured by a stout
trap-door, in such a manner, that by disengaging, from within, the
weights employed to sink it, it might rise of itself to the surface. To
render the trial more satisfactory, and the result more striking, the
projector himself made the first essay. It was agreed that he should
sink in twenty fathoms water, and rise again without assistance at
the expiration of twenty-four hours. Accordingly, making all secure,
fastening down his trap-door, and provided with all necessaries, as
well as with the means of making signals to indicate his situation,
this unhappy victim of his own ingenuity entered and was sunk. No
signal was made, and the time appointed elapsed. An immense concourse
of people had assembled to witness his rising, but in vain; for the
vessel was never seen more. The pressure of the water at so great a
depth had, no doubt, been completely under-estimated, and the sides of
the vessel being at once crushed in, the unfortunate projector perished
before he could even make the signal concerted to indicate his distress.

(39.) Ex. 4. (35.) III. In the granite quarries near Seringapatam the
most enormous blocks are separated from the solid rock by the following
neat and simple process. The workman having found a portion of the rock
sufficiently extensive, and situated near the edge of the part already
quarried, lays bare the upper surface, and marks on it a line in the
direction of the intended separation, along which a groove is cut with
a chisel about a couple of inches in depth. Above this groove a narrow
line of fire is then kindled, and maintained till the rock below is
thoroughly heated, immediately on which a line of men and women, each
provided with a pot full of cold water, suddenly sweep off the ashes,
and pour the water into the heated groove, when the rock at once
splits with a clean fracture. Square blocks of six feet in the side,
and upwards of eighty feet in length, are sometimes detached by this
method, or by another equally simple and efficacious, but not easily
explained without entering into particulars of mineralogical detail.[11]

(40.) Ex. 5. (35.) III. Hardly less simple and efficacious is the
process used in some parts of France, where mill-stones are made. When
a mass of stone sufficiently large is found, it is cut into a cylinder
several feet high, and the question then arises how to subdivide
this into horizontal pieces so as to make as many mill-stones. For
this purpose horizontal indentations or grooves are chiselled out
quite round the cylinder, at distances corresponding to the thickness
intended to be given to the mill-stones, into which wedges of dried
wood are driven. These are then wetted, or exposed to the night dew,
and next morning the different pieces are found separated from each
other by the expansion of the wood, consequent on its absorption of
moisture; an irresistible natural power thus accomplishing, almost
without any trouble, and at no expense, an operation which, from
the peculiar hardness and texture of the stone, would otherwise
be impracticable but by the most powerful machinery or the most
persevering labour.

(41.) Ex. 6. (35.) III. To accomplish our ends quickly is often of, at
least, as much importance as to accomplish them with little labour and
expense. There are innumerable processes which, if left to themselves,
_i. e._ to the ordinary operation of natural causes, are done, and well
done, but with extreme slowness, and in such cases it is often of
the highest practical importance to accelerate them. The bleaching of
linen, for instance, performed in the natural way by exposure to sun,
rain, and wind, requires many weeks or even months for its completion;
whereas, by the simple immersion of the cloth in a liquid, chemically
prepared, the same effect is produced in a few hours. The whole circle
of the arts, indeed, is nothing but one continued comment upon this
head of our subject. The instances above given are selected, not on
account of their superior importance, but for the simplicity and
_directness_ of application of the principles on which they depend, to
the objects intended to be attained.

(42.) But so constituted is the mind of man, that his views enlarge,
and his desires and wants increase, in the full proportion of the
facilities afforded to their gratification, and, indeed, with augmented
rapidity, so that no sooner has the successful exercise of his powers
accomplished any considerable simplification or improvement of
processes subservient to his use or comfort, than his faculties are
again on the stretch to extend the limits of his newly acquired power;
and having once experienced the advantages which are to be gathered
by availing himself of some of the powers of nature to accomplish
his ends, he is led thenceforward to regard them all as a treasure
placed at his disposal, if he have only the art, the industry, or the
good fortune, to penetrate those recesses which conceal them from
immediate view. Having once learned to look on knowledge as power, and
to avail himself of it as such, he is no longer content to limit his
enterprises to the beaten track of former usage, but is constantly
led onwards to contemplate objects which, in a previous stage of his
progress, he would have regarded as unattainable and visionary, had he
even thought of them at all. It is here that the investigation of the
hidden powers of nature becomes a mine, every vein of which is pregnant
with inexhaustible wealth, and whose ramifications appear to extend in
all directions wherever human wants or curiosity may lead us to explore.

(43.) Between the physical sciences and the arts of life there subsists
a constant mutual interchange of good offices, and no considerable
progress can be made in the one without of necessity giving rise to
corresponding steps in the other. On the one hand, every art is in
some measure, and many entirely, dependent on those very powers and
qualities of the material world which it is the object of physical
enquiry to investigate and explain; and, accordingly, abundant examples
might be cited of cases where the remarks of experienced artists, or
even ordinary workmen, have led to the discovery of natural qualities,
elements, or combinations which have proved of the highest importance
in physics. Thus (to give an instance), a soap-manufacturer remarks
that the residuum of his ley, when exhausted of the alkali for which
he employs it, produces a corrosion of his copper boiler for which he
cannot account. He puts it into the hands of a scientific chemist for
analysis, and the result is the discovery of one of the most singular
and important chemical elements, iodine. The properties of this,
being studied, are found to occur most appositely in illustration
and support of a variety of new, curious, and instructive views then
gaining ground in chemistry, and thus exercise a marked influence
over the whole body of that science. Curiosity is excited: the origin
of the new substance is traced to the sea-plants from whose ashes
the principal ingredient of soap is obtained, and ultimately to the
sea-water itself. It is thence hunted through nature, discovered in
salt mines and springs, and pursued into all bodies which have a marine
origin; among the rest, into sponge. A medical practitioner[12] then
calls to mind a reputed remedy for the cure of one of the most grievous
and unsightly disorders to which the human species is subject--the
_goître_--which infests the inhabitants of mountainous districts to
an extent that in this favoured land we have happily no experience
of, and which was said to have been originally cured by the ashes of
burnt sponge. Led by this indication he tries the effect of iodine on
that complaint, and the result establishes the extraordinary fact that
this singular substance, taken as a medicine, acts with the utmost
promptitude and energy on _goître_, dissipating the largest and most
inveterate in a short time, and acting (of course, like all medicines,
even the most approved, with occasional failures,) as a specific, or
natural antagonist, against that odious deformity. It is thus that
any accession to our knowledge of nature is sure, sooner or later, to
make itself felt in some practical application, and that a benefit
conferred on science by the casual observation or shrewd remark of even
an unscientific or illiterate person infallibly repays itself with
interest, though often in a way that could never have been at first
contemplated.

(44.) It is to such observation, reflected upon, however, and matured
into a rational and scientific form by a mind deeply imbued with the
best principles of sound philosophy, that we owe the practice of
vaccination; a practice which has effectually subdued, in every country
where it has been introduced, one of the most frightful scourges of
the human race, and in some extirpated it altogether. Happily for us
we know only by tradition the ravages of the small-pox, as it existed
among us hardly more than a century ago, and as it would in a few
years infallibly exist again, were the barriers which this practice,
and that of inoculation, oppose to its progress abandoned. Hardly
inferior to this terrible scourge on land was, within the last seventy
or eighty years, the scurvy at sea. The sufferings and destruction
produced by this horrid disorder on board our ships when, as a matter
of course, it broke out after a few months’ voyage, seem now almost
incredible. Deaths to the amount of eight or ten a day in a moderate
ship’s company; bodies sewn up in hammocks and washing about the decks
for want of strength and spirits on the part of the miserable survivors
to cast them overboard; and every form of loathsome and excruciating
misery of which the human frame is susceptible:--such are the pictures
which the narratives of nautical adventure in those days continually
offer.[13] At present the scurvy is almost completely eradicated in
the navy, partly, no doubt, from increased and increasing attention to
general cleanliness, comfort, and diet; but mainly from the constant
use of a simple and palatable preventive, the acid of the lemon,
served out in daily rations. If the gratitude of mankind be allowed on
all hands to be the just meed of the philosophic physician, to whose
discernment in seizing, and perseverance in forcing it on public notice
we owe the great safeguard of infant life, it ought not to be denied to
those[14] whose skill and discrimination have thus strengthened the
sinews of our most powerful arm, and obliterated one of the darkest
features in the most glorious of all professions.

(45.) These last, however, are instances of simple observation,
limited to the point immediately in view, and assuming only so far the
character of science as a systematic adoption of good and rejection of
evil, when grounded on experience carefully weighed, justly entitle
it to do. They are not on that account less appositely cited as
instances of the importance of a knowledge of nature and its laws to
our well-being; though, like the great inventions of the mariner’s
compass and of gunpowder, they may have stood, in their origin,
unconnected with more general views. They are rather to be looked upon
as the spontaneous produce of a territory essentially fertile, than as
forming part of the succession of harvests which the same bountiful
soil, diligently cultivated, is capable of yielding. The history of
iodine above related affords, however, a perfect specimen of the
manner in which a knowledge of natural properties and laws, collected
from facts having no reference to the object to which they have
been subsequently applied, enables us to set in array the resources
of nature against herself; and deliberately, of afore-thought, to
devise remedies against the dangers and inconveniences which beset
us. In this view we might instance, too, the _conductor_, which, in
countries where thunder-storms are more frequent and violent than in
our own, and at sea (where they are attended with peculiar danger,
both from the greater probability of accident, and its more terrible
consequences when it does occur,) forms a most real and efficient
preservative against the effects of lightning[15]:--the _safety-lamp_,
which enables us to walk with light and security while surrounded with
an atmosphere more explosive than gunpowder:--the _life-boat_, which
cannot be sunk, and which offers relief in circumstances of all others
the most distressing to humanity, and of which a recent invention
promises to extend the principle to ships of the largest class:--the
_lighthouse_, with the capital improvements which the lenses of
Brewster and Fresnel, and the elegant lamp of lieutenant Drummond, have
conferred, and promise yet to confer by their wonderful powers, the one
of producing the most intense light yet known, the others of conveying
it undispersed to great distances:--the discovery of the disinfectant
powers of chlorine, and its application to the destruction of miasma
and contagion:--that of _quinine_, the essential principle in which
reside the febrifuge qualities of the Peruvian bark, a discovery by
which posterity is yet to benefit in its full extent, but which has
already begun to diffuse _comparative_ comfort and health through
regions almost desolated by pestiferous exhalations[16];--and, if we
desist, it is not because the list is exhausted, but because a sample,
not a catalogue, is intended.

(46.) One instance more, however, we will add, to illustrate the
manner in which a most familiar effect, which seemed destined only
to amuse children, or, at best, to furnish a philosophic toy, may
become a safeguard of human life, and a remedy for a most serious
and distressing evil. In needle manufactories the workmen who point
the needles are constantly exposed to excessively minute particles of
steel which fly from the grindstones, and mix, though imperceptible
to the eye, as the finest dust in the air, and are inhaled with their
breath. The effect, though imperceptible on a short exposure, yet,
being constantly repeated from day to day, produces a constitutional
irritation dependent on the tonic properties of the steel, which is
sure to terminate in pulmonary consumption; insomuch, that persons
employed in this kind of work used scarcely ever to attain the age of
forty years.[17] In vain was it attempted to purify the air before its
entry into the lungs by gauzes or linen guards; the dust was too fine
and penetrating to be obstructed by such coarse expedients, till some
ingenious person bethought him of that wonderful power which every
child who searches for its mother’s needle with a magnet, or admires
the motions and arrangement of a few steel filings on a sheet of paper
held above it, sees in exercise. Masks of magnetized steel wire are now
constructed and adapted to the faces of the workmen. By these the air
is not merely _strained_ but _searched_ in its passage through them,
and each obnoxious atom arrested and removed.

(47.) Perhaps there is no result which places in a stronger light the
advantages which are to be derived from a mere knowledge of the _usual
order of nature_, without any attempt on our part to modify it, and
apart from all consideration of its causes, than the institution of
life-assurances. Nothing is more uncertain than the life of a single
individual; and it is the sense of this insecurity which has given
rise to such institutions. They are, in their nature and objects,
the precise reverse of gambling speculations, their object being to
equalize vicissitude, and to place the pecuniary relations of numerous
masses of mankind, in so far as they extend, on a footing independent
of individual casualty. To do this with the greatest possible
advantage, or indeed with any advantage at all, it is necessary to know
the _laws of mortality_, or the average numbers of individuals, out
of a great multitude, who die at every period of life from infancy to
extreme old age. At first sight this would seem a hopeless enquiry; to
some, perhaps, a presumptuous one. But it has been made; and the result
is, that, abating extraordinary causes, such as wars, pestilence, and
the like, a remarkable regularity _does_ obtain, quite sufficient
to afford grounds not only for general estimations, but for nice
calculations of risk and adventure, such as infallibly to insure the
success of any such institution founded on good computations; and thus
to confer such stability on the fortunes of families dependent on the
exertions of one individual as to constitute an important feature in
modern civilization. The only thing to be feared in such institutions
is their too great multiplication and consequent competition, by which
a spirit of gambling and underbidding is liable to be generated among
their conductors, and the very mischief may be produced, on a scale of
frightful extent, which they are especially intended to prevent.

(48.) We have hitherto considered only cases in which a knowledge of
natural laws enables us to improve our condition, by counteracting
evils of which, but for its possession, we must have remained forever
the helpless victims. Let us now take a similar view of those in which
we are enabled to call in nature as an auxiliary to augment our actual
power, and capacitate us for undertakings, which without such aid might
seem to be hopeless. Now, to this end, it is necessary that we should
form a just conception of what those hidden powers of nature _are_,
which we can at pleasure call into action;--how far they transcend
the measure of human force, and set at naught the efforts not only of
individuals but of whole nations of men.

(49.) It is well known to modern engineers, that _there is virtue_ in a
bushel of coals properly consumed, to raise seventy millions of pounds
weight a foot high. This is actually the _average_ effect of an engine
at this moment working in Cornwall.[18] Let us pause a moment, and
consider what this is equivalent to in matters of practice.

(50.) The ascent of Mont Blanc from the valley of Chamouni is
considered, and with justice, as the most toilsome feat that a strong
man can execute in two days. The combustion of two pounds of coal would
place him on the summit.[19]

(51.) The Menai Bridge, one of the most stupendous works of art that
has been raised by man in modern ages, consists of a mass of iron, not
less than four millions of pounds in weight, suspended at a medium
height of about 120 feet above the sea. The consumption of seven
bushels of coal would suffice to raise it to the place where it hangs.

(52.) The great pyramid of Egypt is composed of granite. It is 700 feet
in the side of its base, and 500 in perpendicular height, and stands on
eleven acres of ground. Its weight is, therefore, 12,760 millions of
pounds, at a medium height of 125 feet; consequently it would be raised
by the effort of about 630 chaldrons of coal, a quantity consumed in
some founderies in a week.

(53.) The annual consumption of coal in London is estimated at
1,500,000 chaldrons. The effort of this quantity would suffice to raise
a cubical block of marble, 2200 feet in the side, through a space equal
to its own height, or to pile one such mountain upon another. The Monte
Nuovo, near Pozzuoli, (which was erupted in a single night by volcanic
fire,) might have been raised by such an effort, from a depth of 40,000
feet, or about eight miles.

(54.) It will be observed, that, in the above statement, the inherent
power of fuel is, of necessity, greatly under-rated. It is not
pretended by engineers that the economy of fuel is yet pushed to its
utmost limit, or that the whole effective power is obtained in any
application of fire yet devised; so that were we to say 100 millions
instead of 70, we should probably be nearer the truth.

(55.) The powers of wind and water, which we are constantly impressing
into our service, can scarcely be called latent or hidden, yet it
is not fully considered, in general, what they _do_ effect for us.
Those who would judge of what advantage may be taken of the wind, for
example, even on land (not to speak of navigation), may turn their
eyes on Holland. A great portion of the most valuable and populous
tract of this country lies much below the level of the sea, and is only
preserved from inundation by the maintenance of embankments. Though
these suffice to keep out the abrupt influx of the ocean, they cannot
oppose that law of nature, by which fluids, in seeking their level,
insinuate themselves through the pores and subterraneous channels
of a loose sandy soil, and keep the country in a constant state of
infiltration from below upwards. To counteract this tendency, as well
as to get rid of the rain water, which has no natural outlet, pumps
worked by windmills are established in great numbers, on the dams
and embankments, which pour out the water, as from a leaky ship, and
in effect preserve the country from submersion, by taking advantage
of every wind that blows. To drain the Haarlem lake[20] would seem a
hopeless project to any speculators but those who had the steam-engine
at their command, or had learnt in Holland what might be accomplished
by the constant agency of the desultory but unwearied powers of wind.
But the Dutch engineer measures his surface, calculates the number of
his pumps, and, trusting to time and his experience of the operation of
the winds for the success of his undertaking, boldly forms his plans to
lay dry the bed of an inland sea, of which those who stand on one shore
cannot see the other.[21]

(56.) To gunpowder, as a source of mechanical power, it seems hardly
necessary to call attention; yet it is only when we endeavour to
_confine_ it, that we get a full conception of the immense energy of
that astonishing agent. In count Rumford’s experiments, twenty-eight
grains of powder confined in a cylindrical space, _which it just
filled_, tore asunder a piece of iron which would have resisted
a strain of 400,000 lbs.[22], applied at no greater mechanical
disadvantage.

(57.) But chemistry furnishes us with means of calling into sudden
action forces of a character infinitely more tremendous than that
of gunpowder. The terrific violence of the different fulminating
compositions is such, that they can only be compared to those
untameable animals, whose ferocious strength has hitherto defied all
useful management, or rather to spirits evoked by the spells of a
magician, manifesting a destructive and unapproachable power, which
makes him but too happy to close his book, and break his wand, as the
price of escaping: unhurt from the storm he has raised. Such powers are
not yet subdued to our purposes, whatever they may hereafter be; but,
in the expansive force of gases, liberated slowly and manageably from
chemical mixtures, we have a host of inferior, yet still most powerful,
energies, capable of being employed in a variety of useful ways,
according to emergencies.[23]

(58.) Such are the forces which nature lends us for the accomplishment
of our purposes, and which it is the province of practical Mechanics to
teach us to combine and apply in the most advantageous manner; without
which the mere command of power would amount to nothing. Practical
Mechanics is, in the most pre-eminent sense, a _scientific art_; and
it may be truly asserted, that almost all the great combinations of
modern mechanism, and many of its refinements and nicer improvements,
are creations of pure intellect, grounding its exertion upon a moderate
number of very elementary propositions in theoretical mechanics and
geometry. On this head we might dwell long, and find ample matter,
both for reflection and wonder; but it would require not volumes
merely, but libraries, to enumerate and describe the prodigies of
ingenuity which have been lavished on every thing connected with
machinery and engineering. By these it is that we are enabled to
diffuse over the whole earth the productions of any part of it; to fill
every corner of it with miracles of art and labour, in exchange for its
peculiar commodities; and to concentrate around us, in our dwellings,
apparel and utensils, the skill and workmanship not of a few expert
individuals, but of all who, in the present and past generations, have
contributed their improvements to the processes of our manufactures.

(59.) The transformations of chemistry, by which we are enabled to
convert the most apparently useless materials into important objects
in the arts, are opening up to us every day sources of wealth and
convenience of which former ages had no idea, and which have been
pure gifts of science to man. Every department of art has felt their
influence, and new instances are continually starting forth of the
unlimited resources which this wonderful science developes in the
most sterile parts of nature. Not to mention the impulse which its
progress has given to a host of other sciences, which will come more
particularly under consideration in another part of this discourse,
what strange and unexpected results has it not brought to light in its
application to some of the most common objects! Who, for instance,
would have conceived that linen rags were capable of producing _more
than their own weight_ of sugar, by the simple agency of one of the
cheapest and most abundant acids?[24]--that dry bones could be a
magazine of nutriment, capable of preservation for years, and ready to
yield up their sustenance in the form best adapted to the support of
life, on the application of that powerful agent, steam, which enters
so largely into all our processes, or of an acid at once cheap and
durable?[25]--that sawdust itself is susceptible of conversion into
a substance bearing no remote analogy to bread; and though certainly
less palatable than that of flour, yet no way disagreeable, and
both wholesome and digestible as well as highly nutritive?[26] What
economy, in all processes where chemical agents are employed, is
introduced by the exact knowledge of the proportions in which natural
elements unite, and their mutual powers of displacing each other! What
perfection in all the arts where fire is employed, either in its more
violent applications, (as, for instance, in the smelting of metals by
the introduction of well adapted fluxes, whereby we obtain the whole
produce of the ore in its purest state,) or in its milder forms, as
in sugar-refining (the whole modern practice of which depends on a
curious and delicate remark of a late eminent scientific chemist on the
nice adjustment of temperature at which the crystallization of syrup
takes place); and a thousand other arts which it would be tedious to
enumerate!

(60.) Armed with such powers and resources, it is no wonder if the
enterprise of man should lead him to form and execute projects
which, to one uninformed of their grounds, would seem altogether
disproportionate. Were they to have been proposed at once, we should,
no doubt, have rejected them as such: but developed, as they have been,
in the slow succession of ages, they have only taught us that things
regarded impossible in one generation may become easy in the next; and
that the power of man over nature is limited only by the one condition,
that it must be exercised in conformity with the laws of nature. He
must study those laws as he would the disposition of a horse he would
ride, or the character of a nation he would govern; and the moment he
presumes either to thwart her fundamental rules, or ventures to measure
his strength with hers, he is at once rendered severely sensible of
his imbecility, and meets the deserved punishment of his rashness and
folly. But if, on the other hand, he will consent to use, without
abusing, the resources thus abundantly placed at his disposal, and obey
that he may command, there seems scarcely any conceivable limit to the
degree in which the _average_ physical condition of great masses of
mankind may be improved, their wants supplied, and their conveniences
and comforts increased. Without adopting such an exaggerated view,
as to assert that the meanest inhabitant of a civilized society is
superior in physical condition to the lordly savage, whose energy and
uncultivated ability gives him a natural predominance over his fellow
denizens of the forest,--at least, if we compare like with like, and
consider the multitude of human beings who are enabled, in an advanced
state of society, to subsist in a degree of comfort and abundance,
which at best only a few of the most fortunate in a less civilized
state could command, we shall not be at a loss to perceive the
principle on which we ought to rest our estimate of the advantages of
civilization; and which applies with hardly less force to every degree
of it, when contrasted with that next inferior, than to the broad
distinction between civilized and barbarous life in general.

(61.) The difference of the degrees in which the individuals of a great
community enjoy the good things of life has been a theme of declamation
and discontent in all ages; and it is doubtless our paramount duty, in
every state of society, to alleviate the pressure of the purely evil
part of this distribution as much as possible, and, by all the means
we can devise, secure the lower links in the chain of society from
dragging in dishonour and wretchedness: but there is a point of view
in which the picture is at least materially altered in its expression.
In comparing society on its present immense scale, with its infant
or less developed state, we must at least take care to enlarge every
feature in the same proportion. If, on comparing the _very_ lowest
states in civilized and savage life, we admit a difficulty in deciding
to which the preference is due, at least in every superior grade we
cannot hesitate a moment; and if we institute a similar comparison in
every different stage of its progress, we cannot fail to be struck with
the rapid _rate of dilatation_ which every degree upward of the scale,
so to speak, exhibits, and which, in an estimate of averages, gives
an immense preponderance to the present over every former condition
of mankind, and, for aught we can see to the contrary, will place
succeeding generations in the same degree of superior relation to the
present that this holds to those passed away. Or we may put the same
proposition in other words, and, admitting the existence of every
inferior grade of advantage in a higher state of civilization which
subsisted in the preceding, we shall find, first, that, taking state
for state, the proportional numbers of those who enjoy the higher
degrees of advantage increases with a constantly accelerated rapidity
as society advances; and, secondly, that the superior extremity of
the scale is constantly enlarging by the addition of new degrees. The
condition of a European prince is now as far superior, in the command
of real comforts and conveniences, to that of one in the middle ages,
as that to the condition of one of his own dependants.

(62.) The advantages conferred by the augmentation of our physical
resources through the medium of increased knowledge and improved art
have this peculiar and remarkable property,--that they are in their
nature diffusive, and cannot be enjoyed in any exclusive manner by a
few. An eastern despot may extort the riches and monopolize the art
of his subjects for his own personal use; he may spread around him an
unnatural splendour and luxury, and stand in strange and preposterous
contrast with the general penury and discomfort of his people; he may
glitter in jewels of gold and raiment of needlework; but the wonders
of well contrived and executed manufacture which we use daily, and
the comforts which have been invented, tried, and improved upon by
thousands, in every form of domestic convenience, and for every
ordinary purpose of life, can never be enjoyed by him. To produce a
state of things in which the physical advantages of civilized life
can exist in a high degree, the stimulus of increasing comforts and
constantly elevated desires, must have been felt by millions; since it
is not in the power of a few individuals to create that wide demand
for useful and ingenious applications, which alone can lead to great
and rapid improvements, unless backed by that arising from the speedy
diffusion of the same advantages among the mass of mankind.

(63.) If this be true of physical advantages, it applies with still
greater force to intellectual. Knowledge can neither be adequately
cultivated nor adequately enjoyed by a few; and although the conditions
of our existence on earth may be such as to preclude an abundant
supply of the physical necessities of all who may be born, there
is no such law of nature in force against that of our intellectual
and moral wants. Knowledge is not, like food, destroyed by use, but
rather augmented and perfected. It acquires not, perhaps, a greater
certainty, but at least a confirmed authority and a probable duration,
by universal assent; and there is no body of knowledge so complete,
but that it may acquire accession, or so free from error but that it
may receive correction in passing through the minds of millions. Those
who admire and love knowledge for its own sake ought to wish to see
its elements made accessible to all, were it only that they may be
the more thoroughly examined into, and more effectually developed in
their consequences, and receive that ductility and plastic quality
which the pressure of minds of all descriptions, constantly moulding
them to their purposes, can alone bestow. But to this end it is
necessary that it should be divested, as far as possible, of artificial
difficulties, and stripped of all such technicalities as tend to place
it in the light of a craft and a mystery, inaccessible without a kind
of apprenticeship. Science, of course, like every thing else, has its
own peculiar terms, and, so to speak, its idioms of language; and these
it would be unwise, were it even possible, to relinquish: but every
thing that tends to clothe it in a strange and repulsive garb, and
especially every thing that, to keep up an appearance of superiority
in its professors over the rest of mankind, assumes an unnecessary
guise of profundity and obscurity, should be sacrificed without mercy.
Not to do this, is to deliberately reject the light which the natural
unencumbered good sense of mankind is capable of throwing on every
subject, even in the elucidation of principles: but where principles
are to be applied to practical uses it becomes absolutely necessary;
as all mankind have then an interest in their being so familiarly
understood, that no mistakes shall arise in their application.

(64.) The same remark applies to arts. They cannot be perfected till
their whole processes are laid open, and their language simplified and
rendered universally intelligible. Art is the application of knowledge
to a practical end. If the knowledge be merely accumulated experience,
the art is _empirical_; but if it be experience reasoned upon and
brought under general principles, it assumes a higher character, and
becomes a _scientific art_. In the progress of mankind from barbarism
to civilised life, the arts necessarily precede science. The wants and
cravings of our animal constitution must be satisfied; the comforts,
and some of the luxuries, of life must exist. Something must be given
to the vanity of show, and more to the pride of power: the round of
baser pleasures must have been tried and found insufficient, before
intellectual ones can gain a footing; and when they have obtained it,
the delights of poetry and its sister arts still take precedence of
contemplative enjoyments, and the severer pursuits of thought; and
when these in time begin to charm from their novelty, and sciences
begin to arise, they will at first be those of pure speculation. The
mind delights to escape from the trammels which had bound it to earth,
and luxuriates in its newly found powers. Hence, the abstractions of
geometry--the properties of numbers--the movements of the celestial
spheres--whatever is abstruse, remote, and extramundane--become the
first objects of infant science. Applications come late: the arts
continue slowly progressive, but their realm remains separated from
that of science by a wide gulf which can only be passed by a powerful
spring. They form their own language and their own conventions, which
none but artists can understand. The whole tendency of empirical
art, is to bury itself in technicalities, and to place its pride in
particular short cuts and mysteries known only to adepts; to surprise
and astonish by results, but conceal processes. The character of
science is the direct contrary. It delights to lay itself open to
enquiry, and is not satisfied with its conclusions, till it can make
the road to them broad and beaten: and in its applications it preserves
the same character; its whole aim being to strip away all technical
mystery, to illuminate every dark recess, and to gain free access to
all processes, with a view to improve them on rational principles.
It would seem that a union of two qualities almost opposite to each
other--a going forth of the thoughts in two directions, and a sudden
transfer of ideas from a remote station in one to an equally distant
one in the other--is required to start the first idea of _applying
science_. Among the Greeks, this point was attained by Archimedes, but
attained too late, on the eve of that great eclipse of science which
was destined to continue for nearly eighteen centuries, till Galileo in
Italy, and Bacon in England, at once dispelled the darkness: the one,
by his inventions and discoveries; the other, by the irresistible force
of his arguments and eloquence.

(65.) Finally, the improvement effected in the condition of mankind
by advances in physical science as applied to the useful purposes of
life, is very far from being limited to their direct consequences in
the more abundant supply of our physical wants, and the increase of our
comforts. Great as these benefits are, they are yet but steps to others
of a still higher kind. The successful results of our experiments and
reasonings in natural philosophy, and the incalculable advantages which
experience, systematically consulted and dispassionately reasoned on,
has conferred in matters purely physical, tend of necessity to impress
something of the well weighed and progressive character of science on
the more complicated conduct of our social and moral relations. It
is thus that legislation and politics become gradually regarded as
experimental sciences; and history, not, as formerly, the mere record
of tyrannies and slaughters, which, by immortalizing the execrable
actions of one age, perpetuates the ambition of committing them in
every succeeding one, but as the archive of experiments, successful
and unsuccessful, gradually accumulating towards the solution of the
grand problem--how the advantages of government are to be secured
with the least possible inconvenience to the governed. The celebrated
apophthegm, that nations never profit by experience, becomes yearly
more and more untrue. Political economy, at least, is found to have
sound principles, founded in the moral and physical nature of man,
which, however lost sight of in particular measures--however even
temporarily controverted and borne down by clamour--have yet a stronger
and stronger testimony borne to them in each succeeding generation, by
which they must, sooner or later, prevail. The idea once conceived and
verified, that great and noble ends are to be achieved, by which the
condition of the whole human species shall be permanently bettered,
by bringing into exercise a sufficient quantity of sober thought, and
by a proper adaptation of means, is of itself sufficient to set us
earnestly on reflecting what ends _are_ truly great and noble, either
in themselves, or as conducive to others of a still loftier character;
because we are not now, as heretofore, hopeless of attaining them. It
is not now equally harmless and insignificant, whether we are right
or wrong; since we are no longer supinely and helplessly carried down
the stream of events, but feel ourselves capable of buffetting at
least with its waves, and perhaps of riding triumphantly over them:
for why should we despair that the reason which has enabled us to
subdue all nature to our purposes, should (if permitted and assisted
by the providence of God) achieve a far more difficult conquest; and
ultimately find some means of enabling the collective wisdom of mankind
to bear down those obstacles which individual short-sightedness,
selfishness, and passion, oppose to all improvements, and by which
the highest hopes are continually blighted, and the fairest prospects
marred.




                                PART II.

  OF THE PRINCIPLES ON WHICH PHYSICAL SCIENCE RELIES FOR ITS
    SUCCESSFUL PROSECUTION, AND THE RULES BY WHICH A SYSTEMATIC
    EXAMINATION OF NATURE SHOULD BE CONDUCTED, WITH ILLUSTRATIONS OF
    THEIR INFLUENCE AS EXEMPLIFIED IN THE HISTORY OF ITS PROGRESS.




