CHAPTER I.

OF THE PHENOMENA OF FORCE, AND OF THE CONSTITUTION OF NATURAL BODIES.


(232.) Natural History may be considered in two very different lights:
either, 1st, as a collection of facts and objects presented by nature,
from the examination, analysis, and combination of which we acquire
whatever knowledge we are capable of attaining both of the order of
nature, and of the agents she employs for producing her ends, and from
which, therefore, all sciences arise; or, 2dly, as an assemblage of
phenomena to be explained; of effects to be deduced from causes; and of
materials prepared to our hands, for the application of our principles
to useful purposes. Natural history, therefore, considered in the
one or the other of these points of view, is either the beginning or
the end of physical science. As it offers to us, in a confused and
interwoven mass, the elements of all our knowledge, our business is to
disentangle, to arrange, and to present them in a separate and distinct
state: and to this end we are called upon to resolve the important but
complicated problem,--Given the effect, or assemblage of effects, to
find the causes. The principles on which this enquiry relies are those
which constitute the relation of cause and effect, as it exists with
reference to our minds; and their rules and mode of application have
been attempted to be sketched out, (though in far less detail than the
intrinsic interest of the subject, both in a logical and practical
point of view, would demand,) in the foregoing pages. It remains
now to bring together, in a summary statement, the results of the
general examination of nature, so far as it has been prosecuted to the
discovery of natural agents, and the mode in which they act.

(233.) The first great agent which the analysis of natural phenomena
offers to our consideration, more frequently and prominently than
any other, is force. Its effects are either, 1st, to counteract the
exertion of opposing force, and thereby to maintain _equilibrium_; or,
2dly, to produce _motion_ in matter.

(234.) Matter, or that, whatever it be, of which all the objects in
nature which manifest themselves directly to our senses consist,
presents us with two general qualities, which at first sight appear
to stand in contradiction to each other--activity and inertness. Its
activity is proved by its power of spontaneously setting other matter
in motion, and of itself obeying their mutual impulse, and moving
under the influence of its own and other force; inertness, in refusing
to move unless obliged to do so by a force impressed externally, or
mutually exerted between itself and other matter, and by persisting in
its state of motion or rest unless disturbed by some external cause.
Yet in reality this contradiction is only apparent. Force being the
cause, and motion the effect produced by it on matter, to say that
matter is inert, or has _inertia_, as it is termed, is only to say
that the cause is expended in producing its effect, and that the
same cause cannot (without renewal) produce double or triple its own
proper effect. In this point of view, equilibrium may be conceived as
a continual production of two opposite effects, each undoing at every
instant what the other has done.

(235.) However, if this should appear too metaphysical, at all events
this difference of effects gives rise to two great divisions of the
science of force, which are commonly known by the names of STATICS and
DYNAMICS; the latter term, which is general, and has been used by us
before in its general sense, being usually confined to the doctrine
of motion, as produced and modified by force. Each of these great
divisions again branches out into distinct subdivisions, according as
we consider the equilibrium or motion of matter in the three distinct
states in which it is presented to us in nature, the solid, liquid, and
aëriform state, to which, perhaps, ought to be added the _viscous_,
as a state intermediate between that of solidity and fluidity, the
consideration of which, though very obscure and difficult, offers a
high degree of interest on a variety of accounts.


_Statics and Dynamics._

(236.) The principles have been definitively fixed by Galileo and his
successors, down to Newton, on a basis of sound induction; and as they
are perfectly general, and apply to every case, they are competent,
as we have already before observed, to the solution of every problem
that can occur in the deductive processes, by which phenomena are
to be explained, or effects calculated. Hence, they include every
question that can arise respecting the motions and rest of the smallest
particles of matter, as well as of the largest masses. But the mode of
reasoning from these general principles differs materially, whether
we consider them as applied to masses of matter of a sensible size,
or to those excessively minute, and perhaps indivisible, molecules of
which such masses are composed. The investigations which relate to the
latter subject are extremely intricate, as they necessarily involve the
consideration of the hypotheses we may form respecting the intimate
constitution of the several sorts of bodies above enumerated.

(237.) On the other hand, those which respect the equilibrium and
motions of sensible masses of matter are happily capable of being
so managed as to render unnecessary the adoption of any particular
hypothesis of structure. Thus, in reasoning respecting the application
of forces to a solid mass, we suppose its parts indissolubly and
unalterably connected; it matters not by what tie, provided this
condition be satisfied, that one point of it cannot be moved without
setting all the rest in motion, so that the relative situation of the
parts one among another be not changed. This is the abstract notion
of a solid which the mechanician employs in his reasonings. And their
conclusions will apply to natural bodies, of course, only so far as
they conform to such a definition. In strictness of speaking, however,
there are no bodies which absolutely conform to it. No substance is
known whose parts are absolutely incapable of yielding one among
another; but the amount by which they do yield is so excessively
small as to be demonstrably incapable, in most cases, of having any
influence on the results: and in those where it has such influence, an
especial investigation of its amount can always be made. This gives
rise to two subdivisions of the application of mechanical reasonings
to solid masses. Those which refer to the action of forces on flexible
or elastic, and on inflexible or rigid, bodies, comprehending under
the latter all such whose resistance to flexure or fracture is so
very great as to permit our adoption of the language and ideas of the
extreme case without fear of material error.

(238.) In like manner, when we reason respecting the action of forces
on a fluid mass, all we have occasion to assume is, that its parts
are freely moveable one among the other. If, besides this, we choose
to regard a fluid as incompressible, and deduce conclusions on this
supposition, they will hold good only so far as there may be found
such fluids in nature. Now, in strictness, there are none such; but,
practically speaking, in the greater number of cases their resistance
to compression is so very great that the result of the reasoning so
carried on is not sensibly vitiated; and, in the remaining cases,
the same general principles enable us to enter on a special enquiry
directed to this point: and hence the division of fluids, in mechanical
language, into compressible and incompressible, the latter being only
the extreme or limiting case of the former.

(239.) As we propose here, however, only to consider what is the actual
constitution of nature, we shall regard all bodies, as they really
are, more or less flexible and yielding. We know for certain, that
the space which any material body appears to occupy is not entirely
filled by it; because there is none which by the application of a
sufficient force may not be _compressed_ or forced into a smaller
space, and which, either wholly, as in air or liquids, or in part, as
in the greater number of solids, will not recover its former dimensions
when the force is taken off. In the case of air, this condensation
may be urged to almost any extent; and not only does a mass of air
so condensed completely recover its original bulk, when the applied
pressure is removed, but if that ordinary pressure under which it
exists at the earth’s surface (and which arises from the weight of
the atmosphere) be also removed by an air-pump, it will still further
dilate itself without limit so far as we have yet been able to try
it. Hence we are led to the conclusion that the particles of air are
mutually elastic, and have a _tendency to recede from one another_,
which can only be counteracted by _force_, and therefore is itself a
force of the repulsive kind. Nevertheless, as air is heavy, and as
gravitation is a universal property of matter, there is no doubt that
this repulsive tendency must have a limit, and that there is a distance
to which, if the particles of the air could be removed from each other,
their mutual repulsion would cease, and an attraction take its place.
This limit is probably attained at some very great height above the
earth’s surface, beyond which, of course, its atmosphere cannot extend.

(240.) What, however, we can only conclude by this or similar reasoning
respecting air, we see distinctly in liquids. They are all, though
in a small degree, compressible, and recover their former dimensions
completely when the pressure is removed; but they cannot be dilated (by
mechanical means), and have no tendency, while they remain liquids, to
enlarge themselves beyond a certain limit, and therefore they assume a
determinate _surface_ while at rest, and their parts actually resist
further separation with a considerable force, thus giving rise to the
phenomenon of the _cohesion of liquids_.

(241.) Both in air and in liquids, however, the most perfect freedom
of motion of the parts among each other subsists, which could hardly
be the case if they were not separate and independent of each other.
And from this, combined with the foregoing considerations, it has been
concluded that they do not actually touch, but are kept asunder at
determinate distances from each other, by the constant action of the
two forces of attraction and repulsion, which are supposed to balance
and counteract each other at the ordinary distances of the particles,
but to prevail, the one, or the other, according as they are forcibly
urged together or pulled asunder.

(242.) In solids, however, the case is very different. The mutual free
motion of their parts _inter se_ is powerfully impeded, and in some
almost destroyed. In some, a slow and gradual change of figure may be
produced to a great extent, by pressure or blows, as for instance in
the metals, clay, butter, &c.; in others, fracture is the consequence
of any attempt to change the figure by violence beyond a certain very
small limit. In solids, then, it is evident, that the consideration of
their intimate structure has a very great influence in modifying the
general results of the action of such attractive and repulsive forces
as may be assumed to account for the phenomena they present; yet the
general facts that their parts _cohere_ with a certain energy, and that
they resist displacement or intrusion on the part of other bodies,
are sufficient to demonstrate at least the existence of such forces,
whatever obscurity may subsist as to their mode of action.

(243.) This division of bodies into airs, liquids, and solids, gives
rise, then, to three distinct branches of mechanical science, in each
of which the general principles of equilibrium and motion have their
peculiar mode of application; viz. pneumatics, hydrostatics, and what
might, without impropriety, be termed stereostatics.


_Pneumatics._

(244.) Pneumatics relates to the equilibrium or movements of aërial
fluids under all circumstances of pressure, density, and elasticity.
The weight of the air, and its pressure on all the bodies on the
earth’s surface, were quite unknown to the ancients, and only first
perceived by Galileo, on the occasion of a sucking-pump refusing to
draw water above a certain height. Before his time it had always been
supposed that water rose by suction in a pipe, in consequence of a
certain natural _abhorrence of a vacuum_ or empty space, which obliged
the water to enter by way of supplying the place of the air sucked out.
But if any such abhorrence existed, and had the force of an _acting
cause_, which could urge water a single foot into a pipe, there is no
reason why the same principle should not carry it up two, three, or
any number of feet; none why it should suddenly stop short at a certain
height, and refuse to rise higher, however violent the suction might
be, nay, even fall back, if purposely forced up too high.

(245.) Galileo, however, at first contented himself with the
conclusion, that the natural abhorrence of a vacuum was not strong
enough to sustain the water more than about thirty-two feet above
its level; and, although the true cause of the phenomenon at length
occurred to him, in the pressure of the air on the general surface,
it was not satisfactorily demonstrated till his pupil, Torricelli,
conceived the happy idea of instituting an experiment on a small
scale by the use of a much heavier liquid, mercury, instead of water,
and, in place of sucking out the air from above, employing the much
more effectual method of filling a long glass tube with mercury, and
inverting it into a basin of the same metal. It was then at once seen,
as by a _glaring instance_, that the maintenance of the mercury in the
tube (which is nothing else than the common barometer) was the effect
of a perfectly definite external cause, while its fluctuations from day
to day, with the varying state of the atmosphere, strongly corroborated
the notion of its being due to the pressure of the external air on the
surface of the mercury in the reservoir.

(246.) The discovery of Torricelli was, however, at first much
misconceived, and even disputed, till the question was finally decided
by appeal to a _crucial instance_, one of the first, if not the very
first on record in physics, and for which we are indebted to the
celebrated Pascal. His acuteness perceived that if the weight of the
incumbent air be the direct cause of the elevation of the mercury,
it must be measured by the amount of that elevation, and therefore
that, by carrying a barometer up a high mountain, and so ascending
into the atmosphere _above_ a large portion of the incumbent air, the
pressure, as well as the length of the column sustained by it, must
be diminished; while, on the other hand, if the phenomenon were due
to the cause originally assigned, no difference could be expected to
take place, whether the observation were made on a mountain or on the
plain. Perhaps the decisive effect of the experiment which he caused
to be instituted for the purpose, on the Puy de Dôme, a high mountain
in Auvergne, while it convinced every one of the truth of Torricelli’s
views, tended more powerfully than any thing which had previously been
done in science to confirm, in the minds of men, that disposition to
experimental verification which had scarcely yet taken full and secure
root.

(247.) Immediately on this discovery followed that of the air-pump,
by Otto von Guericke of Magdeburgh, whose aim seems to have been to
decide the question, whether a vacuum could or could not exist, by
endeavouring to make one. The imperfection of his mechanism enabled
him only to diminish the aërial contents of his receivers, not
entirely to empty them; but the curious effects produced by even a
partial exhaustion of air speedily excited attention, and induced our
illustrious countryman, Robert Boyle, to the prosecution of those
experiments which terminated in his hands, and in those of Hauksbee,
Hooke, Mariotte, and others, in a satisfactory knowledge of the
general law of the equilibrium of the air under the influence of
greater or less pressures. These discoveries have since been extended
to all the various descriptions of aërial fluids which chemistry has
shown to exist, and to maintain their aëriform state under artificial
pressure, and even to those which may be produced from liquids reduced
to a state of vapour by heat, so long as they retain that state.

(248.) The manner in which the observed law of equilibrium of an
elastic fluid, like air, may be considered to originate in the mutual
repulsion of its particles, has been investigated by Newton, and
the actual statement of the law itself, as announced by Mariotte,
“that the density of the air, or the quantity of it contained in the
same space, is, _cæteris paribus_, proportional to the pressure it
supports,” has recently been verified within very extensive limits by
direct experiment, by a committee of the Royal Academy of Paris. This
law contains the principle of solution of every dynamical question
that can occur relative to the equilibrium of elastic fluids, and is
therefore to be regarded as one of the highest _axioms_ in the science
of pneumatics.


_Hydrostatics._

(249.) The principles of the equilibrium of liquids, understanding
by this word such fluids as do not, though quite at liberty, attempt
to dilate themselves beyond a certain point, are at once few and
simple. The first steps towards a knowledge of them were made by
Archimedes, who established the general fact, that a solid immersed in
a liquid loses a portion of its weight equal to that of the liquid it
displaces. It seems very astonishing, after this, that it should not
have been at once concluded that the weight thus said to be _lost_ is
only _counteracted_ by the upward pressure of the liquid, and that,
therefore, a portion of any liquid, surrounded on all sides by a liquid
of the same kind, does really exert its weight in keeping its place.
Yet the prejudice that “liquids do not gravitate in their natural
place” kept its ground, and was only dispelled with the mass of error
and absurdity which the introduction of a rational and experimental
philosophy by Galileo swept away.

(250.) The hydrostatical law of _the equal pressure of liquids in all
directions_, with its train of curious and important consequences, is
an immediate conclusion from the perfect mobility of their parts among
one another, in consequence of which each of them tends to recede from
an excess of pressure on one side, and thus bears upon the rest, and
distributes the pressure among its neighbours. In this form it was
laid down by Newton, and has proved one of the most useful and fertile
principles of physico-mathematical reasoning on the equilibrium of
fluid masses, as affording a means of tracing the action of a force
applied at any point of a liquid through its whole extent. It applies,
too, without any modification, to expansible fluids as well as to
liquids; and, in the applications of geometry to this subject, enables
us to dispense with any minute and intricate enquiries as to the mode
in which individual particles act on each other.

(251.) In a practical point of view, this law is remarkable for the
directness of its application to useful purposes. The immediate and
perfect distribution of a pressure applied on any one part, however
small, of a fluid surface through the whole mass, enables us to
communicate _at one instant_ the same pressure to any number of such
parts by merely increasing the surface of the fluid, which may be done
by enlarging the containing vessel; and if the vessel be so constructed
that a large portion of its surface shall be moveable together, the
pressures on all the similar parts of this portion will be united into
one consentient force, which may thus be increased to any extent we
please. The hydraulic press, invented by Bramah, (or rather applied by
him after a much more ancient inventor, Stevin,) is constructed on this
principle. A small quantity of water is driven by sufficient pressure
into a vessel _already full_, and provided with a moveable surface or
piston of great size. Under such circumstances something must give way;
the great surface of the piston accumulates the pressure on it to such
an extent that nothing can resist its violence. Thus, trees are torn
up by the roots; piles extracted from the earth; woollen and cotton
goods compressed into the most portable dimensions; and even hay, for
military service, reduced to such a state of coercion as to be easily
packed on board transports.

(252.) Liquids differ from aëriform fluids by their _cohesion_, which
may be regarded as a kind of approach to a solid state, and was so
regarded by Bacon (193.). Indeed, there can be little doubt that
the solid, liquid, and aëriform states of bodies are merely stages
in a progress of gradual transition from one extreme to the other;
and that, however strongly marked the distinctions between them may
appear, they will ultimately turn out to be separated by no sudden or
violent line of demarcation, but shade into each other by insensible
gradations. The late experiments of Baron Cagnard de la Tour may be
regarded as a first step towards the full demonstration of this (199.).
But the cohesion of liquids is not, like that of solids, so modified
by their structure in other respects as to destroy the mobility of
their parts one among another (unless in those cases of nearer approach
to the solid state which obtain in viscid or gummy liquids). On the
contrary, the two qualities co-exist, and give rise to a number of
curious and intricate phenomena.

(253.) One of the most remarkable of these is capillary attraction,
or capillarity as it is sometimes called. Every body has remarked the
adhesion of water to glass. The elevation of the general surface of
the liquid where it is in contact with the containing vessel; the form
of a drop suspended at the under side of a solid: these are instances
of capillary attraction. If a small glass tube with a bore as fine as
a hair be immersed in water, the water will be observed to rise in
it to a certain height, and to assume a concave surface at its upper
extremity. The attraction of the glass on the water, and the cohesion
of the parts of the water to each other, are no doubt the joint causes
of this curious effect; but the mode of action is at once obscure and
complex; and although the researches of Laplace and Young have thrown
great light on it, further investigation seems necessary before we can
be said distinctly to understand it.

(254.) As the capillarity and cohesion of the parts of liquids shows
them to possess the power of mutual attraction, so their elasticity
demonstrates that they also possess that of repulsion when forcibly
brought nearer than their natural state. From the extremely small
extent to which the compression of liquids can be carried by any force
we can employ, compared with that of air, we must conclude that this
repulsion is much more violent in the former than in the latter, but
counteracted also by a more powerful force of attraction. So much more
powerful, indeed, is the resistance of liquids to compression, that
they were usually regarded as incompressible; an opinion corroborated
by a celebrated experiment made at Florence, in which water was forced
through the pores (as it was said) of a golden ball. More recent
experiments by Canton, and since by Perkins, Oërsted, and others,
have demonstrated however the contrary, and assigned the amount of
compression.

(255.) The consideration of the motions of fluids, whether liquid
or expansible, is infinitely more complicated than that of their
equilibrium. When their motions are slow, it is reasonable to suppose
that the law of the equable distribution of pressure obtains; but in
very rapid displacements of their parts one among the other, it is not
easy to see how such an equable distribution can be accomplished, and
some phenomena exist which seem to indicate a contrary conclusion.

(256.) Independent of this, there are difficulties of an almost
insuperable nature to the regular deductive application of the general
principles of mechanics to this subject, which arise from the excessive
intricacy of the pure mathematical enquiries to which its investigation
leads. It was Newton who set the example of a first attempt to draw
any conclusions respecting the motion of fluid masses by direct
reasoning from dynamical principles, and thus laid the foundation of
HYDRODYNAMICS; but it was not till the time of D’Alembert that the
method of reducing any question respecting the motions of fluids under
the action of forces to strict mathematical investigation could be said
to be completely understood. But the cases even now in which this mode
of treating such questions can be applied with full satisfaction are
few in comparison of those in which the experimental method of enquiry
as already observed (189.) is preferable. Such, for example, is that
of the resistance of fluids to bodies moving through them; a knowledge
of which is of great importance in naval architecture and in gunnery,
where the resistance of the air acts to an enormous extent. Such,
too, among the practical subjects which depend mainly on this branch
of science, are the use of sails in navigation; the construction of
windmills, and water-wheels; the transmission of water through pipes
and channels; the construction of docks and harbours, &c.


_Nature of Solids in general._

(257.) The intimate constitution of solids is, in all probability, very
complicated, and we cannot be said to know much of it. By some recent
delicate experiments on the dimensions of wires violently strained, it
has been shown that they are to a certain small extent capable of being
dilated by tension, as they are also of being compressed by pressure,
but within limits even narrower than those of liquids. Usually, when
strained too far, they break, and refuse to re-unite; or, if compressed
too forcibly, take a permanent contraction of dimension. Thus, wood
may be indented by a blow, and metals rendered denser and heavier by
hammering or rolling. There is a certain degree of confusion prevalent
in ordinary language about the hardness, elasticity, and other similar
qualities, of solids, which it may be well to remove. Hardness is that
disposition of a solid which renders it difficult to displace its
parts among themselves. Thus, steel is harder than iron; and diamond
almost infinitely harder than any other substance in nature: but the
compressibility of steel, or the extent to which it will yield to a
given pressure and recover itself, is not much less than that of soft
iron, and that of ice is very nearly the same with that of water.

(258.) Again, we call Indian rubber a very elastic body, and so it is;
but in a different sense from steel. Its parts admit of great mutual
displacement without permanent dislocation; however distorted, it
recovers its figure readily, but with a small force. Yet, if Indian
rubber were to be enclosed in a space that it just filled, so as not to
permit its parts to yield laterally, doubtless it would resist actual
compression with great violence. Here, then, we have an instance
of two kinds of elasticity in one substance; a feebler effort of
recovery from distorted figure, and a more violent one from a state
of altered dimension. Both, however, originate in the same causes,
and are referable to the same principles; the former being in fact
only a modified case of the latter, as the effort of a steel spring,
when bent, to recover its former shape, is referable to the same
forces which give to steel its hardness and strength to resist actual
compression and fracture.

(259.) The toughness of a solid, or that quality by which it will
endure heavy blows without breaking, is again distinct from hardness
though often confounded with it. It consists in a certain yielding of
parts with a powerful general cohesion, and is compatible with various
degrees of elasticity. Malleability is again another quality of solids,
especially metals, quite distinct from toughness, and depends on their
capability of being deprived of their figure without an effort to
recover it and without fracture.

(260.) Tenacity, again, is a property of solids more directly depending
on the cohesion of their parts than toughness. It consists in their
power of resisting separation by a strain steadily applied, while the
quality of toughness is materially influenced by their disposition
to communicate through their substance the jarring effect of a
blow. Accordingly, the tenacity of a solid is a direct measure of
the cohesive attraction of its parts, and is the best proof of the
existence of such a power.


_Crystallography._

(261.) It cannot be supposed that these and many other tangible
qualities, as they may be called, should subsist in solids without
a corresponding mechanism in their internal structure. That they
have such a mechanism, and that a very curious and intricate one,
the phenomena of crystallography sufficiently show. This interesting
and beautiful department of natural science is of comparatively very
modern date. That many natural substances affected certain forms must
have been known from the earliest times. Pliny appears to have been
acquainted with this fact, at least in some instances, as he describes
the forms of quartz and diamond. But till the time of Linnæus no
material attention seems to have been bestowed on the subject. He,
however, observed, and described with care, the crystalline forms
of a variety of substances, and even regarded them as so definite a
character of the solids which assumed them, that he supposed every
particular form to be generated by a particular salt. Romé de l’Isle
pursued the study of the crystalline forms of bodies yet farther. He
first ascertained the important fact of the constancy of the angles
at which their faces meet; and observing further that many of them
appear in several different shapes, first conceived the idea that these
shapes might be reducible to one, appropriated in a peculiar manner to
each _substance_, and modified by strict geometrical laws. Bergmann,
reasoning on a fact imparted to him by his pupil Gahn, made a yet
greater step, and showed how at least one species of crystal might
be built up of thin laminæ ranged in a certain order, and following
certain rules of superposition. He failed, however, in deducing just
and general conclusions from this remark, which, correctly viewed, is
the foundation of the most important law of crystallography, that which
connects the primitive form with other forms capable of being exhibited
by the same substance, by a certain fixed relation. An idea may be
formed of what is meant by this sort of connection of one form with
another, by considering a pointed pyramid built up of cubic stones,
disposed in layers, each of which separately is a square plate of the
thickness of a single stone. These layers, laid horizontally one on the
other, and decreasing regularly in size from the bottom to the top,
produce a pyramidal form with a rough or channeled surface; and if the
layers are so extremely thin that the channels cease to be visible to
the eye, the pyramid will seem smooth and perfect.

(262.) Very shortly after this, and without knowledge of what had been
done by Gahn and Bergmann, the Abbé Haüy, instructed by the accidental
fracture of a fine group of crystals, made the remark noticed already
(in 67.), and reasoning on it with more caution and success, and
pursuing it into all its detail, developed the general laws which
regulate the superposition of the layers of particles of which he
supposes all crystals to be built up, and which enable us, from knowing
their primitive forms, to discover, previous to trial, what other
forms they are capable of assuming; and which, according to this idea,
are called derivative or secondary forms. Mohs and others have since
imagined processes and systems by which the derivation of forms from
each other is facilitated, and have corrected some errors of over-hasty
generalization into which their predecessors had fallen, as well as
advanced, by an extraordinary diligence of research, our knowledge of
the forms which the various substances which occur in nature and art
actually do assume.

(263.) In what manner a variety in point of external form may originate
in a variety of figures in the ultimate particles of which a solid
is composed, may very readily be imagined by considering what would
happen if the bricks of which an edifice is constructed had all a
certain _leaning_ or bias in one direction out of the perpendicular.
Suppose every brick, for instance, when laid flat on its face, with
its longer edges north and south, had its eastern and western faces
upright, but its northern and southern ones leaning southwards at a
certain inclination the same for each brick; a house built of such
bricks would lean the same way, if the bricks fitted well together.
If, _besides this_, the eastern and western faces of the bricks,
instead of being truly upright, had an inclination eastward, the house
would have a similar one, and all its four corners, instead of being
upright, would lean to the south-east. Suppose, instead of a house, a
pyramid were built of such oblique bricks, with the sides of its base
directed to the four points of the compass; then its point, instead
of being situated vertically over the centre of its base, would stand
perpendicularly over some point to the south-east of that centre, and
the pyramid itself would have its sides facing the south and the east,
more highly inclined to the horizon than those towards the north and
west.

(264.) Whatever conception we may form of the manner in which the
particles of a crystal cohere and form masses, it is next to impossible
to divest ourselves of the idea of a determinate figure common to them
all. Any other supposition, indeed, would be incompatible with that
exact similarity in all other respects which the phenomena of chemistry
may be considered as having demonstrated. However, it must be borne in
mind that this idea, plausible as it may appear, is yet in some degree
hypothetical, and that the laws of crystallography, as determined from
inductive observation, are quite independent of any supposition of the
kind, or even of the existence of such things as ultimate particles or
atoms at all.

(265.) Still, that peculiar internal constitution of solid bodies,
whatever it be, which is indicated by the assumption of determinate
figures, by their splitting easier in some directions than in others,
and by their presenting glittering plane surfaces when broken into
fragments, cannot but have an important influence on all their
relations to external agents, as well as to their internal movements
and the mutual actions of their parts on one another. Accordingly, the
division of bodies into crystallized and uncrystallized, or imperfectly
crystallized, is one of the most universal importance; and almost all
the phenomena produced by those more intimate natural causes which
act within small limits, and as it were on the immediate mechanism
of solid substances, are remarkably modified by their crystalline
structure. Thus, in transparent solids, the course taken by the rays
of light, in traversing them, as well as the properties impressed upon
them in so doing, are intimately connected with this structure. The
recent experiments of M. Savart, too, have proved that this is also the
case with their power of resistance to external force, on which depends
their elasticity. Crystallized substances, according to the results of
these experiments, resist compression with different degrees of elastic
force, according to the direction in which it is attempted to compress
them; and all the phenomena dependent on their elasticity are affected
by this cause, especially those which relate to their vibratory
movements and their conveyance of sound.

(266.) There can be little doubt that modifications, similarly
depending on the internal structure of crystals, will be traced through
every department of physics. In that interesting one which relates
to the action of heat in expanding the dimensions of substances, a
beginning has already been made by Professor Mitscherlich. It had long
been known that all substances are dilated by heat, and no exception
to this law has been found, so long as we regard the _bulk_ of the
heated body. Thus, an iron rod when hot is both longer and thicker than
when cold; and the difference of dimension, though but trifling in
itself, is yet capable of being made sensible, and is of considerable
consequence in engineering. Thus, too, the quicksilver in a common
thermometer occupies a larger space when hot than when cold; and being
confined by the glass ball, (which also expands, but _not so much in
proportion_,) it is forced to rise in the tube. These and similar facts
had long been known; and accurate measures of the total amount of
dilatation of a variety of different bodies, under similar accessions
of heat, had been obtained and registered in tables. But no one had
suspected the important fact, that this expansion in crystallized
bodies takes place under totally different circumstances from what
obtains in uncrystallized ones. M. Mitscherlich has lately shown that
such substances expand differently in different directions, and has
even produced a case in which expansion in one direction is actually
accompanied with contraction in another. This step, the most important
beyond a doubt which has yet been made in pyrometry, can however only
be regarded as the first in a series of researches which will occupy
the next generation, and which promises to afford an abundant harvest
of new facts, as well as the elucidation of some of the most obscure
and interesting points in the doctrine of heat.

(267.) From what has been said, it is clear that if we look upon solid
bodies as collections of particles or atoms, held together and kept
in their places by the perpetual action of attractive and repulsive
forces, we cannot suppose these forces, at least in crystallized
substances, to act alike in all directions. Hence arises the conception
of _polarity_, of which we see an instance, on a great scale, in the
magnetic needle, but which, under modified forms, there is nothing to
prevent us from conceiving to act among the ultimate atoms of solid
or even fluid bodies, and to produce all the phenomena which they
exhibit in their crystallized state, either when acting on each other,
or on light, heat, &c. It is not difficult, if we give the reins to
imagination, to conceive how attractive and repulsive atoms, bound
together by some unknown tie, may form little machines or compound
particles, which shall have many of the properties which we refer to
polarity; and accordingly many ingenious suppositions have been made to
that effect: but in the actual state of science it is certainly safest
to wave these hypotheses, without however absolutely rejecting them,
and regard the _polarity of matter_ as one of the ultimate phenomena to
which the analysis of nature leads us, and of which it is our business
fully to investigate the laws, before we endeavour to ascertain its
causes, or trace the mechanism by which it is produced.

(268.) The mutual attractions and repulsions of the particles of
matter, then, and their polarity, whether regarded as an original or a
derivative property, are the forces which, acting with great energy,
and within very confined limits, we must look to as the principles on
which the intimate constitution of all bodies and many of their mutual
actions depend. These are what are understood by the general term of
_molecular forces_. Molecular attraction has been attempted to be
confounded by some with the general attraction of gravity, which all
matter exerts on all other matter; but this idea is refuted by the
plainest facts.




CHAP. II.

OF THE COMMUNICATION OF MOTION THROUGH BODIES.--OF SOUND AND LIGHT.


(269.) The propagation of motion through all substances, whether of a
single impulse, as a blow or thrust, or of one frequently and regularly
repeated, such as a jarring or vibratory movement, depends wholly on
these molecular forces; and it is on such propagation that sound and
very probably light depend. To conceive the manner in which a motion
may be conveyed from one part of a substance to another, whether solid
or fluid, we may attend to what takes place when a wave is made to
run along a stretched string, or the surface of still water. Every
part of the string, or water, is in succession moved from its place,
and agitated with a motion similar to that of the original impulse,
leaving its place and returning to it, and when one part ceases to move
the next receives as it were the impression, and forwards it onward.
This may seem a slow and circuitous process in description; but when
sound, for example, is conveyed through the air, we are to consider,
1st, that the air, the substance actually in motion, is extremely light
and acted upon by a very powerful elasticity, so that the force which
propagates the motion, or by which the particles adjacent act on, and
urge forward, each other, is very great, compared with the quantity of
materials set in motion by it: and the same is true, even in a greater
degree, in liquids and solids; for in these the elastic forces are even
greater, in proportion to the weight, than in air.

(270.) A general notion of the mode in which sounds are conveyed
through the air was not altogether deficient among the ancients; but
it is to Newton that we owe the first attempt to analyze the process,
and show correctly what takes place in the communication of motion
from particle to particle. Reasoning on the properties of the air as
an elastic body, he showed the effect of an impulse on any portion of
it to consist in a condensation of the air immediately adjacent in the
direction of the impulse, which then, re-acting by its spring, drives
back the portion which had advanced to its original place, and at the
same time urges forward the portion before it, in the direction of the
impulse, so that every particle alternately advances and retreats.
But, in pursuing this idea into its details, Newton fell into some
errors which were pointed out by Cramer, though their origin was not
traced, nor the reasoning corrected, till the subject was resumed by
Lagrange and Euler; nor is this any impeachment of the penetration of
our immortal countryman. The mathematical theory of the propagation
of sound, and of vibratory and undulatory motions in general, is
one of the utmost intricacy; and, in spite of every exertion on the
part of the most expert geometers, continues to this day to give
continual occasion for fresh researches; while phenomena are constantly
presenting themselves, which show how far we are from being able to
deduce all the particulars, even of cases comparatively simple, by any
direct reasoning from first principles.

(271.) Whenever an impulse of any kind is conveyed by the air, to our
ears, it produces the impression of sound; but when such an impulse
is regularly and uniformly repeated in extremely rapid succession, it
gives us that of a musical note, the pitch of the note depending on
the rapidity of the succession (see art. 153.). The sense of harmony,
too, depends on the periodical recurrence of coincident impulses on the
ear, and affords, perhaps, the only instance of a sensation for whose
pleasing impression a distinct and intelligible reason can be assigned.

(272.) Acoustics, then, or the science of sound, is a very considerable
branch of physics, and one which has been cultivated from the earliest
ages. Even Pythagoras and Aristotle were not ignorant of the general
mode of its transmission through the air, and of the nature of harmony;
but as a branch of science, independent of its delightful application
in the art of music, it could be hardly said to exist, till its nature
and laws became a matter of experimental enquiry to Bacon and Galileo,
Mersenne and Wallis; and of mathematical investigation to Newton, and
his illustrious successors, Lagrange and Euler. From that time its
progress, as a branch both of mathematical and experimental science,
has been constant and accelerated. A curious and beautiful method of
observation, due to Chladni, consists in the happy device of strewing
sand over the surfaces of bodies in a state of sonorous vibration,
and marking the figures it assumes. This has made their motions
susceptible of ocular examination, and has been lately much improved
on, and varied in its application, by M. Savart, to whom we also owe a
succession of instructive researches on every point connected with the
subject of sound, which may rank among the finest specimens of modern
experimental enquiry. But the subject is far from being exhausted; and,
indeed, there are few branches of physics which promise at once so much
amusing interest, and such important consequences, in its bearings on
other subjects, and especially, through the medium of strong analogies,
on that of light.


_Light and Vision._

(273.) The nature of light has always been involved in considerable
doubt and mystery. The ancients could scarcely be said to have any
opinion on the subject, unless, indeed, it could be considered such
to affirm that distant bodies could not be put into communication
without an intermedium; and that, therefore, there must be _something_
between the eye and the thing seen. What that something is, however,
they could only form crude and vague conjectures. One supposed that
the eyes themselves emit rays or emanations of some unknown kind, by
which distant objects are as it were felt; a singularly unfortunate
idea, since it gives no reason why objects should not be equally
well seen in the dark--no account, in short, of the part performed
by _light_ in vision. Others imagined that all visible objects are
constantly throwing out from them, in all directions, some sort of
resemblances or spectral forms of themselves, which, when received by
the eyes, produce an impression of the objects. Vague and clumsy as
this hypothesis obviously is, it assigns to the object a power, and to
light a diffusive propagation in all directions, which are, the one and
the other, independent of our eyes, and therefore goes to separate the
phenomena of _light_ from those of _vision_.

(274.) The hypothesis of Newton is a refinement and improvement on
this idea. Instead of spectra or resemblances, he supposes luminous
objects actually to dart out from them in all directions, particles,
of inconceivable minuteness (as indeed they must be, having such
an enormous velocity (see 17.), not to dash in pieces every thing
they strike upon). These particles he supposes to be acted upon by
attractive and repulsive forces, residing in all material bodies, the
latter extending to some very small distance beyond their surfaces; and
by the action of these forces to be turned aside from their natural
straight-lined course, without ever coming in actual contact with the
particles themselves of the bodies on which they fall, but either being
turned back and _reflected_ by the repulsive forces before they reach
them, or penetrating between their intervals, as a bird may be supposed
to fly through the branches of a forest, and undergoing all their
actions, to take at quitting them a direction finally determined by
the position of the surface at which they emerge with respect to their
course.

(275.) This hypothesis, which was discussed and reasoned upon by Newton
in a manner worthy of himself, affords, by the application of the
same dynamical laws which he had applied with so much success to the
explanation of the planetary motions, not merely a plausible, but a
perfectly reasonable and fair explanation of all the _usual_ phenomena
of light known in his time. His own beautiful discoveries, too, of
the different refrangibilities of the differently coloured rays,
were perfectly well represented in this theory, by simply admitting
a difference of velocity in the particles, which produce in the eye
the sensations of different colours. And had the properties of light
remained confined to these, there would have been no occasion to have
resorted to any other mode of conceiving it.

(276.) A very different hypothesis had, however, been suggested about
the same period by Huyghens, who supposed light to be produced in the
same manner with sound, by the communication of a vibratory motion
from the luminous body to a highly elastic fluid, which he imagined
as filling all space, and as being less condensed within the limits
of space occupied by matter, and that to a greater or less extent,
according to the nature of the occupying substance. Thus, in place of
any thing actually thrown off, he substituted waves, or vibrations,
propagated in all directions from luminous bodies, through this medium,
or ether, as he called it. Huyghens, being himself a consummate
mathematician, was enabled to trace many of the consequences of this
hypothesis, and to show that the ordinary laws of reflection and
refraction were represented or accounted for by it, as well as by
Newton’s. But the hypothesis of Huyghens has not been fully successful
in accounting for what may be considered the chief of all optical
facts, the production of colours in the ordinary refraction of
light by a prism, of which the theory of Newton gives a complete and
elegant explanation; and the discovery of which by him marks one of
the greatest epochs in the annals of experimental science. This, which
has been often urged in objection to it, remains still, if not quite
unanswered, at least only imperfectly removed.

(277.) Other phenomena, however, were not wanting to afford a further
trial of the _explanatory powers_ of either hypothesis. The diffraction
or inflection of light, discovered by Grimaldi, a Jesuit of Bologna,
seemed to indicate that the rays of light were turned aside from their
straight course by merely passing near bodies of every description.
These phenomena, which are very curious and beautiful, were minutely
examined by Newton, and referred by him to the action of repulsive
forces extending to a sensible distance from the surfaces of bodies;
and his explanation, so far as the facts known to him are concerned,
appears as satisfactory as could reasonably be then expected; and much
more so than any thing which could at that time be produced on the side
of the hypothesis of Huyghens, which, in fact, seemed incapable of
giving any account whatever of them.

(278.) Another class of delicate and splendid optical phenomena, which
had begun to attract attention somewhat previous to Newton’s time,
seemed to leave both hypotheses equally at a loss. These were the
colours exhibited by very thin films, either of a liquid (such as a
soap-bubble), or of air, as when two glasses are laid together with
only air between them. These colours were examined by Newton with a
minuteness and care altogether unexampled in experimental philosophy
at that time, and with which few researches undertaken since will bear
to stand in competition. Their result was a theory of a very singular
nature, which he grounded on an hypothesis of what he termed _fits of
easy transmission and reflection_; and which supposed each ray of light
to pass in its progress periodically through a succession of states
such as would alternately dispose it to penetrate or be reflected back
from the surface of a body on which it might fall. The simplest way
in which the reader may conceive this hypothesis, is to regard every
particle of light as a sort of little magnet revolving rapidly about
its own centre while it advances in its course, and thus alternately
presenting its attractive and repulsive pole, so that when it arrives
at the surface of a body with its repulsive pole foremost, it is
repelled and reflected; and when the contrary, attracted, so as to
enter the surface. Newton, however, very cautiously avoided announcing
his theory in this or any similar form, confining himself entirely to
general language. In consequence, it has been confidently asserted
by all his followers, that the doctrine of fits of easy reflection
and transmission, as laid down by him, is substantially nothing more
than a statement of facts. Were it so, it is clear that any other
theory which should offer a just account of the same phenomena must
ultimately involve and coincide with that of Newton. But this, as we
shall presently see, is not the case; and this instance ought to serve
to make us extremely cautious how we employ, in stating physical laws
derived from experiment, language which involves any thing in the
slightest degree theoretical, if we would present the laws themselves
in a form which no future research shall modify or subvert.

(279.) A third class of optical phenomena, which were likewise
discovered while Newton was yet engaged in his optical researches, was
that exhibited by doubly refracting crystals. In what the phenomenon of
double refraction consists, we have already had occasion to explain.
The fact itself was first noticed by Erasmus Bartolin in the crystal
called Iceland spar; and was studied with attention by Huyghens, who
ascertained its laws, and referred it with remarkable ingenuity and
success to his theory of light, by the additional hypothesis of such
a constitution of his ethereal medium within the crystal as should
enable it to convey an impulse faster in one direction than another:
as if, for example’s sake, we should suppose a sound conveyed through
the air with different degrees of rapidity in a vertical and horizontal
direction.

(280.) Some remarkable facts accompanying the double refraction
produced by Iceland spar, which Bartolin, Huyghens, and Newton, had
observed, led the latter to conceive the singular idea that a ray of
light after its emergence from such a crystal acquires _sides_, that
is to say, distinct relations to surrounding space, which it carries
with it through its whole subsequent course, and which give rise to all
those curious and complicated phenomena which are now known under the
name of the _polarization of light_. These results, however, appeared
so extraordinary, and offered so little handle for further enquiry,
that their examination dropped, as if by common consent; Newton himself
resting content with urging strongly the apparent incompatibility of
these properties with the Huyghenian doctrine, but without making any
attempt to explain them by his own.

(281.) From the period of Newton’s optical discoveries to the
commencement of the present century, no great accession to our
knowledge of the nature of light was made, if we except one, which,
from its invaluable practical application, must ever hold a prominent
place in the annals both of art and science: we mean, the discovery
of the principle of the achromatic telescope, which originated in a
discussion between the celebrated geometer Euler, Klingenstierna, an
eminent Swedish philosopher, and our own countryman, the admirable
optician Dollond, on the occasion of certain abstract theoretical
investigations of the former, which led him to speculate on its
_possibility_, and which ultimately terminated in its complete and
happy _execution_ by the latter; a memorable case in science, though
not a singular one, where the speculative geometer in his chamber,
apart from the world, and existing among abstractions, has originated
views of the noblest practical application.[49]

(282.) The explanation which our knowledge of optical laws affords of
the mechanism of the eye, and the process by which vision is performed,
is as complete and satisfactory as that of hearing by the propagation
of motion through the air. The camera obscura, invented by Baptista
Porta in 1560, gave the first idea how the actual images of external
objects might be conveyed into the eye, but it was not till after a
considerable interval that Kepler, the immortal discoverer of those
great laws which regulate the periods and motions of the planets,
pointed out distinctly the offices performed by the several parts
of the eye in the act of vision. From this to the invention of the
telescope and microscope there would seem but a small step, but it is
to accident rather than design that it is due; and its re-invention
by Galileo, on a mere description of its effects, may serve, among
a thousand similar instances, to show that inestimable practical
applications lie open to us, if we can only once bring ourselves
to conceive their possibility, a lesson which the invention of the
achromatic telescope itself, as we have above related it, not less
strongly exemplifies.

(283.) The little instrument with which Galileo’s splendid discoveries
were made was hardly superior in power to an ordinary finder of the
present day; but it was rapidly improved on, and in the hands of
Huyghens attained to gigantic dimensions and very great power. It was
to obviate the necessity of the enormous length required for these
telescopes, and yet secure the same power, that Gregory and Newton
devised the reflecting telescope, which has since become a much
more powerful instrument than its original inventors probably ever
contemplated.

(284.) The telescope, as it exists at present, with the improvements
in its structure and execution which modern artists have effected, must
assuredly be ranked among the highest and most refined productions of
human art; that in which man has been able to approximate most closely
to the workmanship of nature, and which has conferred upon him, if
not another sense, at least an exaltation of one already possessed
by him that merits almost to be regarded as a new one. Nor does it
appear yet to have reached its ultimate perfection, to which indeed
it is difficult to assign any bounds, when we take into consideration
the wonderful progress which workmanship of every kind is making,
and the delicacy, far superior to that of former times, with which
materials may now be wrought, as well as the ingenious inventions and
combinations which every year is bringing forth for accomplishing the
same ends by means hitherto unattempted.[50]

(285.) After a long torpor, the knowledge of the properties of light
began to make fresh progress about the end of the last century,
advancing with an accelerated rapidity, which has continued unabated
to the present time. The example was set by our late admirable and
lamented countryman, Dr. Wollaston, who re-examined and verified
the laws of double refraction in Iceland spar announced by Huyghens.
Attention being thus drawn to the subject, the geometry of Laplace
soon found a means of explaining at least one portion of the mystery
of this singular phenomenon, by the Newtonian theory of light, applied
under certain supposed conditions; and the reasoning which led him to
the result (at that time quite unexpected), may justly be regarded as
one of his happiest efforts. The prosecution of the subject, which had
now acquired a high degree of interest, was encouraged by the offer
of a prize on the part of the French Academy of Sciences; and it was
in a memoir which received this honourable reward on that occasion,
in 1810, that Malus, a retired officer of engineers in the French
army, announced the great discovery of the _polarization of light_ by
ordinary reflection at the surface of a transparent body.

(286.) Malus found that when a beam of light is reflected from the
surface of such a body at a certain angle, it acquires precisely the
same singular property which is impressed upon it in the act of double
refraction, and which Newton had before expressed by saying that it
possessed _sides_. This was the first circumstance which pointed out a
connection between that hitherto mysterious phenomenon and any of the
ordinary modifications of light; and it proved ultimately the means of
bringing the whole within the limits, if not of a complete explanation,
at least of a highly plausible theoretical representation. So true is,
in science, the remark of Bacon, that no natural phenomenon can be
adequately studied _in itself alone_, but, to be understood, must be
considered _as it stands connected with all nature_.

(287.) The new class of phenomena thus disclosed were immediately
studied with diligence and success, both abroad by Malus and Arago, and
at home by our countryman Dr. Brewster, and their laws investigated
with a care proportioned to their importance; when another and
apparently still more extraordinary class of phenomena presented
itself in the production of the most vivid and beautiful colours
(every way resembling those observed by Newton in thin films of air
or liquids, only infinitely more developed and striking,) in certain
transparent crystallized substances, when divided into flat plates in
particular directions, and exposed in a beam of polarized light. The
attentive examination of these colours by Wollaston, Biot, and Arago,
but more especially by Brewster, speedily led to the disclosure of a
series of optical phenomena so various, so brilliant, and evidently
so closely connected with the most important points relating to the
intimate structure of crystallized bodies, as to excite the highest
interest,--that sort of interest which is raised when we feel we are
on the eve of some extraordinary discovery, and expect every moment
that some leading fact will turn up, which will throw light on all that
appears obscure, and reduce into order all that seems anomalous.

(288.) This expectation was not disappointed. So long before the time
we are speaking of as the first year of the present century, our
illustrious countryman, the late Dr. Thomas Young, had established a
principle in optics, which, regarded as a physical law, has hardly its
equal for beauty, simplicity, and extent of application, in the whole
circle of science. Considering the manner in which the vibrations of
two musical sounds arriving at once at the ear affect the sense with
an impression of sound or silence according as they conspire or oppose
each other’s effects, he was led to the idea that the same ought to
hold good with light as with sound, if the theory which makes light
analogous to sound be the true one; and that, therefore, two rays of
light, setting off from the same origin, at the same instant, and
arriving at the same place by different routes, ought to strengthen
or wholly or partially destroy each other’s effects according to
the difference in length of the routes described by them. That two
lights should in any circumstances combine to produce darkness may
be considered strange, but is _literally true_; and it had even been
noticed long ago as a singular and unaccountable fact by Grimaldi, in
his experiments on the inflection of light. The experimental means by
which Dr. Young confirmed this principle, which is known in optics
by the name of the _interference_ of the rays of light, were as
simple and satisfactory as the principle itself is beautiful; but the
verifications of it, drawn from the explanation it affords of phenomena
apparently the most remote, are still more so. Newton’s colours of thin
films were the first phenomena to which its author applied it with full
success. Its next remarkable application was to those of diffraction,
of which, in the hands of M. Fresnel, a late eminent French geometer,
it also furnished a complete explanation, and that, too, in cases to
which Newton’s hypothesis could not apparently be made to apply, and
through a complication of circumstances which might afford a very
severe test of any hypothesis.

(289.) A simple and beautiful experiment on the interferences of
polarized light due to Fresnel and Arago enabled them to bring Dr.
Young’s law to bear on the colours produced by crystallized plates in a
polarized beam, and by so doing afforded a key to all the intricacies
of these magnificent but complex phenomena. Nothing now was wanting to
a rational theory of double refraction but to frame an hypothesis of
some mode in which light might be conceived to be propagated through
the elastic medium supposed to convey it in such a way as not to be
contradictory to any of the facts, nor to the general laws of dynamics.
This essential idea, without which every thing that had been before
done would have been incomplete, was also furnished by Dr. Young, who,
with a sagacity which would have done honour to Newton himself, had
declared, that to accommodate the doctrine of Huyghens to the phenomena
of polarized light it is necessary to conceive the mode of propagation
of a luminous impulse through the ether, differently from that of a
sonorous one through the air. In the latter, the particles of the air
_advance_ and _recede_; in the former, those of the ether must be
supposed to _tremble laterally_.

(290.) Taking this as the groundwork of his reasoning, Fresnel
succeeded in erecting on it a theory of polarization and double
refraction, so happy in its adaptation to facts, and in the coincidence
with experience of results deduced from it by the most intricate
analysis, that it is difficult to conceive it unfounded. If it be
so, it is at least the most curiously artificial system that science
has yet witnessed; and whether it be so or not, so long as it serves
to group together in one comprehensive point of view a mass of facts
almost infinite in number and variety, to reason from one to another,
and to establish analogies and relations between them; on whatever
hypothesis it may be founded, or whatever arbitrary assumptions it
may make respecting structures and modes of action, it can never be
regarded as other than a most real and important accession to our
knowledge.

(291.) Still, it is by no means impossible that the Newtonian theory of
light, if cultivated with equal diligence with the Huyghenian, might
lead to an equally plausible explanation of phenomena now regarded
as beyond its reach. M. Biot is the author of the hypothesis we have
already mentioned of a rotatory motion of the particles of light about
their axes. He has employed it only for a very limited purpose; but
it might doubtless be carried much farther; and by admitting only the
regular emission of the luminous particles at equal intervals of time,
and in similar states of motion from the shining body, which does not
seem a very forced supposition, all the phenomena of interference at
least would be readily enough explained without the admission of an
ether.

(292.) The optical examination of crystallized substances affords
one among many fine examples of the elucidation which every branch
of science is capable of affording to every other. The indefatigable
researches of Dr. Brewster and others have shown that the phenomena
exhibited by polarized light in its transmission through crystals
afford a certain indication of the most important points relating to
the structure of the crystals themselves, and thus become most valuable
characters by which to recognise their internal constitution. It was
Newton who first showed of what importance as a physical character,--as
the indication of other properties,--the action of a body on light
might become; but the characters afforded by the use of polarized light
as an instrument of experimental enquiry are so marked and intimate,
that they may almost be said to have furnished us with a kind of
intellectual sense, by which we are enabled to scrutinize the internal
arrangement of those wonderful structures which Nature builds up by
her refined and invisible architecture, with a delicacy eluding our
conception, yet with a symmetry and beauty which we are never weary
of admiring. In this point of view the science of optics has rendered
to mineralogy and crystallography services not less important than to
astronomy by the invention of the telescope, or to natural history by
that of the microscope; while the relations which have been discovered
to exist between the optical properties of bodies and their crystalline
forms, and even their chemical habitudes, have afforded numerous
and beautiful instances of general laws concluded from laborious and
painful induction, and curiously exemplifying the simplicity of nature
as it emerges slowly from an entangled mass of particulars in which, at
first, neither order nor connection can be traced.




CHAP. III.

OF COSMICAL PHENOMENA.


_Astronomy and Celestial Mechanics._

(293.) Astronomy, as has been observed in the former part of this
discourse, as a science of observation, had made considerable progress
among the ancients: indeed, it was the only branch of physical science
which could be regarded as having been cultivated by them with any
degree of assiduity or real success. The Chaldean and Egyptian records
had furnished materials from which the motions of the sun and moon
could be calculated with sufficient exactness for the prediction of
eclipses; and some remarkable cycles, or periods of years in which
the lunar eclipses return in very nearly the same order, had been
ascertained by observation. Considering the extreme imperfection of
their means of measuring time and space, this was, perhaps, as much
as could have been expected at that early period, and it was followed
up for a while in a philosophical spirit of just speculation, which,
if continued, could hardly have failed to lead to sound and important
conclusions.

(294.) Unfortunately, however, the philosophy of Aristotle laid it
down as a principle, that the celestial motions were regulated by laws
proper to themselves, and bearing no affinity to those which prevail
on earth. By thus drawing a broad and impassable line of separation
between celestial and terrestrial mechanics, it placed the former
altogether out of the pale of experimental research, while it at the
same time impeded the progress of the latter by the assumption of
principles respecting natural and unnatural motions, hastily adopted
from the most superficial and cursory remark, undeserving even the
name of observation. Astronomy, therefore, continued for ages a
science of mere record, in which theory had no part, except in so
far as it attempted to conciliate the inequalities of the celestial
motions with that assumed law of uniform circular revolution which
was alone considered consistent with the perfection of the heavenly
mechanism. Hence arose an unwieldy, if not self-contradictory, mass
of hypothetical motions of sun, moon, and planets, in circles, whose
centres were carried round in other circles, and these again in others
without end,--“cycle on epicycle, orb on orb,”--till at length, as
observation grew more exact, and fresh epicycles were continually
added, the absurdity of so cumbrous a mechanism became too palpable to
be borne. Doubts were expressed, to which the sarcasm of a monarch[51]
gave a currency they might not have obtained in a period when men
scarcely dared trust themselves to think; and at length Copernicus,
promulgating his own, or reviving the Pythagorean doctrine, which
places the sun in the centre of our system, gave to astronomy a
simplicity which, contrasted with the complication of the preceding
views, at once commanded assent.

(295.) An elegant writer[52], whom we have before had occasion to
quote, has briefly and neatly accounted for the confused notions which
so long prevailed respecting the constitution of our system, and the
difficulty experienced in acquiring a true notion of the disposition
of its parts. “We see it,” he observes, “not in _plan_, but in
_section_.” The reason of this is, that our point of observation lies
in its general plane, but the notion we aim at forming of it is not
that of its section, but of its plan. This is as if we should attempt
to read a book, or make out the countries on a map, with the eye on a
level with the paper. We can only judge directly of the distances of
objects by their sizes, or rather of their change of distance by their
change of size; neither have we any means of ascertaining, otherwise
than indirectly, even their positions, one among the other, from their
apparent places as seen by us. Now, the variations in apparent size
of the sun and moon are too small to admit of exact measure without
the use of the telescope, and the bodies of the planets cannot even be
distinguished as having any distinct size with the naked eye.

(296.) The Copernican system once admitted, however, this difficulty
of conception, at least, is effectually got over, and it becomes
a mere problem of geometry and calculation to determine, from the
observed places of a planet, its real orbit about the sun, and the
other circumstances of its motion. This Kepler accomplished for the
orbit of Mars, which he ascertained to be an ellipse having the sun
in one of its foci; and the same law, being extended by inductive
analogy to all the planets, was found to be verified in the case of
each. This with the other remarkable laws which are usually cited in
physical astronomy by the name of Kepler’s laws, constitute undoubtedly
the most important and beautiful system of geometrical relations which
have ever been discovered by a mere inductive process, independent of
any consideration of a theoretical kind. They comprise within them a
compendium of the motions of all the planets, and enable us to assign
their places in their orbits at any instant of time past or to come
(disregarding their mutual perturbations), provided certain purely
geometrical problems can be numerically resolved.

(297.) It was not, however, till long after Kepler’s time that the
real importance of these laws could be felt. Regarded in themselves,
they offered, it is true, a fine example of regular and harmonious
disposition in the greatest of all the works of creation, and a
striking contrast to the cumbersome mechanism of the cycles and
epicycles which preceded them; but there their utility seemed to
terminate, and, indeed, Kepler was reproached, and not without a
semblance of reason, with having rendered the actual calculation of
the places of the planets more difficult than before, the resources of
geometry being then inadequate to resolve the problems to which the
strict application of his laws gave rise.

(298.) The first result of the invention of the telescope and its
application to astronomical purposes, by Galileo, was the discovery
of Jupiter’s disc and satellites,--of a system offering a beautiful
miniature of that greater one of which it forms a portion, and
presenting to the eye of sense, at a single glance, that disposition of
parts which in the planetary system itself is discerned only by the eye
of reason and imagination (see 195.). Kepler had the satisfaction of
seeing it ascertained, that the law which he had discovered to connect
the times of revolution of the planets with their distances from the
sun, holds good also when applied to the periods of circulation of
these little attendants round the centre of their principal; thus
demonstrating it to be something more than a mere empirical rule, and
to depend on the intimate nature of planetary motion itself.

(299.) It had been objected to the doctrine of Copernicus, that, were
it true, Venus should appear sometimes horned like the moon. To this
he answered by admitting the conclusion, and averring that, should we
ever be able to see its actual shape, it _would_ appear so. It is easy
to imagine with what force the application would strike every mind when
the telescope confirmed this prediction, and showed the planet just as
both the philosopher and his objectors had agreed it ought to appear.
The history of science affords perhaps only one instance analogous to
this. When Dr. Hutton expounded his theory of the consolidation of
rocks by the application of heat, at a great depth below the bed of
the ocean, and especially of that of marble by actual fusion; it was
objected that, whatever might be the case with others, with calcareous
or marble rocks, at least, it was impossible to grant such a cause
of consolidation, since heat decomposes their substance and converts
it into quicklime, by driving off the carbonic acid, and leaving a
substance perfectly infusible, and incapable even of agglutination
by heat. To this he replied, that the pressure under which the heat
was applied would prevent the escape of the carbonic acid; and that
being retained, it might be expected to give that fusibility to the
compound which the simple quicklime wanted. The next generation saw
this anticipation converted into an observed fact, and verified by the
direct experiments of Sir James Hall, who actually succeeded in melting
marble, by retaining its carbonic acid under violent pressure.

(300.) Kepler, among a number of vague and even wild speculations on
the causes of the motions whose laws he had developed so beautifully
and with so much patient labour, had obtained a glimpse of the general
law of the inertia of matter, as applicable to the great masses of the
heavenly bodies as well as to those with which we are conversant on
the earth. After Kepler, Galileo, while he gave the finishing blow to
the Aristotelian dogmas which erected a barrier between the laws of
celestial and terrestrial motion, by his powerful argument and caustic
ridicule, contributed, by his investigations of the laws of falling
bodies and the motions of projectiles, to lay the foundation of a
true system of dynamics, by which motions could be determined from a
knowledge of the forces producing them, and forces from the motions
they produce. Hooke went yet farther, and obtained a view so distinct
of the mode in which the planets might be retained in their orbits
by the sun’s attraction, that, had his mathematical attainments been
equal to his philosophical acumen, and his scientific pursuits been
less various and desultory, it can hardly be doubted that he would have
arrived at a knowledge of the law of gravitation.

(301.) But every thing which had been done towards this great end,
before Newton, could only be regarded as smoothing some first
obstacles, and preparing a state of knowledge, in which powers like his
could be effectually exerted. His wonderful combination of mathematical
skill with physical research enabled him to invent, at pleasure, new
and unheard-of methods of investigating the effects of those causes
which his clear and penetrating mind detected in operation. Whatever
department of science he touched, he may be said to have formed afresh.
Ascending by a series of close-compacted inductive arguments to the
highest axioms of dynamical science, he succeeded in applying them
to the complete explanation of all the great astronomical phenomena,
and many of the minuter and more enigmatical ones. In doing this, he
had every thing to create: the mathematics of his age proved totally
inadequate to grapple with the numerous difficulties which were to
be overcome; but this, so far from discouraging him, served only to
afford new opportunities for the exertion of his genius, which, in the
invention of the method of fluxions, or, as it is now more generally
called, the differential calculus, has supplied a means of discovery,
bearing the same proportion to the methods previously in use, that
the steam-engine does to the mechanical powers employed before its
invention. Of the optical discoveries of Newton we have already spoken;
and if the magnitude of the objects of his astronomical discoveries
excite our admiration of the mental powers which could so familiarly
grasp them, the minuteness of the researches into which he there set
the first example of entering, is no less calculated to produce a
corresponding impression. Whichever way we turn our view, we find
ourselves compelled to bow before his genius, and to assign to the
name of NEWTON a place in our veneration which belongs to no other in
the annals of science. His era marks the accomplished maturity of the
human reason as applied to such objects. Every thing which went before
might be more properly compared to the first imperfect attempts of
childhood, or the essays of inexpert, though promising, adolescence.
Whatever has been since performed, however great in itself, and worthy
of so splendid and auspicious a beginning, has never, in point of
intellectual effort, surpassed that astonishing one which produced the
Principia.

(302.) In this great work, Newton shows all the celestial motions known
in his time to be consequences of the simple law, that every particle
of matter attracts every other particle in the universe with a force
proportional to the product of their masses directly, and the square
of their mutual distance inversely, and is itself attracted with an
equal force. Setting out from this, he explains how an attraction
arises between the great spherical masses of which our system consists,
regulated by a law precisely similar in its expression; how the
elliptic motions of planets about the sun, and of satellites about
their primaries, according to the exact rules inductively arrived at
by Kepler, result as necessary consequences from the same general law
of force; and how the orbits of comets themselves are only particular
cases of planetary movements. Thence proceeding to applications of
greater difficulty, he explains how the perplexing inequalities of
the moon’s motion result from the sun’s disturbing action; how tides
arise from the unequal attraction of the sun as well as of the moon
on the earth, and the ocean which surrounds it; and, lastly, how the
precession of the equinoxes is a necessary consequence of the very same
law.

(303.) The immediate successors of Newton found full occupation
in verifying his discoveries, and in extending and improving the
mathematical methods which it had now become manifest were to prove
the keys to an inexhaustible treasure of knowledge. The simultaneous
but independent discovery of a method of mathematical investigation in
every respect similar to that of Newton, by Leibnitz, while it created
a degree of national jealousy which can now only be regretted, had the
effect of stimulating the continental geometers to its cultivation, and
impressing on it a character more entirely independent of the ancient
geometry, to which Newton was peculiarly attached. It was fortunate
for science that it did so; for it was speedily found that (with one
fine exception on the part of our countryman Maclaurin, followed up,
after a long interval, by the late Professor Robison of Edinburgh, with
equal elegance,) the geometry of Newton was like the bow of Ulysses,
which none but its master could bend; and that, to render his methods
available beyond the points to which he himself carried them, it was
necessary to strip them of every vestige of that antique dress in which
he had delighted to clothe them. This, however, the countrymen of
Newton were very unwilling to do; and they paid the penalty in finding
themselves condemned to the situation of lookers on, while their
continental neighbours both in Germany and France were pushing forward
in the career of mathematico-physical discovery with emulous rapidity.

(304.) The legacy of research which Newton may be said to have left
to his successors was truly immense. To pursue, through all its
intricacies, the consequences of the law of gravitation; to account for
all the inequalities of the planetary movements, and the infinitely
more complicated, and to us more important ones, of the moon; and to
give, what Newton himself certainly never entertained a conception
of, a demonstration of the stability and permanence of the system,
under all the accumulating influence of its internal perturbations;
this labour, and this triumph, were reserved for the succeeding
age, and have been shared in succession by Clairaut, D’Alembert,
Euler, Lagrange and Laplace. Yet so extensive is the subject, and so
difficult and intricate the purely mathematical enquiries to which it
leads, that another century may yet be required to go through with
the task. The recent discoveries of astronomers have supplied matter
for investigation, to the geometers of this and the next generation,
of a difficulty far surpassing any thing that had before occurred.
Five primary planets have been added to our system; four of them
since the commencement of the present century, and these, singularly
deviating from the general analogy of the others, and offering _cases
of difficulty_ in theory, which no one had before contemplated. Yet
even the intricate questions to which these bodies have given rise
seem likely to be surpassed by those which have come into view, with
the discovery of several comets revolving in elliptic orbits, like the
planets, round the sun, in very moderate periods. But the resources of
modern geometry seem, so far from being exhausted, to increase with the
difficulties they have to encounter, and already, among the successors
of Lagrange and Laplace, the present generation has to enumerate a
powerful array of names, which promise to render it not less celebrated
in the annals of physico-mathematical research than that which has just
passed away.

(305.) Meanwhile the positions, figures, and dimensions of all the
planetary orbits, are now well known, and their variations from century
to century in great measure determined; and it has been generally
demonstrated, that all the changes which the mutual actions of the
planets on each other can produce in the course of indefinite ages,
are _periodical_, that is to say, increasing to a certain extent (and
that never a very great one), and then again decreasing; so that the
system can never be destroyed or subverted by the mutual action of its
parts, but keeps constantly oscillating, as it were, round a certain
mean state, from which it can never deviate to any ruinous extent. In
particular the researches of Laplace, Lagrange, and Poisson, have shown
the ultimate invariability of the mean distance of each planet from the
sun, and consequently of its periodic time. Relying on these grand
discoveries, we are enabled to look forward, from the point of time
which we now occupy, many thousands of years into futurity, and predict
the state of our system without fear of material error, but such as
may arise from causes whose existence at present we have no reason to
suppose, or from interference which we have no right to anticipate.

(306.) A correct enumeration and description of the fixed stars in
catalogues, and an exact knowledge of their position, supply the
only effectual means we can have of ascertaining what changes they
are liable to, and what motions, too slow to deprive them of their
usual epithet, _fixed_, yet sufficient to produce a sensible change
in the lapse of ages, may exist among them. Previous to the invention
of the compass, they served as guides to the navigator by night; but
for this purpose, a very moderate knowledge of a few of the principal
ones sufficed. Hipparchus was the first astronomer, who, excited
by the appearance of a new star, conceived the idea of forming a
catalogue of the stars, with a view to its use as an astronomical
record, “by which,” says Pliny, “posterity will be able to discover,
not only whether they are born and die, but also whether they change
their places, and whether they increase or decrease.” His catalogue,
containing more than 1000 stars, was constructed about 128 years before
Christ. It was in the course of the laborious discussion of his own and
former observations of them, undertaken with a view to the formation of
this catalogue, that he first recognised the fact of that slow, general
advance of all the stars eastward, when compared with the place of
the equinox, which is known under the name of the precession of the
equinoxes, and which Newton succeeded in referring to a motion in the
earth’s axis, produced by the attraction of the sun and moon.

(307.) Since Hipparchus, at various periods in the history of
astronomy, catalogues of stars have been formed, among which that
of Ulugh Begh, comprising about 1000 stars, constructed in 1437, is
remarkable as the production of a sovereign prince, working personally
in conjunction with his astronomers; and that of Tycho Brahe,
containing 777 stars, constructed in 1600, as having originated in a
phenomenon similar to that which drew the attention of Hipparchus. In
more recent times, astronomers provided with the finest instruments
their respective eras could supply, and established in observatories,
munificently endowed by the sovereigns and governments of different
European nations, have vied and are still vying with each other,
in extending the number of registered stars, and giving the utmost
possible degree of accuracy to the determination of their places.
Among these, it would be ungrateful not to claim especial notice
for the superb series of observations which, under a succession of
indefatigable and meritorious astronomers, has, for a very long period,
continued to emanate from our own national observatory of Greenwich.

(308.) The distance of the fixed stars is so immense, that every
attempt to assign a limit, _within which_ it _must_ fall, has hitherto
failed. The enquiries of astronomers of all ages have been directed
to ascertain this distance, by taking the dimensions of our own
particular system of sun and planets, or of the earth itself, as the
unit of a scale on which it might be measured. But although many have
imagined that their observations afforded grounds for the decision
of this interesting point, it has uniformly happened either that the
phenomena on which they relied have proved to be referable to other
causes not previously known, and which the superior accuracy of their
researches has for the first time brought to light; or to errors
arising from instrumental imperfections and unavoidable defects of the
observations themselves.

(309.) The only indication we can expect to obtain of the actual
distance of a star, would consist in an annual change in its apparent
place corresponding to the motion of the earth round the sun, called
its _annual parallax_, and which is nothing more than the measure
of the apparent size of the earth’s orbit as seen from the star.
Many observers have thought they have detected a measurable amount
of this parallax; but as astronomical instruments have advanced in
perfection, the quantity which they have successively assigned to it
has been continually reduced within narrower and narrower limits,
and has invariably been commensurate with the errors to which the
instruments used might fairly be considered liable. The conclusion this
strongly presses on us is, that it is really a quantity too small to
admit of distinct measurement in the present state of our means for
that purpose; and that, therefore, the distance of the stars must be
a magnitude of such an order as the imagination almost shrinks from
contemplating. But this increase in our scale of dimension calls for
a corresponding enlargement of conception in all other respects. The
same reasoning which places the stars at such immeasurable remoteness,
exalts them at the same time into glorious bodies, similar to, and even
far surpassing, our own sun, the centres perhaps of other planetary
systems, or fulfilling purposes of which we can have no idea, from any
analogy in what passes immediately around us.

(310.) The comparison of catalogues, published at different periods,
has given occasion to many curious remarks, respecting changes both
of place and brightness among the stars, to the discovery of variable
ones which lose and recover their lustre periodically, and to that of
the disappearance of several from the heavens so completely as to have
left no vestige discernible even by powerful telescopes. In proportion
as the construction of astronomical and optical instruments has gone on
improving, our knowledge of the contents of the heavens has undergone
a corresponding extension, and, at the same time, attained a degree of
precision which could not have been anticipated in former ages. The
places of all the principal stars in the northern hemisphere, and of a
great many in the southern, are now known to a degree of nicety which
must infallibly detect any real motions that may exist among them,
and has in fact done so, in a great many instances, some of them very
remarkable ones.

(311.) It is only since a comparatively recent date, however, that
any great attention has been bestowed on the smaller stars, among
which there can be no doubt of the most interesting and instructive
phenomena being sooner or later brought to light. The minute
examination of them with powerful telescopes, and with delicate
instruments for the determination of their places, has, indeed, already
produced immense catalogues and masses of observations, in which
thousands of stars invisible to the naked eye are registered; and has
led to the discovery of innumerable important and curious facts, and
disclosed the existence of whole classes of celestial objects, of a
nature so wonderful as to give room for unbounded speculation on the
extent and construction of the universe.

(312.) Among these, perhaps the most remarkable are the revolving
double stars, or stars which, to the naked eye or to inferior
telescopes, appear single; but, if examined with high magnifying
powers, are found to consist of two individuals placed almost close
together, and which, when carefully watched, are (many of them) found
to revolve in regular elliptic orbits about each other; and so far
as we have yet been able to ascertain, to obey the same laws which
regulate the planetary movements. There is nothing calculated to give a
grander idea of the scale on which the sidereal heavens are constructed
than these beautiful systems. When we see such magnificent bodies
united in pairs, undoubtedly by the same bond of mutual gravitation
which holds together our own system, and sweeping over their enormous
orbits, in periods comprehending many centuries, we admit at once that
they must be accomplishing ends in creation which will remain for ever
unknown to man; and that we have here attained a point in science
where the human intellect is compelled to acknowledge its weakness, and
to feel that no conception the wildest imagination can form will bear
the least comparison with the intrinsic greatness of the subject.


_Geology._

(313.) The researches of physical astronomy are confessedly incompetent
to carry us back to the origin of our system, or to a period when
its state was, in any great essential, different from what it is
at present. So far as the causes now in action go, and so far as
our calculations will enable us to estimate their effects, we are
equally unable to perceive in the general phenomena of the planetary
system either the evidence of a beginning, or the prospect of an end.
Geometers, as already stated, have demonstrated that, in the midst of
all the fluctuations which can possibly take place in the elements of
the orbits of the planets, by reason of their mutual attraction, the
general balance of the parts of the system will always be preserved,
and every departure from a mean state periodically compensated. But
neither the researches of the physical astronomer, nor those of
the geologist, give us any ground for regarding our system, or the
globe we inhabit, as of eternal duration. On the contrary, there are
circumstances in the physical constitution of our own planet which at
least obscurely point to an origin and a formation, however remote,
since it has been found that the figure of the earth is not globular
but elliptical, and that its attraction is such as requires us to admit
the interior to be more dense than the exterior, and the density to
increase with some degree of regularity from the surface towards the
centre, and _that_, in layers arranged elliptically round the centre,
circumstances which could scarcely happen without some such successive
deposition of materials as would enable pressure to be propagated with
a certain degree of freedom from one part of the mass to another, even
if we should hesitate to admit a state of primitive fluidity.

(314.) But from such indications nothing distinct can be concluded;
and if we would speculate to any purpose on a former state of our
globe and on the succession of events which from time to time may have
changed the condition and form of its surface, we must confine our
views within limits far more restricted, and to subjects much more
within the reach of our capacity, than either the creation of the world
or its assumption of its present figure. These, indeed, were favourite
speculations with a race of geologists now extinct; but the science
itself has undergone a total change of character, even within the last
half century, and is brought, at length, effectually within the list
of the inductive sciences. Geologists now no longer bewilder their
imaginations with wild theories of the formation of the globe from
chaos, or its passage through a series of hypothetical transformations,
but rather aim at a careful and accurate examination of the records
of its former state, which they find indelibly impressed on the great
features of its actual surface, and to the evidences of former life
and habitation which organised remains imbedded and preserved in its
strata indisputably afford.

(315.) Records of this kind are neither few nor vague; and though the
obsoleteness of their language when we endeavour to interpret it too
minutely, may, and no doubt often does, lead to misapprehension, still
its general meaning is, on the whole, unequivocal and satisfactory.
Such records teach us, in terms too plain to be misunderstood, that
the whole or nearly the whole of our present lands and continents
were formerly at the bottom of the sea, where they received deposits
of materials from the wearing and degradation of other lands not now
existing, and furnished receptacles for the remains of marine animals
and plants inhabiting the ocean above them, as well as for similar
spoils of the land washed down into its bosom.

(316.) These remains are occasionally brought to light; and their
examination has afforded indubitable evidence of the former existence
of a state of animated nature widely different from what now obtains
on the globe, and of a period anterior to that in which it has been
the habitation of man, or rather, indeed, of a series of periods, of
unknown duration, in which both land and sea teemed with forms of
animal and vegetable life, which have successively disappeared and
given place to others, and these again to new races approximating
gradually more and more nearly to those which now inhabit them, and at
length comprehending species which have their counterparts existing.

(317.) These wrecks of a former state of nature, thus wonderfully
preserved (like ancient medals and inscriptions in the ruins of an
empire), afford a sort of rude chronology, by whose aid the successive
depositions of the strata in which they are found may be marked out
in epochs more or less definitely terminated, and each characterized
by some peculiarity which enables us to recognise the deposits of any
period, in whatever part of the world they may be found. And, so far
as has been hitherto investigated, the _order_ of succession in which
these deposits have been formed appears to have been the same in every
part of the globe.

(318.) Many of the strata which thus bear evident marks of having been
deposited at the bottom of the sea, and of course in a horizontal
state, are now found in a position highly inclined to the horizon, and
even occasionally vertical. And they often bear no less evident marks
of violence, in their bending and fracture, the dislocation of parts
which were once contiguous, and the existence of vast collections of
broken fragments which afford every proof of great violence having been
used in accomplishing some at least of the changes which have taken
place.

(319.) Besides the rocks which carry this internal evidence of
submarine deposition, are many which exhibit no such proofs, but on the
contrary hold out every appearance of owing their origin to volcanoes
or to some other mode of igneous action; and in every part of the
world, and among strata of all ages, there occur evidences of such
action so abundant, and on such a scale, as to point out the volcano
and the earthquake as agents which may have been instrumental in the
production of those changes of level, and those violent dislocations
which we perceive to have taken place.

(320.) At all events, in accounting for those changes, geologists
have no longer recourse, as formerly, to causes purely hypothetical,
such as a shifting of the earth’s axis of rotation, bringing the sea
to overflow the land, by a change in the place of the longer and
shorter diameters of the spheroidal figure, nor to tides produced by
the attraction of comets suddenly approaching very near the earth,
nor to any other fanciful and arbitrarily assumed hypotheses; but
rather endeavour to confine themselves to a careful consideration
of causes evidently in action at present, with a view to ascertain
how far they, in the first instance, are capable of accounting for
the facts observed, and thus legitimately bringing into view, as
residual phenomena, those effects which cannot be so accounted for.
When this shall have been in some measure accomplished, we shall be
able to pronounce with greater security than at present respecting the
necessity of admitting a long succession of tremendous and ravaging
catastrophes and cataclysms,--epochs of terrific confusion and violence
which many geologists (perhaps with justice) regard as indispensable to
the explanation of the existing features of the world. We shall learn
to distinguish between the effects which require for their production
the sudden application of convulsive and fracturing efforts, and those,
probably not less extensive, changes which may have been produced by
forces equally or more powerful, but acting with less irregularity,
and so distributed over time as to produce none of those _interregnums_
of chaotic anarchy which we are apt to think (perhaps erroneously)
great disfigurements of an order so beautiful and harmonious as that of
nature.

(321.) But to estimate justly the effects of causes now in action in
geology is no easy task. There is no _à priori_ or deductive process by
which we can estimate the amount of the annual erosion, for instance,
of a continent by the action of meteoric agents, rain, wind, frost,
&c., nor the quantity of destruction produced on its coasts by the
direct violence of the sea, nor the quantity of lava thrown up _per
annum_ by volcanoes over the whole surface of the earth, nor any
similar effect. And to consult experience on all such points is a
slow and painful process if rightly gone into, and a very fallible
one if only partially executed. Much, then, at present must be left
to opinion, and to that sort of clear-judging tact which sometimes
anticipates experience; but this ought not to stand in the way of our
making every possible effort to obtain accurate information on such
points, by which alone geology can be rendered, if not an experimental
science, at least a science of that kind of active observation which
forms the nearest approach to it, where actual experiment is impossible.

(322.) Let us take, for example, the question, “What is the actual
direction in which changes of relative level are taking place between
the existing continents and seas?” If we consult partial experience,
that is, _all_ the information that we possess respecting ancient
sea-marks, soundings, &c., we shall only find ourselves bewildered in
a mass of conflicting, because imperfect, evidence. It is obvious that
the only way to decide the point is to ascertain, by very precise and
careful observations at proper stations on coasts, selected at points
where there exist natural marks not liable to change in the course of
at least a century, the true elevation of such marks above the _mean_
level of the sea, and to multiply these stations sufficiently over the
whole globe to be capable of affording real available knowledge. Now,
this is not a very easy operation (considering the accuracy required);
for the _mean_ level of the sea can be determined by no single
observation, any more than the mean height of the barometer at a given
station, being affected both by periodical and accidental fluctuations
due to tides, winds, waves, and currents. Yet if an instrument adapted
for the purpose were constructed, and rendered easily attainable, and
rules for its use carefully drawn up, there is little doubt we should
soon (by the industry of observers scattered over the world) be in
possession of a most valuable mass of information, which could not fail
to afford a point of departure for the next generation, and furnish
ground for the only kind of argument which ever can be conclusive on
such subjects.

(323.) Geology, in the magnitude and sublimity of the objects of
which it treats, undoubtedly ranks, in the scale of the sciences,
next to astronomy; like astronomy, too, its progress depends on the
continual accumulation of observations carried on for ages. But, unlike
astronomy, the observations on which it depends, when the whole extent
of the subject to be explored is taken into consideration, can hardly
yet be said to be more than commenced. Yet, to make up for this, there
is another important difference, that while in the latter science it is
impossible to recall the past or anticipate the future, and observation
is in consequence limited to a single fact in a single moment; in
the former, the records of the past are always present;--they may be
examined and re-examined as often as we please, and require nothing
but diligence and judgment to put us in possession of their whole
contents. Only a very small part of the surface of our globe has,
however, been accurately examined in detail, and of that small portion
we are only able to scratch the mere exterior, for so we must consider
those excavations which we are apt to regard as searching the bowels
of the earth; since the deepest mines which have been sunk penetrate
to a depth hardly surpassing the ten thousandth part of the distance
between its surface and its centre. Of course inductions founded on
such limited examination can only be regarded as provisional, except
in those remarkable cases where the same great formations in the same
order have been recognised in very distant quarters, and without
exception. This, however, cannot long be the case. The spirit with
which the subject has been prosecuted for many years in our own country
has been rewarded with so rich a harvest of surprising and unexpected
discoveries, and has carried the investigation of our island into such
detail, as to have excited a corresponding spirit among our continental
neighbours; while the same zeal which animates our countrymen on their
native shore accompanies them in their sojourns abroad, and has
already begun to supply a fund of information respecting the geology of
our Indian possessions, as well as of every other point where English
intellect and research can penetrate.

(324.) Nothing can be more desirable than that every possible facility
and encouragement should be afforded for such researches, and indeed
to the pursuits of the enlightened resident or traveller in every
department of science, by the representatives of our national authority
wherever our power extends. By these only can our knowledge of the
actual state of the surface of the globe, and that of the animals
and vegetables of the ancient continents and seas, be extended and
perfected, while more complete information than we at present possess
of the habits of those actually existing, and the influence of changes
of climate, food, and circumstances, on them, may be expected to render
material assistance to our speculations respecting those which have
become extinct.




CHAP. IV.

OF THE EXAMINATION OF THE MATERIAL CONSTITUENTS OF THE WORLD.


_Mineralogy._

(325.) The consideration of the history and structure of our globe, and
the examination of the fossil contents of its strata, lead us naturally
to consider the materials of which it consists. The history of these
materials, their properties as objects of philosophical enquiry, and
their application to the useful arts and the embellishments of life,
with the characters by which they can be certainly distinguished one
from another, form the object of mineralogy, taken in its most extended
sense.

(326.) There is no branch of science which presents so many points
of contact with other departments of physical research, and serves
as a connecting link between so many distant points of philosophical
speculation, as this. To the geologist, the chemist, the optician, the
crystallographer, the physician, it offers especially the very elements
of their knowledge, and a field for many of their most curious and
important enquiries. Nor, with the exception of chemistry, is there any
which has undergone more revolutions, or been exhibited in a greater
variety of forms. To the ancients it could scarcely be said to be at
all known, and up to a comparatively recent period, nothing could
be more imperfect than its descriptions, or more inartificial and
unnatural than its classification. The more important minerals in the
arts, indeed, those used for economical purposes and those from which
metals were extracted, had a certain degree of attention paid to them,
for the sake of their utility and commercial value, and the precious
stones for that of ornament. But until their crystalline forms were
attentively observed and shown to be determinate characters on which
dependence could be placed, no mineralogist could give any correct
account of the real distinction between one mineral and another.

(327.) It was only, however, when chemical analysis had acquired
a certain degree of precision and universal applicability that
the importance of mineralogy as a science began to be recognized,
and the connection between the external characters of a stone and
its ingredient constituents brought into distinct notice. Among
these characters, however, none were found to possess that eminent
distinctness which the crystalline form offers; a character, in the
highest degree geometrical, and affording, as might be naturally
supposed, the strongest evidence of its necessary connection with the
intimate constitution of the substance. The full importance of this
character was, however, not felt until its connection with the texture
or cleavage of a mineral was pointed out, and even then it required
numerous and striking instances of the critical discernment of Haüy
and other eminent mineralogists in predicting from the measurements
of the angles of crystals which had been confounded together that
differences would be found to exist in their chemical composition, all
which proved fully justified in their result before the essential value
of this character was acknowledged. This was no doubt in great measure
owing to the high importance set by the German mineralogists on those
external characters of touch, sight, weight, colour, and other sensible
qualities, which are little susceptible, with the exception of weight,
of exact determination, and which are subject to material variations
in different specimens of the same mineral. By degrees, however, the
necessity of ascribing great weight to a character so definite was
admitted, especially when it was considered that the same step which
pointed out the intimate connection of external form with internal
structure furnished the mineralogist with the means of reducing all
the forms of which a mineral is susceptible under one general type, or
primitive form, and afforded grounds for an elegant theoretical account
of the assumption of definite figures _ab initio_.

(328.) A simple and elegant invention of Dr. Wollaston, the reflecting
goniometer, gave a fresh impulse to that view of mineralogy which makes
the crystalline form the essential or leading character, by putting
it in the power of every one, by the examination of even the smallest
portion of a broken crystal, to ascertain and verify that essential
character on which the identity of a mineral in the system of Haüy
was made to depend. The application of so ready and exact a method
speedily led to important results, and to a still nicer discrimination
of mineral species than could before be attained; and the confirmation
given to these results by chemical analysis stamped them with a
scientific and decided character which they have retained ever since.

(329.) Meanwhile the progress made in chemical analysis had led to
the important conclusion that every chemical compound susceptible of
assuming the solid state assumed with it a determinate crystalline
form; and the progress of optical science had shown that the
fundamental crystalline form, in the case at least of transparent
bodies, drew with it a series of optical properties no less curious
than important in relation to the affections of light in its passage
through such substances. Thus, in every point of view, additional
importance became added to this character; and the study of the
crystalline forms of bodies in general assumed the form of a separate
and independent branch of science, of which the geometrical forms of
the mineral world constituted only a particular case. Mineralogy,
however, as a branch of natural history, remains still distinct either
from optics or crystallography. The mineralogist is content, and thinks
he has performed his task, if not as a natural historian at least as
a classifier and arranger, if he only gives such a characteristic
description of a mineral as shall effectually distinguish it from every
other, and shall enable any one who may encounter such a body in any
part of the world to impose on it its name, assign it a place in his
system, and turn to his books for a further description of all that
the chemist, the optician, the lapidary, or the artist, may require to
know. Still this is no easy matter: the laborious researches of the
most eminent mineralogists can hardly yet be said to have effectually
accomplished it; and its difficulty may be appreciated by the small
number of simple minerals, or minerals of perfectly definite and
well-marked characters, which have been hitherto made out. Nor can
this indeed be wondered at, when we consider that by far the greater
portion of the rocks and stones which compose the external crust of the
globe consists of nothing more than the accumulated _detritus_ of older
rocks, in which the fragments and powder of an infinite variety of
substances are mingled together, in all sorts of varying proportions,
and in such a way as to defy separation. Many of these rocks, however,
so compounded, occur with sufficient frequency and uniformity of
character to have acquired names and to have been usefully applied;
indeed, in the latter respect, minerals of this description far surpass
all the others. As objects of natural history, therefore, they are well
worthy of attention, however difficult it may be to assign them a place
in any artificial arrangement.

(330.) This paucity of simple minerals, however, is probably rather
apparent than real, and in proportion as the researches of the chemist
and crystallographer shall be extended throughout nature, they will
no doubt become much more numerous. Indeed, in the great laboratories
of nature it can hardly be doubted that almost every kind of chemical
process is going forwards, by which compounds of every description are
continually forming. Accordingly, it is remarked, that the lavas and
ejected scoriæ of volcanoes are receptacles in which mineral products
previously unknown are constantly discovered, and that the primitive
formations, as they are called in geology, which bear no marks of
having been produced by the destruction of others, are also remarkable
for the beauty and distinctness of character of their minerals.

(331.) The great difficulty which has been experienced in attempts to
classify mineral substances by their chemical constituents has arisen
from the observed presence, in some specimens of minerals bearing
that general resemblance in other respects as well as agreement in
form which would seem to entitle them to be considered as alike, of
ingredients foreign to the usual composition of the species, and that
occasionally in so large a proportion as to render it unjustifiable
to refer their occurrence to accidental impurities. These cases, as
well as some anomalies observed in the classification of minerals by
their crystalline forms, which seemed to show that the same substance
might occasionally appear under two distinct forms, as well as some
remarkable coincidences between the forms of substances quite distinct
from each other in a chemical point of view, have within a recent
period given rise to a branch of the science of crystallography of a
very curious and important nature. The _isomorphism_ of certain groups
of chemical elements has already afforded us an example illustrative
of the manner in which inductions sometimes receive unexpected
verifications (see 180.). The laws and relations thus brought to light
are among the most curious and interesting parts of modern science,
and seem likely in their further developement to afford ample scope
for the exercise of chemical and mineralogical research. They have
already afforded innumerable fine examples of that important step in
science by which anomalies disappear, and occasional incongruities
become reconciled under more general expressions of physical laws,
and thus unite in affording support to those very views which they
promised, when first observed, to overset. Nothing, indeed, can be
more striking than to see the very ingredient which every previous
chemist and mineralogist would agree to disregard and reject as a
mere casual impurity brought forward and appealed to in support of a
theory expressly directed to the object of rescuing science from the
imputation of disregarding, under any circumstances, the plain results
of direct experiment.


_Chemistry._

(332.) The laws which concern the intimate constitution of bodies,
not as respects their _structure_ or the manner in which their parts
are put together, but as regards their _materials_ or the ingredients
of which those parts are composed, form the objects of chemistry. A
solid body may be regarded as a fabric, more or less regularly and
artificially constructed, in which the materials and the workmanship
may be separately considered, and in which, though the latter be
ruined and confounded by violence, the former remain unchanged in
their nature, though differently arranged. In liquid or aërial bodies,
too, though there prevails a less degree of difference in point of
structure, and a greater facility of dispersion and dissipation, than
in solids, yet an equal diversity of _materials_ subsists, giving to
them properties differing extremely from each other.

(333.) The inherent activity of matter is proved not only by the
production of motion by the mutual attractions and repulsions of
distant or contiguous masses, but by the changes and apparent
transformations which different substances undergo in their sensible
qualities by mere mixture. If water be added to water, or salt to salt,
the effect is an increase of quantity, but no change of quality. In
this case, the mutual action of the particles is entirely mechanical.
Again, if a blue powder and a yellow one, each perfectly dry, be mixed
and well shaken together, a green powder will be produced; but this
is a mere effect arising in the eye from the intimate mixture of the
yellow and blue light separately and independently reflected from
the minute particles of each; and the proof is had by examining the
mixture with a microscope, when the yellow and blue grains will be seen
separate and each quite unaltered. If the same experiment be tried with
coloured liquids, which are susceptible of mixing without chemical
action, a compound colour is likewise produced, but no examination
with magnifiers is in that case sufficient to detect the ingredients;
the reason obviously being, the excessive minuteness of the parts, and
their perfect intermixture, produced by agitating two liquids together.
From the mixture of two powders, extreme patience would enable any one,
by picking out with a magnifier grain after grain, to separate the
ingredients. But when liquids are mixed, no mechanical separation is
any longer practicable; the particles are so minute as to elude all
search. Yet this does not hinder us from regarding such a compound as
still a mere mixture, and its properties are accordingly intermediate
between those of the liquids mixed. But this is far from being the
case with all liquids. When a solution of potash, for example, and
another of tartaric acid, each perfectly liquid, are mixed together in
proper proportions, a great quantity of a solid saline substance falls
to the bottom of the containing vessel, which is quite different from
either potash or tartaric acid, and the liquid from which it subsided
offers no indications by its taste or other sensible qualities of the
ingredients mixed, but of something totally different from either.
It is evident that this is a phenomenon widely different from that
of mere mixture; there has taken place a great and radical change in
the intimate nature of the ingredients, by which a new substance is
produced which had no existence before. And it has been produced by the
_union_ of the ingredients presented to each other; for when examined
it is found that nothing has been _lost_, the weight of the whole
mixture being the sum of the weights mixed. Yet the potash and tartaric
acid have disappeared entirely, and the weight of the new product is
found to be exactly equal to that of the tartaric acid and potash
employed, taken together, abating a small portion held in solution in
the liquid, which may be obtained however by evaporation. They have
therefore combined, and adhere to one another with a cohesive force
sufficient to form a solid out of a liquid; a force which has thus been
called into action by merely presenting them to each other in a state
of solution.

(334.) It is the business of chemistry to investigate these and similar
changes, or the reverse of such changes, where a single substance is
resolved into two or more others, having different properties from it,
and from each other, and to enquire into all the circumstances which
can influence them; and either determine, modify, or suspend their
accomplishment, whether such influence be exercised by heat or cold, by
time and rest, or by agitation or pressure, or by any of those agents
of which we have acquired a knowledge, such as electricity, light,
magnetism, &c.

(335.) The wonderful and sudden transformations with which chemistry is
conversant, the violent activity often assumed by substances usually
considered the most inert and sluggish, and, above all, the insight
it gives into the nature of innumerable operations which we see daily
carried on around us, have contributed to render it the most popular,
as it is one of the most extensively useful, of the sciences; and
we shall, accordingly, find none which have sprung forward, during
the last century, with such extraordinary vigour, and have had such
extensive influence in promoting corresponding progress in others. One
of the chief causes of its popularity is, perhaps, to be sought for in
this, that it is, of all the sciences, perhaps, the most completely an
experimental one; and even its theories are, for the most part, of that
generally intelligible and readily applicable kind, which demand no
intense concentration of thought, and lead to no profound mathematical
researches. The simple process of inductive generalization, grounded on
the examination of numerous facts, all of them presenting considerable
intrinsic interest, has sufficed, in most instances, to lead, by a
clear and direct road, to its highest laws yet known. But, on the other
hand, these laws, when stated, are not yet fully sufficient to lead us,
except in very limited cases, to a deductive knowledge of particulars
never before examined, at least, not without great caution, and
constant appeal to experiment as a check on our reasoning; so that we
are justified in regarding the _axioms_ of chemistry, the true handles
of deductive reasoning, as still unknown, and, perhaps, likely long
to remain so. This is no fault of its cultivators, who have comprised
in their list the highest and most varied talents and industry, but
of the inherent complexity of the subject, and the infinite multitude
of causes which are concerned in the production of every, even the
simplest, chemical phenomenon.

(336.) The history of chemistry (on which, however, we are not about
to enlarge,) is one of great interest to those who delight to trace
the steps by which mankind advance to the discovery of truth through
a series of mistakes and failures. It may be divided, 1st, into
the period of the alchemists, a lamentable epoch in the annals of
intellectual wandering; 2dly, that of the phlogistic doctrines of
Beccher and Stahl, in which, as if to prove the perversity of the human
mind, of two possible roads the wrong was chosen; and a theory obtained
universal credence on the strength of an induction, valid as such, but
wrongly interpreted, which is negatived, _in every instance_, by an
appeal to the balance. This, too, happened, not by reason of unlucky
coincidences, or individual oversights, but of necessity, and from an
inherent defect of the theory itself, which thus impeded the progress
of the science, as far as a science of experiment can be impeded by
a false theory, by perplexing its cultivators with the appearance of
contradictions in their experiments where none really subsisted, by
destroying all their confidence in the numerical exactness of their
own results, and by involving the subject in a mist of visionary and
hypothetical causes in place of the true acting principles. Thus, in
the combustion of any substance which is incapable of flying away in
fumes, an increase of weight takes place,--the ashes are heavier than
the fuel. Whenever this was observed, however, it was passed carelessly
over as arising from the escape of phlogiston, or the principle of
inflammability, which was considered as being either the element of
fire itself, or in some way combined with it, and thus essentially
_light_. It is now known that the increase of weight is owing to
the absorption of, and combination with, a quantity of a peculiar
ingredient called _oxygen_, from the air, a principle essentially
_heavy_. So far as weight is concerned, it makes no difference whether
a body having weight enters, or one having levity escapes; but there
is this plain difference in a philosophical point of view, that oxygen
is a real producible substance, and phlogiston is no such thing: the
former is a _vera causa_, the latter an hypothetical being, introduced
to account for what the other accounts for much better.

(337.) The third age of chemistry--that which may be called
emphatically modern chemistry--commenced (in 1786) when Lavoisier, by
a series of memorable experiments, extinguished for ever this error,
and placed chemistry in the rank of one of the exact sciences,--a
science of number, weight, and measure. From that epoch to the
present day it has constantly advanced with an accelerated progress,
and at this moment may be regarded as more progressive than ever.
The principal features in this progress may be comprised under the
following general heads:--

   1. The discovery of the proximate, if not the ultimate, elements
        of all bodies, and the enlargement of the list of known
        elements to its present extent of between fifty and sixty
        substances.

   2. The developement of the doctrine of latent heat by Black,
        with its train of important consequences, including the
        scientific theory of the steam-engine.

   3. The establishment of Wenzel’s law of definite proportions on
        his own experiments, and those of Richter, a discovery
        subsequently merged in the more general wording and better
        development of Dalton’s atomic theory.

   4. The precise determination of the atomic weights of the
        different chemical elements, mainly due to the astonishing
        industry of Berzelius, and his unrivalled command of chemical
        resources, as well as to the researches of the other chemists
        of the Swedish and German school.

   5. The assimilation of gases and vapours, by which we are led
        to regard the former, universally, as particular cases of
        the latter, a generalization resulting chiefly from the
        experiments of Faraday on the condensation of the gases,
        and those of Gay-Lussac and Dalton, on the laws of their
        expansion by heat compared with that of vapours.

   6. The establishment of the laws of the combination of gases and
        vapours by definite volumes, by Gay-Lussac.

   7. The discovery of the chemical effects of electricity, and
        the decomposing agency of the Voltaic pile, by Nicholson
        and Carlisle; the investigation of the laws of such
        decompositions, by Berzelius and Hisinger: the decomposition
        of the alkalies by Davy, and the consequent introduction into
        chemistry of new and powerful agents in their metallic bases.

   8. The application of chemical analysis to all the objects of
        organized and unorganized nature, and the discovery of
        the ultimate constituents of all, and the proximate ones
        of organic matter, and the recognisance of the important
        distinctions which appear to divide these great classes of
        bodies from each other.

   9. The applications of chemistry to innumerable processes in the
        arts, and among other useful purposes to the discovery of the
        essential medical principles in vegetables, and to important
        medicaments in the mineral kingdom.

  10. The establishment of the intimate connection between
        chemical composition and crystalline form, by Haüy
        and Vauquelin, with the successive rectifications the
        statement of that connection has undergone in the hands of
        Mitscherlich, Rose, and others, with the progress of chemical
        and crystallographical knowledge.

(338.) To pursue these several heads into detail would lead us into
a treatise on chemistry; but a few remarks on one or two of them, as
they bear upon the general principles of all scientific enquiry, will
not be irrelevant. And first, then, with reference to the discovery
of new elements, it will be observed, that philosophical chemistry no
more aims at determining the one essential element out of which all
matter is framed--the one ultimate principle of the universe--than
astronomy at discovering the origin of the planetary movements in
the application of a determinate projectile force in a determinate
direction, or geology at ascending to the creation of the earth. There
may be such an element. Some singular relations which have been pointed
out in the atomic weights of bodies seem to suggest to minds fond of
speculation that there is; but philosophical chemistry is content to
wait for some striking fact, which may either occur unexpectedly or
be led to by the slow progress of enlarged views, to disclose to us
its existence. Still, the multiplication of so-considered elementary
bodies has been considered by some as an inconvenience. We confess
we do not coincide with this view. Whatever they be, the obstinacy
with which they resist decomposition shows that they are ingredients
of a very high and primary importance in the economy of nature; and
such as, in any state of science, it would be indispensably necessary
to be perfectly familiar with. Like particular theorems in geometry,
which, though not rising to the highest point of generality, have yet
their several scopes and ranges of extensive application, they must be
well and perfectly understood in all their bearings. Should we ever
arrive at an analysis of these bodies, the chemical properties of the
new elements which will then come into view will be known only by our
knowledge of these, or of other compounds of the same class, which they
may be capable of forming. Not but that such an analysis would be a
most important and indeed triumphant achievement, and change the face
of chemistry; but it would undo nothing that has been done, and render
useless no point of knowledge which we have yet arrived at.

(339.) The atomic theory, or the law of definite proportions, which
is the same thing presented in a form divested of all hypothesis,
after the laws of mechanics, is, perhaps, the most important which
the study of nature has yet disclosed. The extreme simplicity which
characterizes it, and which is itself an indication, not unequivocal,
of its elevated rank in the scale of physical truths, had the effect
of causing it to be announced at once by Mr. Dalton, in its most
general terms, on the contemplation of a few instances[53], without
passing through subordinate stages of painful inductive ascent by the
intermedium of subordinate laws, such as, had the contrary course been
pursued by him, would have been naturally preparatory to it, and such
as would have led others to it by the prosecution of Wenzel’s and
Richter’s researches, had they been duly attended to. This is, in fact,
an example, and a most remarkable one, of the effect of that natural
propensity to generalize and simplify (noticed in 171.), which, if it
occasionally leads to over-hasty conclusions, limited or disproved by
further experience, is yet the legitimate parent of many of our most
valuable and soundest results. Instances like this, where great and,
indeed, immeasurable steps in our knowledge of nature are made at once,
and almost without intellectual effort, are well calculated to raise
our hopes of the future progress of science, and, by pointing out the
simplest and most obvious combinations as those which are actually
found to be agreeable to the harmony of creation, to hold out the
cheering prospect of difficulties diminishing as we advance, instead of
thickening around us in increasing complexity.

(340.) A consequence of this immediate presentation of the law of
definite proportions in its most general form is, that its subordinate
laws--those which limit its generality in particular cases, which
diminish the number of combinations abstractly possible, and restrain
the indiscriminate mixture of elements,--remain to be discovered. Some
such limitations have, in fact, been traced to a certain extent, but by
no means so far as the importance of the subject requires; and we have
here abundant occupation for chemists for some time.

(341.) The determination of the atomic weights of the chemical
elements, like that of other standard physical data, with the utmost
exactness, is in itself a branch of enquiry not only of the greatest
importance, but of extreme difficulty. Independent of the general
reasons for desiring accuracy in this respect, there is one peculiar
to the subject. It has been suggested (by Dr. Prout), and strongly
insisted on (by Dr. Thomson), that all the numbers representing these
weights, constituting a scale of great extent, in which the extremes
already known are in proportion to each other, as 1 to upwards of 200,
are simple even multiples of the least of them. If this be really the
case, it opens views of such importance as to justify any degree of
labour and pains in the verification of the law as a purely inductive
one. But in the actual state of chemical analysis, with all deference
to such high authority, we confess it appears to us to stand in great
need of further confirmation, since it seems doubtful whether such
accuracy has yet been attained as to enable us to answer positively
for a fraction not exceeding the three or four hundredth part of the
whole quantity to be determined: at least the results of the first
experimenters, obtained with the greatest care, differ often by a
greater amount; and this degree of exactness, at least, would be
required to verify the law satisfactorily in the higher parts of the
scale.

(342.) The mere agitation of such a question, however, points out
a class of phenomena in physical science of a remote and singular
kind, and of a very high and refined order, which could never become
known but in an advanced state of science, not only practical, but
theoretical,--we mean, such as consist in observed relations among the
_data_ of physics, which show them to be quantities not _arbitrarily_
assumed, but depending on laws and causes which they may be the means
of at length disclosing. A remarkable instance of such a relation is
the curious law which Bode observed to obtain in the progression of the
magnitudes of the several planetary orbits. This law was interrupted
between Mars and Jupiter, so as to induce him to consider a planet
as wanting in that interval;--a deficiency long afterwards strangely
supplied by the discovery of _four_ new planets in that very interval,
all of whose orbits conform in dimension to the law in question, within
such moderate limits of error as may be due to causes independent of
those on which the law itself ultimately rests.[54]

(343.) Neither is it irrelevant to our subject to remark, that the
progress which has been made in this department of chemistry, and
the considerable exactness actually attainable in chemical analysis,
have been owing, in great measure, to a circumstance which might at
first have been hardly considered likely to exercise much influence
on the progress of a science,--the discovery of platina. Without the
resources placed at the ready disposal of chemists by this invaluable
metal, it is difficult to conceive that the multitude of delicate
analytical experiments which have been required to construct the fabric
of existing knowledge could have ever been performed. This, among many
such lessons, will teach us that the most important uses of natural
objects are not those which offer themselves to us most obviously. The
chief use of the moon for man’s immediate purposes remained unknown to
him for five thousand years from his creation. And, since it cannot but
be that innumerable and most important uses remain to be discovered
among the materials and objects already known to us, as well as among
those which the progress of science must hereafter disclose, we may
hence conceive a well-grounded expectation, not only of constant
increase in the physical resources of mankind, and the consequent
improvement of their condition, but of continual accessions to our
power of penetrating into the arcana of nature, and becoming acquainted
with her highest laws.




CHAP. V.

OF THE IMPONDERABLE FORMS OF MATTER.


_Heat._

(344.) One of the chief agents in chemistry, on whose proper
application and management the success of a great number of its
enquiries depends, and many of whose most important laws are disclosed
to us by phenomena of a chemical nature, is HEAT. Although some of
its effects are continually before our eyes as matters of the most
common occurrence, insomuch that there is scarcely any process in the
useful arts and manufactures which does not call for its intervention,
and although, independent of this high utility, and the proportionate
importance of a knowledge of its nature and laws, it presents in itself
a subject of the most curious speculation; yet there is scarcely
any physical agent of which we have so imperfect a knowledge, whose
intimate nature is more hidden, or whose laws are of such delicate and
difficult investigation.

(345.) The word heat generally implies the sensation which we
experience on approaching a fire; but, in the sense it carries in
physics, it denotes the cause, whatever it be, of that sensation, and
of all the other phenomena which arise on the application of fire,
or of any other heating cause. We should be greatly deceived if we
referred only to sensation as an indication of the presence of this
cause. Many of those things which excite in our organs, and especially
of those of taste, a sensation of heat, owe this property to chemical
stimulants, and not at all to their being actually _hot_. This error
of judgment has produced a corresponding confusion of language, and
hence had actually at one period[55] crept into physical philosophy
a great many illogical and absurd conclusions. Again, there are a
number of chemical agents, which, from their corroding, blackening, and
dissolving, or drying up the parts of some descriptions of bodies, and
producing on them effects not generally unlike (though intrinsically
very different from) those produced by heat, are said, in loose and
vulgar language, to burn them; and this error has even become rooted
into a prejudice, by the fact that some of these agents are capable
of becoming actually and truly _hot_ during their action on moist
substances, by reason of their combination with the water the latter
contain. Thus, quicklime and oil of vitriol both exercise a powerful
corrosive action on animal and vegetable substances, and both become
violently hot by their combination with water. They are, therefore,
set down in vulgar parlance as substances of a hot nature; whereas,
in their relations to the physical cause of heat, they agree with the
generality of bodies similarly constituted.

(346.) The nature of heat has hitherto been chiefly studied under the
general heads of--

  1st, Its sources, or the phenomena which it usually accompanies.

  2d, Its communication from its sources to substances capable of
        receiving it, and from these to others, with a view to
        discover the laws which regulate its distribution through
        space or through the bodies which occupy it.

  3d, Its effects, on our senses, and on the bodies to which it is
        communicated in its various degrees of intensity, by which,
        means are afforded us of measuring these degrees.

  4th, Its intimate relations to the atoms of matter, as exhibited
        in its capability of acquiring a latent state under certain
        circumstances, and of entering into something like chemical
        combinations.

(347.) The most obvious sources of heat are, the sun, fire, animal
life, fermentations, violent chemical actions of all kinds, friction,
percussion, lightning, or the electric discharge, in whatever manner
produced, the sudden condensation of air, and others, so numerous,
and so varied, as to show the extensive and important part it has
to perform in the economy of nature. The discoveries of chemists,
however, have referred most of these to the general head of chemical
combination. Thus, fire, or the combustion of inflammable bodies, is
nothing more than a violent chemical action attending the combination
of their ingredients with the oxygen of the air. Animal heat is, in
like manner, referable to a process bearing no remote analogy to
a slow combustion, by which a portion of carbon, an inflammable
principle existing in the blood, is united with the oxygen of the air
in respiration; and thus carried off from the system: fermentation
is nothing more than a decomposition of chemical elements loosely
united, and their re-union in a more permanent state of combination.
The analogy between the sun and terrestrial fire is so natural as to
have been chosen by Newton to exemplify the irresistible force of an
inference derived from that principle. But the nature of the sun and
the mode in which its wonderful supply of light and heat is maintained
are involved in a mystery which every discovery that has been made
either in chemistry or optics, so far from elucidating, seems only to
render more profound. Friction as a source of heat is well known: we
rub our hands to warm them, and we grease the axles of carriage-wheels
to prevent their setting fire to the wood; an accident which, in
spite of this precaution, does sometimes happen. But the effect of
friction, as a means of producing heat with little or no consumption
of materials, was not fully understood till made the subject of direct
experiment by count Rumford, whose results appear to have established
the extraordinary fact, that an unlimited supply of heat may be derived
by friction from the same materials. Condensation, whether of air by
pressure, or of metals by percussion, is another powerful source of
heat. Thus, iron may be so dexterously hammered as to become red-hot,
and the rapid condensation of a confined portion of air will set tinder
on fire.

(348.) The most violent heats known are produced by the concentration
of the solar rays by burning glasses,--by the combustion of oxygen and
hydrogen gases mixed in the exact proportion in which they combine to
produce water,--and by the discharge of a continued and copious current
of electricity through a small conductor. As these three sources of
heat are independent of each other, and each capable of being brought
into action in a very confined space, there seems no reason why they
might not all three be applied at once at the same point, by which
means, probably, effects would be produced infinitely surpassing any
hitherto witnessed.

(349.) Heat is communicated either by _radiation_ between bodies at a
distance, or by _conduction_ between bodies in contact, or between the
contiguous parts of one and the same body. The laws of the radiation
of heat have been studied with great attention, and have been found
to present strong analogies with that of light in some points, and
singular differences in others. Thus, the heat which accompanies the
sun’s rays comports itself, in all respects, like light; being subject
to similar laws of reflection, refraction, and even of polarization, as
has been shown by Berard. Yet they are not identical with each other;
Sir William Herschel having shown, by decisive experiments, verified by
those of Sir H. Englefield, that there exist in a solar beam both rays
of heat which are not luminous, and rays of light which have no heating
power.

(350.) The heat, radiated by terrestrial fires, and by bodies
_obscurely_ hot, by whatever means they have acquired their heat
(even by exposure to the sun’s rays), differs very materially from
solar heat in their power of penetrating transparent substances. This
singular and important difference was first noticed by Mariotte, and
afterwards made the subject of many curious and interesting experiments
by Scheele, who found that terrestrial heat, or that radiated from
fires or heated bodies, is intercepted and detained by glass or
other transparent bodies, while solar heat is not; and that, being
so detained, it heats them: which the latter, as it passes freely
through them, is incapable of doing. The more recent researches of
Delaroche, however, have shown that this detention is complete only
when the temperature of the source of heat is low; but that, as that
temperature is higher, a portion of the heat radiated acquires a
power of penetrating glass; and that the quantity which does so bears
continually a larger and larger proportion to the whole, as the heat
of the radiant body is more intense. This discovery is very important,
as it establishes a community of nature between solar and terrestrial
heat; while at the same time it leads us to regard the actual
temperature of the sun as far exceeding that of any earthly flame.

(351.) A variety of theories have been framed to account for these
curious phenomena; but the subject stands rather in need of further
elucidation from experiment, and is one which merits, and will probably
amply repay, the labours of those who may hereafter devote their
attention to it. The theory of the radiation of heat, in general, which
seems to agree best with the known phenomena, is that of M. Prevost,
who considers all bodies as constantly radiating out heat in all
directions, and receiving it by a similar means of communication from
others, and thus tending, in any space filled, wholly or in part, with
bodies at various temperatures, to establish an equilibrium or equality
of heat in all parts. The application of this idea to the explanation
of the phenomenon of dew we have already seen (see 167.). The laws
of such radiation, under various circumstances, have been lately
investigated in a beautiful series of experiments on the cooling of
bodies by their own radiation in vacuo, by Messrs. Dulong and Petit,
which offer some of the best examples in science of the inductive
investigation of quantitative laws.

(352.) The communication of heat between bodies in contact, or between
the different parts of the same body, is performed by a process called
conduction. It is, in fact, only a particular case of radiation, as
has been explained above (217.); but a case _so_ particular as to
require a separate and independent investigation of its laws. The most
important consideration introduced into the enquiry by this peculiarity
is that of time. The communication of heat by conduction is performed,
for the most part, with extreme slowness, while that performed by
direct radiation is probably not less rapid than the propagation
of light itself. The analysis of the delicate and difficult points
which arise in the investigation of this subject in its reduction
to direct geometrical treatment has been executed with admirable
success by the late Baron Fourrier, whose recent lamented death has
deprived science of an ornament it could ill spare, thinned as its
ranks have been within the last few years. This acute philosopher and
profound mathematician has developed, in a series of elaborate memoirs
presented to the French Institute, the laws of the communication of
heat through the interior of solid masses, placed under the influence
of any external heating and cooling causes, and has in particular
applied his results to the conditions on which the maintenance of the
actual observed temperature on the earth’s surface depends; to the
possible influence of a supposed central heat on our climates; and to
the determination of the actual amount of the heat, derived to us from
the sun, or at least that portion of it on which the difference of the
seasons depends.

(353.) The principal effects of heat are the sensations of warmth or
cold consequent on its entry or egress into or out of our bodies; the
dilatation it causes in the dimensions of all substances in which it is
accumulated; the changes of state it produces in the melting of solids,
and the conversion of them and of liquids into vapour; and the chemical
changes it performs by actual decompositions effected in the intimate
molecules of various substances, especially those of which vegetables
and animals are composed; to which we may add, the production of
electric phenomena under certain circumstances in the contact of
metals, and the developement of electric polarity in crystallised
substances.

(354.) Cold has been considered by some as a positive quality, the
effect of a cause antagonist to that of heat; but this idea seems
now (with perhaps a single exception) to be universally abandoned.
The sensation of cold is as easily explicable by the passage of heat
outwards through the surface of the body as that of heat by its ingress
from without; and the experiments cited in proof of a radiation of
cold are all perfectly explained by Prevost’s theory of reciprocal
interchange. It is remarkable, however, how very limited our means
of producing intense cold are, compared with those we possess of
effecting the accumulation of heat in bodies. This is one of the
strongest arguments adducible in favour of the doctrines of those who
maintain the possibility of exhausting the heat of a body altogether,
and leaving it in a state absolutely devoid of it. But we ought to
consider, that the known methods of generating heat chiefly turn on the
production of chemical combinations: we may easily conceive, therefore,
that, to obtain equally powerful corresponding frigorific effects, we
ought to possess the means of effecting a disunion equally extensive
and rapid between such elements, actually combined, as have already
produced heat by their union. This, however, we can only accomplish by
engaging them in combinations still more energetic, that is to say,
in which we may reasonably expect more heat to be produced by the new
combination than would be destroyed or abstracted by the proposed
decomposition. Chemistry, however, (unaided by electric agency,)
affords no means of suddenly breaking the union of two elements, and
presenting _both_ in an uncombined state. A certain analogy to such
disunion, however, and its consequences, may be traced in the sudden
expansion of condensed gases from a liquid state into vapour, which is
the most powerful source of cold known.

(355.) The dilatation of bodies by heat forms the subject of that
branch of science called pyrometry. There is no body but is capable
of being penetrated by heat, though some with greater, others with
less rapidity; and being so penetrated, all bodies (with a very few
exceptions, and those depending on very peculiar circumstances,) are
dilated by it in bulk, though with a great diversity in the amount
of dilatation produced by the same degree of heat. Of the several
forms of natural bodies, gases and vapours are observed to be most
dilatable; liquids next, and solids least of all. The dilatation of
solids has been made a subject of repeated and careful measurement by
several experimenters; among whom, Smeaton, Lavoisier, and Laplace, are
the principal. The remarkable discovery of the unequal dilatation of
crystallised bodies by Mitscherlich has already been spoken of. (266.)
That of gases and vapours was examined about the same time by Dalton
and Gay-Lussac, who both arrived independently at the conclusion of an
equal dilatability subsisting in them all, which constitutes one of the
most remarkable points in their history.

(356.) The dilatation of air by heat affords, perhaps, the most
unexceptionable means known of measuring degrees of heat. The
thermometer, as originally constructed by Cornelius Drebell, was an
air thermometer. Those now in common use measure accessions of heat
not by the degree of dilatation of air but of mercury. It has been
shown, by the researches of Dulong and Petit, that its indications
coincide exactly with that of the air-thermometer in moderate
temperatures; though at very elevated ones they exhibit a sensible,
and even considerable, deviation. By this instrument, which owes its
present convenience and utility to the happy idea of Newton, who first
thought of fixing determinate points on its scale, we are enabled
to estimate, or at least identify, the degrees of heat; and thereby
to investigate with accuracy the laws of its communication and its
other properties. Were we sure that equal additions of heat produced
equal increments of dimension in any substance, the indications of a
thermometer would afford a true and secure _measure_ of the quantity
present; but this is so far from being the case, that we are nearly in
total ignorance on this important point; a circumstance which throws
the greatest difficulty in the way of all theoretical reasoning, and
even of experimental enquiry. The laws of the dilatation of liquids, in
consequence of this deficiency of necessary preliminary knowledge, are
still involved in great obscurity, notwithstanding the pains which have
been bestowed on them by the elaborate experiments and calculations of
Gilpin, Blagden, Deluc, Dalton, Gay-Lussac, and Biot.

(357.) The most striking and important of the effects of heat consist,
however, in the liquefaction of solid substances, and the conversion of
the liquids so produced into vapour. There is no solid substance known
which, by a sufficiently intense heat, may not be melted, and finally
dissipated in vapour; and this analogy is so extensive and cogent,
that we cannot but suppose that all those bodies which are liquid
under ordinary circumstances, owe their liquidity to heat, and would
freeze or become solid if their heat could be sufficiently reduced.
In many we see this to be the case in ordinary winters; for some,
severe frosts are requisite; others freeze only with the most intense
artificial colds; and some have hitherto resisted all our endeavours;
yet the number of these last is few, and they will probably cease to be
exceptions as our means of producing cold become enlarged.

(358.) A similar analogy leads us to conclude that all aëriform
fluids are merely liquids kept in the state of vapour by heat. Many
of them have been actually condensed into the liquid state by cold
accompanied with violent pressure; and as our means of applying these
causes of condensation have improved, more and more refractory ones
have successively yielded. Hence we are fairly entitled to extend our
conclusion to those which we have not yet been able to succeed with;
and thus we are led to regard it as a general fact, that the liquid and
aëriform or vaporous states are entirely dependent on _heat_; that were
it not for this cause, there would be nothing but solids in nature; and
that, on the other hand, nothing but a sufficient intensity of heat is
requisite to destroy the cohesion of every substance, and reduce all
bodies, first to liquids, and then into vapour.

(359.) But solids, themselves, by the abstraction of heat shrink in
dimension, and at the same time become harder, and more brittle;
yielding less to pressure, and permitting less separation between
their parts by tension. These facts, coupled with the greater
compressibility of liquids, and the still greater of gases, strongly
induce us to believe that it is heat, and heat alone, which holds
the particles of all bodies at that distance from each other which
is necessary to allow of compression; which in fact gives them
their elasticity, and acts as the antagonist force to their mutual
attraction, which would otherwise draw them into actual contact, and
retain them in a state of absolute immobility and impenetrability.
Thus we learn to regard heat as one of the great maintaining powers of
the universe, and to attach to all its laws and relations a degree of
importance which may justly entitle them to the most assiduous enquiry.

(360.) It was first ascertained by Dr. Black that when heat produces
the liquefaction of a solid, or the conversion of a liquid into vapour,
the liquid or the vapour resulting is no _hotter_ than the solid or
liquid from which it was produced, though a great deal of heat has been
expended in producing this effect, and has actually entered into the
substance.

(361.) Hence he drew the conclusion that it has become _latent_, and
continues to exist in the product, maintaining it in its new state,
without increasing its temperature. He further proved, that when the
vapour condenses, or the liquid freezes, this latent heat is again
given out from it. This great discovery, with its natural and hardly
less important concomitant, that of the difference of specific heats in
different bodies, or the different quantities of heat they require to
raise their temperature equally, are the chief reasons for regarding
heat as a material substance in a more decided manner than light, with
which in its radiant state it holds so close an analogy.

(362.) The subject of latent heat has been far less attentively
studied than its great practical importance would appear to demand,
when we consider that it is to this part of physical science that the
theory of the steam-engine is mainly referable, and that material
improvements may not unreasonably be expected in that wonderful
instrument, from a more extended knowledge than we possess of the
latent heats of different vapours. This is not the case, however,
with the subject of specific heat, which was followed up immediately
after its first promulgation with diligence by Irvine; and, after a
brief interval, by Lavoisier and Laplace, as well as by our countryman
Crawfurd, who determined the specific heats of many substances, both
solid and liquid. After a considerable period of inactivity, the
subject was again resumed by Delaroche and Berard, and subsequently
by Dulong and Petit: the result of whose investigations has been the
inductive establishment of one of those simple and elegant physical
laws which carry with them, if not their own evidence, at least their
own recommendation to our belief, as being in unison with every thing
we know of the harmony of nature. The law to which we allude is
this:--that the atoms of all the simple chemical elements have exactly
the same capacity for heat, or are all equally heated or cooled by
equal accessions or abstractions of heat. It is only among laws like
this that we can expect to find a clew capable of guiding us to a
knowledge of the true nature of heat, and its relations to ponderable
matter.


_Magnetism and Electricity._

(363.) These two subjects, which had long maintained a distinct
existence, and been studied as separate branches of science, are at
length effectually blended. This is, perhaps, the most satisfactory
result which the experimental sciences have ever yet attained. All
the phenomena of magnetic polarity, attraction, and repulsion, have
at length been resolved into one general fact, that two currents of
electricity, moving in the same direction repel, and in contrary
directions attract, each other. The phenomena of the communication
of magnetism and what is called its induced state, alone remain
unaccounted for; but the interesting theory which has been developed
by M. Ampere, under the name of Electro-dynamics, holds out a hope
that this difficulty will also in its turn give way, and the whole
subject be at length completely merged, as far as the consideration of
the acting causes goes, in the more general one of electricity. This,
however, does not prevent magnetism from maintaining its separate
importance as a department of physical enquiry, having its own peculiar
laws and relations of the highest practical interest, which are capable
of being studied quite apart from all consideration of its electrical
origin. And not only so, but to study them with advantage, we must
proceed as if that origin were totally unknown, and, at least up to
a certain point, and that a considerably advanced one, conduct our
enquiries into the subject on the same inductive principles as if this
branch of physics were absolutely independent of all others.

(364.) Iron, and its oxides and alloys, were for a long time the only
substances considered susceptible of magnetism. The loadstone was
even one of the examples produced by Bacon of that class of physical
instances to which he applies the term “Instantiæ monodicæ”--_singular
instances_. And the history of magnetism affords a beautiful comment
on his remark on instances of this sort. “Nor should our enquiries,”
he observes, “into their nature be broken off, till the properties and
qualities found in such things as may be esteemed wonders in nature
are reduced and comprehended under some certain law; so that all
irregularity or singularity may be found to depend upon some common
form, and the wonder only rest in the exact differences, degrees,
or extraordinary concurrence, and not in the species itself.” The
discovery of the magnetism of nickel, which though inferior to that
of iron, is still considerable; that of cobalt, yet feebler, and
that of titanium, which is only barely perceptible, have effectually
broken down the imaginary limit between iron and the other materials
of the world, and established the existence of that general law of
continuity which it is one chief business of philosophy to trace
throughout nature. The more recent discoveries of M. Arago (mentioned
in 160.) have completed this generalization, by showing that there
is no substance but which, under proper circumstances, is capable of
exhibiting unequivocal signs of the magnetic virtue. And to obliterate
all traces of that line of separation which was once so broad, we are
now enabled, by the great discovery of Oërsted, to communicate at and
during pleasure to a coiled wire of any metal indifferently all the
properties of a magnet;--its attraction, repulsion, and polarity; and
_that_ even in a more intense degree than was previously thought to
be possible in the best natural magnets. In short, in this case, and
in this case only, perhaps, in science, have we arrived at that point
which Bacon seems to have understood by the discovery of “forms.” “The
_form_ of any nature,” says he, “is such, that where it is, the given
nature must infallibly be. The form, therefore, is perpetually present
when that nature is present; ascertains it universally, and accompanies
it every where. Again, this form is such, that when removed, the given
nature infallibly vanishes. Lastly, a true form is such as can deduce
a given nature from some essential property, which resides in many
things.”

(365.) Magnetism is remarkable in another important point of view. It
offers a prominent, or “_glaring instance_” of that quality in nature
which is termed _polarity_ (267.), and that under circumstances which
peculiarly adapt it for the study of this quality. It does not appear
that the ancients had any knowledge of this property of the magnet,
though its attraction of iron was well known to them. The first mention
of it in modern times cannot be traced earlier than 1180, though it
was probably known to the Chinese before that time. The polarity of
the magnet consists in this, that if suspended freely, one part of it
will invariably direct itself towards a certain point in the horizon,
the other towards the opposite point; and that, if two magnets, so
suspended, be brought near each other, there will take place a mutual
action, in consequence of which, the positions of both will be
disturbed, in the same manner as would happen if the corresponding
parts of each repelled, and those oppositely directed attracted, each
other; and by properly varying the experiment, it is found that they
really do so. If a small magnet, freely suspended, be brought into
the neighbourhood of a larger one, it will take a position depending
on the position of the _poles_ of the larger one, with respect to its
point of suspension. And it has been ascertained that these and all
other phenomena exhibited by magnets in their mutual attractions and
repulsions are explicable on the supposition of two forces or virtues
lodged in the particles of the magnets, the one predominating at one
end, the other at the other; and such that each particle shall attract
those in which the _opposite_ virtue to its own prevails, and repel
those in which a _similar_ one resides with a force proportional to the
inverse square of their mutual distance.

(366.) The direction in which a magnetic bar, or needle of steel,
freely suspended, places itself, has been ascertained to be different
at different points of the earth’s surface. In some places it points
exactly north and south, in others it deviates from this direction
more or less, and at some actually stands at right angles to it. This
remarkable phenomenon, which is called the variation of the needle,
and which was discovered by Sebastian Cabot in the year 1500, is
accompanied with another called the dip, noticed by Robert Norman in
1576. It consists in a tendency of a needle, nicely balanced on its
centre, when unmagnetized, to _dip_ or point downwards when rendered
magnetic, towards a point below the horizon, and situated within the
earth. By tracing the variation and dip over the whole surface of the
globe, it has been found that these phenomena take place as they would
do if the earth itself were a great magnet, having its poles deeply
situated below the surface,--and, what is very remarkable, possessing
a slow motion within it, in consequence of which neither the variation
nor dip remain constantly the same at the same place. The laws of this
motion are at present unknown; but the discovery of electro-magnetism,
by rendering it almost certain that the earth’s magnetism is merely an
effect of the continual circulation of great quantities of electricity
round it, in a direction generally corresponding with that of its
rotation, have dissipated the greater part of the mystery which hung
over these phenomena; since a variety of causes, both geological and
others, may be imagined which may produce considerable deviations in
the intensity, and partial ones in the direction, of such electric
currents. The unequal distribution of land and sea in the two
hemispheres, by affecting the operation of the sun’s heat in producing
evaporation from the latter, which is probably one of the great sources
of terrestrial electricity, may easily be conceived to modify the
general tendency of such currents, and to produce irregularities in
them, which may render a satisfactory account of whatever still appears
anomalous in the phenomena of terrestrial magnetism. This branch
of science thus becomes connected, on a great scale, with that of
meteorology, one of the most complicated and difficult, but at the same
time interesting, subjects of physical research; one, however, which
has of late begun to be studied with a diligence which promises the
speedy disclosure of relations and laws of which at present we can form
but a very imperfect notion.

(367.) The communication of magnetism from the earth to a magnetic
body, or from one magnetic body to another, is performed by a process
to which the name of induction has been given, and the laws and
properties of such induced magnetism have been studied with much
perseverance and success,--practically, by Gilbert, Boyle, Knight,
Whiston, Cavallo, Canton, Duhamel, Rittenhouse, Scoresby, and others;
and theoretically, by Æpinus, Coulomb, and Poisson, and in our own
country by Messrs. Barlow and Christie, who have investigated with
great care the curious phenomena which take place when masses of iron
are presented successively, in different positions, by rotation on
an axis, to the influence of the earth’s magnetism. The magnetism of
crystallized bodies (partly from the extreme rarity of such as are
susceptible of any considerable magnetic virtue) has not hitherto been
at all examined, but would probably afford very curious results.

(368.) To electricity the views of the physical enquirer now turn
from almost every quarter, as to one of those universal powers which
Nature seems to employ in her most important and secret operations.
This wonderful agent, which we see in intense activity in lightning,
and in a feebler and more diffused form traversing the upper regions
of the atmosphere in the northern lights, is present, probably in
immense abundance, in every form of matter which surrounds us, but
becomes sensible only when disturbed by excitements of peculiar
kinds. The most effectual of these is friction, which we have already
observed to be a powerful source of heat. Everybody is familiar
with the crackling sparks which fly from a cat’s back when stroked.
These, by proper management, may be accumulated in bodies suitably
disposed to receive them, and, although then no longer visible, give
evidence of their existence by the exhibition of a vast variety of
extraordinary phenomena,--producing attractions and repulsions in
bodies at a distance,--admitting of being transferred by contact, or
by sudden and violent transilience of the interval of separation, from
one body to another, under the form of sparks and flashes;--traversing
with perfect facility the substance of the densest metals, and a
variety of other bodies called conductors, but being detained by
others, such as glass, and especially _air_, which are thence called
non-conductors,--producing painful shocks and convulsive motions, and
even death itself if in sufficient quantity, in animals through which
they pass, and finally imitating, on a small scale, all the effects of
lightning.

(369.) The study of these phenomena and their laws until a
comparatively recent period occupied the entire attention of
electricians, and constituted the whole of the science of electricity.
It appears, as the result of their enquiries, that all the phenomena in
question are explicable on the supposition that electricity consists
in a rare, subtle, and highly elastic fluid, which in its tendency
to expand and diffuse itself pervades with more or less facility
the substance of conductors, but is obstructed and detained from
expansion more or less completely by non-conductors. It is supposed,
moreover, that this electric fluid possesses a power of attraction
for the particles of all ponderable matter, together with that of a
repulsion for particles of its own kind. Whether it has weight, or is
rather to be regarded as a species of matter distinct from that of
which ponderable bodies consist, is a question of such delicacy, that
no direct experiments have yet enabled us to decide it; but at all
events its _inertia_ compared with its elastic force must be conceived
excessively small, so that it is to be regarded as a fluid in the
highest degree _active_, obeying every impulse, internal or external,
with the greatest promptitude; in short, a fluid whose energies can
only be compared with those of the ethereal medium by which, in the
undulatory doctrine, light is supposed to be conveyed. The properties
of hydrogen gas compared with those of the denser aëriform fluids will,
in some slight degree, aid our conception of the excessive mobility and
penetrating activity of a fluid so constituted. Electricity, however,
must be regarded as differing in some remarkable points from all those
fluids to which we have hitherto been accustomed to apply the epithet
elastic, such as air, gases, and vapours. In these, the repulsive force
of the particles on which their elasticity depends is considered as
extending only to very small distances, so as to affect only those in
the immediate vicinity of each other, while their attractive power, by
which they obey the general gravitation of all matter, extends to any
distance. In electricity, on the other hand, the very reverse must be
admitted. The force by which its particles repel each other extends to
great distances, while its force of adhesion to ponderable matter must
be regarded as limited in its extent to such minute intervals as escape
observation.

(370.) The conception of a single fluid of this kind, which when
accumulated in excess in bodies tends constantly to escape, and seek
a restoration of equilibrium by communicating itself to any others
where there may be a deficiency, is that which occurs most naturally
to the mind, and was accordingly maintained by Franklin, to whom the
science of electricity is under great obligations for those decisive
experiments which informed us respecting the true nature of lightning.
The same theory was afterwards advocated by Æpinus, who first showed
how the laws of equilibrium of such a fluid might be reduced to strict
mathematical investigation. But there are phenomena accompanying its
transfer from body to body and the state of equilibrium it affects
under various circumstances, which appear to require the admission of
_two distinct fluids_ antagonist to each other, each attracting the
other, and repelling itself; but each, alike, susceptible of adhesion
to material substances, and of transfer more or less rapid from
particle to particle of them. These fluids in the natural undisturbed
state are conceived to exist in a state of combination and mutual
saturation; but this combination may be broken, and either of them
separately accumulated in a body to any amount without the other,
provided its escape be properly obstructed by surrounding it with
non-conductors. When so accumulated, its repulsion for its own kind
and attraction of the opposite species in neighbouring bodies tends
to disturb the natural equilibrium of the two fluids present in them,
and to produce phenomena of a peculiar description, which are termed
_induced_ electricity. Curious and artificial as this theory may
appear, there has hitherto been produced no phenomenon of which it
will not afford at least a plausible, and in by far the majority of
cases a very satisfactory, explanation. It has one character which is
extremely valuable in any theory, that of admitting the application of
strict mathematical reasoning to the conclusions we would draw from
it. Without this, indeed, it is scarcely possible that any theory
should ever be fairly brought to the test by a comparison with facts.
Accordingly, the mathematical theory of electrical equilibrium,
and the laws of the distribution of the electric fluids over the
surfaces of bodies in which they are accumulated, have been made the
subject of elaborate geometrical investigation by the most expert
mathematicians, and have attained a degree of extent and elegance
which places this branch of science in a very high rank in the scale
of mathematico-physical enquiry. These researches are grounded on
the assumption of a law of attraction and repulsion similar to those
of gravity and magnetism, and which by the general accordance of the
results with facts, as well as by experiments instituted for the
express purpose of ascertaining the laws in question, are regarded as
sufficiently demonstrated.

(371.) The most obscure part of the subject is no doubt the original
mode of disturbance of electrical equilibrium, by which electricity is
excited in the first instance, either by friction or by any other of
those causes which have been ascertained to produce such an effect:
analogies, it is true, are not wanting[56]; but it must be allowed that
hitherto nothing decisive has been offered on the subject; and that
conjectural modes of action have in this instance too often usurped the
place of those to which a careful examination of facts alone can lead
us.

(372.) Philosophers had long been familiar with the effects of
electricity above referred to, and with those which it produces in
its sudden and violent transfer from one body to another, in rending
and shattering the parts of the substances through which it passes,
and where in great quantity, producing all the effect of intense
heat, igniting, fusing, and volatilizing metals, and setting fire to
inflammable bodies; even its occasional influence in destroying or
altering the polarity of the magnetic needle had been noticed: but as
heat was known to be produced by mechanical violence, and as magnetism
was also known to be greatly affected by the same cause, these effects
were referred rather to that cause than to any thing in the peculiar
nature of the electric matter, and regarded rather as an indirect
consequence of its mode of action than as connected with its intimate
nature. In short, electricity seemed destined to furnish another in
addition to many instances of subjects insulated from the rest of
philosophy, and capable of being studied only in its own internal
relations, when the great discoveries of Galvani and Volta placed a new
power at the command of the experimenter, by whose means those effects
which had before been crowded within an inappreciable instant could
be developed in detail and studied at leisure; and those forces which
had previously exhibited themselves only in a state of uncontrollable
intensity were tamed down, as it were, and made to distribute their
efficacy over an indefinite time, and to regulate their action at the
will of the operator. It was then soon ascertained that electricity
in the act of its passage along conductors, produces a variety of
wonderful effects, which had never been previously suspected; and these
of such a nature, as to afford points of contact with several other
branches of physical enquiry, and to throw new and unexpected lights on
some of the most obscure operations of nature.

(373.) The history of this grand discovery affords a fine illustration
of the advantage to be derived in physical enquiry from a close and
careful attention to any phenomenon, however apparently trifling,
which may at the moment of observation appear inexplicable on received
principles. The convulsive motions of a dead frog in the neighbourhood
of an electric discharge, which originally drew Galvani’s attention to
the subject, had been noticed by others nearly a century before his
time, but attracted no further remark than as indicating a peculiar
sensibility to electrical excitement depending on that remnant of
vitality which is not extinguished in the organic frame of an animal
by the deprivation of actual life. Galvani was not so satisfied. He
analysed the phenomenon; and in investigating all the circumstances
connected with it was led to the observation of a peculiar electrical
excitement which took place when a circuit was formed of three distinct
parts, a muscle, a nerve, and a metallic conductor, each placed in
contact with the other two, and which was manifested by a convulsive
motion produced in the muscle. To this phenomenon he gave the name of
animal electricity, an unfortunate epithet, since it tended to restrict
enquiry into its nature to the class of phenomena in which it first
became apparent. But this circumstance, which in a less enquiring age
of science might have exercised a fatal influence on the progress of
knowledge, proved happily no obstacle to the further developement of
its principles, the subject being immediately taken up with a kind
of prophetic ardour by Volta, who at once generalized the phenomena,
rejecting the physiological considerations introduced by Galvani, as
foreign to the enquiry, and regarding the contraction of the muscles
as merely a delicate means of detecting the production of electrical
excitements too feeble to be rendered sensible by any other means.
It was thus that he arrived at the knowledge of a general fact, that
of the disturbance of electrical equilibrium by the mere contact of
different bodies, and the circulation of a current of electricity in
one constant direction, through a circuit composed of three different
conductors. To increase the intensity of the very minute and delicate
effect thus observed became his next aim, nor did his enquiry terminate
till it had placed him in possession of that most wonderful of all
human inventions, the pile which bears his name, through the medium of
a series of well conducted and logically combined experiments, which
has rarely, if ever, been surpassed in the annals of physical research.

(374.) Though the original pile of Volta was feeble compared to those
gigantic combinations which were afterwards produced, it sufficed,
however, to exhibit electricity under a very different aspect from any
thing which had gone before, and to bring into view those peculiar
modifications in its action which Dr. Wollaston was the first to
render a satisfactory account of, by referring them to an increase
of _quantity_, accompanied with a diminution of _intensity_ in the
supply afforded. The discovery had not long been made public, and
the instrument in the hands of chemists and electricians, before it
was ascertained that the electric current, transmitted by it through
conducting liquids, produces in them chemical decompositions. This
capital discovery appears to have been made, in the first instance, by
Messrs. Nicholson and Carlisle, who observed the decomposition of water
so produced. It was speedily followed up by the still more important
one of Berzelius and Hisinger, who ascertained it as a general law,
that, in all the decompositions so effected, the acids and oxygen
become transferred to, and accumulated around, the positive,--and
hydrogen, metals, and alkalies round the negative, pole of a Voltaic
circuit; being transferred in an invisible, and, as it were, a latent
or torpid state, by the action of the electric current, through
considerable spaces, and even through large quantities of water or
other liquids, again to re-appear with all their properties at their
appropriate resting-places.

(375.) It was in this state of things that the subject was taken up
by Davy, who, seeing that the strongest chemical affinities were thus
readily subverted by the decomposing action of the pile, conceived
the happy idea of bringing to bear the intense power of the enormous
batteries of the Royal Institution on those substances which, though
strongly suspected to be compounds, had resisted all attempts to
decompose them--the alkalies and earths. They yielded to the force
applied, and a total revolution was thus effected in chemistry; not so
much by the introduction of the new elements thus brought to light, as
by the mode of conceiving the nature of chemical affinity, which from
that time has been regarded (as Davy broadly laid it down, in a theory
which was readily adopted by the most eminent chemists, and by none
more readily than by Berzelius himself,) as entirely due to electric
attractions and repulsions, those bodies combining most intimately
whose particles are habitually in a state of the most powerful
electrical antagonism, and dispossessing each other, according to the
amount of their difference in this respect.

(376.) The connection of magnetism and electricity had long been
suspected, and innumerable fruitless trials had been made to determine,
in the affirmative or negative, the question of such connection. The
phenomena of many crystallized minerals which become electric by heat,
and develope opposite electric poles at their two extremities, offered
an analogy so striking to the polarity of the magnet, that it seemed
hardly possible to doubt a closer connection of the two powers. The
developement of a similar polarity in the Voltaic pile pointed strongly
to the same conclusion; and experiments had even been made with a
view to ascertain whether a pile in a state of excitement might not
manifest a disposition to place itself in the magnetic meridian; but
the essential condition had been omitted, that of allowing the pile to
discharge itself freely, a condition which assuredly never would have
occurred of itself to any experimenter. Of all the philosophers who
had speculated on this subject, none had so pertinaciously adhered to
the idea of a necessary connection between the phenomena as Oërsted.
Baffled often, he returned to the attack; and his perseverance was at
length rewarded by the complete disclosure of the wonderful phenomena
of electro-magnetism. There is something in this which reminds us of
the obstinate adherence of Columbus to his notion of the necessary
existence of the New World; and the whole history of this beautiful
discovery may serve to teach us reliance on those general analogies
and parallels between great branches of science by which one strongly
reminds us of another, though no direct connection appears; as an
indication not to be neglected of a community of origin.

(377.) It is highly probable that we are still ignorant of many
interesting features in electrical science, which the study of the
Voltaic circuit will one day disclose. The violent mechanical effects
produced by it on mercury, placed under conducting liquids which have
been referred by Professor Erman to a modified form of capillary
attraction, but which a careful and extended view of the phenomena
have led others[57] to regard in a very different light, as pointing
out a primary action of a dynamical rather than a statical character,
deserve, in this point of view, a further investigation; and the
curious relations of electricity to heat, as exhibited in the phenomena
of what has been called thermo-electricity, promise an ample supply of
new information.

(378.) Among the remarkable effects of electricity disclosed by the
researches of Galvani and Volta, perhaps the most so consisted in its
influence on the nervous system of animals. The origin of muscular
motion is one of those profound mysteries of nature which we can
scarcely venture to hope will ever be fully explained. Physiologists,
however, had long entertained a general conception of the conveyance
of some subtle fluid or spirit from the brain to the muscles of
animals along the nerves; and the discovery of the rapid transmission
of electricity along conductors, with the violent effects produced by
shocks, transmitted through the body, on the nervous system, would
very naturally lead to the idea that this nervous fluid, if it had
any real existence, might be no other than the electrical. But until
the discoveries of Galvani and Volta, this could only be looked upon
as a vague conjecture. The character of a _vera causa_ was wanting to
give it any degree of rational plausibility, since no reason could
be imagined for the disturbance of the electrical equilibrium in the
animal frame, composed as it is entirely of conductors, or rather, it
seemed contrary to the then known laws of electrical communication
to suppose any such. Yet one strange and surprising phenomenon might
be adduced indicative of the possibility of such disturbance, viz.
the powerful shock given by the torpedo and other fishes of the same
kind, which presented so many analogies with those arising from
electricity, that they could hardly be referred to a different source,
though _besides_ the shock neither spark nor any other indication of
electrical tension could be detected in them.

(379.) The benumbing effect of the torpedo had been ascertained to
depend on certain singularly constructed organs composed of membranous
columns, filled from end to end with laminæ, separated from each other
by a fluid: but of its mode of action no satisfactory account could be
given; nor was there any thing in its construction, and still less in
the nature of its materials, to give the least ground for supposing
it an electrical apparatus. But the pile of Volta supplied at once
the analogies both of structure and of effect, so as to leave little
doubt of the electrical nature of the apparatus, or of the power, a
most wonderful one certainly, of the animal, to determine, by an effort
of its will, that concurrence of conditions on which its activity
depends. This remained, as it probably ever will remain, mysterious
and inexplicable; but the principle once established, that there
exists in the animal economy a power of determining the developement
of electric excitement, capable of being transmitted along the nerves,
and it being ascertained, by numerous and decisive experiments, that
the transmission of Voltaic electricity along the nerves of even
a dead animal is sufficient to produce the most violent muscular
action, it became an easy step to refer the origin of muscular motion
in the living frame to a similar cause; and to look to the brain, a
wonderfully constituted organ, for which no mode of action possessing
the least plausibility had ever been devised, as the source of the
required electrical power.[58]

(380.) It is not our intention, however, to enter into any further
consideration of physiological subjects. They form, it is true, a
most important and deeply interesting province of philosophical
enquiry; but the view that we have taken of physical science has
rather been directed to the study of inanimate nature, than to that of
the mysterious phenomena of organization and life, which constitute
the object of physiology. The history of the animal and vegetable
productions of the globe, as affording objects and materials for the
convenience and use of man, and as dependent on and indicative of the
general laws which determine the distribution of heat, moisture, and
other natural agents, over its surface, and the revolutions it has
undergone, are of course intimately connected with our subject, and
will, therefore, naturally afford room for some remarks, but not such
as will long detain the reader’s attention.

(381.) In _zoology_, the connection of peculiar modes of life and
food, with peculiarities of structure, has given rise to systems of
classification at once obvious and natural; and the great progress
which has been made in comparative anatomy has enabled us to trace
a graduated scale of organization almost through the whole chain of
animal being; a scale not without its intervals, but which every
successive discovery of animals heretofore unknown has tended to fill
up. The wonders disclosed by microscopic observation have opened to
us a new world, in which we discover, with astonishment, the extremes
of minuteness and complexity of structure united; while, on the other
hand, the examination of the fossil remains of a former state of
creation has demonstrated the existence of animals far surpassing in
magnitude those now living, and brought to light many forms of being
which have nothing analogous to them at present, and many others
which afford important connecting links between existing genera. And,
on the other hand, the researches of the comparative anatomist and
conchologist have thrown the greatest light on the studies of the
geologist, and enabled him to discern, through the obscure medium of a
few relics, scattered here and there through a stratum, circumstances
connected with the formation of the stratum itself which he could have
recognised by no other indication. This is one among many striking
instances of the unexpected lights which sciences, however apparently
remote, may throw upon each other.

(382.) To _botany_ many of the same remarks apply. Its artificial
systems of classification, however convenient, have not prevented
botanists from endeavouring to group together the objects of their
science in natural classes having a community of character more
intimate than those which determine their place in the Linnean or any
similar system; a community of character extending over the whole
habit and properties of the individuals compared. The important
chemical discoveries which have been lately made of peculiar proximate
principles which, in an especial manner, characterize certain
families of plants, hold out the prospect of a greatly increased
field of interesting knowledge in this direction, and not only
interesting, but in a high degree important, when it is considered
that the principles thus brought into view are, for the most part,
very powerful medicines, and are, in fact, the essential ingredients
on which the medical virtues of the plants depend. The law of the
distribution of the generic forms of plants over the globe, too, has,
within a comparatively recent period, become an object of study to the
naturalist; and its connection with the laws of climate constitutes one
of the most interesting and important branches of natural-historical
enquiry, and one on which great light remains to be thrown by future
researches. It is this which constitutes the chief connecting link
between botany and geology, and renders a knowledge of the vegetable
fossils, of any portion of the earth’s surface, indispensable to the
formation of a correct judgment of the circumstances under which it
existed in its ancient state. Fossil botany is accordingly cultivated
with great and increasing ardour; and the subterraneous “Flora” of a
geological formation is, in many instances, studied with a degree of
care and precision little inferior to that which its surface exhibits.




CHAP. VI.

  OF THE CAUSES OF THE ACTUAL RAPID ADVANCE OF THE PHYSICAL SCIENCES
    COMPARED WITH THEIR PROGRESS AT AN EARLIER PERIOD.


(383.) There is no more extraordinary contrast than that presented by
the slow progress of the physical sciences, from the earliest ages
of the world to the close of the sixteenth century, and the rapid
developement they have since experienced. In the former period of
their history, we find only small additions to the stock of knowledge,
made at long intervals of time; during which a total indifference
on the part of the mass of mankind to the study of nature operated
to effect an almost complete oblivion of former discoveries, or,
at best, permitted them to linger on record, rather as literary
curiosities, than as possessing, in themselves, any intrinsic interest
and importance. A few enquiring individuals, from age to age, might
perceive their value, and might feel that irrepressible thirst after
knowledge which, in minds of the highest order, supplies the absence
both of external stimulus and opportunity. But the total want of a
right direction given to enquiry, and of a clear perception of the
objects to be aimed at, and the advantages to be gained by systematic
and connected research, together with the general apathy of society
to speculations remote from the ordinary affairs of life, and
studiously kept involved in learned mystery, effectually prevented
these occasional impulses from overcoming the inertia of ignorance, and
impressing any regular and steady progress on science. Its objects,
indeed, were confined in a region too sublime for vulgar comprehension.
An earthquake, a comet, or a fiery meteor, would now and then call the
attention of the whole world, and produce from all quarters a plentiful
supply of crude and fanciful conjectures on their causes; but it was
never supposed that sciences could exist among common objects, have a
place among mechanical arts, or find worthy matter of speculation in
the mine or the laboratory. Yet it cannot be supposed, that all the
indications of nature continually passed unremarked, or that much good
observation and shrewd reasoning on it failed to perish unrecorded,
before the invention of printing enabled every one to make his ideas
known to all the world. The moment this took place, however, the sparks
of information from time to time struck out, instead of glimmering
for a moment, and dying away in oblivion, began to accumulate into a
genial glow, and the flame was at length kindled which was speedily to
acquire the strength and rapid spread of a conflagration. The universal
excitement in the minds of men throughout Europe, which the first
out-break of modern science produced, has been already spoken of. But
even the most sanguine anticipators could scarcely have looked forward
to that steady, unintermitted progress which it has since maintained,
nor to that rapid succession of great discoveries which has kept up
the interest of the first impulse still vigorous and undiminished. It
may truly, indeed, be said, that there is scarcely a single branch of
physical enquiry which is either stationary, or which has not been,
for many years past, in a constant state of advance, and in which the
progress is not, at this moment, going on with accelerated rapidity.

(384.) Among the causes of this happy and desirable state of things,
no doubt we are to look, in the first instance, to that great
increase in wealth and civilization which has at once afforded the
necessary leisure and diffused the taste for intellectual pursuits
among numbers of mankind, which have long been and still continue
steadily progressive in every principal European state, and which the
increase and fresh establishment of civilized communities in every
distant region are rapidly spreading over the whole globe. It is not,
however, merely the increased number of cultivators of science, but
their enlarged opportunities, that we have here to consider, which, in
all those numerous departments of natural research that require local
information, is in fact the most important consideration of all. To
this cause we must trace the great extension which has of late years
been conferred on every branch of natural history, and the immense
contributions which have been made, and are daily making, to the
departments of zoology and botany, in all their ramifications. It is
obvious, too, that all the information that can possibly be procured,
and reported, by the most enlightened and active travellers, must fall
infinitely short of what is to be obtained by individuals actually
resident upon the spot. Travellers, indeed, may make collections,
may snatch a few hasty observations, may note, for instance, the
distribution of geological formations in a few detached points, and now
and then witness remarkable local phenomena; but the resident alone can
make continued series of regular observations, such as the scientific
determination of climates, tides, magnetic variations, and innumerable
other objects of that kind, requires; can alone mark all the details
of geological structure, and refer each stratum, by a careful and long
continued observation of its fossil contents, to its true epoch; can
alone note the habits of the animals of his country, and the limits
of its vegetation, or obtain a satisfactory knowledge of its mineral
contents, with a thousand other particulars essential to that complete
acquaintance with our globe as a whole, which is beginning to be
understood by the extensive designation of physical geography. Besides
which, ought not to be omitted multiplied opportunities of observing
and recording those extraordinary phenomena of nature which offer an
intense interest, from the rarity of their occurrence as well as the
instruction they are calculated to afford. To what, then, may we not
look forward, when a spirit of scientific enquiry shall have spread
through those vast regions in which the process of civilization, its
sure precursor, is actually commenced and in active progress? And what
may we not expect from the exertions of powerful minds called into
action under circumstances totally different from any which have yet
existed in the world, and over an extent of territory far surpassing
that which has hitherto produced the whole harvest of human intellect?
In proportion as the number of those who are engaged on each department
of physical enquiry increases, and the geographical extent over which
they are spread is enlarged, a proportionately increased facility
of communication and interchange of knowledge becomes essential to
the prosecution of their researches with full advantage. Not only
is this desirable, to prevent a number of individuals from making
the same discoveries at the same moment, which (besides the waste of
valuable time) has always been a fertile source of jealousies and
misunderstandings, by which great evils have been entailed on science;
but because methods of observation are continually undergoing new
improvements, or acquiring new facilities, a knowledge of which, it is
for the general interest of science, should be diffused as widely and
as rapidly as possible. By this means, too, a sense of common interest,
of mutual assistance, and a feeling of sympathy in a common pursuit,
are generated, which proves a powerful stimulus to exertion; and, on
the other hand, means are thereby afforded of detecting and pointing
out mistakes before it is too late for their rectification.

(385.) Perhaps it may be truly remarked, that, next to the
establishment of institutions having either the promotion of science
in general, or, what is still more practically efficacious in its
present advanced state, that of particular departments of physical
enquiry, for their express objects, nothing has exercised so powerful
an influence on the progress of modern science as the publication
of monthly and quarterly scientific journals, of which there is now
scarcely a nation in Europe which does not produce several. The quick
and universal circulation of these, places observers of all countries
on the same level of perfect intimacy with each other’s objects and
methods, while the abstracts they from time to time (if well conducted)
contain of the most important researches of the day consigned to the
more ponderous tomes of academical collections, serve to direct the
course of general observation, as well as to hold out, in the most
conspicuous manner, models for emulative imitation. In looking forward
to what may hereafter be expected from this cause of improvement, we
are not to forget the powerful effect which must in future be produced
by the spread of elementary works and digests of what is actually known
in each particular branch of science. Nothing can be more discouraging
to one engaged in active research, than the impression that all he
is doing may, very likely, be labour taken in vain; that it may,
perhaps, have been already done, and much better done, than, with his
opportunities, or his resources, he can hope to perform it; and, on the
other hand, nothing can be more exciting than the contrary impression.
Thus, by giving a connected view of what has been done, and what
remains to be accomplished in every branch, those digests and bodies
of science, which from time to time appear, have, in fact, a very
important weight in determining its future progress, quite independent
of the quantity of information they communicate. With respect to
elementary treatises, it is needless to point out their utility, or
to dwell on the influence which their actual abundance, contrasted
with their past remarkable deficiency, is likely to exercise over the
future. It is only by condensing, simplifying, and arranging, in the
most lucid possible manner, the acquired knowledge of past generations,
that those to come can be enabled to avail themselves to the full of
the advanced point from which they will start.

(386.) One of the means by which an advanced state of physical science
contributes greatly to accelerate and secure its further progress,
is the exact knowledge acquired of physical data, or those normal
quantities which we have more than once spoken of in the preceding
pages (222.); a knowledge which enables us not only to appretiate
the accuracy of experiments, but even to correct their results. As
there is no surer criterion of the state of science in any age than
the degree of care bestowed, and discernment exhibited, in the choice
of such data, so as to afford the simplest possible grounds for the
application of theories, and the degree of accuracy attained in their
determination, so there is scarcely any thing by which science can be
more truly benefited than by researches directed expressly to this
object, and to the construction of tables exhibiting the true numerical
relations of the elements of theories, and the actual state of nature,
in all its different branches. It is only by such determinations that
we can ascertain what changes are slowly and imperceptibly taking place
in the existing order of things; and the more accurate they are, the
_sooner_ will this knowledge be acquired. What might we not now have
known of the motions of the (so-called) fixed stars, had the ancients
possessed the means of observation we now possess, and employed them
as we employ them now?

(387.) In any enumeration of causes which have contributed to
the recent rapid advancement of science, we must not forget the
very important one of improved and constantly improving means of
observation, both in instruments adapted for the exact measurement of
quantity, and in the general convenience and well-judged adaptation
to its purposes, of every description of scientific apparatus. In
the actual state of science there are few observations which can
be productive of any great advantage but such as afford accurate
measurement; and an increased refinement in this respect is constantly
called for. The degree of delicacy actually attained, we will not say
in the most elaborate works of the highest art, but in such ordinary
apparatus as every observer may now command, is such as could not have
been arrived at unless in a state of the mechanical arts, which in
its turn (such is the mutual re-action of cause and effect) requires
for its existence a very advanced state of science. What an important
influence may be exercised over the progress of a single branch of
science by the invention of a ready and convenient mode of executing a
definite measurement, and the construction and common introduction of
an instrument adapted for it cannot be better exemplified than by the
instance of the reflecting goniometer. This simple, cheap, and portable
little instrument, has changed the face of mineralogy, and given it all
the characters of one of the exact sciences.

(388.) Our means of perceiving and measuring minute quantities, in the
important relations of weight, space, and time, seem already to have
been carried to a point which it is hardly conceivable they should
surpass. Balances have been constructed which have rendered sensible
the millionth part of the whole quantity weighed; and to turn with the
thousandth part of a grain is the performance of balances pretending
to no very extraordinary degree of merit. The elegant invention of
the sphærometer, by substituting the sense of touch for that of sight
in the measurement of minute objects, permits the determination of
their dimensions with a degree of precision which is fully adequate
to the nicest purposes of scientific enquiry. By its aid an inch may
be readily subdivided into ten or even twenty thousand parts; and the
lever of contact, an instrument in use among the German opticians,
enables us to appretiate quantities of space even yet smaller. For
the subdivision of time, too, the perfection of modern mechanism has
furnished resources which leave very little to be desired. By the
aid of clocks and chronometers, as they are now constructed, a few
tenths of a second is all the error that need be apprehended in the
subdivision of a day; and for the further subdivision of smaller
portions of time, instruments have been imagined which admit of
almost unlimited precision, and permit us to appreciate intervals to
the nicety of the hundredth, or even the thousandth part of a single
second.[59] When the precision attainable by such means is contrasted
with what could be procured a few generations ago, by the rude and
clumsy workmanship of even the early part of the last century, it will
be no matter of astonishment that the sciences which depend on exact
measurements should have made a proportional progress. Nor will any
degree of nicety in physical determinations appear beyond our reach, if
we consider the inexhaustible resources which science itself furnishes,
in rendering the quantities actually to be determined by measure great
multiples of the elements required for the purposes of theory, so as to
diminish in the same proportion the influence of any errors which may
be committed on the final results.

(389.) Great, indeed, as have been of late the improvements in the
construction of instruments, both as to what regards convenience and
accuracy, it is to the discovery of improved _methods_ of observation
that the chief progress of those parts of science which depend on
exact determinations is owing. The balance of torsion, the ingenious
invention of Cavendish and Coulomb, may be cited as an example of what
we mean. By its aid we are enabled not merely to render sensible,
but to subject to precise measurement and subdivision, degrees of
force infinitely too feeble to affect the nicest balance of the usual
construction, even were it possible to bring them to act on it. The
galvanometer, too, affords another example of the same kind, in an
instrument whose range of utility lies among electric forces which we
have no other means of rendering sensible, much less of estimating
with exactness. In determinations of quantities less minute in
themselves, the methods devised by Messrs. Arago and Fresnel, for the
measurement of the refractive powers of transparent media by means of
the phenomenon of diffraction, may be cited as affording a degree of
precision limited only by the wishes of the observer, and the time and
patience he is willing to devote to his observation. And in respect of
the direction of observations to points from which real information
is to be obtained, and positive conclusions drawn, the hygrometer of
Daniell may be cited as an elegant example of the introduction into
general use of an instrument substituting an indication founded on
strict principles for one perfectly arbitrary.

(390.) In speculating on the future prospects of physical science,
we should not be justified in leaving out of consideration the
probability, or rather certainty, of the occasional occurrence of those
happy accidents which have had so powerful an influence on the past;
occasions, where a fortunate combination opportunely noticed may admit
us in an instant to the knowledge of principles of which no suspicion
might occur but for some such casual notice. Boyle has entitled one of
his essays thus remarkably,--“_Of Man’s great Ignorance of the Uses
of natural Things; or that there is no one Thing in Nature whereof
the Uses to human Life are yet thoroughly understood_.”[60] The whole
history of the arts since Boyle’s time has been one continued comment
on this text; and if we regard among the uses of the works of nature,
_that_, assuredly the noblest of all, which leads us to a knowledge
of the Author of nature through the contemplation of the wonderful
means by which he has wrought out his purposes in his works, the
sciences have not been behind hand in affording their testimony to its
truth. Nor are we to suppose that the field is in the slightest degree
narrowed, or the chances in favour of such fortunate discoveries at all
decreased, by those which have already taken place: on the contrary,
they have been incalculably extended. It is true that the ordinary
phenomena which pass before our eyes have been minutely examined, and
those more striking and obvious principles which occur to superficial
observation have been noticed and embodied in our systems of science;
but, not to mention that by far the greater part of natural phenomena
remain yet unexplained, every new discovery in science brings into
view whole classes of facts which would never otherwise have fallen
under our notice at all, and establishes relations which afford to
the philosophic mind a constantly extending field of speculation,
in ranging over which it is next to impossible that he should not
encounter new and unexpected principles. How infinitely greater, for
instance, are the mere chances of discovery in chemistry among the
innumerable combinations with which the modern chemist is familiar,
than at a period when two or three imaginary elements, and some ten
or twenty substances, whose properties were known with an approach to
distinctness, formed the narrow circle within which his ideas had to
revolve? How many are the instances where a new substance, or a new
property, introduced into familiar use, by being thus brought into
relation with all our actual elements of knowledge, has become the
means of developing properties and principles among the most common
objects, which could never have otherwise been discovered? Had not
platina (to take an instance) been an object of the most ordinary
occurrence in a laboratory, would a suspicion have ever occurred that
a lamp could be constructed to burn without flame; and should we have
ever arrived at a knowledge of those curious phenomena and products of
semi-combustion which this beautiful experiment discloses?

(391.) Finally, when we look back on what has been accomplished in
science, and compare it with what remains to be done, it is hardly
possible to avoid being strongly impressed with the idea that we have
been and are still executing the labour by which succeeding generations
are to profit.[61] In a few instances only have we arrived at those
general axiomatic laws which admit of direct deductive inference,
and place the solutions of physical phenomena before us as so many
problems, whose principles of solution we fully possess, and which
require nothing but acuteness of reasoning to pursue even into their
farthest recesses. In fewer still have we reached that command of
abstract reasoning itself which is necessary for the accomplishment of
so arduous a task. Science, therefore, in relation to our faculties,
still remains boundless and unexplored, and, after the lapse of a
century and a half from the æra of Newton’s discoveries, during which
every department of it has been cultivated with a zeal and energy which
have assuredly met their full return, we remain in the situation in
which he figured himself,--standing on the shore of a wide ocean, from
whose beach we may have culled some of those innumerable beautiful
productions it casts up with lavish prodigality, but whose acquisition
can be regarded as no diminution of the treasures that remain.

(392.) But this consideration, so far from repressing our efforts, or
rendering us hopeless of attaining any thing intrinsically great, ought
rather to excite us to fresh enterprise, by the prospect of assured
and ample recompense from that inexhaustible store which only awaits
our continued endeavours. “It is no detraction from human capacity to
suppose it incapable of infinite exertion, or of exhausting an infinite
subject.”[62] In whatever state of knowledge we may conceive man to
be placed, his progress towards a yet higher state need never fear a
check, but must continue till the last existence of society.

(393.) It is in this respect an advantageous view of science, which
refers all its advances to the discovery of general laws, and to
the inclusion of what is already known in generalizations of still
higher orders; inasmuch as this view of the subject represents it, as
it really is, essentially incomplete, and incapable of being fully
embodied in any system, or embraced by any single mind. Yet it must be
recollected that, so far as our experience has hitherto gone, every
advance towards generality has at the same time been a step towards
simplification. It is only when we are wandering and lost in the mazes
of particulars, or entangled in fruitless attempts to work our way
downwards in the thorny paths of applications, to which our reasoning
powers are incompetent, that nature appears complicated:--the moment we
contemplate it as it is, and attain a position from which we can take a
commanding view, though but of a small part of its plan, we never fail
to recognise that sublime simplicity on which the mind rests satisfied
that it has attained the truth.




INDEX.


  Acoustics cultivated by Pythagoras and Aristotle, page 248.

  Æpinus, his laws of equilibrium of electricity, 332.

  Aëriform fluids, liquids kept in a state of vapour, 321.

  Agricola, George, his knowledge of mineralogy and metallurgy, 112.

  Air, compressibility and elasticity of; limitation to the repulsive
        tendency of, 226.
    Weight of, unknown to the ancients, 228.
    First perceived by Galileo, 228.
    Proved by a crucial instance, 229.
    Equilibrium of, established, 231.
    Dilatation of, by heat, 319.

  Air-pump, discovery of, 230.

  Airy, his experiments in Dolcoath mine, 187.

  Alchemists, advantages derived from, 11.

  Algebra, 19.

  Ampere, his electro-dynamic theory, 202.
    Utility of, 203, 324.

  Analysis of force, 86.
    Of motion, 87.
    Of complex phenomena, 88.

  Anaxagoras, philosophy of, 107.

  Animal electricity, 337.

  Arago, M., his experiment with a magnetic needle and a plate of
        copper, 157.

  Archimedes, his practical application of science, 72.
    His knowledge of hydrostatics, 231.

  Arfwedson, his discovery of lithia, 158.

  Aristotle, his knowledge of natural history, 109.
    His works condemned, and subsequently studied with avidity, 111.
    His philosophy overturned by the discoveries of Copernicus, Kepler,
        and Galileo, 113.

  Arithmetic, 19.

  Art, empirical and scientific, differences between, 71.
    Remarks on the language, terms, or signs, used in treating of
        it, 70.

  Assurances, life, utility and abuses of, 58.

  Astronomy, cause of the slow progress of our knowledge of, 78.
    Theory and practical observations distinct in, 132.
    An extensive acquaintance with science and every branch of knowledge
        necessary to make a perfect observer in, 132.
    Five primary planets added to our system, 274.
    Positions, figures, and dimensions of all the planetary orbits now
        well known, 275.

  Atomic theory, 305.
    Advantage of, 306.

  Atomic weights of chemical elements, 306.

  Attraction, capillary, or capillarity, investigated by Laplace and
        Young, 234.


  Bacon, celebrated in England for his knowledge of science, 72.
    Benefits conferred on Natural Philosophy by him, 104.
    His Novum Organum, 105.
    His reform in philosophy proves the paramount importance of
        induction, 114.
    His prerogative of facts, 181.
    Illustrated by the fracture of a crystallized substance, 183.
    His collective instances, 184.
    Importance of, 185.
    His experiment on the weight of bodies, 186.
    Travelling instances of, frontier instances of, 188.
    His difference between liquids and aëriform fluids, 233.

  Bartolin, Erasmus, first discovers the phenomena exhibited by doubly
        refracting crystals, 254.

  Beccher, phlogistic doctrines of, 300.

  Bergmann, his advancement in crystallography, 239.

  Bernoulli, experiments of, in hydrodynamical science, 181.

  Biot, his hypothesis of a rotatory motion of the particles of light
        about their axes, 262.

  Black, Dr., his discovery of latent heat, 322.

  Bode, his curious law observed in the progression of the magnitudes of
        the several planetary orbits, 308.

  Bodies, natural constitution of, 221.
    Division of, into crystallized and uncrystallized, 242.

  Bones, dry, a magazine of nutriment, 65.

  Borda, his invention for subdivision, 128.

  Botany, general utility of, 345.

  Boyle, Robert, his enthusiasm in the pursuit of science, 115.
    His improvement on the air-pump, 230.

  Brain, hypothesis of its being an electric pile, 343.

  Bramah’s press, principle and utility of, 233.

  Brewster, Dr., his improvement on lenses for lighthouses, 56.
    His researches prove that the phenomena exhibited by polarized
        light, in its transmission through crystals, afford a certain
        indication of the most important points relating to the
        structure of crystals themselves, 263.


  Cabot, Sebastian, his discovery of the variation of the needle, 327.

  Cagnard, Baron de la Tour, utility of his experiments, 234.

  Causes and consequences directors of the will of man, 6.

  Causes, proximate, discovery of, called by Newton _veræ causæ_, 144.

  Celestial mechanics, 265.

  Chaldean records, 265.

  Chemistry furnishes causes of sudden action, also fulminating
        compositions, 62.
    Analogy of the complex phenomena of, with those of physics, 92.
    Benefits arising from the analysis of, 94.
    Axioms of, analogous to those of geometry, 95.
    Many of the new elements of, detected in the investigation of
        residual phenomena, 158.
    The most general law of, 209.
    Illustration of, 210.
    Between fifty and sixty elements in, 211.
    Objects of, 296.
    General heads of the principal improvements in, 302.
    Remarks on those general heads, 304.

  Chemistry, Stahlian, cause of the mistakes and confusions of, 123.

  Chladni, experiments of, in dynamical science, 181.

  Chlorine, disinfectant powers of, 56.

  Clarke, Dr., his experiments on the arseniate and phosphate
        of soda, 170.
    His success in producing a new phosphate of soda, 171.

  Climate, change of, in large tracts of the globe, alleged
        cause of, 145.

  Coals, power of a bushel of, properly consumed, 59.
    Quantity consumed in London, 60.

  Cohesion, an ultimate phenomenon, 90.

  Cold, qualities of, 318.

  Compass, mariner’s, 55.

  Condensation, a source of heat, 313.

  Conduction of heat, laws of, 205.

  Copernicus, effect of his discoveries on the Aristotelian
        philosophy, 113.
    Objections to his astronomical doctrines, 269.

  Crystallography, laws of, 123, 239.
    A determinate figure supposed to be common to all the particles of a
        crystal, 242.


  D’Alembert, his improvements in hydrodynamics, 236.

  Dalton, his announcement of the atomic theory, 305.
    His examination of gases and vapours, 319.

  Davy, Sir H., brings the voltaic pile to bear upon the earths and
        alkalies, 339.

  Deduction, utility of, 174.

  De l’Isle, Romé, his study of crystalline bodies, 239.

  Dew, causes of, investigated, 159.
    Effects of, on different substances, 160.
    Objects capable of contracting it, 161.
    A cloudless sky favourable to its production, 162.
    General proximate cause of, 163.

  Drummond, lieutenant, his improvement on lenses for lamps of
        lighthouses, 56.

  Dynamics, importance of, 96, 223.


  Earth, the orbit of,--diminution of its eccentricity round
        the sun, 147.

  Economy, political, 73.

  Egypt, great pyramid of, height, weight, and ground occupied by
        it, 60.
    Accuracy of the astronomical records of, 265.

  Elasticity, an ultimate phenomenon, 90.

  Electricity may be the cause of magnetism, 93.
    Universality of, 329.
    Effects of, 330.
    Activity of, 331.
    Equilibrium of, 332.
    Productive of chemical decomposition, 338.

  Empirical laws, 178.
    Evils resulting from, 179.

  Encke, professor, his prediction of the return of the comet so many
        times in succession, 156.

  Englefield, sir H., his analysis of a solar beam, 314.

  Equilibrium maintained by force, 222.

  Erman, professor, his opinion of the effects of the voltaic
        circuit, 340.

  Euler, his improvement on Newton’s theory of sound, 247.

  Experience, source of our knowledge of nature’s laws, 76.

  Experiment, a means of acquiring experience, 76.
    Utility of, 151.


  Facts, the observation of, 118.

  Faujas de St. Fond, imaginary craters of, 131.

  Fluids, laws of the motion of, 181.
    Compressibility of, 225.
    Consideration of the motions of, more complicated than that of
        equilibrium, 235.

  Force, analysis of, 86.
    The cause of motion, 149.
    Phenomena of, 221.
    Molecular forces, 245.

  Fourier, baron, his opinion that the celestial regions have a
        temperature, independent of the sun, not greatly inferior
        to that at which quicksilver congeals, 157.
    His analysis of the laws of conduction and radiation of heat, 317.

  Franklin, Dr., his experiments on electricity, 332.

  Fresnel, M., his mathematical explanation of the phenomena of double
        refraction, 32.
    His improvement on lenses for lamps of lighthouses, 56.
    His opinions on the nature of light, 207.
    His experiments on the interference of polarized light, 261.
    His theory of polarization, 262.

  Friction, a source of heat, 313.


  Galileo, celebrity of, for his knowledge of science, 72.
    His exposition of the Aristotelian philosophy, 110.
    His refutation of Aristotle’s dogmas respecting motion, his
        persecution in consequence of it, 113.
    His knowledge of the accelerating power of gravity, 168.
    His knowledge of the weight of the atmosphere, 228.

  Galvani, utility of his discoveries in electricity, 335.
    His application of it to animals, 336.

  Gay-Lussac, his examination of gases and vapours, 319.

  Generalization, inductive, 1, 90.

  Geology, 281.
    Its rank as a science, 287.

  Geometry, axioms of, an appeal to experience, not corporeal, but
        mental, 95.

  Gilbert, Dr., of Colchester, his knowledge of magnetism and
        electricity, 112.

  Gravitation, law of, a physical axiom of a very high and universal
        kind, 98.
    Influence of, decreases in the inverse ratio of the square of the
        distance, 123.

  Greece, philosophers of, their extraordinary success in abstract
        reasoning, and their careless consideration of external
        nature, 105.
    Their general character, 106.
    Philosophy of, 108.

  Grimaldi, a jesuit of Bologna, his discovery of diffraction, or
        inflection of light, 252.

  Guinea and feather experiment, 168.

  Gunpowder, invention of, 55.
    A mechanical agent, 62.


  Haarlem lake, draining of, 61.

  Harmony, sense of, 248.

  Head, captain, anecdote of, 84.

  Heat, 193.
    Radiation and conduction of, 205.
    One of the chief agents in chemistry, 310.
    Our ignorance of the nature of, 310.
    Abuse of the sense of the term, 311.
    The general heads under which it is studied, 312.
    Its most obvious sources, 312.
    Animal heat, to what process referable, 313.
    Radiation and conduction of, 314.
    Solar heat differs from terrestrial fires, or hot bodies, 315.
    Principal effects of, 317.
    The antagonist to mutual attraction, 322.
    Latent heat, 322.
    Specific heat, 323.

  Herschel, sir William, his analysis of a solar beam, 314.

  Hipparchus, his catalogue of stars, 276.

  Holland drained of water by windmills, 61.

  Hooke almost the rival of Newton, 116.

  Huel Towan, steam-engine at, 59.

  Huyghens, his doctrine of light, 207.
    Ascertains the laws of double refraction, 254.

  Hydrostatics, first step towards a knowledge of, made by
        Archimedes, 231.
    Law of the equal pressure of liquids, 232.
    General applicability of, 232.

  Hypothesis, not to be deterred from framing them, 196.
    Conditions on which they should be framed, 197.
    Illustrated by the laws of gravitation, 198.
    Use and abuse of, 204.


  Induction, different ways of carrying it on, 102.
    Steps by which it is arrived at on a legitimate and extensive
        scale, 118.
    First stage of, 144.
    Verification of, 164.
    Instanced in astronomy, 166.
    Must be followed into all its consequences, and applied to all those
        cases which seem even remotely to bear upon the subject of
        enquiry, 173.
    Nature of the inductions by which quantitative laws are arrived
        at, 176.
    Necessity of induction embracing a series of cases which absolutely
        include the whole scale of variation of which the quantities
        in question admit, 177.

  Induced electricity, 333.

  Inertia, 223.

  Iodine, discovery of, 50.
    Efficacy of, in curing goître, 51.

  Isomorphism, law of, 170.


  Kepler, effect of his discoveries on the Aristotelian philosophy, 113.
    Nature of his laws of the planetary system, 178.
    Proofs of the Newtonian system, 179.

  Knowledge, physical facts illustrative of the utility of, 45.
    Diffusion of, how to take advantage of in the investigation of
        nature, 138.


  Lagrange, his improvements on Newton’s theory of sound, 247.
    His astronomical researches, 275.

  Lamp, safety, 55.

  Laplace, his explanation of the residual velocity of sound and
        confirmation of the general law of the developement of heat
        by compression, 172.
    His astronomical research, 275.
    His experiments on the dilatation of bodies by heat, 319.
    His study of specific heat, 323.
    Latent heat, 323.

  Laws, inductive, 171.
    General, 198.
    How applicable, 199.
    Illustrated by the planetary system, 201.
    Empirical laws, 178.

  Lavoisier, his improvements in chemical science, 302.
    Experiments on dilatation of bodies by heat, 319.
    His investigation on specific heat, 323.

  Light, refraction of, 30.
    Double refraction of, 31.
    Polarization of, 254.

  Light and vision, ignorance of the ancients respecting, 249.

  Lighthouse, 56.

  Lightning, how to judge philosophically of it, 120.
    Returning stroke of, 121.

  Liquids, cohesion, attraction and repulsion of the particles of, 227.
    Differ from aëriform fluids by their cohesion, 233.
    The Florentine experiment on; experiments by Canton, Perkins,
        Oërsted, and others on, 235.
    Obscurity of the laws of dilatation of, 320.

  Linnæus, his knowledge of crystalline substances, 239.

  Logic, 19.

  Lyell’s Principles of Geology, extract from, 146.


  Magnetism may be caused by electricity, 93.
    Offers a “glaring instance” of polarity, 326.
    Experiments illustrative of, 327.

  Malus, a French officer of engineers, discovers the polarization of
        light, 132, 258.

  Man, regarded as a creature of instinct, 1.
    Of reason and speculation, 3.
    His will determined by causes and consequences, 6.
    Advantages to, from the study of science, 7.
    His necessity to study the laws of nature illustrated, 66.
    Happiness and the opposite state of man in the aggregate, 67.
    Advantages conferred on, by the augmentation of physical
        resources, 68.
    Advantages from intellectual resources, 69.

  Mariotte, his law of equilibrium of an elastic fluid recently verified
        by the Royal Academy of Paris, 231.
    His difference between solar and other heat, 315.

  Matter, indestructibility of; Divided by grinding, 40.
    By fire, 41.
    Dilated by heat, 193.
    Inertia of, 202.
    Polarity of, one of the ultimate phenomena to which the analysis of
        nature leads us, 245.
    Inherent activity of, 297.
    Causes of the polarity of, 299.
    Imponderable forms of, 310.

  Measure, the standard, difficulty of preserving it unaltered, 128.
    How to be assisted in measurement, 129.
    Our conclusions from, should be conditional, 130.

  Menai Bridge, weight and height of, 60.

  Mechanics, practical, 63.

  Mètre, the French, 126.

  Microscopes, power of, 191.

  Millstones, method of making in France, 48.

  Mind, its transition from the little to the great, and _vice versâ_,
        illustrated, 172.

  Mineralogy unknown to the ancients, 79.
    Prejudiced by the rage for nomenclature, 139.
    Benefited by the progress of chemical analysis, 293.

  Minerals, simple, apparent paucity of, 294.
    Difficulty in classing them, 295.

  Mitscherlich, his law of isomorphism, 170.
    His experiments on the expansion of substances by heat, 243.

  Motion, 87.
    Simplicity and precision of the laws of, 179.


  Nature, laws of, 37.
    Immutability of, 42.
    Harmony of, and advantage of studying them, 43.
    Prove the impossibility of attaining the declared object of the
        alchemist. How they serve mankind generally, 44.
    Illustrated by mining, 45.
    Economy derived from a knowledge of, 65.
    How to be regarded, 100, 101.

  Nature, objects of, an enumeration and nomenclature of, useful in the
        study of, 135.
    Mechanism of, on too large or too small a scale to be immediately
        cognisable by our senses, 191.

  Newton, his proof of Galileo’s laws of gravitation by an experiment
        with a hollow glass pendulum, 160.
    His foundation to hydrodynamical science, 181.
    Fixes the division between statics and dynamics, 223.
    His investigation of the law of equilibrium of elastic fluids, 231.
    His law of hydrostatics, 232.
    His foundation of hydrodynamics 236.
    His analysis of sound, 247.
    Hypothesis of light, 250.
    Examination of a soap-bubble, 252.
    His hypothesis of fits of easy transmission and reflection, 253.
    His combination of mathematical skill with physical research, 271.
    His Principia, 272.
    His successors; his geometry, 273.

  Nomenclature, importance of, to science, 136.
    More a consequence than a cause of extended knowledge, 138.
    Prejudicial to mineralogy, 139.

  Norman, Robert, his discovery of the dip of the needle, 327.

  Numerical precision, necessity of, in science, 122.


  Objects, and their mutual actions, subjects of contemplation, 118.

  Observation, a means of acquiring experience, 76.
    Passive and active, 77.
    Recorded observation, 120.
    Necessity of, to acquire precise physical data, 215.
    Illustrated by the barometer, 216.

  Oërsted, his discoveries in electricity and magnetism, 132.
    Of electro-magnetism, 340.

  Opacity, 189.

  Otto von Guericke of Magdeburgh, his invention of the air-pump, 230.


  Paracelsus, power of his chemical remedies; his use of mercury,
        opium, and tartar, 112.

  Pascal, his crucial instances proving the weight of air, 229.

  Pendulum, 126.

  Phenomena, analysis of, illustrated by musical sounds, the sensation
        of taste, 85.
    The ultimate and inward process of nature in the production of, 86.
    Analysis of complex phenomena, 88.
    Ultimate phenomena, 90.
    How the analysis of, is useful, 97.
    A transient phenomenon, how to judge of, 122.
    Method of explaining one when it presents itself, 148.
    How to discover the cause of one, 150.
    Two, or many, theories, maintained as the origin of, in
        physics, 195.
    Cosmical phenomena, 265.

  Philosophy, natural, unfounded objections to the study of, 7.
    Advantages derivable from the study of, 10.
    Pleasure and happiness, the consequences of the study of, 15.

  Phlogistic doctrines of Beccher and Stahl, 300.

  Physical data, necessity of, 209.
    Great importance of, 211.
    Illustrated by the erection of observatories, 213.
    Necessity of an exact knowledge of, 214.
    More precise than the observations by which we acquire them, 215.

  Physics, axioms of; analysis of, 102.

  Planets, circumjovial, 186.

  Platina, discovery of, 308.

  Pliny, his knowledge of quartz and diamond, 239.

  Pneumatics, 228.

  Political economy, 73.

  Prejudices of opinion and sense, 80.
    Conditions on which such are injurious, 81.
    Illustrated by the division of the rays of light, by the moon at the
        horizon, and by ventriloquism, 82.
    By the transition of the hand from heat to cold, 83.

  Prevost, M., his theory of heat, 316.
    His theory of reciprocal interchanges, a proof of the radiation
        of cold, 318.

  Printing, the art of, 193.
    Performed by steam, 194.

  Probabilities, doctrine of, 217.
    Illustrated by shooting at a wafer, 218.

  Prout, Dr., his opinion of the atomic weights, 307.

  Pyrometry, 319.

  Pythagoras, philosophy of, 107.


  Quinine, sulphate of, comparative comfort and health resulting from
        the use of, 56.


  Radiation of heat, laws of, 205.

  Repulsion in fluids and solids, 227.

  Rules, general, for guiding and facilitating our search among a great
        mass of assembled facts, 151.

  Rumford, count, experiments of, on gunpowder, 62.


  Savart, M., his experiments on solids, 243.
    His researches on sound, 249.

  Science, abstract, a preparation for the study of physics, 19.
    Not indispensable to the study of physical laws, 25.
    Instances illustrative of, 27.

  Science, physical, nature and objects, immediate and collateral, as
        regarded in itself and in its application to the practical
        purposes of life, and its influence on society, 35.
    State of, previous to the age of Galileo and Bacon, 104.
    Causes of the rapid advance of, compared with the progress at an
        earlier period, 347.

  Science, natural, cause and effect, the ultimate relations of, 76.

  Sciences and Arts, remarks on the language, terms, or signs used in
        treating of them, 70.
    Receive an impulse by the Baconian philosophy, 114.

  Sensation, cause of, 91.

  Senses, inadequate to give us direct information for the exact
        comparison of quantity, 124.
    Substitutes for the inefficiency of, 125.

  Seringapatam, method of breaking blocks from the quarries of, 47.

  Shells found in rocks at a great height above the sea, supposed
        cause of, 145.

  Smeaton, his experiments on bodies dilated by heat, 319.

  Solids, transparent, exhibit periodical colours when exposed to
        polarized light, 99.
    Influence of, on the Mind, 101.

  Solids in general, nature of, 236.
    Constitution of, complicated, 237.
    Toughness of, distinct from hardness; tenacity of, 238.
    Become liquefied by the addition of heat, 321.

  Sounds, musical, illustrative of the analysis of phenomena, 85.
    Means of having a knowledge of, 89.
    Propagation of, through the air, 246.
    Newton’s analysis of, 247.

  Standard measurement, necessity of, 125.
    Laws of nature used as such, illustrated by the rotation of the
        earth, 126.

  Substances all subject to dilatation by the addition of heat, 243.

  Sun, the character of the heat of, 315.


  Thales, philosophy of, 107.

  Theories, how to estimate the value of, 204.
    Best arrived at by the consideration of general laws, 208.
    Explanatory of the phenomena of nature; on what their application
        ought to be grounded, 209.

  Thomson, Dr., his opinion of the atomic weights, 307.

  Thermometer, air, 319.

  Thermo-electricity, 341.

  Time, division of, 126, 127.

  Torricelli, pupil of Galileo, his experiments proving the weight of
        atmosphere, 229.

  Torpedo, shock of, 341, 342.


  Ulugh Begh, his catalogue of stars, 277.


  Vaccination, success of, as a preventive to small-pox, 52.

  Vision and light, ignorance of the ancients respecting, 249.

  Volta, his discoveries in electricity, 335.
    Electric pile of, 337.

  Voltaic circuit, 338.


  Water, effects of the power of, 61.

  Whewell, his experiments, 187.

  Wells, Dr., his theory of dew, 163.

  Wind, effects of the power of, 61.

  Wire steel, magnetized masks of, used by needle-makers, 57.

  Wollaston, Dr., his verification of the laws of double refraction in
        Iceland spar, 258.
    His invention of the goniometer, 292.

  World, the materials of the, 290.


  Young, Dr., his experiments on the interference of the rays of
        light, 260.


  Zoology, fossil, 344.


THE END.


  LONDON
  PRINTED BY SPOTTISWOODE AND CO.
  NEW-STREET SQUARE.




FOOTNOTES


[1] Hooke’s Posthumous Works. Lond. 1705.--p. 472 and p. 458.

[2] Wealth of Nations, book i. chap. i. p. 15.

[3] On this subject, we cannot forbear citing a passage from one of
the most profound but at the same time popular writers of our time, on
a subject unconnected it is true with our own, but bearing strongly
on the point before us. “But, if science be manifestly incomplete,
and yet of the highest importance, it would surely be most unwise
to restrain enquiry, conducted on just principles, even where the
immediate practical utility of it was not visible. In mathematics,
chemistry, and every branch of natural philosophy, how many are the
enquiries necessary for their improvement and completion, which, taken
separately, do not appear to lead to any specifically advantageous
purpose! how many useful inventions, and how much valuable and
improving knowledge, would have been lost, if a rational curiosity,
and a mere love of information, had not generally been allowed to be a
sufficient motive for the search after truth!”--Malthus’s Principles of
Political Economy, p. 16.

[4] Λογος, _ratio_, reason.

[5] Λογος, _verbum_, a word.

[6] It were much to be wished that navigators would be more cautious in
laying themselves open to a similar censure. On looking hastily over
a map of the world we see three Melville Islands, two King George’s
Sounds, and Cape Blancos innumerable.

[7] Young. Lectures on Nat. Phil. ii. 627. See also Phil. Trans. 1801-2.

[8] Captain Basil Hall, R. N.

[9] We must caution our readers who would assure themselves of it by
trial, that it is an experiment of some delicacy, and not to be made
without several precautions to ensure success. For these we must refer
to our original authority (Fresnel. Mémoire sur la Diffraction de la
Lumiere, p. 124.); and the principles on which they depend will of
course be detailed in that volume of the Cabinet Cyclopædia which is
devoted to the subject of LIGHT.

[10] Little reels used in cotton mills to twist the thread.

[11] Such a block would weigh between four and five hundred thousand
pounds. See Dr. Kennedy’s “Account of the Erection of a Granite Obelisk
of a Single Stone about Seventy Feet high, at Seringapatam.”--_Ed.
Phil. Trans._ vol. ix, p. 312.

[12] Dr. Coindet of Geneva.

[13] Journal of a Voyage to the South Seas, &c. &c. under the Command
of Commodore George Anson, in 1740-1744, by Pascoe Thomas, Lond. 1745,
So tremendous were the ravages of scurvy, that, in the year 1726,
admiral Hosier sailed with seven ships of the line to the West Indies,
and buried his ships’ companies twice, and died himself in consequence
of a broken heart. Dr. Johnson, in the year 1778, could describe a
sea-life in such terms as these:--“As to the sailor, when you look down
from the quarter deck to the space below, you see the utmost extremity
of human misery, such crowding, such filth, such stench!”--“A ship is
a prison with the chance of being drowned--it is worse--worse in every
respect--worse room, worse air, worse food--worse company!” Smollet,
who had personal experience of the horrors of a seafaring life in those
days, gives a lively picture of them in his Roderick Random.

[14] Lemon juice was known to be a remedy for scurvy far superior
to all others 200 years ago, as appears by the writings of Woodall.
His work is entitled “The Surgeon’s Mate, or Military and Domestic
Medicine. By John Woodall, Master in Surgery London, 1636,” p. 165. In
1600, Commodore Lancaster sailed from England with three other ships
for the Cape of Good Hope, on the 2d of April, and arrived in Saldanha
Bay on the 1st of August, the commodore’s own ship being in perfect
health, from the administration of three table-spoonsfull of lemon
juice every morning to each of his men, whereas the other ships were so
sickly as to be unmanageable for want of hands, and the commander was
obliged to send men on board to take in their sails and hoist out their
boats. (Purchas’s Pilgrim, vol. i. p. 149.) A Fellow of the college,
and an eminent practitioner, in 1753 published a tract on sea scurvy,
in which he adverts to the superior virtue of this medicine; and Mr. A.
Baird, surgeon of the Hector sloop of war, states, that from what he
had seen of its effects on board of that ship, he “thinks he shall not
be accused of presumption in pronouncing it, if properly administered,
a _most infallible remedy_, both in the cure and prevention of
scurvy.” (Vide Trotter’s Medicina Nautica.) The precautions adopted
by captain Cook in his celebrated voyages, had fully demonstrated by
their complete success the practicability of keeping scurvy under in
the longest voyages, but a uniform system of prevention throughout the
service was still deficient.

It is to the representations of Dr. Blair and sir Gilbert Blane, in
their capacity of commissioners of the board for sick and wounded
seamen, in 1795, we believe, that its _systematic introduction into
nautical diet_, by a general order of the admiralty, is owing. The
effect of this wise measure (taken, of course, in conjunction with the
general causes of improved health,) may be estimated from the following
facts:--In 1780, the number of cases of scurvy received into Haslar
hospital was 1457; in 1806 _one_ only, and in 1807 _one_. There are now
many surgeons in the navy who have never seen the disease.

[15] Throughout France the conductor is recognised as a most
valuable and useful instrument; and in those parts of Germany where
thunder-storms are still more common and tremendous they are become
nearly universal. In Munich there is hardly a modern house unprovided
with them, and of a much better construction than ours--several copper
wires twisted into a rope.

[16] We have been informed by an eminent physician in Rome, (Dr.
Morichini) that a vast quantity of the sulphate of quinine is
manufactured there and consumed in the Campagna, with an evident effect
in mitigating the severity of the malarious complaints which affect its
inhabitants.

[17] Dr. Johnson, Memoirs of the Medical Society, vol. v.

[18] The engine at Huel Towan. See Mr. Henwood’s Statement “of the
performance of steam-engines in Cornwall for April, May, and June,
1829.” Brewster’s Journal, Oct. 1829.--The _highest_ monthly average of
this engine extends to 79 millions of pounds.

[19] However, this is not quite a fair statement; a man’s daily labour
is about 4 lbs. of coals. The extreme toil of this ascent arises from
other obvious causes than the mere height.

[20] Its surface is about 40,000 acres, and medium depth about 20 feet.
It was proposed to drain it by running embankments across it, and thus
cutting it up into more manageable portions to be drained by windmills.

[21] No one doubts the _practicability_ of the undertaking. Eight or
nine thousand chaldrons of coals duly burnt would evacuate the whole
contents. But many doubt whether it would be profitable, and some,
considering that a few hundreds of fishermen who gain their livelihood
on its waters would be dispossessed, deny that it would be _desirable_.

[22] “Experiments to determine the Force of fired Gunpowder.” Phil.
Trans. vol. lxxxvii. p. 254. et seq.

[23] See a very ingenious application of this kind in Mr. Babbage’s
article on Diving in the Encyc. Metrop.--Others will readily suggest
themselves. For instance, the ballast in reserve of a balloon might
consist of materials capable of evolving great quantities of hydrogen
gas in proportion to their weight, should such be found.

[24] The sulphuric. Bracconot, Annales de Chimie, vol. xii. p. 184.

[25] D’Arcet, Annales de l’Industrie, Fevrier, 1829.

[26] See Dr. Prout’s account of the experiments of professor Autenrieth
of Tubingen. Phil. Trans. 1827, p. 381. This discovery, which renders
famine next to _impossible_, deserves a higher degree of celebrity than
it has obtained.

[27] Greenwich.

[28] Maskelyne’s.

[29] Thomson’s First Principles of Chemistry, vol. ii. p. 68.

[30] Galileo exposes unsparingly the Aristotelian style of reasoning.
The reader may take the following from him as a specimen of its
quality. The object is to prove the immutability and incorruptibility
of the heavens; and thus it is done:--

    I. Mutation is either generation or corruption.

   II. Generation and corruption only happen between contraries.

  III. The motions of contraries are contrary.

   IV. The celestial motions are circular.

    V. Circular motions have no contraries.

      α. Because there can be but three simple motions.
             1. To a centre.
             2. Round a centre.
             3. From a centre.

      β. Of three things, one only can be contrary to one.

      γ. But a motion to a centre is manifestly the contrary to a
          motion from a centre.

      δ. Therefore a motion _round_ a centre (_i. e._ a circular
          motion) remains without a contrary.

   VI. _Therefore_ celestial motions have no contraries--_therefore_
         among celestial _things_ there are no contraries--_therefore_
         the heavens are eternal, immutable, incorruptible, and so forth.

It is evident that all this string of nonsense depends on the excessive
vagueness of the notions of generation, corruption, contrariety, &c. on
which the changes are rung.--_See_ GALILEO, _Systema Cosmicum_, Dial.
i. p. 30.

[31] Macquer justly observes, that the alchemists would have rendered
essential service to chemistry had they only related their unsuccessful
experiments as clearly as they have obscurely related those which they
pretend to have been successful.--_Macquer’s Dictionary of Chemistry_,
i. x.

[32] Paracelsus performed most of these cures by mercury and opium,
the use of which latter drug he had learned in Turkey. Of mercurial
preparations the physicians of his time were ignorant, and of opium
they were afraid, as being “cold in the fourth degree.” Tartar was
likewise a great favourite of Paracelsus, who imposed on it that name,
“because it contains the water, the salt, the oil, and the acid, which
burn the patient as hell does:” in short, a kind of counterbalance to
his opium.

[33] See the Life of Galileo Galilei, by Mr. Drinkwater, with
Illustrations of the Advancement of Experimental Philosophy.

[34] The temporary star in Cassiopeia observed by Cornelius Gemma, in
1572, was so bright as to be seen at noon-day. That in Serpentarius,
first seen by Kepler in 1604, exceeded in brilliancy all the other
stars and planets.

[35] Edinburgh Phil. Journ. 1819, vol. i. p. 8.

[36] The abstract principle of repetition in matters of measurement
(viz. juxta-position of units without error) is applicable to a great
variety of cases in which quantities are required to be determined to
minute nicety. In chemistry, in determining the standard atomic weights
of bodies, it seems easily and completely applicable, by a process
which will suggest itself at once to every chemist, and seems the only
thing wanting to place the exactness of chemical determinations on a
par with astronomical measurements.

[37] Accurate and _perfectly_ authentic copies of the yard and pound,
executed in platina, and hermetically sealed in glass, should be
deposited deep in the interior of the massive stone-work of some great
public building, whence they could only be rescued with a degree
of difficulty sufficient to preclude their being disturbed unless
on some very high and urgent occasion. The fact should be publicly
recorded, and its memory preserved by an inscription. Indeed, how much
valuable and useful information of the actual existing state of arts
and knowledge at any period might be transmitted to posterity in a
distinct, tangible, and imperishable form, if, instead of the absurd
and useless deposition of a few coins and medals under the foundations
of buildings, specimens of ingenious implements or condensed statements
of scientific truths, or processes in arts and manufactures, were
substituted. Will books infallibly preserve to a remote posterity all
that we may desire should be hereafter known of ourselves and our
discoveries, or all that posterity would wish to know? and may not a
useless ceremony be thus transformed into an act of enrolment in a
perpetual archive of what we most prize, and acknowledge to be most
valuable?

[38] In the system alluded to, the name of quartz is assigned to
iolite and obsidian; that of mica to plumbago, chlorite, and uranite;
sulphur, to orpiment and realgar, &c. See Mohs’s System of Mineralogy,
translated by Haidinger.

[39] The following passage, from Lindley’s Synopsis of the British
Flora, characterises justly the respective merits, in a philosophical
point of view, of natural and artificial systems of classification
in general, though limited in its expression to his own immediate
science:--“After all that has been effected, or is likely to be
accomplished hereafter, there will always be more difficulty in
acquiring a knowledge of the natural system of botany than of the
Linnæan. The latter skims only the surface of things, and leaves the
student in the fancied possession of a sort of information which it is
easy enough to obtain, but which is of little value when acquired: the
former requires a minute investigation of every part and every property
known to exist in plants; but when understood has conveyed to the mind
a store of real information, of the utmost use to man in every station
of life. Whatever the difficulties may be of becoming acquainted with
plants according to this method, they are inseparable from botany,
which cannot be usefully studied without encountering them.” Schiller
has some beautiful lines on this, entitled “Menschliches Wissen” (or
Human Knowledge); Gedichte, vol. i. p. 72. Leipzig, 1800.

[40] Lyell’s Principles of Geology, vol. i. Fourrier, Mém. de l’Acad.
des Sciences, tom. vii. p. 592. “L’établissement et le progrès des
sociétés humaines, l’action des forces naturelles, peuvent changer
notablement, et dans de vastes contrées, l’état de la surface du sol,
la distribution des eaux, et les grands mouvemens de l’air. De tels
effets sont propres à faire varier, dans le cours de plusieurs siècles,
le dégré de la chaleur moyenne; car les expressions analytiques
comprennent des coefficiens qui se rapportent à l’état superficiel,
et qui influent beaucoup sur la valeur de la température.” In this
enumeration, by M. Fourrier, of causes which may vary the general
relation of the surface of extensive continents to heat, it is but
justice to Mr. Lyell to observe, that the gradual shifting of the
_places_ of the continents themselves on the surface of the globe,
by the abrading action of the sea on the one hand, and the elevating
agency of subterranean forces on the other, does not expressly occur
and cannot be fairly included in the general sense of the passage,
which confines itself to the consideration of such changes as may take
place on the existing surface of the land.

[41] The reader will find this subject further developed in a paper
lately communicated to the Geological Society.

[42] Phil. Trans. 1824.

[43] Wells on Dew.

[44] Principia, book iii. prop. 6.

[45] A very curious instance of the pursuit of a law completely
empirical into an extreme case is to be found in Newton’s rule for
the dilatation of his coloured rings seen between glasses at great
obliquities. Optics, book ii. part i. obs. 7.

[46] See Phil. Trans. 1819.

[47] “When we are told that Saturn moves in his orbit more than 22,000
miles an hour, we fancy the motion to be swift; but when we find that
he is more than three hours moving his own diameter, we must then think
it, as it really is, slow.” Thirty Letters on various Subjects, by
William Jackson, 1795.

[48] Thomson’s First Principles of Chemistry.

[49] There seems no doubt, however, that an achromatic telescope had
been constructed by a private amateur, a Mr. Hall, some time before
either Euler or Dollond ever thought of it.

[50] We allude to the recently invented achromatic combinations of
Messrs. Barlow and Rogers, and the dense glasses of which Mr. Faraday
has recently explained the manufacture in a memoir full of the most
beautiful examples of delicate and successful chemical manipulation,
and which promise to give rise to a new era in optical practice, by
which the next generation at least may benefit. See Phil. Trans. 1830.

[51] Alphonso of Castile, 1252.

[52] Jackson, Letters on Various Subjects, &c.

[53] Thomson’s First Principles of Chemistry, Introduction.

[54] The progress of astronomical discovery has since shown that this
law cannot be relied on (1851).

[55] Novum Organum, part ii. table 2. (24), (30), &c. on the form or
nature of heat.

[56] We will mention one which we do not remember to have seen
noticed elsewhere in the case of a disturbance of the equilibrium of
heat produced by means purely mechanical, and by a process depending
entirely on a certain order and sequence of events, and the operation
of known causes. Suppose a quantity of air enclosed in a metallic
reservoir, of some good conductor of heat, and suddenly compressed by
a piston. After giving time for the heat developed by the condensation
to be communicated from the air to the metal which will be thereby
more or less raised in temperature _above_ the surrounding atmosphere,
let the piston be suddenly retracted and the air restored to its
original volume in an instant. The whole apparatus is now precisely in
its initial situation, as to the disposition of its material parts,
and the whole quantity of heat it contains remains unchanged. But it
is evident that the distribution of this heat within it is now very
different from what it was before; for the air in its sudden expansion
cannot re-absorb in an instant of time all the heat it had parted with
to the metal: it will, therefore, have a temperature _below_ that of
the general atmosphere, while the metal yet retains one above it. Thus,
a subversion of the equilibrium of temperature has been _bonâ fide_
effected. Heat has been driven from the air into the metal, while every
thing else remains unchanged.

We have here a means by which, it is evident, heat may be obtained, to
any extent, from the air, without fuel. For if, in place of withdrawing
the piston and letting the _same_ air expand, within the reservoir, it
be allowed to escape so suddenly as not to re-absorb the heat given
off, and fresh air be then admitted and the process repeated, any
quantity of air may thus be _drained_ of its heat.

[57] See Phil. Trans. 1824.

[58] If the brain be an electric pile, constantly in action, it may be
conceived to discharge itself at regular intervals, when the tension
of the electricity developed reaches a certain point, along the nerves
which communicate with the heart, and thus to excite the pulsations of
that organ. This idea is forcibly suggested by a view of that elegant
apparatus, the dry pile of Deluc; in which the successive accumulations
of electricity are carried off by a suspended ball, which is kept by
the discharges in a state of regular pulsation for any length of time.
We have witnessed the action of such a pile maintained in this way for
whole years in the study of the above-named eminent philosopher. The
same idea of the cause of the pulsation of the heart appears to have
occurred to Dr. Arnott; and is mentioned in his useful and excellent
work on physics, to which however, we are not indebted for the
suggestion, it having occurred to us independently many years ago.

[59] See a description of a contrivance of this kind by Dr. Young,
Lectures, vol. i. p. 191.

[60] Boyle’s Works, folio, vol. iii. Essay x. p. 185.

[61] Jackson, The Four Ages, p. 52. London: Cadell and Davies, 1798.
8vo.

[62] Jackson, The Four Ages, p. 90.




Transcriber’s Notes


Cover created by Transcriber and placed in the Public Domain.

Punctuation, hyphenation, and spelling were made consistent when a
predominant preference was found in this book; otherwise they were not
changed.

Simple typographical errors were corrected; occasional unbalanced
quotation marks retained.

Ambiguous hyphens at the ends of lines were retained.

Spelling of non-English words was not reviewed.

Text uses both “appreciate” and “appretiate”; both retained.

Index not checked for proper alphabetization or correct page references.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Preliminary Discourse on the Study of
Natural Philosophy, by John F. W. Herschel

