CHAPTER II

MATHEMATICAL DEFINITIONS AND TEACHING


1. I should speak here of general definitions in mathematics; at least
that is the title, but it will be impossible to confine myself to the
subject as strictly as the rule of unity of action would require; I
shall not be able to treat it without touching upon a few other related
questions, and if thus I am forced from time to time to walk on the
bordering flower-beds on the right or left, I pray you bear with me.

What is a good definition? For the philosopher or the scientist it is a
definition which applies to all the objects defined, and only those; it
is the one satisfying the rules of logic. But in teaching it is not
that; a good definition is one understood by the scholars.

How does it happen that so many refuse to understand mathematics? Is
that not something of a paradox? Lo and behold! a science appealing only
to the fundamental principles of logic, to the principle of
contradiction, for instance, to that which is the skeleton, so to speak,
of our intelligence, to that of which we can not divest ourselves
without ceasing to think, and there are people who find it obscure! and
they are even in the majority! That they are incapable of inventing may
pass, but that they do not understand the demonstrations shown them,
that they remain blind when we show them a light which seems to us
flashing pure flame, this it is which is altogether prodigious.

And yet there is no need of a wide experience with examinations to know
that these blind men are in no wise exceptional beings. This is a
problem not easy to solve, but which should engage the attention of all
those wishing to devote themselves to teaching.

What is it, to understand? Has this word the same meaning for all the
world? To understand the demonstration of a theorem, is that to examine
successively each of the syllogisms composing it and to ascertain its
correctness, its conformity to the rules of the game? Likewise, to
understand a definition, is this merely to recognize that one already
knows the meaning of all the terms employed and to ascertain that it
implies no contradiction?

For some, yes; when they have done this, they will say: I understand.

For the majority, no. Almost all are much more exacting; they wish to
know not merely whether all the syllogisms of a demonstration are
correct, but why they link together in this order rather than another.
In so far as to them they seem engendered by caprice and not by an
intelligence always conscious of the end to be attained, they do not
believe they understand.

Doubtless they are not themselves just conscious of what they crave and
they could not formulate their desire, but if they do not get
satisfaction, they vaguely feel that something is lacking. Then what
happens? In the beginning they still perceive the proofs one puts under
their eyes; but as these are connected only by too slender a thread to
those which precede and those which follow, they pass without leaving
any trace in their head; they are soon forgotten; a moment bright, they
quickly vanish in night eternal. When they are farther on, they will no
longer see even this ephemeral light, since the theorems lean one upon
another and those they would need are forgotten; thus it is they become
incapable of understanding mathematics.

This is not always the fault of their teacher; often their mind, which
needs to perceive the guiding thread, is too lazy to seek and find it.
But to come to their aid, we first must know just what hinders them.

Others will always ask of what use is it; they will not have understood
if they do not find about them, in practise or in nature, the
justification of such and such a mathematical concept. Under each word
they wish to put a sensible image; the definition must evoke this image,
so that at each stage of the demonstration they may see it transform and
evolve. Only upon this condition do they comprehend and retain. Often
these deceive themselves; they do not listen to the reasoning, they look
at the figures; they think they have understood and they have only seen.

2. How many different tendencies! Must we combat them? Must we use them?
And if we wish to combat them, which should be favored? Must we show
those content with the pure logic that they have seen only one side of
the matter? Or need we say to those not so cheaply satisfied that what
they demand is not necessary?

In other words, should we constrain the young people to change the
nature of their minds? Such an attempt would be vain; we do not possess
the philosopher's stone which would enable us to transmute one into
another the metals confided to us; all we can do is to work with them,
adapting ourselves to their properties.

Many children are incapable of becoming mathematicians, to whom however
it is necessary to teach mathematics; and the mathematicians themselves
are not all cast in the same mold. To read their works suffices to
distinguish among them two sorts of minds, the logicians like
Weierstrass for example, the intuitives like Riemann. There is the same
difference among our students. The one sort prefer to treat their
problems 'by analysis' as they say, the others 'by geometry.'

It is useless to seek to change anything of that, and besides would it
be desirable? It is well that there are logicians and that there are
intuitives; who would dare say whether he preferred that Weierstrass had
never written or that there never had been a Riemann? We must therefore
resign ourselves to the diversity of minds, or better we must rejoice in
it.

3. Since the word understand has many meanings, the definitions which
will be best understood by some will not be best suited to others. We
have those which seek to produce an image, and those where we confine
ourselves to combining empty forms, perfectly intelligible, but purely
intelligible, which abstraction has deprived of all matter.

I know not whether it be necessary to cite examples. Let us cite them,
anyhow, and first the definition of fractions will furnish us an extreme
case. In the primary schools, to define a fraction, one cuts up an apple
or a pie; it is cut up mentally of course and not in reality, because I
do not suppose the budget of the primary instruction allows of such
prodigality. At the Normal School, on the other hand, or at the college,
it is said: a fraction is the combination of two whole numbers separated
by a horizontal bar; we define by conventions the operations to which
these symbols may be submitted; it is proved that the rules of these
operations are the same as in calculating with whole numbers, and we
ascertain finally that multiplying the fraction, according to these
rules, by the denominator gives the numerator. This is all very well
because we are addressing young people long familiarized with the notion
of fractions through having cut up apples or other objects, and whose
mind, matured by a hard mathematical education, has come little by
little to desire a purely logical definition. But the débutant to whom
one should try to give it, how dumfounded!

Such also are the definitions found in a book justly admired and greatly
honored, the _Foundations of Geometry_ by Hilbert. See in fact how he
begins: _We think three systems of_ THINGS _which we shall call points,
straights and planes_. What are these 'things'?

We know not, nor need we know; it would even be a pity to seek to know;
all we have the right to know of them is what the assumptions tell us;
this for example: _Two distinct points always determine a straight_,
which is followed by this remark: _in place of determine, we may say the
two points are on the straight, or the straight goes through these two
points or joins the two points_.

Thus 'to be on a straight' is simply defined as synonymous with
'determine a straight.' Behold a book of which I think much good, but
which I should not recommend to a school boy. Yet I could do so without
fear, he would not read much of it. I have taken extreme examples and no
teacher would dream of going that far. But even stopping short of such
models, does he not already expose himself to the same danger?

Suppose we are in a class; the professor dictates: the circle is the
locus of points of the plane equidistant from an interior point called
the center. The good scholar writes this phrase in his note-book; the
bad scholar draws faces; but neither understands; then the professor
takes the chalk and draws a circle on the board. "Ah!" think the
scholars, "why did he not say at once: a circle is a ring, we should
have understood." Doubtless the professor is right. The scholars'
definition would have been of no avail, since it could serve for no
demonstration, since besides it would not give them the salutary habit
of analyzing their conceptions. But one should show them that they do
not comprehend what they think they know, lead them to be conscious of
the roughness of their primitive conception, and of themselves to wish
it purified and made precise.

4. I shall return to these examples; I only wished to show you the two
opposed conceptions; they are in violent contrast. This contrast the
history of science explains. If we read a book written fifty years ago,
most of the reasoning we find there seems lacking in rigor. Then it was
assumed a continuous function can change sign only by vanishing; to-day
we prove it. It was assumed the ordinary rules of calculation are
applicable to incommensurable numbers; to-day we prove it. Many other
things were assumed which sometimes were false.

We trusted to intuition; but intuition can not give rigor, nor even
certainty; we see this more and more. It tells us for instance that
every curve has a tangent, that is to say that every continuous function
has a derivative, and that is false. And as we sought certainty, we had
to make less and less the part of intuition.

What has made necessary this evolution? We have not been slow to
perceive that rigor could not be established in the reasonings, if it
were not first put into the definitions.

The objects occupying mathematicians were long ill defined; we thought
we knew them because we represented them with the senses or the
imagination; but we had of them only a rough image and not a precise
concept upon which reasoning could take hold. It is there that the
logicians would have done well to direct their efforts.

So for the incommensurable number, the vague idea of continuity, which
we owe to intuition, has resolved itself into a complicated system of
inequalities bearing on whole numbers. Thus have finally vanished all
those difficulties which frightened our fathers when they reflected upon
the foundations of the infinitesimal calculus. To-day only whole numbers
are left in analysis, or systems finite or infinite of whole numbers,
bound by a plexus of equalities and inequalities. Mathematics we say is
arithmetized.

5. But do you think mathematics has attained absolute rigor without
making any sacrifice? Not at all; what it has gained in rigor it has
lost in objectivity. It is by separating itself from reality that it has
acquired this perfect purity. We may freely run over its whole domain,
formerly bristling with obstacles, but these obstacles have not
disappeared. They have only been moved to the frontier, and it would be
necessary to vanquish them anew if we wished to break over this frontier
to enter the realm of the practical.

We had a vague notion, formed of incongruous elements, some _a priori_,
others coming from experiences more or less digested; we thought we
knew, by intuition, its principal properties. To-day we reject the
empiric elements, retaining only the _a priori_; one of the properties
serves as definition and all the others are deduced from it by rigorous
reasoning. This is all very well, but it remains to be proved that this
property, which has become a definition, pertains to the real objects
which experience had made known to us and whence we drew our vague
intuitive notion. To prove that, it would be necessary to appeal to
experience, or to make an effort of intuition, and if we could not prove
it, our theorems would be perfectly rigorous, but perfectly useless.

Logic sometimes makes monsters. Since half a century we have seen arise
a crowd of bizarre functions which seem to try to resemble as little as
possible the honest functions which serve some purpose. No longer
continuity, or perhaps continuity, but no derivatives, etc. Nay more,
from the logical point of view, it is these strange functions which are
the most general, those one meets without seeking no longer appear
except as particular case. There remains for them only a very small
corner.

Heretofore when a new function was invented, it was for some practical
end; to-day they are invented expressly to put at fault the reasonings
of our fathers, and one never will get from them anything more than
that.

If logic were the sole guide of the teacher, it would be necessary to
begin with the most general functions, that is to say with the most
bizarre. It is the beginner that would have to be set grappling with
this teratologic museum. If you do not do it, the logicians might say,
you will achieve rigor only by stages.

6. Yes, perhaps, but we can not make so cheap of reality, and I mean not
only the reality of the sensible world, which however has its worth,
since it is to combat against it that nine tenths of your students ask
of you weapons. There is a reality more subtile, which makes the very
life of the mathematical beings, and which is quite other than logic.

Our body is formed of cells, and the cells of atoms; are these cells and
these atoms then all the reality of the human body? The way these cells
are arranged, whence results the unity of the individual, is it not also
a reality and much more interesting?

A naturalist who never had studied the elephant except in the
microscope, would he think he knew the animal adequately? It is the same
in mathematics. When the logician shall have broken up each
demonstration into a multitude of elementary operations, all correct, he
still will not possess the whole reality; this I know not what which
makes the unity of the demonstration will completely escape him.

In the edifices built up by our masters, of what use to admire the work
of the mason if we can not comprehend the plan of the architect? Now
pure logic can not give us this appreciation of the total effect; this
we must ask of intuition.

Take for instance the idea of continuous function. This is at first only
a sensible image, a mark traced by the chalk on the blackboard. Little
by little it is refined; we use it to construct a complicated system of
inequalities, which reproduces all the features of the primitive image;
when all is done, we have _removed the centering_, as after the
construction of an arch; this rough representation, support thenceforth
useless, has disappeared and there remains only the edifice itself,
irreproachable in the eyes of the logician. And yet, if the professor
did not recall the primitive image, if he did not restore momentarily
the _centering_, how could the student divine by what caprice all these
inequalities have been scaffolded in this fashion one upon another? The
definition would be logically correct, but it would not show him the
veritable reality.

7. So back we must return; doubtless it is hard for a master to teach
what does not entirely satisfy him; but the satisfaction of the master
is not the unique object of teaching; we should first give attention to
what the mind of the pupil is and to what we wish it to become.

Zoologists maintain that the embryonic development of an animal
recapitulates in brief the whole history of its ancestors throughout
geologic time. It seems it is the same in the development of minds. The
teacher should make the child go over the path his fathers trod; more
rapidly, but without skipping stations. For this reason, the history of
science should be our first guide.

Our fathers thought they knew what a fraction was, or continuity, or the
area of a curved surface; we have found they did not know it. Just so
our scholars think they know it when they begin the serious study of
mathematics. If without warning I tell them: "No, you do not know it;
what you think you understand, you do not understand; I must prove to
you what seems to you evident," and if in the demonstration I support
myself upon premises which to them seem less evident than the
conclusion, what shall the unfortunates think? They will think that the
science of mathematics is only an arbitrary mass of useless subtilities;
either they will be disgusted with it, or they will play it as a game
and will reach a state of mind like that of the Greek sophists.

Later, on the contrary, when the mind of the scholar, familiarized with
mathematical reasoning, has been matured by this long frequentation, the
doubts will arise of themselves and then your demonstration will be
welcome. It will awaken new doubts, and the questions will arise
successively to the child, as they arose successively to our fathers,
until perfect rigor alone can satisfy him. To doubt everything does not
suffice, one must know why he doubts.

8. The principal aim of mathematical teaching is to develop certain
faculties of the mind, and among them intuition is not the least
precious. It is through it that the mathematical world remains in
contact with the real world, and if pure mathematics could do without
it, it would always be necessary to have recourse to it to fill up the
chasm which separates the symbol from reality. The practician will
always have need of it, and for one pure geometer there should be a
hundred practicians.


The engineer should receive a complete mathematical education, but for
what should it serve him?

To see the different aspects of things and see them quickly; he has no
time to hunt mice. It is necessary that, in the complex physical objects
presented to him, he should promptly recognize the point where the
mathematical tools we have put in his hands can take hold. How could he
do it if we should leave between instruments and objects the deep chasm
hollowed out by the logicians?

9. Besides the engineers, other scholars, less numerous, are in their
turn to become teachers; they therefore must go to the very bottom; a
knowledge deep and rigorous of the first principles is for them before
all indispensable. But this is no reason not to cultivate in them
intuition; for they would get a false idea of the science if they never
looked at it except from a single side, and besides they could not
develop in their students a quality they did not themselves possess.

For the pure geometer himself, this faculty is necessary; it is by logic
one demonstrates, by intuition one invents. To know how to criticize is
good, to know how to create is better. You know how to recognize if a
combination is correct; what a predicament if you have not the art of
choosing among all the possible combinations. Logic tells us that on
such and such a way we are sure not to meet any obstacle; it does not
say which way leads to the end. For that it is necessary to see the end
from afar, and the faculty which teaches us to see is intuition. Without
it the geometer would be like a writer who should be versed in grammar
but had no ideas. Now how could this faculty develop if, as soon as it
showed itself, we chase it away and proscribe it, if we learn to set it
at naught before knowing the good of it.

And here permit a parenthesis to insist upon the importance of written
exercises. Written compositions are perhaps not sufficiently emphasized
in certain examinations, at the polytechnic school, for instance. I am
told they would close the door against very good scholars who have
mastered the course, thoroughly understanding it, and who nevertheless
are incapable of making the slightest application. I have just said the
word understand has several meanings: such students only understand in
the first way, and we have seen that suffices neither to make an
engineer nor a geometer. Well, since choice must be made, I prefer those
who understand completely.

10. But is the art of sound reasoning not also a precious thing, which
the professor of mathematics ought before all to cultivate? I take good
care not to forget that. It should occupy our attention and from the
very beginning. I should be distressed to see geometry degenerate into I
know not what tachymetry of low grade and I by no means subscribe to the
extreme doctrines of certain German Oberlehrer. But there are occasions
enough to exercise the scholars in correct reasoning in the parts of
mathematics where the inconveniences I have pointed out do not present
themselves. There are long chains of theorems where absolute logic has
reigned from the very first and, so to speak, quite naturally, where the
first geometers have given us models we should constantly imitate and
admire.

It is in the exposition of first principles that it is necessary to
avoid too much subtility; there it would be most discouraging and
moreover useless. We can not prove everything and we can not define
everything; and it will always be necessary to borrow from intuition;
what does it matter whether it be done a little sooner or a little
later, provided that in using correctly premises it has furnished us, we
learn to reason soundly.

11. Is it possible to fulfill so many opposing conditions? Is this
possible in particular when it is a question of giving a definition? How
find a concise statement satisfying at once the uncompromising rules of
logic, our desire to grasp the place of the new notion in the totality
of the science, our need of thinking with images? Usually it will not be
found, and this is why it is not enough to state a definition; it must
be prepared for and justified.

What does that mean? You know it has often been said: every definition
implies an assumption, since it affirms the existence of the object
defined. The definition then will not be justified, from the purely
logical point of view, until one shall have _proved_ that it involves no
contradiction, neither in the terms, nor with the verities previously
admitted.

But this is not enough; the definition is stated to us as a convention;
but most minds will revolt if we wish to impose it upon them as an
_arbitrary_ convention. They will be satisfied only when you have
answered numerous questions.

Usually mathematical definitions, as M. Liard has shown, are veritable
constructions built up wholly of more simple notions. But why assemble
these elements in this way when a thousand other combinations were
possible?

Is it by caprice? If not, why had this combination more right to exist
than all the others? To what need does it respond? How was it foreseen
that it would play an important rôle in the development of the science,
that it would abridge our reasonings and our calculations? Is there in
nature some familiar object which is so to speak the rough and vague
image of it?

This is not all; if you answer all these questions in a satisfactory
manner, we shall see indeed that the new-born had the right to be
baptized; but neither is the choice of a name arbitrary; it is needful
to explain by what analogies one has been guided and that if analogous
names have been given to different things, these things at least differ
only in material and are allied in form; that their properties are
analogous and so to say parallel.

At this cost we may satisfy all inclinations. If the statement is
correct enough to please the logician, the justification will satisfy
the intuitive. But there is still a better procedure; wherever possible,
the justification should precede the statement and prepare for it; one
should be led on to the general statement by the study of some
particular examples.

Still another thing: each of the parts of the statement of a definition
has as aim to distinguish the thing to be defined from a class of other
neighboring objects. The definition will be understood only when you
have shown, not merely the object defined, but the neighboring objects
from which it is proper to distinguish it, when you have given a grasp
of the difference and when you have added explicitly: this is why in
stating the definition I have said this or that.

But it is time to leave generalities and examine how the somewhat
abstract principles I have expounded may be applied in arithmetic,
geometry, analysis and mechanics.


ARITHMETIC

12. The whole number is not to be defined; in return, one ordinarily
defines the operations upon whole numbers; I believe the scholars learn
these definitions by heart and attach no meaning to them. For that there
are two reasons: first they are made to learn them too soon, when their
mind as yet feels no need of them; then these definitions are not
satisfactory from the logical point of view. A good definition for
addition is not to be found just simply because we must stop and can not
define everything. It is not defining addition to say it consists in
adding. All that can be done is to start from a certain number of
concrete examples and say: the operation we have performed is called
addition.

For subtraction it is quite otherwise; it may be logically defined as
the operation inverse to addition; but should we begin in that way? Here
also start with examples, show on these examples the reciprocity of the
two operations; thus the definition will be prepared for and justified.

Just so again for multiplication; take a particular problem; show that
it may be solved by adding several equal numbers; then show that we
reach the result more quickly by a multiplication, an operation the
scholars already know how to do by routine and out of that the logical
definition will issue naturally.

Division is defined as the operation inverse to multiplication; but
begin by an example taken from the familiar notion of partition and show
on this example that multiplication reproduces the dividend.

There still remain the operations on fractions. The only difficulty is
for multiplication. It is best to expound first the theory of
proportion; from it alone can come a logical definition; but to make
acceptable the definitions met at the beginning of this theory, it is
necessary to prepare for them by numerous examples taken from classic
problems of the rule of three, taking pains to introduce fractional
data.

Neither should we fear to familiarize the scholars with the notion of
proportion by geometric images, either by appealing to what they
remember if they have already studied geometry, or in having recourse to
direct intuition, if they have not studied it, which besides will
prepare them to study it. Finally I shall add that after defining
multiplication of fractions, it is needful to justify this definition by
showing that it is commutative, associative and distributive, and
calling to the attention of the auditors that this is established to
justify the definition.

One sees what a rôle geometric images play in all this; and this rôle is
justified by the philosophy and the history of the science. If
arithmetic had remained free from all admixture of geometry, it would
have known only the whole number; it is to adapt itself to the needs of
geometry that it invented anything else.


GEOMETRY

In geometry we meet forthwith the notion of the straight line. Can the
straight line be defined? The well-known definition, the shortest path
from one point to another, scarcely satisfies me. I should start simply
with the _ruler_ and show at first to the scholar how one may verify a
ruler by turning; this verification is the true definition of the
straight line; the straight line is an axis of rotation. Next he should
be shown how to verify the ruler by sliding and he would have one of the
most important properties of the straight line.

As to this other property of being the shortest path from one point to
another, it is a theorem which can be demonstrated apodictically, but
the demonstration is too delicate to find a place in secondary teaching.
It will be worth more to show that a ruler previously verified fits on a
stretched thread. In presence of difficulties like these one need not
dread to multiply assumptions, justifying them by rough experiments.

It is needful to grant these assumptions, and if one admits a few more
of them than is strictly necessary, the evil is not very great; the
essential thing is to learn to reason soundly on the assumptions
admitted. Uncle Sarcey, who loved to repeat, often said that at the
theater the spectator accepts willingly all the postulates imposed upon
him at the beginning, but the curtain once raised, he becomes
uncompromising on the logic. Well, it is just the same in mathematics.

For the circle, we may start with the compasses; the scholars will
recognize at the first glance the curve traced; then make them observe
that the distance of the two points of the instrument remains constant,
that one of these points is fixed and the other movable, and so we shall
be led naturally to the logical definition.

The definition of the plane implies an axiom and this need not be
hidden. Take a drawing board and show that a moving ruler may be kept
constantly in complete contact with this plane and yet retain three
degrees of freedom. Compare with the cylinder and the cone, surfaces on
which an applied straight retains only two degrees of freedom; next take
three drawing boards; show first that they will glide while remaining
applied to one another and this with three degrees of freedom; and
finally to distinguish the plane from the sphere, show that two of these
boards which fit a third will fit each other.

Perhaps you are surprised at this incessant employment of moving things;
this is not a rough artifice; it is much more philosophic than one would
at first think. What is geometry for the philosopher? It is the study of
a group. And what group? That of the motions of solid bodies. How define
this group then without moving some solids?

Should we retain the classic definition of parallels and say parallels
are two coplanar straights which do not meet, however far they be
prolonged? No, since this definition is negative, since it is
unverifiable by experiment, and consequently can not be regarded as an
immediate datum of intuition. No, above all because it is wholly strange
to the notion of group, to the consideration of the motion of solid
bodies which is, as I have said, the true source of geometry. Would it
not be better to define first the rectilinear translation of an
invariable figure, as a motion wherein all the points of this figure
have rectilinear trajectories; to show that such a translation is
possible by making a square glide on a ruler?

From this experimental ascertainment, set up as an assumption, it would
be easy to derive the notion of parallel and Euclid's postulate itself.



MECHANICS

I need not return to the definition of velocity, or acceleration, or
other kinematic notions; they may be advantageously connected with that
of the derivative.

I shall insist, on the other hand, upon the dynamic notions of force and
mass.

I am struck by one thing: how very far the young people who have
received a high-school education are from applying to the real world the
mechanical laws they have been taught. It is not only that they are
incapable of it; they do not even think of it. For them the world of
science and the world of reality are separated by an impervious
partition wall.

If we try to analyze the state of mind of our scholars, this will
astonish us less. What is for them the real definition of force? Not
that which they recite, but that which, crouching in a nook of their
mind, from there directs it wholly. Here is the definition: forces are
arrows with which one makes parallelograms. These arrows are imaginary
things which have nothing to do with anything existing in nature. This
would not happen if they had been shown forces in reality before
representing them by arrows.

How shall we define force?

I think I have elsewhere sufficiently shown there is no good logical
definition. There is the anthropomorphic definition, the sensation of
muscular effort; this is really too rough and nothing useful can be
drawn from it.

Here is how we should go: first, to make known the genus force, we must
show one after the other all the species of this genus; they are very
numerous and very different; there is the pressure of fluids on the
insides of the vases wherein they are contained; the tension of threads;
the elasticity of a spring; the gravity working on all the molecules of
a body; friction; the normal mutual action and reaction of two solids in
contact.

This is only a qualitative definition; it is necessary to learn to
measure force. For that begin by showing that one force may be replaced
by another without destroying equilibrium; we may find the first example
of this substitution in the balance and Borda's double weighing.

Then show that a weight may be replaced, not only by another weight,
but by force of a different nature; for instance, Prony's brake permits
replacing weight by friction.

From all this arises the notion of the equivalence of two forces.

The direction of a force must be defined. If a force _F_ is equivalent
to another force _F'_ applied to the body considered by means of a
stretched string, so that _F_ may be replaced by _F'_ without affecting
the equilibrium, then the point of attachment of the string will be by
definition the point of application of the force _F'_, and that of the
equivalent force _F_; the direction of the string will be the direction
of the force _F'_ and that of the equivalent force _F_.

From that, pass to the comparison of the magnitude of forces. If a force
can replace two others with the same direction, it equals their sum;
show for example that a weight of 20 grams may replace two 10-gram
weights.

Is this enough? Not yet. We now know how to compare the intensity of two
forces which have the same direction and same point of application; we
must learn to do it when the directions are different. For that, imagine
a string stretched by a weight and passing over a pulley; we shall say
that the tensor of the two legs of the string is the same and equal to
the tension weight.

This definition of ours enables us to compare the tensions of the two
pieces of our string, and, using the preceding definitions, to compare
any two forces having the same direction as these two pieces. It should
be justified by showing that the tension of the last piece of the string
remains the same for the same tensor weight, whatever be the number and
the disposition of the reflecting pulleys. It has still to be completed
by showing this is only true if the pulleys are frictionless.

Once master of these definitions, it is to be shown that the point of
application, the direction and the intensity suffice to determine a
force; that two forces for which these three elements are the same are
_always_ equivalent and may _always_ be replaced by one another, whether
in equilibrium or in movement, and this whatever be the other forces
acting.

It must be shown that two concurrent forces may always be replaced by a
unique resultant; and that _this resultant remains the same_, whether
the body be at rest or in motion and whatever be the other forces
applied to it.

Finally it must be shown that forces thus defined satisfy the principle
of the equality of action and reaction.

Experiment it is, and experiment alone, which can teach us all that. It
will suffice to cite certain common experiments, which the scholars make
daily without suspecting it, and to perform before them a few
experiments, simple and well chosen.

It is after having passed through all these meanders that one may
represent forces by arrows, and I should even wish that in the
development of the reasonings return were made from time to time from
the symbol to the reality. For instance it would not be difficult to
illustrate the parallelogram of forces by aid of an apparatus formed of
three strings, passing over pulleys, stretched by weights and in
equilibrium while pulling on the same point.

Knowing force, it is easy to define mass; this time the definition
should be borrowed from dynamics; there is no way of doing otherwise,
since the end to be attained is to give understanding of the distinction
between mass and weight. Here again, the definition should be led up to
by experiments; there is in fact a machine which seems made expressly to
show what mass is, Atwood's machine; recall also the laws of the fall of
bodies, that the acceleration of gravity is the same for heavy as for
light bodies, and that it varies with the latitude, etc.

Now, if you tell me that all the methods I extol have long been applied
in the schools, I shall rejoice over it more than be surprised at it. I
know that on the whole our mathematical teaching is good. I do not wish
it overturned; that would even distress me. I only desire betterments
slowly progressive. This teaching should not be subjected to brusque
oscillations under the capricious blast of ephemeral fads. In such
tempests its high educative value would soon founder. A good and sound
logic should continue to be its basis. The definition by example is
always necessary, but it should prepare the way for the logical
definition, it should not replace it; it should at least make this
wished for, in the cases where the true logical definition can be
advantageously given only in advanced teaching.

Understand that what I have here said does not imply giving up what I
have written elsewhere. I have often had occasion to criticize certain
definitions I extol to-day. These criticisms hold good completely. These
definitions can only be provisory. But it is by way of them that we must
pass.




