BOOK III


THE NEW MECHANICS




CHAPTER I

MECHANICS AND RADIUM


I

_Introduction_

The general principles of Dynamics, which have, since Newton, served as
foundation for physical science, and which appeared immovable, are they
on the point of being abandoned or at least profoundly modified? This is
what many people have been asking themselves for some years. According
to them, the discovery of radium has overturned the scientific dogmas we
believed the most solid: on the one hand, the impossibility of the
transmutation of metals; on the other hand, the fundamental postulates
of mechanics.

Perhaps one is too hasty in considering these novelties as finally
established, and breaking our idols of yesterday; perhaps it would be
proper, before taking sides, to await experiments more numerous and more
convincing. None the less is it necessary, from to-day, to know the new
doctrines and the arguments, already very weighty, upon which they rest.

In few words let us first recall in what those principles consist:

_A._ The motion of a material point isolated and apart from all exterior
force is straight and uniform; this is the principle of inertia: without
force no acceleration;

_B._ The acceleration of a moving point has the same direction as the
resultant of all the forces to which it is subjected; it is equal to the
quotient of this resultant by a coefficient called _mass_ of the moving
point.

The mass of a moving point, so defined, is a constant; it does not
depend upon the velocity acquired by this point; it is the same whether
the force, being parallel to this velocity, tends only to accelerate or
to retard the motion of the point, or whether, on the contrary, being
perpendicular to this velocity, it tends to make this motion deviate
toward the right, or the left, that is to say to _curve_ the trajectory;

_C._ All the forces affecting a material point come from the action of
other material points; they depend only upon the _relative_ positions
and velocities of these different material points.

Combining the two principles _B_ and _C_, we reach the _principle of
relative motion_, in virtue of which the laws of the motion of a system
are the same whether we refer this system to fixed axes, or to moving
axes animated by a straight and uniform motion of translation, so that
it is impossible to distinguish absolute motion from a relative motion
with reference to such moving axes;

_D._ If a material point _A_ acts upon another material point _B_, the
body _B_ reacts upon _A_, and these two actions are two equal and
directly opposite forces. This is _the principle of the equality of
action and reaction_, or, more briefly, the _principle of reaction_.

Astronomic observations and the most ordinary physical phenomena seem to
have given of these principles a confirmation complete, constant and
very precise. This is true, it is now said, but it is because we have
never operated with any but very small velocities; Mercury, for example,
the fastest of the planets, goes scarcely 100 kilometers a second. Would
this planet act the same if it went a thousand times faster? We see
there is yet no need to worry; whatever may be the progress of
automobilism, it will be long before we must give up applying to our
machines the classic principles of dynamics.

How then have we come to make actual speeds a thousand times greater
than that of Mercury, equal, for instance, to a tenth or a third of the
velocity of light, or approaching still more closely to that velocity?
It is by aid of the cathode rays and the rays from radium.

We know that radium emits three kinds of rays, designated by the three
Greek letters [alpha], [beta], [gamma]; in what follows, unless the
contrary be expressly stated, it will always be a question of the [beta]
rays, which are analogous to the cathode rays.

After the discovery of the cathode rays two theories appeared. Crookes
attributed the phenomena to a veritable molecular bombardment; Hertz, to
special undulations of the ether. This was a renewal of the debate which
divided physicists a century ago about light; Crookes took up the
emission theory, abandoned for light; Hertz held to the undulatory
theory. The facts seem to decide in favor of Crookes.

It has been recognized, in the first place, that the cathode rays carry
with them a negative electric charge; they are deviated by a magnetic
field and by an electric field; and these deviations are precisely such
as these same fields would produce upon projectiles animated by a very
high velocity and strongly charged with electricity. These two
deviations depend upon two quantities: one the velocity, the other the
relation of the electric charge of the projectile to its mass; we cannot
know the absolute value of this mass, nor that of the charge, but only
their relation; in fact, it is clear that if we double at the same time
the charge and the mass, without changing the velocity, we shall double
the force which tends to deviate the projectile, but, as its mass is
also doubled, the acceleration and deviation observable will not be
changed. The observation of the two deviations will give us therefore
two equations to determine these two unknowns. We find a velocity of
from 10,000 to 30,000 kilometers a second; as to the ratio of the charge
to the mass, it is very great. We may compare it to the corresponding
ratio in regard to the hydrogen ion in electrolysis; we then find that a
cathodic projectile carries about a thousand times more electricity than
an equal mass of hydrogen would carry in an electrolyte.

To confirm these views, we need a direct measurement of this velocity to
compare with the velocity so calculated. Old experiments of J. J.
Thomson had given results more than a hundred times too small; but they
were exposed to certain causes of error. The question was taken up again
by Wiechert in an arrangement where the Hertzian oscillations were
utilized; results were found agreeing with the theory, at least as to
order of magnitude; it would be of great interest to repeat these
experiments. However that may be, the theory of undulations appears
powerless to account for this complex of facts.

The same calculations made with reference to the [beta] rays of radium
have given velocities still greater: 100,000 or 200,000 kilometers or
more yet. These velocities greatly surpass all those we know. It is true
that light has long been known to go 300,000 kilometers a second; but it
is not a carrying of matter, while, if we adopt the emission theory for
the cathode rays, there would be material molecules really impelled at
the velocities in question, and it is proper to investigate whether the
ordinary laws of mechanics are still applicable to them.


II

_Mass Longitudinal and Mass Transversal_

We know that electric currents produce the phenomena of induction, in
particular _self-induction_. When a current increases, there develops an
electromotive force of self-induction which tends to oppose the current;
on the contrary, when the current decreases, the electromotive force of
self-induction tends to maintain the current. The self-induction
therefore opposes every variation of the intensity of the current, just
as in mechanics the inertia of a body opposes every variation of its
velocity.

_Self-induction is a veritable inertia._ Everything happens as if the
current could not establish itself without putting in motion the
surrounding ether and as if the inertia of this ether tended, in
consequence, to keep constant the intensity of this current. It would be
requisite to overcome this inertia to establish the current, it would be
necessary to overcome it again to make the current cease.

A cathode ray, which is a rain of projectiles charged with negative
electricity, may be likened to a current; doubtless this current
differs, at first sight at least, from the currents of ordinary
conduction, where the matter does not move and where the electricity
circulates through the matter. This is a _current of convection_, where
the electricity, attached to a material vehicle, is carried along by the
motion of this vehicle. But Rowland has proved that currents of
convection produce the same magnetic effects as currents of conduction;
they should produce also the same effects of induction. First, if this
were not so, the principle of the conservation of energy would be
violated; besides, Crémieu and Pender have employed a method putting in
evidence _directly_ these effects of induction.

If the velocity of a cathode corpuscle varies, the intensity of the
corresponding current will likewise vary; and there will develop effects
of self-induction which will tend to oppose this variation. These
corpuscles should therefore possess a double inertia: first their own
proper inertia, and then the apparent inertia, due to self-induction,
which produces the same effects. They will therefore have a total
apparent mass, composed of their real mass and of a fictitious mass of
electromagnetic origin. Calculation shows that this fictitious mass
varies with the velocity, and that the force of inertia of
self-induction is not the same when the velocity of the projectile
accelerates or slackens, or when it is deviated; therefore so it is with
the force of the total apparent inertia.

The total apparent mass is therefore not the same when the real force
applied to the corpuscle is parallel to its velocity and tends to
accelerate the motion as when it is perpendicular to this velocity and
tends to make the direction vary. It is necessary therefore to
distinguish the _total longitudinal mass_ from the _total transversal
mass_. These two total masses depend, moreover, upon the velocity. This
follows from the theoretical work of Abraham.

In the measurements of which we speak in the preceding section, what is
it we determine in measuring the two deviations? It is the velocity on
the one hand, and on the other hand the ratio of the charge to the
_total transversal mass_. How, under these conditions, can we make out
in this total mass the part of the real mass and that of the fictitious
electromagnetic mass? If we had only the cathode rays properly so
called, it could not be dreamed of; but happily we have the rays of
radium which, as we have seen, are notably swifter. These rays are not
all identical and do not behave in the same way under the action of an
electric field and a magnetic field. It is found that the electric
deviation is a function of the magnetic deviation, and we are able, by
receiving on a sensitive plate radium rays which have been subjected to
the action of the two fields, to photograph the curve which represents
the relation between these two deviations. This is what Kaufmann has
done, deducing from it the relation between the velocity and the ratio
of the charge to the total apparent mass, a ratio we shall call
[epsilon].

One might suppose there are several species of rays, each characterized
by a fixed velocity, by a fixed charge and by a fixed mass. But this
hypothesis is improbable; why, in fact, would all the corpuscles of the
same mass take always the same velocity? It is more natural to suppose
that the charge as well as the _real_ mass are the same for all the
projectiles, and that these differ only by their velocity. If the ratio
[epsilon] is a function of the velocity, this is not because the real
mass varies with this velocity; but, since the fictitious
electromagnetic mass depends upon this velocity, the total apparent
mass, alone observable, must depend upon it, though the real mass does
not depend upon it and may be constant.

The calculations of Abraham let us know the law according to which the
_fictitious_ mass varies as a function of the velocity; Kaufmann's
experiment lets us know the law of variation of the _total_ mass.

The comparison of these two laws will enable us therefore to determine
the ratio of the real mass to the total mass.

Such is the method Kaufmann used to determine this ratio. The result is
highly surprising: _the real mass is naught_.

This has led to conceptions wholly unexpected. What had only been proved
for cathode corpuscles was extended to all bodies. What we call mass
would be only semblance; all inertia would be of electromagnetic origin.
But then mass would no longer be constant, it would augment with the
velocity; sensibly constant for velocities up to 1,000 kilometers a
second, it then would increase and would become infinite for the
velocity of light. The transversal mass would no longer be equal to the
longitudinal: they would only be nearly equal if the velocity is not too
great. The principle _B_ of mechanics would no longer be true.


III

_The Canal Rays_

At the point where we now are, this conclusion might seem premature. Can
one apply to all matter what has been proved only for such light
corpuscles, which are a mere emanation of matter and perhaps not true
matter? But before entering upon this question, a word must be said of
another sort of rays. I refer to the _canal rays_, the _Kanalstrahlen_
of Goldstein.

The cathode, together with the cathode rays charged with negative
electricity, emits canal rays charged with positive electricity. In
general, these canal rays not being repelled by the cathode, are
confined to the immediate neighborhood of this cathode, where they
constitute the `chamois cushion,' not very easy to perceive; but, if the
cathode is pierced with holes and if it almost completely blocks up the
tube, the canal rays spread _back_ of the cathode, in the direction
opposite to that of the cathode rays, and it becomes possible to study
them. It is thus that it has been possible to show their positive charge
and to show that the magnetic and electric deviations still exist, as
for the cathode rays, but are much feebler.

Radium likewise emits rays analogous to the canal rays, and relatively
very absorbable, called [alpha] rays.

We can, as for the cathode rays, measure the two deviations and thence
deduce the velocity and the ratio [epsilon]. The results are less
constant than for the cathode rays, but the velocity is less, as well as
the ratio [epsilon]; the positive corpuscles are less charged than the
negative; or if, which is more natural, we suppose the charges equal and
of opposite sign, the positive corpuscles are much the larger. These
corpuscles, charged the ones positively, the others negatively, have
been called _electrons_.


IV

_The Theory of Lorentz_

But the electrons do not merely show us their existence in these rays
where they are endowed with enormous velocities. We shall see them in
very different rôles, and it is they that account for the principal
phenomena of optics and electricity. The brilliant synthesis about to be
noticed is due to Lorentz.

Matter is formed solely of electrons carrying enormous charges, and, if
it seems to us neutral, this is because the charges of opposite sign of
these electrons compensate each other. We may imagine, for example, a
sort of solar system formed of a great positive electron, around which
gravitate numerous little planets, the negative electrons, attracted by
the electricity of opposite name which charges the central electron. The
negative charges of these planets would balance the positive charge of
this sun, so that the algebraic sum of all these charges would be
naught.

All these electrons swim in the ether. The ether is everywhere
identically the same, and perturbations in it are propagated according
to the same laws as light or the Hertzian oscillations _in vacuo_. There
is nothing but electrons and ether. When a luminous wave enters a part
of the ether where electrons are numerous, these electrons are put in
motion under the influence of the perturbation of the ether, and they
then react upon the ether. So would be explained refraction, dispersion,
double refraction and absorption. Just so, if for any cause an electron
be put in motion, it would trouble the ether around it and would give
rise to luminous waves, and this would explain the emission of light by
incandescent bodies.

In certain bodies, the metals for example, we should have fixed
electrons, between which would circulate moving electrons enjoying
perfect liberty, save that of going out from the metallic body and
breaking the surface which separates it from the exterior void or from
the air, or from any other non-metallic body.

These movable electrons behave then, within the metallic body, as do,
according to the kinetic theory of gases, the molecules of a gas within
the vase where this gas is confined. But, under the influence of a
difference of potential, the negative movable electrons would tend to go
all to one side, and the positive movable electrons to the other. This
is what would produce electric currents, and _this is why these bodies
would be conductors_. On the other hand, the velocities of our electrons
would be the greater the higher the temperature, if we accept the
assimilation with the kinetic theory of gases. When one of these movable
electrons encounters the surface of the metallic body, whose boundary it
can not pass, it is reflected like a billiard ball which has hit the
cushion, and its velocity undergoes a sudden change of direction. But
when an electron changes direction, as we shall see further on, it
becomes the source of a luminous wave, and this is why hot metals are
incandescent.

In other bodies, the dielectrics and the transparent bodies, the movable
electrons enjoy much less freedom. They remain as if attached to fixed
electrons which attract them. The farther they go away from them the
greater becomes this attraction and tends to pull them back. They
therefore can make only small excursions; they can no longer circulate,
but only oscillate about their mean position. This is why these bodies
would not be conductors; moreover they would most often be transparent,
and they would be refractive, since the luminous vibrations would be
communicated to the movable electrons, susceptible of oscillation, and
thence a perturbation would result.

I can not here give the details of the calculations; I confine myself to
saying that this theory accounts for all the known facts, and has
predicted new ones, such as the Zeeman effect.


V

_Mechanical Consequences_

We now may face two hypotheses:

1º The positive electrons have a real mass, much greater than their
fictitious electromagnetic mass; the negative electrons alone lack real
mass. We might even suppose that apart from electrons of the two signs,
there are neutral atoms which have only their real mass. In this case,
mechanics is not affected; there is no need of touching its laws; the
real mass is constant; simply, motions are deranged by the effects of
self-induction, as has always been known; moreover, these perturbations
are almost negligible, except for the negative electrons which, not
having real mass, are not true matter.

2º But there is another point of view; we may suppose there are no
neutral atoms, and the positive electrons lack real mass just as the
negative electrons. But then, real mass vanishing, either the word
_mass_ will no longer have any meaning, or else it must designate the
fictitious electromagnetic mass; in this case, mass will no longer be
constant, the transversal _mass_ will no longer be equal to the
longitudinal, the principles of mechanics will be overthrown.

First a word of explanation. We have said that, for the same charge, the
_total_ mass of a positive electron is much greater than that of a
negative. And then it is natural to think that this difference is
explained by the positive electron having, besides its fictitious mass,
a considerable real mass; which takes us back to the first hypothesis.
But we may just as well suppose that the real mass is null for these as
for the others, but that the fictitious mass of the positive electron is
much the greater since this electron is much the smaller. I say
advisedly: much the smaller. And, in fact, in this hypothesis inertia is
exclusively electromagnetic in origin; it reduces itself to the inertia
of the ether; the electrons are no longer anything by themselves; they
are solely holes in the ether and around which the ether moves; the
smaller these holes are, the more will there be of ether, the greater,
consequently, will be the inertia of the ether.

How shall we decide between these two hypotheses? By operating upon the
canal rays as Kaufmann did upon the [beta] rays? This is impossible; the
velocity of these rays is much too slight. Should each therefore decide
according to his temperament, the conservatives going to one side and
the lovers of the new to the other? Perhaps, but, to fully understand
the arguments of the innovators, other considerations must come in.




