CHAPTER III

MATHEMATICAL CREATION


The genesis of mathematical creation is a problem which should intensely
interest the psychologist. It is the activity in which the human mind
seems to take least from the outside world, in which it acts or seems to
act only of itself and on itself, so that in studying the procedure of
geometric thought we may hope to reach what is most essential in man's
mind.

This has long been appreciated, and some time back the journal called
_L'enseignement mathématique_, edited by Laisant and Fehr, began an
investigation of the mental habits and methods of work of different
mathematicians. I had finished the main outlines of this article when
the results of that inquiry were published, so I have hardly been able
to utilize them and shall confine myself to saying that the majority of
witnesses confirm my conclusions; I do not say all, for when the appeal
is to universal suffrage unanimity is not to be hoped.

A first fact should surprise us, or rather would surprise us if we were
not so used to it. How does it happen there are people who do not
understand mathematics? If mathematics invokes only the rules of logic,
such as are accepted by all normal minds; if its evidence is based on
principles common to all men, and that none could deny without being
mad, how does it come about that so many persons are here refractory?

That not every one can invent is nowise mysterious. That not every one
can retain a demonstration once learned may also pass. But that not
every one can understand mathematical reasoning when explained appears
very surprising when we think of it. And yet those who can follow this
reasoning only with difficulty are in the majority: that is undeniable,
and will surely not be gainsaid by the experience of secondary-school
teachers.

And further: how is error possible in mathematics? A sane mind should
not be guilty of a logical fallacy, and yet there are very fine minds
who do not trip in brief reasoning such as occurs in the ordinary doings
of life, and who are incapable of following or repeating without error
the mathematical demonstrations which are longer, but which after all
are only an accumulation of brief reasonings wholly analogous to those
they make so easily. Need we add that mathematicians themselves are not
infallible?

The answer seems to me evident. Imagine a long series of syllogisms, and
that the conclusions of the first serve as premises of the following: we
shall be able to catch each of these syllogisms, and it is not in
passing from premises to conclusion that we are in danger of deceiving
ourselves. But between the moment in which we first meet a proposition
as conclusion of one syllogism, and that in which we reencounter it as
premise of another syllogism occasionally some time will elapse, several
links of the chain will have unrolled; so it may happen that we have
forgotten it, or worse, that we have forgotten its meaning. So it may
happen that we replace it by a slightly different proposition, or that,
while retaining the same enunciation, we attribute to it a slightly
different meaning, and thus it is that we are exposed to error.

Often the mathematician uses a rule. Naturally he begins by
demonstrating this rule; and at the time when this proof is fresh in his
memory he understands perfectly its meaning and its bearing, and he is
in no danger of changing it. But subsequently he trusts his memory and
afterward only applies it in a mechanical way; and then if his memory
fails him, he may apply it all wrong. Thus it is, to take a simple
example, that we sometimes make slips in calculation because we have
forgotten our multiplication table.

According to this, the special aptitude for mathematics would be due
only to a very sure memory or to a prodigious force of attention. It
would be a power like that of the whist-player who remembers the cards
played; or, to go up a step, like that of the chess-player who can
visualize a great number of combinations and hold them in his memory.
Every good mathematician ought to be a good chess-player, and inversely;
likewise he should be a good computer. Of course that sometimes happens;
thus Gauss was at the same time a geometer of genius and a very
precocious and accurate computer.

But there are exceptions; or rather I err; I can not call them
exceptions without the exceptions being more than the rule. Gauss it is,
on the contrary, who was an exception. As for myself, I must confess, I
am absolutely incapable even of adding without mistakes. In the same way
I should be but a poor chess-player; I would perceive that by a certain
play I should expose myself to a certain danger; I would pass in review
several other plays, rejecting them for other reasons, and then finally
I should make the move first examined, having meantime forgotten the
danger I had foreseen.

In a word, my memory is not bad, but it would be insufficient to make me
a good chess-player. Why then does it not fail me in a difficult piece
of mathematical reasoning where most chess-players would lose
themselves? Evidently because it is guided by the general march of the
reasoning. A mathematical demonstration is not a simple juxtaposition of
syllogisms, it is syllogisms _placed in a certain order_, and the order
in which these elements are placed is much more important than the
elements themselves. If I have the feeling, the intuition, so to speak,
of this order, so as to perceive at a glance the reasoning as a whole, I
need no longer fear lest I forget one of the elements, for each of them
will take its allotted place in the array, and that without any effort
of memory on my part.

It seems to me then, in repeating a reasoning learned, that I could have
invented it. This is often only an illusion; but even then, even if I am
not so gifted as to create it by myself, I myself re-invent it in so far
as I repeat it.

We know that this feeling, this intuition of mathematical order, that
makes us divine hidden harmonies and relations, can not be possessed by
every one. Some will not have either this delicate feeling so difficult
to define, or a strength of memory and attention beyond the ordinary,
and then they will be absolutely incapable of understanding higher
mathematics. Such are the majority. Others will have this feeling only
in a slight degree, but they will be gifted with an uncommon memory and
a great power of attention. They will learn by heart the details one
after another; they can understand mathematics and sometimes make
applications, but they cannot create. Others, finally, will possess in a
less or greater degree the special intuition referred to, and then not
only can they understand mathematics even if their memory is nothing
extraordinary, but they may become creators and try to invent with more
or less success according as this intuition is more or less developed in
them.

In fact, what is mathematical creation? It does not consist in making
new combinations with mathematical entities already known. Any one could
do that, but the combinations so made would be infinite in number and
most of them absolutely without interest. To create consists precisely
in not making useless combinations and in making those which are useful
and which are only a small minority. Invention is discernment, choice.

How to make this choice I have before explained; the mathematical facts
worthy of being studied are those which, by their analogy with other
facts, are capable of leading us to the knowledge of a mathematical law
just as experimental facts lead us to the knowledge of a physical law.
They are those which reveal to us unsuspected kinship between other
facts, long known, but wrongly believed to be strangers to one another.

Among chosen combinations the most fertile will often be those formed of
elements drawn from domains which are far apart. Not that I mean as
sufficing for invention the bringing together of objects as disparate as
possible; most combinations so formed would be entirely sterile. But
certain among them, very rare, are the most fruitful of all.

To invent, I have said, is to choose; but the word is perhaps not wholly
exact. It makes one think of a purchaser before whom are displayed a
large number of samples, and who examines them, one after the other, to
make a choice. Here the samples would be so numerous that a whole
lifetime would not suffice to examine them. This is not the actual state
of things. The sterile combinations do not even present themselves to
the mind of the inventor. Never in the field of his consciousness do
combinations appear that are not really useful, except some that he
rejects but which have to some extent the characteristics of useful
combinations. All goes on as if the inventor were an examiner for the
second degree who would only have to question the candidates who had
passed a previous examination.

But what I have hitherto said is what may be observed or inferred in
reading the writings of the geometers, reading reflectively.

It is time to penetrate deeper and to see what goes on in the very soul
of the mathematician. For this, I believe, I can do best by recalling
memories of my own. But I shall limit myself to telling how I wrote my
first memoir on Fuchsian functions. I beg the reader's pardon; I am
about to use some technical expressions, but they need not frighten him,
for he is not obliged to understand them. I shall say, for example, that
I have found the demonstration of such a theorem under such
circumstances. This theorem will have a barbarous name, unfamiliar to
many, but that is unimportant; what is of interest for the psychologist
is not the theorem but the circumstances.

For fifteen days I strove to prove that there could not be any functions
like those I have since called Fuchsian functions. I was then very
ignorant; every day I seated myself at my work table, stayed an hour or
two, tried a great number of combinations and reached no results. One
evening, contrary to my custom, I drank black coffee and could not
sleep. Ideas rose in crowds; I felt them collide until pairs
interlocked, so to speak, making a stable combination. By the next
morning I had established the existence of a class of Fuchsian
functions, those which come from the hypergeometric series; I had only
to write out the results, which took but a few hours.

Then I wanted to represent these functions by the quotient of two
series; this idea was perfectly conscious and deliberate, the analogy
with elliptic functions guided me. I asked myself what properties these
series must have if they existed, and I succeeded without difficulty in
forming the series I have called theta-Fuchsian.

Just at this time I left Caen, where I was then living, to go on a
geologic excursion under the auspices of the school of mines. The
changes of travel made me forget my mathematical work. Having reached
Coutances, we entered an omnibus to go some place or other. At the
moment when I put my foot on the step the idea came to me, without
anything in my former thoughts seeming to have paved the way for it,
that the transformations I had used to define the Fuchsian functions
were identical with those of non-Euclidean geometry. I did not verify
the idea; I should not have had time, as, upon taking my seat in the
omnibus, I went on with a conversation already commenced, but I felt a
perfect certainty. On my return to Caen, for conscience' sake I verified
the result at my leisure.

Then I turned my attention to the study of some arithmetical questions
apparently without much success and without a suspicion of any
connection with my preceding researches. Disgusted with my failure, I
went to spend a few days at the seaside, and thought of something else.
One morning, walking on the bluff, the idea came to me, with just the
same characteristics of brevity, suddenness and immediate certainty,
that the arithmetic transformations of indeterminate ternary quadratic
forms were identical with those of non-Euclidean geometry.

Returned to Caen, I meditated on this result and deduced the
consequences. The example of quadratic forms showed me that there were
Fuchsian groups other than those corresponding to the hypergeometric
series; I saw that I could apply to them the theory of theta-Fuchsian
series and that consequently there existed Fuchsian functions other than
those from the hypergeometric series, the ones I then knew. Naturally I
set myself to form all these functions. I made a systematic attack upon
them and carried all the outworks, one after another. There was one
however that still held out, whose fall would involve that of the whole
place. But all my efforts only served at first the better to show me the
difficulty, which indeed was something. All this work was perfectly
conscious.

Thereupon I left for Mont-Valérien, where I was to go through my
military service; so I was very differently occupied. One day, going
along the street, the solution of the difficulty which had stopped me
suddenly appeared to me. I did not try to go deep into it immediately,
and only after my service did I again take up the question. I had all
the elements and had only to arrange them and put them together. So I
wrote out my final memoir at a single stroke and without difficulty.

I shall limit myself to this single example; it is useless to multiply
them. In regard to my other researches I would have to say analogous
things, and the observations of other mathematicians given in
_L'enseignement mathématique_ would only confirm them.

Most striking at first is this appearance of sudden illumination, a
manifest sign of long, unconscious prior work. The rôle of this
unconscious work in mathematical invention appears to me incontestable,
and traces of it would be found in other cases where it is less evident.
Often when one works at a hard question, nothing good is accomplished at
the first attack. Then one takes a rest, longer or shorter, and sits
down anew to the work. During the first half-hour, as before, nothing is
found, and then all of a sudden the decisive idea presents itself to the
mind. It might be said that the conscious work has been more fruitful
because it has been interrupted and the rest has given back to the mind
its force and freshness. But it is more probable that this rest has been
filled out with unconscious work and that the result of this work has
afterward revealed itself to the geometer just as in the cases I have
cited; only the revelation, instead of coming during a walk or a
journey, has happened during a period of conscious work, but
independently of this work which plays at most a rôle of excitant, as if
it were the goad stimulating the results already reached during rest,
but remaining unconscious, to assume the conscious form.

There is another remark to be made about the conditions of this
unconscious work: it is possible, and of a certainty it is only
fruitful, if it is on the one hand preceded and on the other hand
followed by a period of conscious work. These sudden inspirations (and
the examples already cited sufficiently prove this) never happen except
after some days of voluntary effort which has appeared absolutely
fruitless and whence nothing good seems to have come, where the way
taken seems totally astray. These efforts then have not been as sterile
as one thinks; they have set agoing the unconscious machine and without
them it would not have moved and would have produced nothing.

The need for the second period of conscious work, after the inspiration,
is still easier to understand. It is necessary to put in shape the
results of this inspiration, to deduce from them the immediate
consequences, to arrange them, to word the demonstrations, but above all
is verification necessary. I have spoken of the feeling of absolute
certitude accompanying the inspiration; in the cases cited this feeling
was no deceiver, nor is it usually. But do not think this a rule without
exception; often this feeling deceives us without being any the less
vivid, and we only find it out when we seek to put on foot the
demonstration. I have especially noticed this fact in regard to ideas
coming to me in the morning or evening in bed while in a semi-hypnagogic
state.

Such are the realities; now for the thoughts they force upon us. The
unconscious, or, as we say, the subliminal self plays an important rôle
in mathematical creation; this follows from what we have said. But
usually the subliminal self is considered as purely automatic. Now we
have seen that mathematical work is not simply mechanical, that it could
not be done by a machine, however perfect. It is not merely a question
of applying rules, of making the most combinations possible according to
certain fixed laws. The combinations so obtained would be exceedingly
numerous, useless and cumbersome. The true work of the inventor consists
in choosing among these combinations so as to eliminate the useless ones
or rather to avoid the trouble of making them, and the rules which must
guide this choice are extremely fine and delicate. It is almost
impossible to state them precisely; they are felt rather than
formulated. Under these conditions, how imagine a sieve capable of
applying them mechanically?

A first hypothesis now presents itself: the subliminal self is in no way
inferior to the conscious self; it is not purely automatic; it is
capable of discernment; it has tact, delicacy; it knows how to choose,
to divine. What do I say? It knows better how to divine than the
conscious self, since it succeeds where that has failed. In a word, is
not the subliminal self superior to the conscious self? You recognize
the full importance of this question. Boutroux in a recent lecture has
shown how it came up on a very different occasion, and what consequences
would follow an affirmative answer. (See also, by the same author,
_Science et Religion_, pp. 313 ff.)

Is this affirmative answer forced upon us by the facts I have just
given? I confess that, for my part, I should hate to accept it.
Reexamine the facts then and see if they are not compatible with another
explanation.

It is certain that the combinations which present themselves to the mind
in a sort of sudden illumination, after an unconscious working somewhat
prolonged, are generally useful and fertile combinations, which seem the
result of a first impression. Does it follow that the subliminal self,
having divined by a delicate intuition that these combinations would be
useful, has formed only these, or has it rather formed many others which
were lacking in interest and have remained unconscious?

In this second way of looking at it, all the combinations would be
formed in consequence of the automatism of the subliminal self, but only
the interesting ones would break into the domain of consciousness. And
this is still very mysterious. What is the cause that, among the
thousand products of our unconscious activity, some are called to pass
the threshold, while others remain below? Is it a simple chance which
confers this privilege? Evidently not; among all the stimuli of our
senses, for example, only the most intense fix our attention, unless it
has been drawn to them by other causes. More generally the privileged
unconscious phenomena, those susceptible of becoming conscious, are
those which, directly or indirectly, affect most profoundly our
emotional sensibility.

It may be surprising to see emotional sensibility invoked _à propos_ of
mathematical demonstrations which, it would seem, can interest only the
intellect. This would be to forget the feeling of mathematical beauty,
of the harmony of numbers and forms, of geometric elegance. This is a
true esthetic feeling that all real mathematicians know, and surely it
belongs to emotional sensibility.

Now, what are the mathematic entities to which we attribute this
character of beauty and elegance, and which are capable of developing in
us a sort of esthetic emotion? They are those whose elements are
harmoniously disposed so that the mind without effort can embrace their
totality while realizing the details. This harmony is at once a
satisfaction of our esthetic needs and an aid to the mind, sustaining
and guiding; And at the same time, in putting under our eyes a
well-ordered whole, it makes us foresee a mathematical law. Now, as we
have said above, the only mathematical facts worthy of fixing our
attention and capable of being useful are those which can teach us a
mathematical law. So that we reach the following conclusion: The useful
combinations are precisely the most beautiful, I mean those best able to
charm this special sensibility that all mathematicians know, but of
which the profane are so ignorant as often to be tempted to smile at it.

What happens then? Among the great numbers of combinations blindly
formed by the subliminal self, almost all are without interest and
without utility; but just for that reason they are also without effect
upon the esthetic sensibility. Consciousness will never know them; only
certain ones are harmonious, and, consequently, at once useful and
beautiful. They will be capable of touching this special sensibility of
the geometer of which I have just spoken, and which, once aroused, will
call our attention to them, and thus give them occasion to become
conscious.

This is only a hypothesis, and yet here is an observation which may
confirm it: when a sudden illumination seizes upon the mind of the
mathematician, it usually happens that it does not deceive him, but it
also sometimes happens, as I have said, that it does not stand the test
of verification; well, we almost always notice that this false idea, had
it been true, would have gratified our natural feeling for mathematical
elegance.

Thus it is this special esthetic sensibility which plays the rôle of the
delicate sieve of which I spoke, and that sufficiently explains why the
one lacking it will never be a real creator.

Yet all the difficulties have not disappeared. The conscious self is
narrowly limited, and as for the subliminal self we know not its
limitations, and this is why we are not too reluctant in supposing that
it has been able in a short time to make more different combinations
than the whole life of a conscious being could encompass. Yet these
limitations exist. Is it likely that it is able to form all the possible
combinations, whose number would frighten the imagination? Nevertheless
that would seem necessary, because if it produces only a small part of
these combinations, and if it makes them at random, there would be
small chance that the _good_, the one we should choose, would be found
among them.

Perhaps we ought to seek the explanation in that preliminary period of
conscious work which always precedes all fruitful unconscious labor.
Permit me a rough comparison. Figure the future elements of our
combinations as something like the hooked atoms of Epicurus. During the
complete repose of the mind, these atoms are motionless, they are, so to
speak, hooked to the wall; so this complete rest may be indefinitely
prolonged without the atoms meeting, and consequently without any
combination between them.

On the other hand, during a period of apparent rest and unconscious
work, certain of them are detached from the wall and put in motion. They
flash in every direction through the space (I was about to say the room)
where they are enclosed, as would, for example, a swarm of gnats or, if
you prefer a more learned comparison, like the molecules of gas in the
kinematic theory of gases. Then their mutual impacts may produce new
combinations.

What is the rôle of the preliminary conscious work? It is evidently to
mobilize certain of these atoms, to unhook them from the wall and put
them in swing. We think we have done no good, because we have moved
these elements a thousand different ways in seeking to assemble them,
and have found no satisfactory aggregate. But, after this shaking up
imposed upon them by our will, these atoms do not return to their
primitive rest. They freely continue their dance.

Now, our will did not choose them at random; it pursued a perfectly
determined aim. The mobilized atoms are therefore not any atoms
whatsoever; they are those from which we might reasonably expect the
desired solution. Then the mobilized atoms undergo impacts which make
them enter into combinations among themselves or with other atoms at
rest which they struck against in their course. Again I beg pardon, my
comparison is very rough, but I scarcely know how otherwise to make my
thought understood.

However it may be, the only combinations that have a chance of forming
are those where at least one of the elements is one of those atoms
freely chosen by our will. Now, it is evidently among these that is
found what I called the _good combination_. Perhaps this is a way of
lessening the paradoxical in the original hypothesis.

Another observation. It never happens that the unconscious work gives us
the result of a somewhat long calculation _all made_, where we have only
to apply fixed rules. We might think the wholly automatic subliminal
self particularly apt for this sort of work, which is in a way
exclusively mechanical. It seems that thinking in the evening upon the
factors of a multiplication we might hope to find the product ready made
upon our awakening, or again that an algebraic calculation, for example
a verification, would be made unconsciously. Nothing of the sort, as
observation proves. All one may hope from these inspirations, fruits of
unconscious work, is a point of departure for such calculations. As for
the calculations themselves, they must be made in the second period of
conscious work, that which follows the inspiration, that in which one
verifies the results of this inspiration and deduces their consequences.
The rules of these calculations are strict and complicated. They require
discipline, attention, will, and therefore consciousness. In the
subliminal self, on the contrary, reigns what I should call liberty, if
we might give this name to the simple absence of discipline and to the
disorder born of chance. Only, this disorder itself permits unexpected
combinations.

I shall make a last remark: when above I made certain personal
observations, I spoke of a night of excitement when I worked in spite of
myself. Such cases are frequent, and it is not necessary that the
abnormal cerebral activity be caused by a physical excitant as in that I
mentioned. It seems, in such cases, that one is present at his own
unconscious work, made partially perceptible to the over-excited
consciousness, yet without having changed its nature. Then we vaguely
comprehend what distinguishes the two mechanisms or, if you wish, the
working methods of the two egos. And the psychologic observations I have
been able thus to make seem to me to confirm in their general outlines
the views I have given.

Surely they have need of it, for they are and remain in spite of all
very hypothetical: the interest of the questions is so great that I do
not repent of having submitted them to the reader.




