CHAPTER V

THE LATEST EFFORTS OF THE LOGISTICIANS


I

The logicians have attempted to answer the preceding considerations. For
that, a transformation of logistic was necessary, and Russell in
particular has modified on certain points his original views. Without
entering into the details of the debate, I should like to return to the
two questions to my mind most important: Have the rules of logistic
demonstrated their fruitfulness and infallibility? Is it true they
afford means of proving the principle of complete induction without any
appeal to intuition?


II

_The Infallibility of Logistic_

On the question of fertility, it seems M. Couturat has naïve illusions.
Logistic, according to him, lends invention 'stilts and wings,' and on
the next page: "_Ten years ago_, Peano published the first edition of
his _Formulaire_." How is that, ten years of wings and not to have
flown!

I have the highest esteem for Peano, who has done very pretty things
(for instance his 'space-filling curve,' a phrase now discarded); but
after all he has not gone further nor higher nor quicker than the
majority of wingless mathematicians, and would have done just as well
with his legs.

On the contrary I see in logistic only shackles for the inventor. It is
no aid to conciseness--far from it, and if twenty-seven equations were
necessary to establish that 1 is a number, how many would be needed to
prove a real theorem? If we distinguish, with Whitehead, the individual
_x_, the class of which the only member is _x_ and which shall be called
[iota]_x_, then the class of which the only member is the class of which
the only member is _x_ and which shall be called [mu]_x_, do you think
these distinctions, useful as they may be, go far to quicken our pace?

Logistic forces us to say all that is ordinarily left to be understood;
it makes us advance step by step; this is perhaps surer but not quicker.

It is not wings you logisticians give us, but leading-strings. And then
we have the right to require that these leading-strings prevent our
falling. This will be their only excuse. When a bond does not bear much
interest, it should at least be an investment for a father of a family.

Should your rules be followed blindly? Yes, else only intuition could
enable us to distinguish among them; but then they must be infallible;
for only in an infallible authority can one have a blind confidence.
This, therefore, is for you a necessity. Infallible you shall be, or not
at all.

You have no right to say to us: "It is true we make mistakes, but so do
you." For us to blunder is a misfortune, a very great misfortune; for
you it is death.

Nor may you ask: Does the infallibility of arithmetic prevent errors in
addition? The rules of calculation are infallible, and yet we see those
blunder _who do not apply these rules_; but in checking their
calculation it is at once seen where they went wrong. Here it is not at
all the case; the logicians _have applied_ their rules, and they have
fallen into contradiction; and so true is this, that they are preparing
to change these rules and to "sacrifice the notion of class." Why change
them if they were infallible?

"We are not obliged," you say, "to solve _hic et nunc_ all possible
problems." Oh, we do not ask so much of you. If, in face of a problem,
you would give _no_ solution, we should have nothing to say; but on the
contrary you give us _two_ of them and those contradictory, and
consequently at least one false; this it is which is failure.

Russell seeks to reconcile these contradictions, which can only be done,
according to him, "by restricting or even sacrificing the notion of
class." And M. Couturat, discovering the success of his attempt, adds:
"If the logicians succeed where others have failed, M. Poincaré will
remember this phrase, and give the honor of the solution to logistic."

But no! Logistic exists, it has its code which has already had four
editions; or rather this code is logistic itself. Is Mr. Russell
preparing to show that one at least of the two contradictory reasonings
has transgressed the code? Not at all; he is preparing to change these
laws and to abrogate a certain number of them. If he succeeds, I shall
give the honor of it to Russell's intuition and not to the Peanian
logistic which he will have destroyed.


III

_The Liberty of Contradiction_

I made two principal objections to the definition of whole number
adopted in logistic. What says M. Couturat to the first of these
objections?

What does the word _exist_ mean in mathematics? It means, I said, to be
free from contradiction. This M. Couturat contests. "Logical existence,"
says he, "is quite another thing from the absence of contradiction. It
consists in the fact that a class is not empty." To say: _a_'s exist,
is, by definition, to affirm that the class _a_ is not null.

And doubtless to affirm that the class _a_ is not null, is, by
definition, to affirm that _a_'s exist. But one of the two affirmations
is as denuded of meaning as the other, if they do not both signify,
either that one may see or touch _a_'s which is the meaning physicists
or naturalists give them, or that one may conceive an _a_ without being
drawn into contradictions, which is the meaning given them by logicians
and mathematicians.

For M. Couturat, "it is not non-contradiction that proves existence, but
it is existence that proves non-contradiction." To establish the
existence of a class, it is necessary therefore to establish, by an
_example_, that there is an individual belonging to this class: "But, it
will be said, how is the existence of this individual proved? Must not
this existence be established, in order that the existence of the class
of which it is a part may be deduced? Well, no; however paradoxical may
appear the assertion, we never demonstrate the existence of an
individual. Individuals, just because they are individuals, are always
considered as existent.... We never have to express that an individual
exists, absolutely speaking, but only that it exists in a class." M.
Couturat finds his own assertion paradoxical, and he will certainly not
be the only one. Yet it must have a meaning. It doubtless means that the
existence of an individual, alone in the world, and of which nothing is
affirmed, can not involve contradiction; in so far as it is all alone it
evidently will not embarrass any one. Well, so let it be; we shall admit
the existence of the individual, 'absolutely speaking,' but nothing
more. It remains to prove the existence of the individual 'in a class,'
and for that it will always be necessary to prove that the affirmation,
"Such an individual belongs to such a class," is neither contradictory
in itself, nor to the other postulates adopted.

"It is then," continues M. Couturat, "arbitrary and misleading to
maintain that a definition is valid only if we first prove it is not
contradictory." One could not claim in prouder and more energetic terms
the liberty of contradiction. "In any case, the _onus probandi_ rests
upon those who believe that these principles are contradictory."
Postulates are presumed to be compatible until the contrary is proved,
just as the accused person is presumed innocent. Needless to add that I
do not assent to this claim. But, you say, the demonstration you require
of us is impossible, and you can not ask us to jump over the moon.
Pardon me; that is impossible for you, but not for us, who admit the
principle of induction as a synthetic judgment _a priori_. And that
would be necessary for you, as for us.

To demonstrate that a system of postulates implies no contradiction, it
is necessary to apply the principle of complete induction; this mode of
reasoning not only has nothing 'bizarre' about it, but it is the only
correct one. It is not 'unlikely' that it has ever been employed; and it
is not hard to find 'examples and precedents' of it. I have cited two
such instances borrowed from Hilbert's article. He is not the only one
to have used it, and those who have not done so have been wrong. What I
have blamed Hilbert for is not his having recourse to it (a born
mathematician such as he could not fail to see a demonstration was
necessary and this the only one possible), but his having recourse
without recognizing the reasoning by recurrence.


IV

_The Second Objection_

I pointed out a second error of logistic in Hilbert's article. To-day
Hilbert is excommunicated and M. Couturat no longer regards him as of
the logistic cult; so he asks if I have found the same fault among the
orthodox. No, I have not seen it in the pages I have read; I know not
whether I should find it in the three hundred pages they have written
which I have no desire to read.

Only, they must commit it the day they wish to make any application of
mathematics. This science has not as sole object the eternal
contemplation of its own navel; it has to do with nature and some day it
will touch it. Then it will be necessary to shake off purely verbal
definitions and to stop paying oneself with words.

To go back to the example of Hilbert: always the point at issue is
reasoning by recurrence and the question of knowing whether a system of
postulates is not contradictory. M. Couturat will doubtless say that
then this does not touch him, but it perhaps will interest those who do
not claim, as he does, the liberty of contradiction.

We wish to establish, as above, that we shall never encounter
contradiction after any number of deductions whatever, provided this
number be finite. For that, it is necessary to apply the principle of
induction. Should we here understand by finite number every number to
which by definition the principle of induction applies? Evidently not,
else we should be led to most embarrassing consequences. To have the
right to lay down a system of postulates, we must be sure they are not
contradictory. This is a truth admitted by _most_ scientists; I should
have written _by all_ before reading M. Couturat's last article. But
what does this signify? Does it mean that we must be sure of not meeting
contradiction after a _finite_ number of propositions, the _finite_
number being by definition that which has all properties of recurrent
nature, so that if one of these properties fails--if, for instance, we
come upon a contradiction--we shall agree to say that the number in
question is not finite? In other words, do we mean that we must be sure
not to meet contradictions, on condition of agreeing to stop just when
we are about to encounter one? To state such a proposition is enough to
condemn it.

So, Hilbert's reasoning not only assumes the principle of induction, but
it supposes that this principle is given us not as a simple definition,
but as a synthetic judgment _a priori_.

To sum up:

A demonstration is necessary.

The only demonstration possible is the proof by recurrence.

This is legitimate only if we admit the principle of induction and if we
regard it not as a definition but as a synthetic judgment.


V

_The Cantor Antinomies_

Now to examine Russell's new memoir. This memoir was written with the
view to conquer the difficulties raised by those Cantor antinomies to
which frequent allusion has already been made. Cantor thought he could
construct a science of the infinite; others went on in the way he
opened, but they soon ran foul of strange contradictions. These
antinomies are already numerous, but the most celebrated are:

1. The Burali-Forti antinomy;

2. The Zermelo-König antinomy;

3. The Richard antinomy.

Cantor proved that the ordinal numbers (the question is of transfinite
ordinal numbers, a new notion introduced by him) can be ranged in a
linear series; that is to say that of two unequal ordinals one is always
less than the other. Burali-Forti proves the contrary; and in fact he
says in substance that if one could range _all_ the ordinals in a linear
series, this series would define an ordinal greater than _all_ the
others; we could afterwards adjoin 1 and would obtain again an ordinal
which would be _still greater_, and this is contradictory.

We shall return later to the Zermelo-König antinomy which is of a
slightly different nature. The Richard antinomy[15] is as follows:
Consider all the decimal numbers definable by a finite number of words;
these decimal numbers form an aggregate _E_, and it is easy to see that
this aggregate is countable, that is to say we can _number_ the
different decimal numbers of this assemblage from 1 to infinity. Suppose
the numbering effected, and define a number _N_ as follows: If the _n_th
decimal of the _n_th number of the assemblage _E_ is

  0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9

the _n_th decimal of _N_ shall be:

  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1, 1

  [15] _Revue générale des sciences_, June 30, 1905.

As we see, _N_ is not equal to the _n_th number of _E_, and as _n_ is
arbitrary, _N_ does not appertain to _E_ and yet _N_ should belong to
this assemblage since we have defined it with a finite number of words.

We shall later see that M. Richard has himself given with much sagacity
the explanation of his paradox and that this extends, _mutatis
mutandis_, to the other like paradoxes. Again, Russell cites another
quite amusing paradox: _What is the least whole number which can not be
defined by a phrase composed of less than a hundred English words_?

This number exists; and in fact the numbers capable of being defined by
a like phrase are evidently finite in number since the words of the
English language are not infinite in number. Therefore among them will
be one less than all the others. And, on the other hand, this number
does not exist, because its definition implies contradiction. This
number, in fact, is defined by the phrase in italics which is composed
of less than a hundred English words; and by definition this number
should not be capable of definition by a like phrase.


VI

_Zigzag Theory and No-class Theory_

What is Mr. Russell's attitude in presence of these contradictions?
After having analyzed those of which we have just spoken, and cited
still others, after having given them a form recalling Epimenides, he
does not hesitate to conclude: "A propositional function of one
variable does not always determine a class." A propositional function
(that is to say a definition) does not always determine a class. A
'propositional function' or 'norm' may be 'non-predicative.' And this
does not mean that these non-predicative propositions determine an empty
class, a null class; this does not mean that there is no value of x
satisfying the definition and capable of being one of the elements of
the class. The elements exist, but they have no right to unite in a
syndicate to form a class.

But this is only the beginning and it is needful to know how to
recognize whether a definition is or is not predicative. To solve this
problem Russell hesitates between three theories which he calls

A. The zigzag theory;

B. The theory of limitation of size;

C. The no-class theory.

According to the zigzag theory "definitions (propositional functions)
determine a class when they are very simple and cease to do so only when
they are complicated and obscure." Who, now, is to decide whether a
definition may be regarded as simple enough to be acceptable? To this
question there is no answer, if it be not the loyal avowal of a complete
inability: "The rules which enable us to recognize whether these
definitions are predicative would be extremely complicated and can not
commend themselves by any plausible reason. This is a fault which might
be remedied by greater ingenuity or by using distinctions not yet
pointed out. But hitherto in seeking these rules, I have not been able
to find any other directing principle than the absence of
contradiction."

This theory therefore remains very obscure; in this night a single
light--the word zigzag. What Russell calls the 'zigzaginess' is
doubtless the particular characteristic which distinguishes the argument
of Epimenides.

According to the theory of limitation of size, a class would cease to
have the right to exist if it were too extended. Perhaps it might be
infinite, but it should not be too much so. But we always meet again the
same difficulty; at what precise moment does it begin to be too much
so? Of course this difficulty is not solved and Russell passes on to the
third theory.

In the no-classes theory it is forbidden to speak the word 'class' and
this word must be replaced by various periphrases. What a change for
logistic which talks only of classes and classes of classes! It becomes
necessary to remake the whole of logistic. Imagine how a page of
logistic would look upon suppressing all the propositions where it is a
question of class. There would only be some scattered survivors in the
midst of a blank page. _Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto._

Be that as it may, we see how Russell hesitates and the modifications to
which he submits the fundamental principles he has hitherto adopted.
Criteria are needed to decide whether a definition is too complex or too
extended, and these criteria can only be justified by an appeal to
intuition.

It is toward the no-classes theory that Russell finally inclines. Be
that as it may, logistic is to be remade and it is not clear how much of
it can be saved. Needless to add that Cantorism and logistic are alone
under consideration; real mathematics, that which is good for something,
may continue to develop in accordance with its own principles without
bothering about the storms which rage outside it, and go on step by step
with its usual conquests which are final and which it never has to
abandon.


VII

_The True Solution_

What choice ought we to make among these different theories? It seems to
me that the solution is contained in a letter of M. Richard of which I
have spoken above, to be found in the _Revue générale des sciences_ of
June 30, 1905. After having set forth the antinomy we have called
Richard's antinomy, he gives its explanation. Recall what has already
been said of this antinomy. _E_ is the aggregate of _all_ the numbers
definable by a finite number of words, _without introducing the notion
of the aggregate E itself_. Else the definition of _E_ would contain a
vicious circle; we must not define _E_ by the aggregate _E_ itself.

Now we have defined _N_ with a finite number of words, it is true, but
with the aid of the notion of the aggregate _E_. And this is why _N_ is
not part of _E_. In the example selected by M. Richard, the conclusion
presents itself with complete evidence and the evidence will appear
still stronger on consulting the text of the letter itself. But the same
explanation holds good for the other antinomies, as is easily verified.
Thus _the definitions which should be regarded as not predicative are
those which contain a vicious circle_. And the preceding examples
sufficiently show what I mean by that. Is it this which Russell calls
the 'zigzaginess'? I put the question without answering it.


VIII

_The Demonstrations of the Principle of Induction_

Let us now examine the pretended demonstrations of the principle of
induction and in particular those of Whitehead and of Burali-Forti.

We shall speak of Whitehead's first, and take advantage of certain new
terms happily introduced by Russell in his recent memoir. Call
_recurrent class_ every class containing zero, and containing _n_ + 1 if
it contains _n_. Call _inductive number_ every number which is a part of
_all_ the recurrent classes. Upon what condition will this latter
definition, which plays an essential rôle in Whitehead's proof, be
'predicative' and consequently acceptable?

In accordance with what has been said, it is necessary to understand by
_all_ the recurrent classes, all those in whose definition the notion of
inductive number does not enter. Else we fall again upon the vicious
circle which has engendered the antinomies.

Now _Whitehead has not taken this precaution_. Whitehead's reasoning is
therefore fallacious; it is the same which led to the antinomies. It was
illegitimate when it gave false results; it remains illegitimate when by
chance it leads to a true result.

A definition containing a vicious circle defines nothing. It is of no
use to say, we are sure, whatever meaning we may give to our definition,
zero at least belongs to the class of inductive numbers; it is not a
question of knowing whether this class is void, but whether it can be
rigorously deliminated. A 'non-predicative' class is not an empty
class, it is a class whose boundary is undetermined. Needless to add
that this particular objection leaves in force the general objections
applicable to all the demonstrations.


IX

Burali-Forti has given another demonstration.[16] But he is obliged to
assume two postulates: First, there always exists at least one infinite
class. The second is thus expressed:

  u[epsilon]K(K - [iota][Lambda]) · [inverted c] · u < v'u.

The first postulate is not more evident than the principle to be proved.
The second not only is not evident, but it is false, as Whitehead has
shown; as moreover any recruit would see at the first glance, if the
axiom had been stated in intelligible language, since it means that the
number of combinations which can be formed with several objects is less
than the number of these objects.

  [16] In his article 'Le classi finite,' _Atti di Torino_, Vol. XXXII.


X

_Zermelo's Assumption_

A famous demonstration by Zermelo rests upon the following assumption:
In any aggregate (or the same in each aggregate of an assemblage of
aggregates) we can always choose _at random_ an element (even if this
assemblage of aggregates should contain an infinity of aggregates). This
assumption had been applied a thousand times without being stated, but,
once stated, it aroused doubts. Some mathematicians, for instance
M. Borel, resolutely reject it; others admire it. Let us see what,
according to his last article, Russell thinks of it. He does not speak
out, but his reflections are very suggestive.

And first a picturesque example: Suppose we have as many pairs of shoes
as there are whole numbers, and so that we can number _the pairs_ from
one to infinity, how many shoes shall we have? Will the number of shoes
be equal to the number of pairs? Yes, if in each pair the right shoe is
distinguishable from the left; it will in fact suffice to give the
number 2_n_ - 1 to the right shoe of the _n_th pair, and the number 2_n_
to the left shoe of the _n_th pair. No, if the right shoe is just like
the left, because a similar operation would become impossible--unless we
admit Zermelo's assumption, since then we could choose _at random_ in
each pair the shoe to be regarded as the right.


XI

_Conclusions_

A demonstration truly founded upon the principles of analytic logic will
be composed of a series of propositions. Some, serving as premises, will
be identities or definitions; the others will be deduced from the
premises step by step. But though the bond between each proposition and
the following is immediately evident, it will not at first sight appear
how we get from the first to the last, which we may be tempted to regard
as a new truth. But if we replace successively the different expressions
therein by their definition and if this operation be carried as far as
possible, there will finally remain only identities, so that all will
reduce to an immense tautology. Logic therefore remains sterile unless
made fruitful by intuition.

This I wrote long ago; logistic professes the contrary and thinks it has
proved it by actually proving new truths. By what mechanism? Why in
applying to their reasonings the procedure just described--namely,
replacing the terms defined by their definitions--do we not see them
dissolve into identities like ordinary reasonings? It is because this
procedure is not applicable to them. And why? Because their definitions
are not predicative and present this sort of hidden vicious circle which
I have pointed out above; non-predicative definitions can not be
substituted for the terms defined. Under these conditions _logistic is
not sterile, it engenders antinomies_.

It is the belief in the existence of the actual infinite which has given
birth to those non-predicative definitions. Let me explain. In these
definitions the word 'all' figures, as is seen in the examples cited
above. The word 'all' has a very precise meaning when it is a question
of a finite number of objects; to have another one, when the objects are
infinite in number, would require there being an actual (given complete)
infinity. Otherwise _all_ these objects could not be conceived as
postulated anteriorly to their definition, and then if the definition of
a notion _N_ depends upon _all_ the objects _A_, it may be infected with
a vicious circle, if among the objects _A_ are some indefinable without
the intervention of the notion _N_ itself.

The rules of formal logic express simply the properties of all possible
classifications. But for them to be applicable it is necessary that
these classifications be immutable and that we have no need to modify
them in the course of the reasoning. If we have to classify only a
finite number of objects, it is easy to keep our classifications without
change. If the objects are _indefinite_ in number, that is to say if one
is constantly exposed to seeing new and unforeseen objects arise, it may
happen that the appearance of a new object may require the
classification to be modified, and thus it is we are exposed to
antinomies. _There is no actual (given complete) infinity._ The
Cantorians have forgotten this, and they have fallen into contradiction.
It is true that Cantorism has been of service, but this was when applied
to a real problem whose terms were precisely defined, and then we could
advance without fear.

Logistic also forgot it, like the Cantorians, and encountered the same
difficulties. But the question is to know whether they went this way by
accident or whether it was a necessity for them. For me, the question is
not doubtful; belief in an actual infinity is essential in the Russell
logic. It is just this which distinguishes it from the Hilbert logic.
Hilbert takes the view-point of extension, precisely in order to avoid
the Cantorian antinomies. Russell takes the view-point of comprehension.
Consequently for him the genus is anterior to the species, and the
_summum genus_ is anterior to all. That would not be inconvenient if the
_summum genus_ was finite; but if it is infinite, it is necessary to
postulate the infinite, that is to say to regard the infinite as actual
(given complete). And we have not only infinite classes; when we pass
from the genus to the species in restricting the concept by new
conditions, these conditions are still infinite in number. Because they
express generally that the envisaged object presents such or such a
relation with all the objects of an infinite class.

But that is ancient history. Russell has perceived the peril and takes
counsel. He is about to change everything, and, what is easily
understood, he is preparing not only to introduce new principles which
shall allow of operations formerly forbidden, but he is preparing to
forbid operations he formerly thought legitimate. Not content to adore
what he burned, he is about to burn what he adored, which is more
serious. He does not add a new wing to the building, he saps its
foundation.

The old logistic is dead, so much so that already the zigzag theory and
the no-classes theory are disputing over the succession. To judge of the
new, we shall await its coming.




