CHAPTER III

MATHEMATICS AND LOGIC


INTRODUCTION

Can mathematics be reduced to logic without having to appeal to
principles peculiar to mathematics? There is a whole school, abounding
in ardor and full of faith, striving to prove it. They have their own
special language, which is without words, using only signs. This
language is understood only by the initiates, so that commoners are
disposed to bow to the trenchant affirmations of the adepts. It is
perhaps not unprofitable to examine these affirmations somewhat closely,
to see if they justify the peremptory tone with which they are
presented.

But to make clear the nature of the question it is necessary to enter
upon certain historical details and in particular to recall the
character of the works of Cantor.

Since long ago the notion of infinity had been introduced into
mathematics; but this infinite was what philosophers call a _becoming_.
The mathematical infinite was only a quantity capable of increasing
beyond all limit: it was a variable quantity of which it could not be
said that it _had passed_ all limits, but only that it _could pass_
them.

Cantor has undertaken to introduce into mathematics an _actual
infinite_, that is to say a quantity which not only is capable of
passing all limits, but which is regarded as having already passed them.
He has set himself questions like these: Are there more points in space
than whole numbers? Are there more points in space than points in a
plane? etc.

And then the number of whole numbers, that of the points of space, etc.,
constitutes what he calls a _transfinite cardinal number_, that is to
say a cardinal number greater than all the ordinary cardinal numbers.
And he has occupied himself in comparing these transfinite cardinal
numbers. In arranging in a proper order the elements of an aggregate
containing an infinity of them, he has also imagined what he calls
transfinite ordinal numbers upon which I shall not dwell.

Many mathematicians followed his lead and set a series of questions of
the sort. They so familiarized themselves with transfinite numbers that
they have come to make the theory of finite numbers depend upon that of
Cantor's cardinal numbers. In their eyes, to teach arithmetic in a way
truly logical, one should begin by establishing the general properties
of transfinite cardinal numbers, then distinguish among them a very
small class, that of the ordinary whole numbers. Thanks to this détour,
one might succeed in proving all the propositions relative to this
little class (that is to say all our arithmetic and our algebra) without
using any principle foreign to logic. This method is evidently contrary
to all sane psychology; it is certainly not in this way that the human
mind proceeded in constructing mathematics; so its authors do not dream,
I think, of introducing it into secondary teaching. But is it at least
logic, or, better, is it correct? It may be doubted.

The geometers who have employed it are however very numerous. They have
accumulated formulas and they have thought to free themselves from what
was not pure logic by writing memoirs where the formulas no longer
alternate with explanatory discourse as in the books of ordinary
mathematics, but where this discourse has completely disappeared.

Unfortunately they have reached contradictory results, what are called
the _cantorian antinomies_, to which we shall have occasion to return.
These contradictions have not discouraged them and they have tried to
modify their rules so as to make those disappear which had already shown
themselves, without being sure, for all that, that new ones would not
manifest themselves.

It is time to administer justice on these exaggerations. I do not hope
to convince them; for they have lived too long in this atmosphere.
Besides, when one of their demonstrations has been refuted, we are sure
to see it resurrected with insignificant alterations, and some of them
have already risen several times from their ashes. Such long ago was the
Lernæan hydra with its famous heads which always grew again. Hercules
got through, since his hydra had only nine heads, or eleven; but here
there are too many, some in England, some in Germany, in Italy, in
France, and he would have to give up the struggle. So I appeal only to
men of good judgment unprejudiced.


I

In these latter years numerous works have been published on pure
mathematics and the philosophy of mathematics, trying to separate and
isolate the logical elements of mathematical reasoning. These works have
been analyzed and expounded very clearly by M. Couturat in a book
entitled: _The Principles of Mathematics_.

For M. Couturat, the new works, and in particular those of Russell and
Peano, have finally settled the controversy, so long pending between
Leibnitz and Kant. They have shown that there are no synthetic judgments
a priori (Kant's phrase to designate judgments which can neither be
demonstrated analytically, nor reduced to identities, nor established
experimentally), they have shown that mathematics is entirely reducible
to logic and that intuition here plays no rôle.

This is what M. Couturat has set forth in the work just cited; this he
says still more explicitly in his Kant jubilee discourse, so that I
heard my neighbor whisper: "I well see this is the centenary of Kant's
_death_."

Can we subscribe to this conclusive condemnation? I think not, and I
shall try to show why.


II

What strikes us first in the new mathematics is its purely formal
character: "We think," says Hilbert, "three sorts of _things_, which we
shall call points, straights and planes. We convene that a straight
shall be determined by two points, and that in place of saying this
straight is determined by these two points, we may say it passes through
these two points, or that these two points are situated on this
straight." What these _things_ are, not only we do not know, but we
should not seek to know. We have no need to, and one who never had seen
either point or straight or plane could geometrize as well as we. That
the phrase _to pass through_, or the phrase _to be situated upon_ may
arouse in us no image, the first is simply a synonym of to _be
determined_ and the second of _to determine_.

Thus, be it understood, to demonstrate a theorem, it is neither
necessary nor even advantageous to know what it means. The geometer
might be replaced by the _logic piano_ imagined by Stanley Jevons; or,
if you choose, a machine might be imagined where the assumptions were
put in at one end, while the theorems came out at the other, like the
legendary Chicago machine where the pigs go in alive and come out
transformed into hams and sausages. No more than these machines need the
mathematician know what he does.

I do not make this formal character of his geometry a reproach to
Hilbert. This is the way he should go, given the problem he set himself.
He wished to reduce to a minimum the number of the fundamental
assumptions of geometry and completely enumerate them; now, in
reasonings where our mind remains active, in those where intuition still
plays a part, in living reasonings, so to speak, it is difficult not to
introduce an assumption or a postulate which passes unperceived. It is
therefore only after having carried back all the geometric reasonings to
a form purely mechanical that he could be sure of having accomplished
his design and finished his work.

What Hilbert did for geometry, others have tried to do for arithmetic
and analysis. Even if they had entirely succeeded, would the Kantians be
finally condemned to silence? Perhaps not, for in reducing mathematical
thought to an empty form, it is certainly mutilated.

Even admitting it were established that all the theorems could be
deduced by procedures purely analytic, by simple logical combinations of
a finite number of assumptions, and that these assumptions are only
conventions; the philosopher would still have the right to investigate
the origins of these conventions, to see why they have been judged
preferable to the contrary conventions.

And then the logical correctness of the reasonings leading from the
assumptions to the theorems is not the only thing which should occupy
us. The rules of perfect logic, are they the whole of mathematics? As
well say the whole art of playing chess reduces to the rules of the
moves of the pieces. Among all the constructs which can be built up of
the materials furnished by logic, choice must be made; the true geometer
makes this choice judiciously because he is guided by a sure instinct,
or by some vague consciousness of I know not what more profound and more
hidden geometry, which alone gives value to the edifice constructed.

To seek the origin of this instinct, to study the laws of this deep
geometry, felt, not stated, would also be a fine employment for the
philosophers who do not want logic to be all. But it is not at this
point of view I wish to put myself, it is not thus I wish to consider
the question. The instinct mentioned is necessary for the inventor, but
it would seem at first we might do without it in studying the science
once created. Well, what I wish to investigate is if it be true that,
the principles of logic once admitted, one can, I do not say discover,
but demonstrate, all the mathematical verities without making a new
appeal to intuition.


III

I once said no to this question:[12] should our reply be modified by the
recent works? My saying no was because "the principle of complete
induction" seemed to me at once necessary to the mathematician and
irreducible to logic. The statement of this principle is: "If a property
be true of the number 1, and if we establish that it is true of _n_ + 1
provided it be of _n_, it will be true of all the whole numbers."
Therein I see the mathematical reasoning par excellence. I did not mean
to say, as has been supposed, that all mathematical reasonings can be
reduced to an application of this principle. Examining these reasonings
closely, we there should see applied many other analogous principles,
presenting the same essential characteristics. In this category of
principles, that of complete induction is only the simplest of all and
this is why I have chosen it as type.

  [12] See _Science and Hypothesis_, chapter I.

The current name, principle of complete induction, is not justified.
This mode of reasoning is none the less a true mathematical induction
which differs from ordinary induction only by its certitude.


