CHAPTER IV

CHANCE


I

"How dare we speak of the laws of chance? Is not chance the antithesis
of all law?" So says Bertrand at the beginning of his _Calcul des
probabiltités_. Probability is opposed to certitude; so it is what we do
not know and consequently it seems what we could not calculate. Here is
at least apparently a contradiction, and about it much has already been
written.

And first, what is chance? The ancients distinguished between phenomena
seemingly obeying harmonious laws, established once for all, and those
which they attributed to chance; these were the ones unpredictable
because rebellious to all law. In each domain the precise laws did not
decide everything, they only drew limits between which chance might act.
In this conception the word chance had a precise and objective meaning;
what was chance for one was also chance for another and even for the
gods.

But this conception is not ours to-day. We have become absolute
determinists, and even those who want to reserve the rights of human
free will let determinism reign undividedly in the inorganic world at
least. Every phenomenon, however minute, has a cause; and a mind
infinitely powerful, infinitely well-informed about the laws of nature,
could have foreseen it from the beginning of the centuries. If such a
mind existed, we could not play with it at any game of chance; we should
always lose.

In fact for it the word chance would not have any meaning, or rather
there would be no chance. It is because of our weakness and our
ignorance that the word has a meaning for us. And, even without going
beyond our feeble humanity, what is chance for the ignorant is not
chance for the scientist. Chance is only the measure of our ignorance.
Fortuitous phenomena are, by definition, those whose laws we do not
know.

But is this definition altogether satisfactory? When the first Chaldean
shepherds followed with their eyes the movements of the stars, they knew
not as yet the laws of astronomy; would they have dreamed of saying that
the stars move at random? If a modern physicist studies a new
phenomenon, and if he discovers its law Tuesday, would he have said
Monday that this phenomenon was fortuitous? Moreover, do we not often
invoke what Bertrand calls the laws of chance, to predict a phenomenon?
For example, in the kinetic theory of gases we obtain the known laws of
Mariotte and of Gay-Lussac by means of the hypothesis that the
velocities of the molecules of gas vary irregularly, that is to say at
random. All physicists will agree that the observable laws would be much
less simple if the velocities were ruled by any simple elementary law
whatsoever, if the molecules were, as we say, _organized_, if they were
subject to some discipline. It is due to chance, that is to say, to our
ignorance, that we can draw our conclusions; and then if the word chance
is simply synonymous with ignorance what does that mean? Must we
therefore translate as follows?

"You ask me to predict for you the phenomena about to happen. If,
unluckily, I knew the laws of these phenomena I could make the
prediction only by inextricable calculations and would have to renounce
attempting to answer you; but as I have the good fortune not to know
them, I will answer you at once. And what is most surprising, my answer
will be right."

So it must well be that chance is something other than the name we give
our ignorance, that among phenomena whose causes are unknown to us we
must distinguish fortuitous phenomena about which the calculus of
probabilities will provisionally give information, from those which are
not fortuitous and of which we can say nothing so long as we shall not
have determined the laws governing them. For the fortuitous phenomena
themselves, it is clear that the information given us by the calculus of
probabilities will not cease to be true upon the day when these
phenomena shall be better known.

The director of a life insurance company does not know when each of the
insured will die, but he relies upon the calculus of probabilities and
on the law of great numbers, and he is not deceived, since he
distributes dividends to his stockholders. These dividends would not
vanish if a very penetrating and very indiscreet physician should, after
the policies were signed, reveal to the director the life chances of the
insured. This doctor would dissipate the ignorance of the director, but
he would have no influence on the dividends, which evidently are not an
outcome of this ignorance.


II

To find a better definition of chance we must examine some of the facts
which we agree to regard as fortuitous, and to which the calculus of
probabilities seems to apply; we then shall investigate what are their
common characteristics.

The first example we select is that of unstable equilibrium; if a cone
rests upon its apex, we know well that it will fall, but we do not know
toward what side; it seems to us chance alone will decide. If the cone
were perfectly symmetric, if its axis were perfectly vertical, if it
were acted upon by no force other than gravity, it would not fall at
all. But the least defect in symmetry will make it lean slightly toward
one side or the other, and if it leans, however little, it will fall
altogether toward that side. Even if the symmetry were perfect, a very
slight tremor, a breath of air could make it incline some seconds of
arc; this will be enough to determine its fall and even the sense of its
fall which will be that of the initial inclination.

A very slight cause, which escapes us, determines a considerable effect
which we can not help seeing, and then we say this effect is due to
chance. If we could know exactly the laws of nature and the situation of
the universe at the initial instant, we should be able to predict
exactly the situation of this same universe at a subsequent instant. But
even when the natural laws should have no further secret for us, we
could know the initial situation only _approximately_. If that permits
us to foresee the subsequent situation _with the same degree of
approximation_, this is all we require, we say the phenomenon has been
predicted, that it is ruled by laws. But this is not always the case; it
may happen that slight differences in the initial conditions produce
very great differences in the final phenomena; a slight error in the
former would make an enormous error in the latter. Prediction becomes
impossible and we have the fortuitous phenomenon.

Our second example will be very analogous to the first and we shall take
it from meteorology. Why have the meteorologists such difficulty in
predicting the weather with any certainty? Why do the rains, the
tempests themselves seem to us to come by chance, so that many persons
find it quite natural to pray for rain or shine, when they would think
it ridiculous to pray for an eclipse? We see that great perturbations
generally happen in regions where the atmosphere is in unstable
equilibrium. The meteorologists are aware that this equilibrium is
unstable, that a cyclone is arising somewhere; but where they can not
tell; one-tenth of a degree more or less at any point, and the cyclone
bursts here and not there, and spreads its ravages over countries it
would have spared. This we could have foreseen if we had known that
tenth of a degree, but the observations were neither sufficiently close
nor sufficiently precise, and for this reason all seems due to the
agency of chance. Here again we find the same contrast between a very
slight cause, unappreciable to the observer, and important effects,
which are sometimes tremendous disasters.

Let us pass to another example, the distribution of the minor planets on
the zodiac. Their initial longitudes may have been any longitudes
whatever; but their mean motions were different and they have revolved
for so long a time that we may say they are now distributed _at random_
along the zodiac. Very slight initial differences between their
distances from the sun, or, what comes to the same thing, between their
mean motions, have ended by giving enormous differences between their
present longitudes. An excess of the thousandth of a second in the daily
mean motion will give in fact a second in three years, a degree in ten
thousand years, an entire circumference in three or four million years,
and what is that to the time which has passed since the minor planets
detached themselves from the nebula of Laplace? Again therefore we see a
slight cause and a great effect; or better, slight differences in the
cause and great differences in the effect.

The game of roulette does not take us as far as might seem from the
preceding example. Assume a needle to be turned on a pivot over a dial
divided into a hundred sectors alternately red and black. If it stops on
a red sector I win; if not, I lose. Evidently all depends upon the
initial impulse I give the needle. The needle will make, suppose, ten or
twenty turns, but it will stop sooner or not so soon, according as I
shall have pushed it more or less strongly. It suffices that the impulse
vary only by a thousandth or a two thousandth to make the needle stop
over a black sector or over the following red one. These are differences
the muscular sense can not distinguish and which elude even the most
delicate instruments. So it is impossible for me to foresee what the
needle I have started will do, and this is why my heart throbs and I
hope everything from luck. The difference in the cause is imperceptible,
and the difference in the effect is for me of the highest importance,
since it means my whole stake.


III

Permit me, in this connection, a thought somewhat foreign to my subject.
Some years ago a philosopher said that the future is determined by the
past, but not the past by the future; or, in other words, from knowledge
of the present we could deduce the future, but not the past; because,
said he, a cause can have only one effect, while the same effect might
be produced by several different causes. It is clear no scientist can
subscribe to this conclusion. The laws of nature bind the antecedent to
the consequent in such a way that the antecedent is as well determined
by the consequent as the consequent by the antecedent. But whence came
the error of this philosopher? We know that in virtue of Carnot's
principle physical phenomena are irreversible and the world tends toward
uniformity. When two bodies of different temperature come in contact,
the warmer gives up heat to the colder; so we may foresee that the
temperature will equalize. But once equal, if asked about the anterior
state, what can we answer? We might say that one was warm and the other
cold, but not be able to divine which formerly was the warmer.

And yet in reality the temperatures will never reach perfect equality.
The difference of the temperatures only tends asymptotically toward
zero. There comes a moment when our thermometers are powerless to make
it known. But if we had thermometers a thousand times, a hundred
thousand times as sensitive, we should recognize that there still is a
slight difference, and that one of the bodies remains a little warmer
than the other, and so we could say this it is which formerly was much
the warmer.

So then there are, contrary to what we found in the former examples,
great differences in cause and slight differences in effect. Flammarion
once imagined an observer going away from the earth with a velocity
greater than that of light; for him time would have changed sign.
History would be turned about, and Waterloo would precede Austerlitz.
Well, for this observer, effects and causes would be inverted; unstable
equilibrium would no longer be the exception. Because of the universal
irreversibility, all would seem to him to come out of a sort of chaos in
unstable equilibrium. All nature would appear to him delivered over to
chance.


IV

Now for other examples where we shall see somewhat different
characteristics. Take first the kinetic theory of gases. How should we
picture a receptacle filled with gas? Innumerable molecules, moving at
high speeds, flash through this receptacle in every direction. At every
instant they strike against its walls or each other, and these
collisions happen under the most diverse conditions. What above all
impresses us here is not the littleness of the causes, but their
complexity, and yet the former element is still found here and plays an
important rôle. If a molecule deviated right or left from its
trajectory, by a very small quantity, comparable to the radius of action
of the gaseous molecules, it would avoid a collision or sustain it under
different conditions, and that would vary the direction of its velocity
after the impact, perhaps by ninety degrees or by a hundred and eighty
degrees.

And this is not all; we have just seen that it is necessary to deflect
the molecule before the clash by only an infinitesimal, to produce its
deviation after the collision by a finite quantity. If then the molecule
undergoes two successive shocks, it will suffice to deflect it before
the first by an infinitesimal of the second order, for it to deviate
after the first encounter by an infinitesimal of the first order, and
after the second hit, by a finite quantity. And the molecule will not
undergo merely two shocks; it will undergo a very great number per
second. So that if the first shock has multiplied the deviation by a
very large number _A_, after _n_ shocks it will be multiplied by
_A_^{_n_}. It will therefore become very great not merely because _A_
is large, that is to say because little causes produce big effects, but
because the exponent _n_ is large, that is to say because the shocks are
very numerous and the causes very complex.

Take a second example. Why do the drops of rain in a shower seem to be
distributed at random? This is again because of the complexity of the
causes which determine their formation. Ions are distributed in the
atmosphere. For a long while they have been subjected to air-currents
constantly changing, they have been caught in very small whirlwinds, so
that their final distribution has no longer any relation to their
initial distribution. Suddenly the temperature falls, vapor condenses,
and each of these ions becomes the center of a drop of rain. To know
what will be the distribution of these drops and how many will fall on
each paving-stone, it would not be sufficient to know the initial
situation of the ions, it would be necessary to compute the effect of a
thousand little capricious air-currents.

And again it is the same if we put grains of powder in suspension in
water. The vase is ploughed by currents whose law we know not, we only
know it is very complicated. At the end of a certain time the grains
will be distributed at random, that is to say uniformly, in the vase;
and this is due precisely to the complexity of these currents. If they
obeyed some simple law, if for example the vase revolved and the
currents circulated around the axis of the vase, describing circles, it
would no longer be the same, since each grain would retain its initial
altitude and its initial distance from the axis.

We should reach the same result in considering the mixing of two liquids
or of two fine-grained powders. And to take a grosser example, this is
also what happens when we shuffle playing-cards. At each stroke the
cards undergo a permutation (analogous to that studied in the theory of
substitutions). What will happen? The probability of a particular
permutation (for example, that bringing to the _n_th place the card
occupying the [phi](_n_)th place before the permutation) depends upon
the player's habits. But if this player shuffles the cards long enough,
there will be a great number of successive permutations, and the
resulting final order will no longer be governed by aught but chance; I
mean to say that all possible orders will be equally probable. It is to
the great number of successive permutations, that is to say to the
complexity of the phenomenon, that this result is due.

A final word about the theory of errors. Here it is that the causes are
complex and multiple. To how many snares is not the observer exposed,
even with the best instrument! He should apply himself to finding out
the largest and avoiding them. These are the ones giving birth to
systematic errors. But when he has eliminated those, admitting that he
succeeds, there remain many small ones which, their effects
accumulating, may become dangerous. Thence come the accidental errors;
and we attribute them to chance because their causes are too complicated
and too numerous. Here again we have only little causes, but each of
them would produce only a slight effect; it is by their union and their
number that their effects become formidable.


V

We may take still a third point of view, less important than the first
two and upon which I shall lay less stress. When we seek to foresee an
event and examine its antecedents, we strive to search into the anterior
situation. This could not be done for all parts of the universe and we
are content to know what is passing in the neighborhood of the point
where the event should occur, or what would appear to have some relation
to it. An examination can not be complete and we must know how to
choose. But it may happen that we have passed by circumstances which at
first sight seemed completely foreign to the foreseen happening, to
which one would never have dreamed of attributing any influence and
which nevertheless, contrary to all anticipation, come to play an
important rôle.

A man passes in the street going to his business; some one knowing the
business could have told why he started at such a time and went by such
a street. On the roof works a tiler. The contractor employing him could
in a certain measure foresee what he would do. But the passer-by
scarcely thinks of the tiler, nor the tiler of him; they seem to belong
to two worlds completely foreign to one another. And yet the tiler drops
a tile which kills the man, and we do not hesitate to say this is
chance.

Our weakness forbids our considering the entire universe and makes us
cut it up into slices. We try to do this as little artificially as
possible. And yet it happens from time to time that two of these slices
react upon each other. The effects of this mutual action then seem to us
to be due to chance.

Is this a third way of conceiving chance? Not always; in fact most often
we are carried back to the first or the second. Whenever two worlds
usually foreign to one another come thus to react upon each other, the
laws of this reaction must be very complex. On the other hand, a very
slight change in the initial conditions of these two worlds would have
been sufficient for the reaction not to have happened. How little was
needed for the man to pass a second later or the tiler to drop his tile
a second sooner.


VI

All we have said still does not explain why chance obeys laws. Does the
fact that the causes are slight or complex suffice for our foreseeing,
if not their effects _in each case_, at least what their effects will
be, _on the average_? To answer this question we had better take up
again some of the examples already cited.

I shall begin with that of the roulette. I have said that the point
where the needle will stop depends upon the initial push given it. What
is the probability of this push having this or that value? I know
nothing about it, but it is difficult for me not to suppose that this
probability is represented by a continuous analytic function. The
probability that the push is comprised between [alpha] and [alpha] +
[epsilon] will then be sensibly equal to the probability of its being
comprised between [alpha] + [epsilon] and [alpha] + 2[epsilon],
_provided_ [epsilon] _be very small_. This is a property common to all
analytic functions. Minute variations of the function are proportional
to minute variations of the variable.

But we have assumed that an exceedingly slight variation of the push
suffices to change the color of the sector over which the needle finally
stops. From [alpha] to [alpha]+[epsilon] it is red, from
[alpha]+[epsilon] to [alpha]+2[epsilon] it is black; the probability of
each red sector is therefore the same as of the following black, and
consequently the total probability of red equals the total probability
of black.

The datum of the question is the analytic function representing the
probability of a particular initial push. But the theorem remains true
whatever be this datum, since it depends upon a property common to all
analytic functions. From this it follows finally that we no longer need
the datum.

What we have just said for the case of the roulette applies also to the
example of the minor planets. The zodiac may be regarded as an immense
roulette on which have been tossed many little balls with different
initial impulses varying according to some law. Their present
distribution is uniform and independent of this law, for the same reason
as in the preceding case. Thus we see why phenomena obey the laws of
chance when slight differences in the causes suffice to bring on great
differences in the effects. The probabilities of these slight
differences may then be regarded as proportional to these differences
themselves, just because these differences are minute, and the
infinitesimal increments of a continuous function are proportional to
those of the variable.

Take an entirely different example, where intervenes especially the
complexity of the causes. Suppose a player shuffles a pack of cards. At
each shuffle he changes the order of the cards, and he may change them
in many ways. To simplify the exposition, consider only three cards. The
cards which before the shuffle occupied respectively the places 123, may
after the shuffle occupy the places

  123, 231, 312, 321, 132, 213.

Each of these six hypotheses is possible and they have respectively for
probabilities:

  p_1, p_2, p_3, p_4, p_5, p_6.

The sum of these six numbers equals 1; but this is all we know of them;
these six probabilities depend naturally upon the habits of the player
which we do not know.

At the second shuffle and the following, this will recommence, and under
the same conditions; I mean that p_4 for example represents always the
probability that the three cards which occupied after the _n_th shuffle
and before the _n_ + 1th the places 123, occupy the places 321 after the
_n_ + 1th shuffle. And this remains true whatever be the number _n_,
since the habits of the player and his way of shuffling remain the same.

But if the number of shuffles is very great, the cards which before the
first shuffle occupied the places 123 may, after the last shuffle,
occupy the places

  123, 231, 312, 321, 132, 213

and the probability of these six hypotheses will be sensibly the same
and equal to 1/6; and this will be true whatever be the numbers
p_1 ... p_6 which we do not know. The great number of shuffles, that
is to say the complexity of the causes, has produced uniformity.

This would apply without change if there were more than three cards,
but even with three cards the demonstration would be complicated;
let it suffice to give it for only two cards. Then we have only two
possibilities 12, 21 with the probabilities p_1 and p_2 = 1 - p_1.

Suppose _n_ shuffles and suppose I win one franc if the cards are
finally in the initial order and lose one if they are finally inverted.
Then, my mathematical expectation will be (p_1 - p_2)^{_n_}.

The difference p_1 - p_2 is certainly less than 1; so that if _n_ is
very great my expectation will be zero; we need not learn p_1 and p_2
to be aware that the game is equitable.

There would always be an exception if one of the numbers p_1 and p_2
was equal to 1 and the other naught. _Then it would not apply because
our initial hypotheses would be too simple._

What we have just seen applies not only to the mixing of cards, but to
all mixings, to those of powders and of liquids; and even to those of
the molecules of gases in the kinetic theory of gases.

To return to this theory, suppose for a moment a gas whose molecules can
not mutually clash, but may be deviated by hitting the insides of the
vase wherein the gas is confined. If the form of the vase is
sufficiently complex the distribution of the molecules and that of the
velocities will not be long in becoming uniform. But this will not be so
if the vase is spherical or if it has the shape of a cuboid. Why?
Because in the first case the distance from the center to any trajectory
will remain constant; in the second case this will be the absolute value
of the angle of each trajectory with the faces of the cuboid.

So we see what should be understood by conditions _too simple_; they are
those which conserve something, which leave an invariant remaining. Are
the differential equations of the problem too simple for us to apply the
laws of chance? This question would seem at first view to lack precise
meaning; now we know what it means. They are too simple if they conserve
something, if they admit a uniform integral. If something in the initial
conditions remains unchanged, it is clear the final situation can no
longer be independent of the initial situation.

We come finally to the theory of errors. We know not to what are due the
accidental errors, and precisely because we do not know, we are aware
they obey the law of Gauss. Such is the paradox. The explanation is
nearly the same as in the preceding cases. We need know only one thing:
that the errors are very numerous, that they are very slight, that each
may be as well negative as positive. What is the curve of probability of
each of them? We do not know; we only suppose it is symmetric. We prove
then that the resultant error will follow Gauss's law, and this
resulting law is independent of the particular laws which we do not
know. Here again the simplicity of the result is born of the very
complexity of the data.


VII

But we are not through with paradoxes. I have just recalled the figment
of Flammarion, that of the man going quicker than light, for whom time
changes sign. I said that for him all phenomena would seem due to
chance. That is true from a certain point of view, and yet all these
phenomena at a given moment would not be distributed in conformity with
the laws of chance, since the distribution would be the same as for us,
who, seeing them unfold harmoniously and without coming out of a primal
chaos, do not regard them as ruled by chance.

What does that mean? For Lumen, Flammarion's man, slight causes seem to
produce great effects; why do not things go on as for us when we think
we see grand effects due to little causes? Would not the same reasoning
be applicable in his case?

Let us return to the argument. When slight differences in the causes
produce vast differences in the effects, why are these effects
distributed according to the laws of chance? Suppose a difference of a
millimeter in the cause produces a difference of a kilometer in the
effect. If I win in case the effect corresponds to a kilometer bearing
an even number, my probability of winning will be 1/2. Why? Because to
make that, the cause must correspond to a millimeter with an even
number. Now, according to all appearance, the probability of the cause
varying between certain limits will be proportional to the distance
apart of these limits, provided this distance be very small. If this
hypothesis were not admitted there would no longer be any way of
representing the probability by a continuous function.

What now will happen when great causes produce small effects? This is
the case where we should not attribute the phenomenon to chance and
where on the contrary Lumen would attribute it to chance. To a
difference of a kilometer in the cause would correspond a difference of
a millimeter in the effect. Would the probability of the cause being
comprised between two limits _n_ kilometers apart still be proportional
to _n_? We have no reason to suppose so, since this distance, _n_
kilometers, is great. But the probability that the effect lies between
two limits _n_ millimeters apart will be precisely the same, so it will
not be proportional to _n_, even though this distance, _n_ millimeters,
be small. There is no way therefore of representing the law of
probability of effects by a continuous curve. This curve, understand,
may remain continuous in the _analytic_ sense of the word; to
_infinitesimal_ variations of the abscissa will correspond infinitesimal
variations of the ordinate. But _practically_ it will not be continuous,
since _very small_ variations of the ordinate would not correspond to
very small variations of the abscissa. It would become impossible to
trace the curve with an ordinary pencil; that is what I mean.

So what must we conclude? Lumen has no right to say that the
probability of the cause (_his_ cause, our effect) should be represented
necessarily by a continuous function. But then why have we this right?
It is because this state of unstable equilibrium which we have been
calling initial is itself only the final outcome of a long previous
history. In the course of this history complex causes have worked a
great while: they have contributed to produce the mixture of elements
and they have tended to make everything uniform at least within a small
region; they have rounded off the corners, smoothed down the hills and
filled up the valleys. However capricious and irregular may have been
the primitive curve given over to them, they have worked so much toward
making it regular that finally they deliver over to us a continuous
curve. And this is why we may in all confidence assume its continuity.

Lumen would not have the same reasons for such a conclusion. For him
complex causes would not seem agents of equalization and regularity, but
on the contrary would create only inequality and differentiation. He
would see a world more and more varied come forth from a sort of
primitive chaos. The changes he could observe would be for him
unforeseen and impossible to foresee. They would seem to him due to some
caprice or another; but this caprice would be quite different from our
chance, since it would be opposed to all law, while our chance still has
its laws. All these points call for lengthy explications, which perhaps
would aid in the better comprehension of the irreversibility of the
universe.


VIII

We have sought to define chance, and now it is proper to put a question.
Has chance thus defined, in so far as this is possible, objectivity?

It may be questioned. I have spoken of very slight or very complex
causes. But what is very little for one may be very big for another, and
what seems very complex to one may seem simple to another. In part I
have already answered by saying precisely in what cases differential
equations become too simple for the laws of chance to remain applicable.
But it is fitting to examine the matter a little more closely, because
we may take still other points of view.

What means the phrase 'very slight'? To understand it we need only go
back to what has already been said. A difference is very slight, an
interval is very small, when within the limits of this interval the
probability remains sensibly constant. And why may this probability be
regarded as constant within a small interval? It is because we assume
that the law of probability is represented by a continuous curve,
continuous not only in the analytic sense, but _practically_ continuous,
as already explained. This means that it not only presents no absolute
hiatus, but that it has neither salients nor reentrants too acute or too
accentuated.

And what gives us the right to make this hypothesis? We have already
said it is because, since the beginning of the ages, there have always
been complex causes ceaselessly acting in the same way and making the
world tend toward uniformity without ever being able to turn back. These
are the causes which little by little have flattened the salients and
filled up the reentrants, and this is why our probability curves now
show only gentle undulations. In milliards of milliards of ages another
step will have been made toward uniformity, and these undulations will
be ten times as gentle; the radius of mean curvature of our curve will
have become ten times as great. And then such a length as seems to us
to-day not very small, since on our curve an arc of this length can not
be regarded as rectilineal, should on the contrary at that epoch be
called very little, since the curvature will have become ten times less
and an arc of this length may be sensibly identified with a sect.

Thus the phrase 'very slight' remains relative; but it is not relative
to such or such a man, it is relative to the actual state of the world.
It will change its meaning when the world shall have become more
uniform, when all things shall have blended still more. But then
doubtless men can no longer live and must give place to other
beings--should I say far smaller or far larger? So that our criterion,
remaining true for all men, retains an objective sense.

And on the other hand what means the phrase 'very complex'? I have
already given one solution, but there are others. Complex causes we have
said produce a blend more and more intimate, but after how long a time
will this blend satisfy us? When will it have accumulated sufficient
complexity? When shall we have sufficiently shuffled the cards? If we
mix two powders, one blue, the other white, there comes a moment when
the tint of the mixture seems to us uniform because of the feebleness of
our senses; it will be uniform for the presbyte, forced to gaze from
afar, before it will be so for the myope. And when it has become uniform
for all eyes, we still could push back the limit by the use of
instruments. There is no chance for any man ever to discern the infinite
variety which, if the kinetic theory is true, hides under the uniform
appearance of a gas. And yet if we accept Gouy's ideas on the Brownian
movement, does not the microscope seem on the point of showing us
something analogous?

This new criterion is therefore relative like the first; and if it
retains an objective character, it is because all men have approximately
the same senses, the power of their instruments is limited, and besides
they use them only exceptionally.


IX

It is just the same in the moral sciences and particularly in history.
The historian is obliged to make a choice among the events of the epoch
he studies; he recounts only those which seem to him the most important.
He therefore contents himself with relating the most momentous events of
the sixteenth century, for example, as likewise the most remarkable
facts of the seventeenth century. If the first suffice to explain the
second, we say these conform to the laws of history. But if a great
event of the seventeenth century should have for cause a small fact of
the sixteenth century which no history reports, which all the world has
neglected, then we say this event is due to chance. This word has
therefore the same sense as in the physical sciences; it means that
slight causes have produced great effects.

The greatest bit of chance is the birth of a great man. It is only by
chance that meeting of two germinal cells, of different sex, containing
precisely, each on its side, the mysterious elements whose mutual
reaction must produce the genius. One will agree that these elements
must be rare and that their meeting is still more rare. How slight a
thing it would have required to deflect from its route the carrying
spermatozoon. It would have sufficed to deflect it a tenth of a
millimeter and Napoleon would not have been born and the destinies of a
continent would have been changed. No example can better make us
understand the veritable characteristics of chance.

One more word about the paradoxes brought out by the application of the
calculus of probabilities to the moral sciences. It has been proven that
no Chamber of Deputies will ever fail to contain a member of the
opposition, or at least such an event would be so improbable that we
might without fear wager the contrary, and bet a million against a sou.

Condorcet has striven to calculate how many jurors it would require to
make a judicial error practically impossible. If we had used the results
of this calculation, we should certainly have been exposed to the same
disappointments as in betting, on the faith of the calculus, that the
opposition would never be without a representative.

The laws of chance do not apply to these questions. If justice be not
always meted out to accord with the best reasons, it uses less than we
think the method of Bridoye. This is perhaps to be regretted, for then
the system of Condorcet would shield us from judicial errors.

What is the meaning of this? We are tempted to attribute facts of this
nature to chance because their causes are obscure; but this is not true
chance. The causes are unknown to us, it is true, and they are even
complex; but they are not sufficiently so, since they conserve
something. We have seen that this it is which distinguishes causes 'too
simple.' When men are brought together they no longer decide at random
and independently one of another; they influence one another. Multiplex
causes come into action. They worry men, dragging them to right or left,
but one thing there is they can not destroy, this is their Panurge
flock-of-sheep habits. And this is an invariant.


X

Difficulties are indeed involved in the application of the calculus of
probabilities to the exact sciences. Why are the decimals of a table of
logarithms, why are those of the number [pi] distributed in accordance
with the laws of chance? Elsewhere I have already studied the question
in so far as it concerns logarithms, and there it is easy. It is clear
that a slight difference of argument will give a slight difference of
logarithm, but a great difference in the sixth decimal of the logarithm.
Always we find again the same criterion.

But as for the number [pi], that presents more difficulties, and I have
at the moment nothing worth while to say.

There would be many other questions to resolve, had I wished to attack
them before solving that which I more specially set myself. When we
reach a simple result, when we find for example a round number, we say
that such a result can not be due to chance, and we seek, for its
explanation, a non-fortuitous cause. And in fact there is only a very
slight probability that among 10,000 numbers chance will give a round
number; for example, the number 10,000. This has only one chance in
10,000. But there is only one chance in 10,000 for the occurrence of any
other one number; and yet this result will not astonish us, nor will it
be hard for us to attribute it to chance; and that simply because it
will be less striking.

Is this a simple illusion of ours, or are there cases where this way of
thinking is legitimate? We must hope so, else were all science
impossible. When we wish to check a hypothesis, what do we do? We can
not verify all its consequences, since they would be infinite in number;
we content ourselves with verifying certain ones and if we succeed we
declare the hypothesis confirmed, because so much success could not be
due to chance. And this is always at bottom the same reasoning.

I can not completely justify it here, since it would take too much time;
but I may at least say that we find ourselves confronted by two
hypotheses, either a simple cause or that aggregate of complex causes we
call chance. We find it natural to suppose that the first should produce
a simple result, and then, if we find that simple result, the round
number for example, it seems more likely to us to be attributable to the
simple cause which must give it almost certainly, than to chance which
could only give it once in 10,000 times. It will not be the same if we
find a result which is not simple; chance, it is true, will not give
this more than once in 10,000 times; but neither has the simple cause
any more chance of producing it.




