CHAPTER III

THE NEW MECHANICS AND ASTRONOMY


I

_Gravitation_

Mass may be defined in two ways:

1º By the quotient of the force by the acceleration; this is the true
definition of the mass, which measures the inertia of the body.

2° By the attraction the body exercises upon an exterior body, in virtue
of Newton's law. We should therefore distinguish the mass coefficient of
inertia and the mass coefficient of attraction. According to Newton's
law, there is rigorous proportionality between these two coefficients.
But that is demonstrated only for velocities to which the general
principles of dynamics are applicable. Now, we have seen that the mass
coefficient of inertia increases with the velocity; should we conclude
that the mass coefficient of attraction increases likewise with the
velocity and remains proportional to the coefficient of inertia, or, on
the contrary, that this coefficient of attraction remains constant? This
is a question we have no means of deciding.

On the other hand, if the coefficient of attraction depends upon the
velocity, since the velocities of two bodies which mutually attract are
not in general the same, how will this coefficient depend upon these two
velocities?

Upon this subject we can only make hypotheses, but we are naturally led
to investigate which of these hypotheses would be compatible with the
principle of relativity. There are a great number of them; the only one
of which I shall here speak is that of Lorentz, which I shall briefly
expound.

Consider first electrons at rest. Two electrons of the same sign repel
each other and two electrons of contrary sign attract each other; in the
ordinary theory, their mutual actions are proportional to their electric
charges; if therefore we have four electrons, two positive _A_ and
_A'_, and two negative _B_ and _B'_, the charges of these four being the
same in absolute value, the repulsion of _A_ for _A'_ will be, at the
same distance, equal to the repulsion of _B_ for _B'_ and equal also to
the attraction of _A_ for _B'_, or of _A'_ for _B_. If therefore _A_ and
_B_ are very near each other, as also _A'_ and _B'_, and we examine the
action of the system _A_ + _B_ upon the system _A'_ + _B'_, we shall
have two repulsions and two attractions which will exactly compensate
each other and the resulting action will be null.

Now, material molecules should just be regarded as species of solar
systems where circulate the electrons, some positive, some negative, and
_in such a way that the algebraic sum of all the charges is null_. A
material molecule is therefore wholly analogous to the system _A_ + _B_
of which we have spoken, so that the total electric action of two
molecules one upon the other should be null.

But experiment shows us that these molecules attract each other in
consequence of Newtonian gravitation; and then we may make two
hypotheses: we may suppose gravitation has no relation to the
electrostatic attractions, that it is due to a cause entirely different,
and is simply something additional; or else we may suppose the
attractions are not proportional to the charges and that the attraction
exercised by a charge +1 upon a charge -1 is greater than the mutual
repulsion of two +1 charges, or two -1 charges.

In other words, the electric field produced by the positive electrons
and that which the negative electrons produce might be superposed and
yet remain distinct. The positive electrons would be more sensitive to
the field produced by the negative electrons than to the field produced
by the positive electrons; the contrary would be the case for the
negative electrons. It is clear that this hypothesis somewhat
complicates electrostatics, but that it brings back into it gravitation.
This was, in sum, Franklin's hypothesis.

What happens now if the electrons are in motion? The positive electrons
will cause a perturbation in the ether and produce there an electric and
magnetic field. The same will be the case for the negative electrons.
The electrons, positive as well as negative, undergo then a mechanical
impulsion by the action of these different fields. In the ordinary
theory, the electromagnetic field, due to the motion of the positive
electrons, exercises, upon two electrons of contrary sign and of the
same absolute charge, equal actions with contrary sign. We may then
without inconvenience not distinguish the field due to the motion of the
positive electrons and the field due to the motion of the negative
electrons and consider only the algebraic sum of these two fields, that
is to say the resulting field.

In the new theory, on the contrary, the action upon the positive
electrons of the electromagnetic field due to the positive electrons
follows the ordinary laws; it is the same with the action upon the
negative electrons of the field due to the negative electrons. Let us
now consider the action of the field due to the positive electrons upon
the negative electrons (or inversely); it will still follow the same
laws, but _with a different coefficient_. Each electron is more
sensitive to the field created by the electrons of contrary name than to
the field created by the electrons of the same name.

Such is the hypothesis of Lorentz, which reduces to Franklin's
hypothesis for slight velocities; it will therefore explain, for these
small velocities, Newton's law. Moreover, as gravitation goes back to
forces of electrodynamic origin, the general theory of Lorentz will
apply, and consequently the principle of relativity will not be
violated.

We see that Newton's law is no longer applicable to great velocities and
that it must be modified, for bodies in motion, precisely in the same
way as the laws of electrostatics for electricity in motion.

We know that electromagnetic perturbations spread with the velocity of
light. We may therefore be tempted to reject the preceding theory upon
remembering that gravitation spreads, according to the calculations of
Laplace, at least ten million times more quickly than light, and that
consequently it can not be of electromagnetic origin. The result of
Laplace is well known, but one is generally ignorant of its
signification. Laplace supposed that, if the propagation of gravitation
is not instantaneous, its velocity of spread combines with that of the
body attracted, as happens for light in the phenomenon of astronomic
aberration, so that the effective force is not directed along the
straight joining the two bodies, but makes with this straight a small
angle. This is a very special hypothesis, not well justified, and, in
any case, entirely different from that of Lorentz. Laplace's result
proves nothing against the theory of Lorentz.


II

_Comparison with Astronomic Observations_

Can the preceding theories be reconciled with astronomic observations?

First of all, if we adopt them, the energy of the planetary motions will
be constantly dissipated by the effect of the _wave of acceleration_.
From this would result that the mean motions of the stars would
constantly accelerate, as if these stars were moving in a resistant
medium. But this effect is exceedingly slight, far too much so to be
discerned by the most precise observations. The acceleration of the
heavenly bodies is relatively slight, so that the effects of the wave of
acceleration are negligible and the motion may be regarded as _quasi
stationary_. It is true that the effects of the wave of acceleration
constantly accumulate, but this accumulation itself is so slow that
thousands of years of observation would be necessary for it to become
sensible. Let us therefore make the calculation considering the motion
as quasi-stationary, and that under the three following hypotheses:

A. Admit the hypothesis of Abraham (electrons indeformable) and retain
Newton's law in its usual form;

B. Admit the hypothesis of Lorentz about the deformation of electrons
and retain the usual Newton's law;

C. Admit the hypothesis of Lorentz about electrons and modify Newton's
law as we have done in the preceding paragraph, so as to render it
compatible with the principle of relativity.

It is in the motion of Mercury that the effect will be most sensible,
since this planet has the greatest velocity. Tisserand formerly made an
analogous calculation, admitting Weber's law; I recall that Weber had
sought to explain at the same time the electrostatic and electrodynamic
phenomena in supposing that electrons (whose name was not yet invented)
exercise, one upon another, attractions and repulsions directed along
the straight joining them, and depending not only upon their distances,
but upon the first and second derivatives of these distances,
consequently upon their velocities and their accelerations. This law of
Weber, different enough from those which to-day tend to prevail, none
the less presents a certain analogy with them.

Tisserand found that, if the Newtonian attraction conformed to Weber's
law there resulted, for Mercury's perihelion, secular variation of 14",
_of the same sense as that which has been observed and could not be
explained_, but smaller, since this is 38".

Let us recur to the hypotheses A, B and C, and study first the motion of
a planet attracted by a fixed center. The hypotheses B and C are no
longer distinguished, since, if the attracting point is fixed, the field
it produces is a purely electrostatic field, where the attraction varies
inversely as the square of the distance, in conformity with Coulomb's
electrostatic law, identical with that of Newton.

The vis viva equation holds good, taking for vis viva the new
definition; in the same way, the equation of areas is replaced by
another equivalent to it; the moment of the quantity of motion is a
constant, but the quantity of motion must be defined as in the new
dynamics.

The only sensible effect will be a secular motion of the perihelion.
With the theory of Lorentz, we shall find, for this motion, half of what
Weber's law would give; with the theory of Abraham, two fifths.

If now we suppose two moving bodies gravitating around their common
center of gravity, the effects are very little different, though the
calculations may be a little more complicated. The motion of Mercury's
perihelion would therefore be 7" in the theory of Lorentz and 5".6 in
that of Abraham.

The effect moreover is proportional to (_n_^{3})(_a_^{2}), where _n_ is
the star's mean motion and a the radius of its orbit. For the planets,
in virtue of Kepler's law, the effect varies then inversely as
sqrt(_a_^{5}); it is therefore insensible, save for Mercury.

It is likewise insensible for the moon though _n_ is great, because _a_
is extremely small; in sum, it is five times less for Venus, and six
hundred times less for the moon than for Mercury. We may add that as to
Venus and the earth, the motion of the perihelion (for the same angular
velocity of this motion) would be much more difficult to discern by
astronomic observations, because the excentricity of their orbits is
much less than for Mercury.

To sum up, _the only sensible effect upon astronomic observations would
be a motion of Mercury's perihelion, in the same sense as that which has
been observed without being explained, but notably slighter_.

That can not be regarded as an argument in favor of the new dynamics,
since it will always be necessary to seek another explanation for the
greater part of Mercury's anomaly; but still less can it be regarded as
an argument against it.


III

_The Theory of Lesage_

It is interesting to compare these considerations with a theory long
since proposed to explain universal gravitation.

Suppose that, in the interplanetary spaces, circulate in every
direction, with high velocities, very tenuous corpuscles. A body
isolated in space will not be affected, apparently, by the impacts of
these corpuscles, since these impacts are equally distributed in all
directions. But if two bodies _A_ and _B_ are present, the body _B_ will
play the rôle of screen and will intercept part of the corpuscles which,
without it, would have struck _A_. Then, the impacts received by _A_ in
the direction opposite that from _B_ will no longer have a counterpart,
or will now be only partially compensated, and this will push _A_ toward
_B_.

Such is the theory of Lesage; and we shall discuss it, taking first the
view-point of ordinary mechanics.

First, how should the impacts postulated by this theory take place; is
it according to the laws of perfectly elastic bodies, or according to
those of bodies devoid of elasticity, or according to an intermediate
law? The corpuscles of Lesage can not act as perfectly elastic bodies;
otherwise the effect would be null, since the corpuscles intercepted by
the body _B_ would be replaced by others which would have rebounded from
_B_, and calculation proves that the compensation would be perfect. It
is necessary then that the impact make the corpuscles lose energy, and
this energy should appear under the form of heat. But how much heat
would thus be produced? Note that attraction passes through bodies; it
is necessary therefore to represent to ourselves the earth, for example,
not as a solid screen, but as formed of a very great number of very
small spherical molecules, which play individually the rôle of little
screens, but between which the corpuscles of Lesage may freely
circulate. So, not only the earth is not a solid screen, but it is not
even a cullender, since the voids occupy much more space than the
plenums. To realize this, recall that Laplace has demonstrated that
attraction, in traversing the earth, is weakened at most by one
ten-millionth part, and his proof is perfectly satisfactory: in fact, if
attraction were absorbed by the body it traverses, it would no longer be
proportional to the masses; it would be _relatively_ weaker for great
bodies than for small, since it would have a greater thickness to
traverse. The attraction of the sun for the earth would therefore be
_relatively_ weaker than that of the sun for the moon, and thence would
result, in the motion of the moon, a very sensible inequality. We should
therefore conclude, if we adopt the theory of Lesage, that the total
surface of the spherical molecules which compose the earth is at most
the ten-millionth part of the total surface of the earth.

Darwin has proved that the theory of Lesage only leads exactly to
Newton's law when we postulate particles entirely devoid of elasticity.
The attraction exerted by the earth on a mass 1 at a distance 1 will
then be proportional, at the same time, to the total surface _S_ of the
spherical molecules composing it, to the velocity _v_ of the corpuscles,
to the square root of the density [rho] of the medium formed by the
corpuscles. The heat produced will be proportional to _S_, to the
density [rho], and to the cube of the velocity _v_.

But it is necessary to take account of the resistance experienced by a
body moving in such a medium; it can not move, in fact, without going
against certain impacts, in fleeing, on the contrary, before those
coming in the opposite direction, so that the compensation realized in
the state of rest can no longer subsist. The calculated resistance is
proportional to _S_, to [rho] and to _v_; now, we know that the heavenly
bodies move as if they experienced no resistance, and the precision of
observations permits us to fix a limit to the resistance of the medium.

This resistance varying as _S_[rho]_v_, while the attraction varies as
_S_{sqrt([rho]_v_)}, we see that the ratio of the resistance to the
square of the attraction is inversely as the product _Sv_.

We have therefore a lower limit of the product _Sv_. We have already an
upper limit of _S_ (by the absorption of attraction by the body it
traverses); we have therefore a lower limit of the velocity _v_, which
must be at least 24·10^{17} times that of light.

From this we are able to deduce [rho] and the quantity of heat produced;
this quantity would suffice to raise the temperature 10^{26} degrees a
second; the earth would receive in a given time 10^{20} times more heat
than the sun emits in the same time; I am not speaking of the heat the
sun sends to the earth, but of that it radiates in all directions.

It is evident the earth could not long stand such a régime.

We should not be led to results less fantastic if, contrary to Darwin's
views, we endowed the corpuscles of Lesage with an elasticity imperfect
without being null. In truth, the vis viva of these corpuscles would not
be entirely converted into heat, but the attraction produced would
likewise be less, so that it would be only the part of this vis viva
converted into heat, which would contribute to produce the attraction
and that would come to the same thing; a judicious employment of the
theorem of the viriel would enable us to account for this.

The theory of Lesage may be transformed; suppress the corpuscles and
imagine the ether overrun in all senses by luminous waves coming from
all points of space. When a material object receives a luminous wave,
this wave exercises upon it a mechanical action due to the
Maxwell-Bartholi pressure, just as if it had received the impact of a
material projectile. The waves in question could therefore play the rôle
of the corpuscles of Lesage. This is what is supposed, for example, by
M. Tommasina.

The difficulties are not removed for all that; the velocity of
propagation can be only that of light, and we are thus led, for the
resistance of the medium, to an inadmissible figure. Besides, if the
light is all reflected, the effect is null, just as in the hypothesis of
the perfectly elastic corpuscles.

That there should be attraction, it is necessary that the light be
partially absorbed; but then there is production of heat. The
calculations do not differ essentially from those made in the ordinary
theory of Lesage, and the result retains the same fantastic character.

On the other hand, attraction is not absorbed by the body it traverses,
or hardly at all; it is not so with the light we know. Light which would
produce the Newtonian attraction would have to be considerably different
from ordinary light and be, for example, of very short wave length. This
does not count that, if our eyes were sensible of this light, the whole
heavens should appear to us much more brilliant than the sun, so that
the sun would seem to us to stand out in black, otherwise the sun would
repel us instead of attracting us. For all these reasons, light which
would permit of the explanation of attraction would be much more like
Röntgen rays than like ordinary light.

And besides, the X-rays would not suffice; however penetrating they may
seem to us, they could not pass through the whole earth; it would be
necessary therefore to imagine X'-rays much more penetrating than the
ordinary X-rays. Moreover a part of the energy of these X'-rays would
have to be destroyed, otherwise there would be no attraction. If you do
not wish it transformed into heat, which would lead to an enormous heat
production, you must suppose it radiated in every direction under the
form of secondary rays, which might be called X'' and which would have
to be much more penetrating still than the X'-rays, otherwise they would
in their turn derange the phenomena of attraction.

Such are the complicated hypotheses to which we are led when we try to
give life to the theory of Lesage.

But all we have said presupposes the ordinary laws of mechanics.

Will things go better if we admit the new dynamics? And first, can we
conserve the principles of relativity? Let us give at first to the
theory of Lesage its primitive form, and suppose space ploughed by
material corpuscles; if these corpuscles were perfectly elastic, the
laws of their impact would conform to this principle of relativity, but
we know that then their effect would be null. We must therefore suppose
these corpuscles are not elastic, and then it is difficult to imagine a
law of impact compatible with the principle of relativity. Besides, we
should still find a production of considerable heat, and yet a very
sensible resistance of the medium.

If we suppress these corpuscles and revert to the hypothesis of the
Maxwell-Bartholi pressure, the difficulties will not be less. This is
what Lorentz himself has attempted in his Memoir to the Amsterdam
Academy of Sciences of April 25, 1900.

Consider a system of electrons immersed in an ether permeated in every
sense by luminous waves; one of these electrons, struck by one of these
waves, begins to vibrate; its vibration will be synchronous with that of
light; but it may have a difference of phase, if the electron absorbs a
part of the incident energy. In fact, if it absorbs energy, this is
because the vibration of the ether _impels_ the electron; the electron
must therefore be slower than the ether. An electron in motion is
analogous to a convection current; therefore every magnetic field, in
particular that due to the luminous perturbation itself, must exert a
mechanical action upon this electron. This action is very slight;
moreover, it changes sign in the current of the period; nevertheless,
the mean action is not null if there is a difference of phase between
the vibrations of the electron and those of the ether. The mean action
is proportional to this difference, consequently to the energy absorbed
by the electron. I can not here enter into the detail of the
calculations; suffice it to say only that the final result is an
attraction of any two electrons, varying inversely as the square of the
distance and proportional to the energy absorbed by the two electrons.

Therefore there can not be attraction without absorption of light and,
consequently, without production of heat, and this it is which
determined Lorentz to abandon this theory, which, at bottom, does not
differ from that of Lesage-Maxwell-Bartholi. He would have been much
more dismayed still if he had pushed the calculation to the end. He
would have found that the temperature of the earth would have to
increase 10^{12} degrees a second.


IV

_Conclusions_

I have striven to give in few words an idea as complete as possible of
these new doctrines; I have sought to explain how they took birth;
otherwise the reader would have had ground to be frightened by their
boldness. The new theories are not yet demonstrated; far from it; only
they rest upon an aggregate of probabilities sufficiently weighty for us
not to have the right to treat them with disregard.

New experiments will doubtless teach us what we should finally think of
them. The knotty point of the question lies in Kaufmann's experiment and
those that may be undertaken to verify it.

In conclusion, permit me a word of warning. Suppose that, after some
years, these theories undergo new tests and triumph; then our secondary
education will incur a great danger; certain professors will doubtless
wish to make a place for the new theories.

Novelties are so attractive, and it is so hard not to seem highly
advanced! At least there will be the wish to open vistas to the pupils
and, before teaching them the ordinary mechanics, to let them know it
has had its day and was at best good enough for that old dolt Laplace.
And then they will not form the habit of the ordinary mechanics.

Is it well to let them know this is only approximative? Yes; but later,
when it has penetrated to their very marrow, when they shall have taken
the bent of thinking only through it, when there shall no longer be risk
of their unlearning it, then one may, without inconvenience, show them
its limits.

It is with the ordinary mechanics that they must live; this alone will
they ever have to apply. Whatever be the progress of automobilism, our
vehicles will never attain speeds where it is not true. The other is
only a luxury, and we should think of the luxury only when there is no
longer any risk of harming the necessary.




