BOOK IV


ASTRONOMIC SCIENCE




CHAPTER I

THE MILKY WAY AND THE THEORY OF GASES


The considerations to be here developed have scarcely as yet drawn the
attention of astronomers; there is hardly anything to cite except an
ingenious idea of Lord Kelvin's, which has opened a new field of
research, but still waits to be followed out. Nor have I original
results to impart, and all I can do is to give an idea of the problems
presented, but which no one hitherto has undertaken to solve. Every one
knows how a large number of modern physicists represent the constitution
of gases; gases are formed of an innumerable multitude of molecules
which, at high speeds, cross and crisscross in every direction. These
molecules probably act at a distance one upon another, but this action
decreases very rapidly with distance, so that their trajectories remain
sensibly straight; they cease to be so only when two molecules happen to
pass very near to each other; in this case, their mutual attraction or
repulsion makes them deviate to right or left. This is what is sometimes
called an impact; but the word _impact_ is not to be understood in its
usual sense; it is not necessary that the two molecules come into
contact, it suffices that they approach sufficiently near each other for
their mutual attractions to become sensible. The laws of the deviation
they undergo are the same as for a veritable impact.

It seems at first that the disorderly impacts of this innumerable dust
can engender only an inextricable chaos before which analysis must
recoil. But the law of great numbers, that supreme law of chance, comes
to our aid; in presence of a semi-disorder, we must despair, but in
extreme disorder, this statistical law reestablishes a sort of mean
order where the mind can recover. It is the study of this mean order
which constitutes the kinetic theory of gases; it shows us that the
velocities of the molecules are equally distributed among all the
directions, that the rapidity of these velocities varies from one
molecule to another, but that even this variation is subject to a law
called Maxwell's law. This law tells us how many of the molecules move
with such and such a velocity. As soon as the gas departs from this law,
the mutual impacts of the molecules, in modifying the rapidity and
direction of their velocities, tend to bring it promptly back.
Physicists have striven, not without success, to explain in this way the
experimental properties of gases; for example Mariotte's law.

Consider now the milky way; there also we see an innumerable dust; only
the grains of this dust are not atoms, they are stars; these grains move
also with high velocities; they act at a distance one upon another, but
this action is so slight at great distance that their trajectories are
straight; and yet, from time to time, two of them may approach near
enough to be deviated from their path, like a comet which has passed too
near Jupiter. In a word, to the eyes of a giant for whom our suns would
be as for us our atoms, the milky way would seem only a bubble of gas.

Such was Lord Kelvin's leading idea. What may be drawn from this
comparison? In how far is it exact? This is what we are to investigate
together; but before reaching a definite conclusion, and without wishing
to prejudge it, we foresee that the kinetic theory of gases will be for
the astronomer a model he should not follow blindly, but from which he
may advantageously draw inspiration. Up to the present, celestial
mechanics has attacked only the solar system or certain systems of
double stars. Before the assemblage presented by the milky way, or the
agglomeration of stars, or the resolvable nebulae it recoils, because it
sees therein only chaos. But the milky way is not more complicated than
a gas; the statistical methods founded upon the calculus of
probabilities applicable to a gas are also applicable to it. Before all,
it is important to grasp the resemblance of the two cases, and their
difference.

Lord Kelvin has striven to determine in this manner the dimensions of
the milky way; for that we are reduced to counting the stars visible in
our telescopes; but we are not sure that behind the stars we see, there
are not others we do not see; so that what we should measure in this way
would not be the size of the milky way, it would be the range of our
instruments.

The new theory comes to offer us other resources. In fact, we know the
motions of the stars nearest us, and we can form an idea of the rapidity
and direction of their velocities. If the ideas above set forth are
exact, these velocities should follow Maxwell's law, and their mean
value will tell us, so to speak, that which corresponds to the
temperature of our fictitious gas. But this temperature depends itself
upon the dimensions of our gas bubble. In fact, how will a gaseous mass
let loose in the void act, if its elements attract one another according
to Newton's law? It will take a spherical form; moreover, because of
gravitation, the density will be greater at the center, the pressure
also will increase from the surface to the center because of the weight
of the outer parts drawn toward the center; finally, the temperature
will increase toward the center: the temperature and the pressure being
connected by the law called adiabatic, as happens in the successive
layers of our atmosphere. At the surface itself, the pressure will be
null, and it will be the same with the absolute temperature, that is to
say with the velocity of the molecules.

A question comes here: I have spoken of the adiabatic law, but this law
is not the same for all gases, since it depends upon the ratio of their
two specific heats; for the air and like gases, this ratio is 1.42; but
is it to air that it is proper to liken the milky way? Evidently not, it
should be regarded as a mono-atomic gas, like mercury vapor, like argon,
like helium, that is to say that the ratio of the specific heats should
be taken equal to 1.66. And, in fact, one of our molecules would be for
example the solar system; but the planets are very small personages, the
sun alone counts, so that our molecule is indeed mono-atomic. And even
if we take a double star, it is probable that the action of a strange
star which might approach it would become sufficiently sensible to
deviate the motion of general translation of the system much before
being able to trouble the relative orbits of the two components; the
double star, in a word, would act like an indivisible atom.

However that may be, the pressure, and consequently the temperature, at
the center of the gaseous sphere would be by so much the greater as the
sphere was larger since the pressure increases by the weight of all the
superposed layers. We may suppose that we are nearly at the center of
the milky way, and by observing the mean proper velocity of the stars,
we shall know that which corresponds to the central temperature of our
gaseous sphere and we shall determine its radius.

We may get an idea of the result by the following considerations: make a
simpler hypothesis: the milky way is spherical, and in it the masses are
distributed in a homogeneous manner; thence results that the stars in it
describe ellipses having the same center. If we suppose the velocity
becomes nothing at the surface, we may calculate this velocity at the
center by the equation of vis viva. Thus we find that this velocity is
proportional to the radius of the sphere and to the square root of its
density. If the mass of this sphere was that of the sun and its radius
that of the terrestrial orbit, this velocity would be (it is easy to
see) that of the earth in its orbit. But in the case we have supposed,
the mass of the sun should be distributed in a sphere of radius
1,000,000 times greater, this radius being the distance of the nearest
stars; the density is therefore 10^{18} times less; now, the velocities
are of the same order, therefore it is necessary that the radius be
10^{9} times greater, be 1,000 times the distance of the nearest stars,
which would give about a thousand millions of stars in the milky way.

But you will say these hypothesis differ greatly from the reality;
first, the milky way is not spherical and we shall soon return to this
point, and again the kinetic theory of gases is not compatible with the
hypothesis of a homogeneous sphere. But in making the exact calculation
according to this theory, we should find a different result, doubtless,
but of the same order of magnitude; now in such a problem the data are
so uncertain that the order of magnitude is the sole end to be aimed at.

And here a first remark presents itself; Lord Kelvin's result, which I
have obtained again by an approximative calculation, agrees sensibly
with the evaluations the observers have made with their telescopes; so
that we must conclude we are very near to piercing through the milky
way. But that enables us to answer another question. There are the stars
we see because they shine; but may there not be dark stars circulating
in the interstellar spaces whose existence might long remain unknown?
But then, what Lord Kelvin's method would give us would be the total
number of stars, including the dark stars; as his figure is comparable
to that the telescope gives, this means there is no dark matter, or at
least not so much as of shining matter.

Before going further, we must look at the problem from another angle. Is
the milky way thus constituted truly the image of a gas properly so
called? You know Crookes has introduced the notion of a fourth state of
matter, where gases having become too rarefied are no longer true gases
and become what he calls radiant matter. Considering the slight density
of the milky way, is it the image of gaseous matter or of radiant
matter? The consideration of what is called the _free path_ will furnish
us the answer.

The trajectory of a gaseous molecule may be regarded as formed of
straight segments united by very small arcs corresponding to the
successive impacts. The length of each of these segments is what is
called the free path; of course this length is not the same for all the
segments and for all the molecules; but we may take a mean; this is what
is called the _mean path_. This is the greater the less the density of
the gas. The matter will be radiant if the mean path is greater than the
dimensions of the receptacle wherein the gas is enclosed, so that a
molecule has a chance to go across the whole receptacle without
undergoing an impact; if the contrary be the case, it is gaseous. From
this it follows that the same fluid may be radiant in a little
receptacle and gaseous in a big one; this perhaps is why, in a Crookes
tube, it is necessary to make the vacuum by so much the more complete as
the tube is larger.

How is it then for the milky way? This is a mass of gas of which the
density is very slight, but whose dimensions are very great; has a star
chances of traversing it without undergoing an impact, that is to say
without passing sufficiently near another star to be sensibly deviated
from its route! What do we mean by _sufficiently near_? That is perforce
a little arbitrary; take it as the distance from the sun to Neptune,
which would represent a deviation of a dozen degrees; suppose therefore
each of our stars surrounded by a protective sphere of this radius;
could a straight pass between these spheres? At the mean distance of the
stars of the milky way, the radius of these spheres will be seen under
an angle of about a tenth of a second; and we have a thousand millions
of stars. Put upon the celestial sphere a thousand million little
circles of a tenth of a second radius. Are the chances that these
circles will cover a great number of times the celestial sphere? Far
from it; they will cover only its sixteen thousandth part. So the milky
way is not the image of gaseous matter, but of Crookes' radiant matter.
Nevertheless, as our foregoing conclusions are happily not at all
precise, we need not sensibly modify them.

But there is another difficulty: the milky way is not spherical, and we
have reasoned hitherto as if it were, since this is the form of
equilibrium a gas isolated in space would take. To make amends,
agglomerations of stars exist whose form is globular and to which would
better apply what we have hitherto said. Herschel has already endeavored
to explain their remarkable appearances. He supposed the stars of the
aggregates uniformly distributed, so that an assemblage is a homogeneous
sphere; each star would then describe an ellipse and all these orbits
would be passed over in the same time, so that at the end of a period
the aggregate would take again its primitive configuration and this
configuration would be stable. Unluckily, the aggregates do not appear
to be homogeneous; we see a condensation at the center, we should
observe it even were the sphere homogeneous, since it is thicker at the
center; but it would not be so accentuated. We may therefore rather
compare an aggregate to a gas in adiabatic equilibrium, which takes the
spherical form because this is the figure of equilibrium of a gaseous
mass.

But, you will say, these aggregates are much smaller than the milky way,
of which they even in probability make part, and even though they be
more dense, they will rather present something analogous to radiant
matter; now, gases attain their adiabatic equilibrium only through
innumerable impacts of the molecules. That might perhaps be adjusted.
Suppose the stars of the aggregate have just enough energy for their
velocity to become null when they reach the surface; then they may
traverse the aggregate without impact, but arrived at the surface they
will go back and will traverse it anew; after a great number of
crossings, they will at last be deviated by an impact; under these
conditions, we should still have a matter which might be regarded as
gaseous; if perchance there had been in the aggregate stars whose
velocity was greater, they have long gone away out of it, they have left
it never to return. For all these reasons, it would be interesting to
examine the known aggregates, to seek to account for the law of the
densities, and to see if it is the adiabatic law of gases.

But to return to the milky way; it is not spherical and would rather be
represented as a flattened disc. It is clear then that a mass starting
without velocity from the surface will reach the center with different
velocities, according as it starts from the surface in the neighborhood
of the middle of the disc or just on the border of the disc; the
velocity would be notably greater in the latter case. Now, up to the
present, we have supposed that the proper velocities of the stars, those
we observe, must be comparable to those which like masses would attain;
this involves a certain difficulty. We have given above a value for the
dimensions of the milky way, and we have deduced it from the observed
proper velocities which are of the same order of magnitude as that of
the earth in its orbit; but which is the dimension we have thus
measured? Is it the thickness? Is it the radius of the disc? It is
doubtless something intermediate; but what can we say then of the
thickness itself, or of the radius of the disc? Data are lacking to make
the calculation; I shall confine myself to giving a glimpse of the
possibility of basing an evaluation at least approximate upon a deeper
discussion of the proper motions.

And then we find ourselves facing two hypotheses: either the stars of
the milky way are impelled by velocities for the most part parallel to
the galactic plane, but otherwise distributed uniformly in all
directions parallel to this plane. If this be so, observation of the
proper motions should show a preponderance of components parallel to the
milky way; this is to be determined, because I do not know whether a
systematic discussion has ever been made from this view-point. On the
other hand, such an equilibrium could only be provisory, since because
of impacts the molecules, I mean the stars, would in the long run
acquire notable velocities in the sense perpendicular to the milky way
and would end by swerving from its plane, so that the system would tend
toward the spherical form, the only figure of equilibrium of an isolated
gaseous mass.

Or else the whole system is impelled by a common rotation, and for that
reason is flattened like the earth, like Jupiter, like all bodies that
twirl. Only, as the flattening is considerable, the rotation must be
rapid; rapid doubtless, but it must be understood in what sense this
word is used. The density of the milky way is 10^{23} times less than
that of the sun; a velocity of rotation sqrt(10^{25}) times less than
that of the sun, for it would, therefore, be the equivalent so far as
concerns flattening; a velocity 10^{12} times slower than that of the
earth, say a thirtieth of a second of arc in a century, would be a very
rapid rotation, almost too rapid for stable equilibrium to be possible.

In this hypothesis, the observable proper motions would appear to us
uniformly distributed, and there would no longer be a preponderance of
components parallel to the galactic plane.

They will tell us nothing about the rotation itself, since we belong to
the turning system. If the spiral nebulæ are other milky ways, foreign
to ours, they are not borne along in this rotation, and we might study
their proper motions. It is true they are very far away; if a nebula has
the dimensions of the milky way and if its apparent radius is for
example 20", its distance is 10,000 times the radius of the milky way.

But that makes no difference, since it is not about the translation of
our system that we ask information from them, but about its rotation.
The fixed stars, by their apparent motion, reveal to us the diurnal
rotation of the earth, though their distance is immense. Unluckily, the
possible rotation of the milky way, however rapid it may be relatively,
is very slow viewed absolutely, and besides the pointings on nebulæ can
not be very precise; therefore thousands of years of observations would
be necessary to learn anything.

However that may be, in this second hypothesis, the figure of the milky
way would be a figure of final equilibrium.

I shall not further discuss the relative value of these two hypotheses
since there is a third which is perhaps more probable. We know that
among the irresolvable nebulæ, several kinds may be distinguished: the
irregular nebulæ like that of Orion, the planetary and annular nebulæ,
the spiral nebulæ. The spectra of the first two families have been
determined, they are discontinuous; these nebulæ are therefore not
formed of stars; besides, their distribution on the heavens seems to
depend upon the milky way; whether they have a tendency to go away from
it, or on the contrary to approach it, they make therefore a part of the
system. On the other hand, the spiral nebulæ are generally considered as
independent of the milky way; it is supposed that they, like it, are
formed of a multitude of stars, that they are, in a word, other milky
ways very far away from ours. The recent investigations of Stratonoff
tend to make us regard the milky way itself as a spiral nebula, and this
is the third hypothesis of which I wish to speak.

How can we explain the very singular appearances presented by the spiral
nebulæ, which are too regular and too constant to be due to chance?
First of all, to take a look at one of these representations is enough
to see that the mass is in rotation; we may even see what the sense of
the rotation is; all the spiral radii are curved in the same sense; it
is evident that the _moving wing_ lags behind the pivot and that fixes
the sense of the rotation. But this is not all; it is evident that these
nebulæ can not be likened to a gas at rest, nor even to a gas in
relative equilibrium under the sway of a uniform rotation; they are to
be compared to a gas in permanent motion in which internal currents
prevail.

Suppose, for example, that the rotation of the central nucleus is rapid
(you know what I mean by this word), too rapid for stable equilibrium;
then at the equator the centrifugal force will drive it away over the
attraction, and the stars will tend to break away at the equator and
will form divergent currents; but in going away, as their moment of
rotation remains constant, while the radius vector augments, their
angular velocity will diminish, and this is why the moving wing seems to
lag back.

From this point of view, there would not be a real permanent motion, the
central nucleus would constantly lose matter which would go out of it
never to return, and would drain away progressively. But we may modify
the hypothesis. In proportion as it goes away, the star loses its
velocity and ends by stopping; at this moment attraction regains
possession of it and leads it back toward the nucleus; so there will be
centripetal currents. We must suppose the centripetal currents are the
first rank and the centrifugal currents the second rank, if we adopt the
comparison with a troop in battle executing a change of front; and, in
fact, it is necessary that the composite centrifugal force be
compensated by the attraction exercised by the central layers of the
swarm upon the extreme layers.

Besides, at the end of a certain time a permanent régime establishes
itself; the swarm being curved, the attraction exercised upon the pivot
by the moving wing tends to slow up the pivot and that of the pivot upon
the moving wing tends to accelerate the advance of this wing which no
longer augments its lag, so that finally all the radii end by turning
with a uniform velocity. We may still suppose that the rotation of the
nucleus is quicker than that of the radii.

A question remains; why do these centripetal and centrifugal swarms tend
to concentrate themselves in radii instead of disseminating themselves a
little everywhere? Why do these rays distribute themselves regularly? If
the swarms concentrate themselves, it is because of the attraction
exercised by the already existing swarms upon the stars which go out
from the nucleus in their neighborhood. After an inequality is produced,
it tends to accentuate itself in this way.

Why do the rays distribute themselves regularly? That is less obvious.
Suppose there is no rotation, that all the stars are in two planes at
right angles, in such a way that their distribution is symmetric with
regard to these two planes.

By symmetry, there would be no reason for their going out of these
planes, nor for the symmetry changing. This configuration would give us
therefore equilibrium, but _this would be an unstable equilibrium_.

If on the contrary, there is rotation, we shall find an analogous
configuration of equilibrium with four curved rays, equal to each other
and intersecting at 90°, and if the rotation is sufficiently rapid, this
equilibrium is stable.

I am not in position to make this more precise: enough if you see that
these spiral forms may perhaps some day be explained by only the law of
gravitation and statistical consideration recalling those of the theory
of gases.

What has been said of internal currents shows it is of interest to
discuss systematically the aggregate of proper motions; this may be done
in a hundred years, when the second edition is issued of the chart of
the heavens and compared with the first, that we now are making.

But, in conclusion, I wish to call your attention to a question, that of
the age of the milky way or the nebulæ. If what we think we see is
confirmed, we can get an idea of it. That sort of statistical
equilibrium of which gases give us the model is established only in
consequence of a great number of impacts. If these impacts are rare, it
can come about only after a very long time; if really the milky way (or
at least the agglomerations which are contained in it), if the nebulæ
have attained this equilibrium, this means they are very old, and we
shall have an inferior limit of their age. Likewise we should have of it
a superior limit; this equilibrium is not final and can not last always.
Our spiral nebulæ would be comparable to gases impelled by permanent
motions; but gases in motion are viscous and their velocities end by
wearing out. What here corresponds to the viscosity (and which depends
upon the chances of impact of the molecules) is excessively slight, so
that the present régime may persist during an extremely long time, yet
not forever, so that our milky ways can not live eternally nor become
infinitely old.

And this is not all. Consider our atmosphere: at the surface must reign
a temperature infinitely small and the velocity of the molecules there
is near zero. But this is a question only of the mean velocity; as a
consequence of impacts, one of these molecules may acquire (rarely, it
is true) an enormous velocity, and then it will rush out of the
atmosphere, and once out, it will never return; therefore our atmosphere
drains off thus with extreme slowness. The milky way also from time to
time loses a star by the same mechanism, and that likewise limits its
duration.

Well, it is certain that if we compute in this manner the age of the
milky way, we shall get enormous figures. But here a difficulty presents
itself. Certain physicists, relying upon other considerations, reckon
that suns can have only an ephemeral existence, about fifty million
years; our minimum would be much greater than that. Must we believe that
the evolution of the milky way began when the matter was still dark? But
how have the stars composing it reached all at the same time adult age,
an age so briefly to endure? Or must they reach there all successively,
and are those we see only a feeble minority compared with those
extinguished or which shall one day light up? But how reconcile that
with what we have said above on the absence of a noteworthy proportion
of dark matter? Should we abandon one of the two hypotheses, and which?
I confine myself to pointing out the difficulty without pretending to
solve it; I shall end therefore with a big interrogation point.

However, it is interesting to set problems, even when their solution
seems very far away.




