CHAPTER II

THE FUTURE OF MATHEMATICS


To foresee the future of mathematics, the true method is to study its
history and its present state.

Is this not for us mathematicians in a way a professional procedure? We
are accustomed to _extrapolate_, which is a means of deducing the future
from the past and present, and as we well know what this amounts to, we
run no risk of deceiving ourselves about the range of the results it
gives us.

We have had hitherto prophets of evil. They blithely reiterate that all
problems capable of solution have already been solved, and that nothing
is left but gleaning. Happily the case of the past reassures us. Often
it was thought all problems were solved or at least an inventory was
made of all admitting solution. And then the sense of the word solution
enlarged, the insoluble problems became the most interesting of all, and
others unforeseen presented themselves. For the Greeks a good solution
was one employing only ruler and compasses; then it became one obtained
by the extraction of roots, then one using only algebraic or logarithmic
functions. The pessimists thus found themselves always outflanked,
always forced to retreat, so that at present I think there are no more.

My intention, therefore, is not to combat them, as they are dead; we
well know that mathematics will continue to develop, but the question is
how, in what direction? You will answer, 'in every direction,' and that
is partly true; but if it were wholly true it would be a little
appalling. Our riches would soon become encumbering and their
accumulation would produce a medley as impenetrable as the unknown true
was for the ignorant.

The historian, the physicist, even, must make a choice among facts; the
head of the scientist, which is only a corner of the universe, could
never contain the universe entire; so that among the innumerable facts
nature offers, some will be passed by, others retained.

Just so, _a fortiori_, in mathematics; no more can the geometer hold
fast pell-mell all the facts presenting themselves to him; all the more
because he it is, almost I had said his caprice, that creates these
facts. He constructs a wholly new combination by putting together its
elements; nature does not in general give it to him ready made.

Doubtless it sometimes happens that the mathematician undertakes a
problem to satisfy a need in physics; that the physicist or engineer
asks him to calculate a number for a certain application. Shall it be
said that we geometers should limit ourselves to awaiting orders, and,
in place of cultivating our science for our own delectation, try only to
accommodate ourselves to the wants of our patrons? If mathematics has no
other object besides aiding those who study nature, it is from these we
should await orders. Is this way of looking at it legitimate? Certainly
not; if we had not cultivated the exact sciences for themselves, we
should not have created mathematics the instrument, and the day the call
came from the physicist we should have been helpless.

Nor do the physicists wait to study a phenomenon until some urgent need
of material life has made it a necessity for them; and they are right.
If the scientists of the eighteenth century had neglected electricity as
being in their eyes only a curiosity without practical interest, we
should have had in the twentieth century neither telegraphy, nor
electro-chemistry, nor electro-technics. The physicists, compelled to
choose, are therefore not guided in their choice solely by utility. How
then do they choose between the facts of nature? We have explained it in
the preceding chapter: the facts which interest them are those capable
of leading to the discovery of a law, and so they are analogous to many
other facts which do not seem to us isolated, but closely grouped with
others. The isolated fact attracts all eyes, those of the layman as well
as of the scientist. But what the genuine physicist alone knows how to
see, is the bond which unites many facts whose analogy is profound but
hidden. The story of Newton's apple is probably not true, but it is
symbolic; let us speak of it then as if it were true. Well then, we must
believe that before Newton plenty of men had seen apples fall; not one
knew how to conclude anything therefrom. Facts would be sterile were
there not minds capable of choosing among them, discerning those behind
which something was hidden, and of recognizing what is hiding, minds
which under the crude fact perceive the soul of the fact.

We find just the same thing in mathematics. From the varied elements at
our disposal we can get millions of different combinations; but one of
these combinations, in so far as it is isolated, is absolutely void of
value. Often we have taken great pains to construct it, but it serves no
purpose, if not perhaps to furnish a task in secondary education. Quite
otherwise will it be when this combination shall find place in a class
of analogous combinations and we shall have noticed this analogy. We are
no longer in the presence of a fact, but of a law. And upon that day the
real discoverer will not be the workman who shall have patiently built
up certain of these combinations; it will be he who brings to light
their kinship. The first will have seen merely the crude fact, only the
other will have perceived the soul of the fact. Often to fix this
kinship it suffices him to make a new word, and this word is creative.
The history of science furnishes us a crowd of examples familiar to all.

The celebrated Vienna philosopher Mach has said that the rôle of science
is to produce economy of thought, just as machines produce economy of
effort. And that is very true. The savage reckons on his fingers or by
heaping pebbles. In teaching children the multiplication table we spare
them later innumerable pebble bunchings. Some one has already found out,
with pebbles or otherwise, that 6 times 7 is 42 and has had the idea of
noting the result, and so we need not do it over again. He did not waste
his time even if he reckoned for pleasure: his operation took him only
two minutes; it would have taken in all two milliards if a milliard men
had had to do it over after him.

The importance of a fact then is measured by its yield, that is to say,
by the amount of thought it permits us to spare.

In physics the facts of great yield are those entering into a very
general law, since from it they enable us to foresee a great number of
others, and just so it is in mathematics. Suppose I have undertaken a
complicated calculation and laboriously reached a result: I shall not
be compensated for my trouble if thereby I have not become capable of
foreseeing the results of other analogous calculations and guiding them
with a certainty that avoids the gropings to which one must be resigned
in a first attempt. On the other hand, I shall not have wasted my time
if these gropings themselves have ended by revealing to me the profound
analogy of the problem just treated with a much more extended class of
other problems; if they have shown me at once the resemblances and
differences of these, if in a word they have made me perceive the
possibility of a generalization. Then it is not a new result I have won,
it is a new power.

The simple example that comes first to mind is that of an algebraic
formula which gives us the solution of a type of numeric problems when
finally we replace the letters by numbers. Thanks to it, a single
algebraic calculation saves us the pains of ceaselessly beginning over
again new numeric calculations. But this is only a crude example; we all
know there are analogies inexpressible by a formula and all the more
precious.

A new result is of value, if at all, when in unifying elements long
known but hitherto separate and seeming strangers one to another it
suddenly introduces order where apparently disorder reigned. It then
permits us to see at a glance each of these elements and its place in
the assemblage. This new fact is not merely precious by itself, but it
alone gives value to all the old facts it combines. Our mind is weak as
are the senses; it would lose itself in the world's complexity were this
complexity not harmonious; like a near-sighted person, it would see only
the details and would be forced to forget each of these details before
examining the following, since it would be incapable of embracing all.
The only facts worthy our attention are those which introduce order into
this complexity and so make it accessible.

Mathematicians attach great importance to the elegance of their methods
and their results. This is not pure dilettantism. What is it indeed that
gives us the feeling of elegance in a solution, in a demonstration? It
is the harmony of the diverse parts, their symmetry, their happy
balance; in a word it is all that introduces order, all that gives
unity, that permits us to see clearly and to comprehend at once both the
_ensemble_ and the details. But this is exactly what yields great
results; in fact the more we see this aggregate clearly and at a single
glance, the better we perceive its analogies with other neighboring
objects, consequently the more chances we have of divining the possible
generalizations. Elegance may produce the feeling of the unforeseen by
the unexpected meeting of objects we are not accustomed to bring
together; there again it is fruitful, since it thus unveils for us
kinships before unrecognized. It is fruitful even when it results only
from the contrast between the simplicity of the means and the complexity
of the problem set; it makes us then think of the reason for this
contrast and very often makes us see that chance is not the reason; that
it is to be found in some unexpected law. In a word, the feeling of
mathematical elegance is only the satisfaction due to any adaptation of
the solution to the needs of our mind, and it is because of this very
adaptation that this solution can be for us an instrument. Consequently
this esthetic satisfaction is bound up with the economy of thought.
Again the comparison of the Erechtheum comes to my mind, but I must not
use it too often.

It is for the same reason that, when a rather long calculation has led
to some simple and striking result, we are not satisfied until we have
shown that we should have been _able to foresee_, if not this entire
result, at least its most characteristic traits. Why? What prevents our
being content with a calculation which has told us, it seems, all we
wished to know? It is because, in analogous cases, the long calculation
might not again avail, and that this is not so about the reasoning often
half intuitive which would have enabled us to foresee. This reasoning
being short, we see at a single glance all its parts, so that we
immediately perceive what must be changed to adapt it to all the
problems of the same nature which can occur. And then it enables us to
foresee if the solution of these problems will be simple, it shows us at
least if the calculation is worth undertaking.

What we have just said suffices to show how vain it would be to seek to
replace by any mechanical procedure the free initiative of the
mathematician. To obtain a result of real value, it is not enough to
grind out calculations, or to have a machine to put things in order; it
is not order alone, it is unexpected order, which is worth while. The
machine may gnaw on the crude fact, the soul of the fact will always
escape it.

Since the middle of the last century, mathematicians are more and more
desirous of attaining absolute rigor; they are right, and this tendency
will be more and more accentuated. In mathematics rigor is not
everything, but without it there is nothing. A demonstration which is
not rigorous is nothingness. I think no one will contest this truth. But
if it were taken too literally, we should be led to conclude that before
1820, for example, there was no mathematics; this would be manifestly
excessive; the geometers of that time understood voluntarily what we
explain by prolix discourse. This does not mean that they did not see it
at all; but they passed over it too rapidly, and to see it well would
have necessitated taking the pains to say it.

But is it always needful to say it so many times? Those who were the
first to emphasize exactness before all else have given us arguments
that we may try to imitate; but if the demonstrations of the future are
to be built on this model, mathematical treatises will be very long; and
if I fear the lengthenings, it is not solely because I deprecate
encumbering libraries, but because I fear that in being lengthened out,
our demonstrations may lose that appearance of harmony whose usefulness
I have just explained.

The economy of thought is what we should aim at, so it is not enough to
supply models for imitation. It is needful for those after us to be able
to dispense with these models and, in place of repeating an argument
already made, summarize it in a few words. And this has already been
attained at times. For instance, there was a type of reasoning found
everywhere, and everywhere alike. They were perfectly exact but long.
Then all at once the phrase 'uniformity of convergence' was hit upon and
this phrase made those arguments needless; we were no longer called upon
to repeat them, since they could be understood. Those who conquer
difficulties then do us a double service: first they teach us to do as
they at need, but above all they enable us as often as possible to avoid
doing as they, yet without sacrifice of exactness.

We have just seen by one example the importance of words in mathematics,
but many others could be cited. It is hard to believe how much a
well-chosen word can economize thought, as Mach says. Perhaps I have
already said somewhere that mathematics is the art of giving the same
name to different things. It is proper that these things, differing in
matter, be alike in form, that they may, so to speak, run in the same
mold. When the language has been well chosen, we are astonished to see
that all the proofs made for a certain object apply immediately to many
new objects; there is nothing to change, not even the words, since the
names have become the same.

A well-chosen word usually suffices to do away with the exceptions from
which the rules stated in the old way suffer; this is why we have
created negative quantities, imaginaries, points at infinity, and what
not. And exceptions, we must not forget, are pernicious because they
hide the laws.

Well, this is one of the characteristics by which we recognize the facts
which yield great results. They are those which allow of these happy
innovations of language. The crude fact then is often of no great
interest; we may point it out many times without having rendered great
service to science. It takes value only when a wiser thinker perceives
the relation for which it stands, and symbolizes it by a word.

Moreover the physicists do just the same. They have invented the word
'energy,' and this word has been prodigiously fruitful, because it also
made the law by eliminating the exceptions, since it gave the same name
to things differing in matter and like in form.

Among words that have had the most fortunate influence I would select
'group' and 'invariant.' They have made us see the essence of many
mathematical reasonings; they have shown us in how many cases the old
mathematicians considered groups without knowing it, and how, believing
themselves far from one another, they suddenly found themselves near
without knowing why.

To-day we should say that they had dealt with isomorphic groups. We now
know that in a group the matter is of little interest, the form alone
counts, and that when we know a group we thus know all the isomorphic
groups; and thanks to these words 'group' and 'isomorphism,' which
condense in a few syllables this subtile rule and quickly make it
familiar to all minds, the transition is immediate and can be done with
every economy of thought effort. The idea of group besides attaches to
that of transformation. Why do we put such a value on the invention of a
new transformation? Because from a single theorem it enables us to get
ten or twenty; it has the same value as a zero adjoined to the right of
a whole number.

This then it is which has hitherto determined the direction of
mathematical advance, and just as certainly will determine it in the
future. But to this end the nature of the problems which come up
contributes equally. We can not forget what must be our aim. In my
opinion this aim is double. Our science borders upon both philosophy and
physics, and we work for our two neighbors; so we have always seen and
shall still see mathematicians advancing in two opposite directions.

On the one hand, mathematical science must reflect upon itself, and that
is useful since reflecting on itself is reflecting on the human mind
which has created it, all the more because it is the very one of its
creations for which it has borrowed least from without. This is why
certain mathematical speculations are useful, such as those devoted to
the study of the postulates, of unusual geometries, of peculiar
functions. The more these speculations diverge from ordinary
conceptions, and consequently from nature and applications, the better
they show us what the human mind can create when it frees itself more
and more from the tyranny of the external world, the better therefore
they let us know it in itself.

But it is toward the other side, the side of nature, that we must direct
the bulk of our army. There we meet the physicist or the engineer, who
says to us: "Please integrate this differential equation for me; I might
need it in a week in view of a construction which should be finished by
that time." "This equation," we answer, "does not come under one of the
integrable types; you know there are not many." "Yes, I know; but then
what good are you?" Usually to understand each other is enough; the
engineer in reality does not need the integral in finite terms; he
needs to know the general look of the integral function, or he simply
wants a certain number which could readily be deduced from this integral
if it were known. Usually it is not known, but the number can be
calculated without it if we know exactly what number the engineer needs
and with what approximation.

Formerly an equation was considered solved only when its solution had
been expressed by aid of a finite number of known functions; but that is
possible scarcely once in a hundred times. What we always can do, or
rather what we should always seek to do, is to solve the problem
_qualitatively_ so to speak; that is to say, seek to know the general
form of the curve which represents the unknown function.

It remains to find the _quantitative_ solution of the problem; but if
the unknown can not be determined by a finite calculation, it may always
be represented by a convergent infinite series which enables us to
calculate it. Can that be regarded as a true solution? We are told that
Newton sent Leibnitz an anagram almost like this: aaaaabbbeeeeij, etc.
Leibnitz naturally understood nothing at all of it; but we, who have the
key, know that this anagram meant, translated into modern terms: "I can
integrate all differential equations"; and we are tempted to say that
Newton had either great luck or strange delusions. He merely wished to
say he could form (by the method of indeterminate coefficients) a series
of powers formally satisfying the proposed equation.

Such a solution would not satisfy us to-day, and for two reasons:
because the convergence is too slow and because the terms follow each
other without obeying any law. On the contrary, the series [Theta] seems
to us to leave nothing to be desired, first because it converges very
quickly (this is for the practical man who wishes to get at a number as
quickly as possible) and next because we see at a glance the law of the
terms (this is to satisfy the esthetic need of the theorist).

But then there are no longer solved problems and others which are not;
there are only problems _more or less_ solved, according as they are
solved by a series converging more or less rapidly, or ruled by a law
more or less harmonious. It often happens however that an imperfect
solution guides us toward a better one. Sometimes the series converges
so slowly that the computation is impracticable and we have only
succeeded in proving the possibility of the problem.

And then the engineer finds this a mockery, and justly, since it will
not aid him to complete his construction by the date fixed. He little
cares to know if it will benefit engineers of the twenty-second century.
But as for us, we think differently and we are sometimes happier to have
spared our grandchildren a day's work than to have saved our
contemporaries an hour.

Sometimes by groping, empirically, so to speak, we reach a formula
sufficiently convergent. "What more do you want?" says the engineer. And
yet, in spite of all, we are not satisfied; we should have liked _to
foresee_ that convergence. Why? Because if we had known how to foresee
it once, we would know how to foresee it another time. We have
succeeded; that is a small matter in our eyes if we can not validly
expect to do so again.

In proportion as science develops, its total comprehension becomes more
difficult; then we seek to cut it in pieces and to be satisfied with one
of these pieces: in a word, to specialize. If we went on in this way, it
would be a grievous obstacle to the progress of science. As we have
said, it is by unexpected union between its diverse parts that it
progresses. To specialize too much would be to forbid these drawings
together. It is to be hoped that congresses like those of Heidelberg and
Rome, by putting us in touch with one another, will open for us vistas
over neighboring domains and oblige us to compare them with our own, to
range somewhat abroad from our own little village; thus they will be the
best remedy for the danger just mentioned.

But I have lingered too long over generalities; it is time to enter into
detail.

Let us pass in review the various special sciences which combined make
mathematics; let us see what each has accomplished, whither it tends and
what we may hope from it. If the preceding views are correct, we should
see that the greatest advances in the past have happened when two of
these sciences have united, when we have become conscious of the
similarity of their form, despite the difference of their matter, when
they have so modeled themselves upon each other that each could profit
by the other's conquests. We should at the same time foresee in
combinations of the same sort the progress of the future.


ARITHMETIC

Progress in arithmetic has been much slower than in algebra and
analysis, and it is easy to see why. The feeling of continuity is a
precious guide which the arithmetician lacks; each whole number is
separated from the others--it has, so to speak, its own individuality.
Each of them is a sort of exception and this is why general theorems are
rarer in the theory of numbers; this is also why those which exist are
more hidden and longer elude the searchers.

If arithmetic is behind algebra and analysis, the best thing for it to
do is to seek to model itself upon these sciences so as to profit by
their advance. The arithmetician ought therefore to take as guide the
analogies with algebra. These analogies are numerous and if, in many
cases, they have not yet been studied sufficiently closely to become
utilizable, they at least have long been foreseen, and even the language
of the two sciences shows they have been recognized. Thus we speak of
transcendent numbers and thus we account for the future classification
of these numbers already having as model the classification of
transcendent functions, and still we do not as yet very well see how to
pass from one classification to the other; but had it been seen, it
would already have been accomplished and would no longer be the work of
the future.

The first example that comes to my mind is the theory of congruences,
where is found a perfect parallelism to the theory of algebraic
equations. Surely we shall succeed in completing this parallelism, which
must hold for instance between the theory of algebraic curves and that
of congruences with two variables. And when the problems relative to
congruences with several variables shall be solved, this will be a first
step toward the solution of many questions of indeterminate analysis.


ALGEBRA

The theory of algebraic equations will still long hold the attention of
geometers; numerous and very different are the sides whence it may be
attacked.

We need not think algebra is ended because it gives us rules to form all
possible combinations; it remains to find the interesting combinations,
those which satisfy such and such a condition. Thus will be formed a
sort of indeterminate analysis where the unknowns will no longer be
whole numbers, but polynomials. This time it is algebra which will model
itself upon arithmetic, following the analogy of the whole number to the
integral polynomial with any coefficients or to the integral polynomial
with integral coefficients.


GEOMETRY

It looks as if geometry could contain nothing which is not already
included in algebra or analysis; that geometric facts are only algebraic
or analytic facts expressed in another language. It might then be
thought that after our review there would remain nothing more for us to
say relating specially to geometry. This would be to fail to recognize
the importance of well-constructed language, not to comprehend what is
added to the things themselves by the method of expressing these things
and consequently of grouping them.

First the geometric considerations lead us to set ourselves new
problems; these may be, if you choose, analytic problems, but such as we
never would have set ourselves in connection with analysis. Analysis
profits by them however, as it profits by those it has to solve to
satisfy the needs of physics.

A great advantage of geometry lies in the fact that in it the senses can
come to the aid of thought, and help find the path to follow, and many
minds prefer to put the problems of analysis into geometric form.
Unhappily our senses can not carry us very far, and they desert us when
we wish to soar beyond the classical three dimensions. Does this mean
that, beyond the restricted domain wherein they seem to wish to imprison
us, we should rely only on pure analysis and that all geometry of more
than three dimensions is vain and objectless? The greatest masters of a
preceding generation would have answered 'yes'; to-day we are so
familiarized with this notion that we can speak of it, even in a
university course, without arousing too much astonishment.

But what good is it? That is easy to see: First it gives us a very
convenient terminology, which expresses concisely what the ordinary
analytic language would say in prolix phrases. Moreover, this language
makes us call like things by the same name and emphasize analogies it
will never again let us forget. It enables us therefore still to find
our way in this space which is too big for us and which we can not see,
always recalling visible space, which is only an imperfect image of it
doubtless, but which is nevertheless an image. Here again, as in all the
preceding examples, it is analogy with the simple which enables us to
comprehend the complex.

This geometry of more than three dimensions is not a simple analytic
geometry; it is not purely quantitative, but qualitative also, and it is
in this respect above all that it becomes interesting. There is a
science called _analysis situs_ and which has for its object the study
of the positional relations of the different elements of a figure, apart
from their sizes. This geometry is purely qualitative; its theorems
would remain true if the figures, instead of being exact, were roughly
imitated by a child. We may also make an _analysis situs_ of more than
three dimensions. The importance of _analysis situs_ is enormous and can
not be too much emphasized; the advantage obtained from it by Riemann,
one of its chief creators, would suffice to prove this. We must achieve
its complete construction in the higher spaces; then we shall have an
instrument which will enable us really to see in hyperspace and
supplement our senses.

The problems of _analysis situs_ would perhaps not have suggested
themselves if the analytic language alone had been spoken; or rather, I
am mistaken, they would have occurred surely, since their solution is
essential to a crowd of questions in analysis, but they would have come
singly, one after another, and without our being able to perceive their
common bond.


CANTORISM

I have spoken above of our need to go back continually to the first
principles of our science, and of the advantage of this for the study of
the human mind. This need has inspired two endeavors which have taken a
very prominent place in the most recent annals of mathematics. The first
is Cantorism, which has rendered our science such conspicuous service.
Cantor introduced into science a new way of considering mathematical
infinity. One of the characteristic traits of Cantorism is that in place
of going up to the general by building up constructions more and more
complicated and defining by construction, it starts from the _genus
supremum_ and defines only, as the scholastics would have said, _per
genus proximum et differentiam specificam_. Thence comes the horror it
has sometimes inspired in certain minds, for instance in Hermite, whose
favorite idea was to compare the mathematical to the natural sciences.
With most of us these prejudices have been dissipated, but it has come
to pass that we have encountered certain paradoxes, certain apparent
contradictions that would have delighted Zeno, the Eleatic and the
school of Megara. And then each must seek the remedy. For my part, I
think, and I am not the only one, that the important thing is never to
introduce entities not completely definable in a finite number of words.
Whatever be the cure adopted, we may promise ourselves the joy of the
doctor called in to follow a beautiful pathologic case.


THE INVESTIGATION OF THE POSTULATES

On the other hand, efforts have been made to enumerate the axioms and
postulates, more or less hidden, which serve as foundation to the
different theories of mathematics. Professor Hilbert has obtained the
most brilliant results. It seems at first that this domain would be very
restricted and there would be nothing more to do when the inventory
should be ended, which could not take long. But when we shall have
enumerated all, there will be many ways of classifying all; a good
librarian always finds something to do, and each new classification will
be instructive for the philosopher.

Here I end this review which I could not dream of making complete. I
think these examples will suffice to show by what mechanism the
mathematical sciences have made their progress in the past and in what
direction they must advance in the future.




