CHAPTER IV

THE NEW LOGICS


I

_The Russell Logic_

To justify its pretensions, logic had to change. We have seen new logics
arise of which the most interesting is that of Russell. It seems he has
nothing new to write about formal logic, as if Aristotle there had
touched bottom. But the domain Russell attributes to logic is infinitely
more extended than that of the classic logic, and he has put forth on
the subject views which are original and at times well warranted.

First, Russell subordinates the logic of classes to that of
propositions, while the logic of Aristotle was above all the logic of
classes and took as its point of departure the relation of subject to
predicate. The classic syllogism, "Socrates is a man," etc., gives place
to the hypothetical syllogism: "If _A_ is true, _B_ is true; now if _B_
is true, _C_ is true," etc. And this is, I think, a most happy idea,
because the classic syllogism is easy to carry back to the hypothetical
syllogism, while the inverse transformation is not without difficulty.

And then this is not all. Russell's logic of propositions is the study
of the laws of combination of the conjunctions _if_, _and_, _or_, and
the negation _not_.

In adding here two other conjunctions, _and_ and _or_, Russell opens to
logic a new field. The symbols _and_, _or_ follow the same laws as the
two signs × and +, that is to say the commutative associative and
distributive laws. Thus _and_ represents logical multiplication, while
_or_ represents logical addition. This also is very interesting.

Russell reaches the conclusion that any false proposition implies all
other propositions true or false. M. Couturat says this conclusion will
at first seem paradoxical. It is sufficient however to have corrected a
bad thesis in mathematics to recognize how right Russell is. The
candidate often is at great pains to get the first false equation; but
that once obtained, it is only sport then for him to accumulate the most
surprising results, some of which even may be true.


II

We see how much richer the new logic is than the classic logic; the
symbols are multiplied and allow of varied combinations _which are no
longer limited in number_. Has one the right to give this extension to
the meaning of the word _logic_? It would be useless to examine this
question and to seek with Russell a mere quarrel about words. Grant him
what he demands; but be not astonished if certain verities declared
irreducible to logic in the old sense of the word find themselves now
reducible to logic in the new sense--something very different.

A great number of new notions have been introduced, and these are not
simply combinations of the old. Russell knows this, and not only at the
beginning of the first chapter, 'The Logic of Propositions,' but at the
beginning of the second and third, 'The Logic of Classes' and 'The Logic
of Relations,' he introduces new words that he declares indefinable.

And this is not all; he likewise introduces principles he declares
indemonstrable. But these indemonstrable principles are appeals to
intuition, synthetic judgments _a priori_. We regard them as intuitive
when we meet them more or less explicitly enunciated in mathematical
treatises; have they changed character because the meaning of the word
logic has been enlarged and we now find them in a book entitled
_Treatise on Logic_? _They have not changed nature; they have only
changed place._


III

Could these principles be considered as disguised definitions? It would
then be necessary to have some way of proving that they imply no
contradiction. It would be necessary to establish that, however far one
followed the series of deductions, he would never be exposed to
contradicting himself.

We might attempt to reason as follows: We can verify that the
operations of the new logic applied to premises exempt from
contradiction can only give consequences equally exempt from
contradiction. If therefore after _n_ operations we have not met
contradiction, we shall not encounter it after _n_ + 1. Thus it is
impossible that there should be a moment when contradiction _begins_,
which shows we shall never meet it. Have we the right to reason in this
way? No, for this would be to make use of complete induction; and
_remember, we do not yet know the principle of complete induction_.

We therefore have not the right to regard these assumptions as disguised
definitions and only one resource remains for us, to admit a new act of
intuition for each of them. Moreover I believe this is indeed the
thought of Russell and M. Couturat.

Thus each of the nine indefinable notions and of the twenty
indemonstrable propositions (I believe if it were I that did the
counting, I should have found some more) which are the foundation of the
new logic, logic in the broad sense, presupposes a new and independent
act of our intuition and (why not say it?) a veritable synthetic
judgment _a priori_. On this point all seem agreed, but what Russell
claims, and _what seems to me doubtful, is that after these appeals to
intuition, that will be the end of it; we need make no others and can
build all mathematics without the intervention of any new element_.


IV

M. Couturat often repeats that this new logic is altogether independent
of the idea of number. I shall not amuse myself by counting how many
numeral adjectives his exposition contains, both cardinal and ordinal,
or indefinite adjectives such as several. We may cite, however, some
examples:

"The logical product of _two_ or _more_ propositions is....";

"All propositions are capable only of _two_ values, true and false";

"The relative product of _two_ relations is a relation";

"A relation exists between two terms," etc., etc.

Sometimes this inconvenience would not be unavoidable, but sometimes
also it is essential. A relation is incomprehensible without two terms;
it is impossible to have the intuition of the relation, without having
at the same time that of its two terms, and without noticing they are
two, because, if the relation is to be conceivable, it is necessary that
there be two and only two.


V

_Arithmetic_

I reach what M. Couturat calls the _ordinal theory_ which is the
foundation of arithmetic properly so called. M. Couturat begins by
stating Peano's five assumptions, which are independent, as has been
proved by Peano and Padoa.

1. Zero is an integer.

2. Zero is not the successor of any integer.

3. The successor of an integer is an integer. To this it would be proper
to add,

Every integer has a successor.

4. Two integers are equal if their successors are.

The fifth assumption is the principle of complete induction.

M. Couturat considers these assumptions as disguised definitions; they
constitute the definition by postulates of zero, of successor, and of
integer.

But we have seen that for a definition by postulates to be acceptable we
must be able to prove that it implies no contradiction.

Is this the case here? Not at all.

The demonstration can not be made _by example_. We can not take a part
of the integers, for instance the first three, and prove they satisfy
the definition.

If I take the series 0, 1, 2, I see it fulfils the assumptions 1, 2, 4
and 5; but to satisfy assumption 3 it still is necessary that 3 be an
integer, and consequently that the series 0, 1, 2, 3, fulfil the
assumptions; we might prove that it satisfies assumptions 1, 2, 4, 5,
but assumption 3 requires besides that 4 be an integer and that the
series 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 fulfil the assumptions, and so on.

It is therefore impossible to demonstrate the assumptions for certain
integers without proving them for all; we must give up proof by
example.

It is necessary then to take all the consequences of our assumptions and
see if they contain no contradiction.

If these consequences were finite in number, this would be easy; but
they are infinite in number; they are the whole of mathematics, or at
least all arithmetic.

What then is to be done? Perhaps strictly we could repeat the reasoning
of number III.

But as we have said, this reasoning is complete induction, and it is
precisely the principle of complete induction whose justification would
be the point in question.


VI

_The Logic of Hilbert_

I come now to the capital work of Hilbert which he communicated to the
Congress of Mathematicians at Heidelberg, and of which a French
translation by M. Pierre Boutroux appeared in _l'Enseignement
mathématique_, while an English translation due to Halsted appeared in
_The Monist_.[13] In this work, which contains profound thoughts, the
author's aim is analogous to that of Russell, but on many points he
diverges from his predecessor.

  [13] 'The Foundations of Logic and Arithmetic,' _Monist_, XV.,
       338-352.

"But," he says (_Monist_, p. 340), "on attentive consideration we become
aware that in the usual exposition of the laws of logic certain
fundamental concepts of arithmetic are already employed; for example,
the concept of the aggregate, in part also the concept of number.

"We fall thus into a vicious circle and therefore to avoid paradoxes a
partly simultaneous development of the laws of logic and arithmetic is
requisite."

We have seen above that what Hilbert says of the principles of logic _in
the usual exposition_ applies likewise to the logic of Russell. So for
Russell logic is prior to arithmetic; for Hilbert they are
'simultaneous.' We shall find further on other differences still
greater, but we shall point them out as we come to them. I prefer to
follow step by step the development of Hilbert's thought, quoting
textually the most important passages.

"Let us take as the basis of our consideration first of all a
thought-thing 1 (one)" (p. 341). Notice that in so doing we in no wise
imply the notion of number, because it is understood that 1 is here only
a symbol and that we do not at all seek to know its meaning. "The taking
of this thing together with itself respectively two, three or more
times...." Ah! this time it is no longer the same; if we introduce the
words 'two,' 'three,' and above all 'more,' 'several,' we introduce the
notion of number; and then the definition of finite whole number which
we shall presently find, will come too late. Our author was too
circumspect not to perceive this begging of the question. So at the end
of his work he tries to proceed to a truly patching-up process.

Hilbert then introduces two simple objects 1 and =, and considers all
the combinations of these two objects, all the combinations of their
combinations, etc. It goes without saying that we must forget the
ordinary meaning of these two signs and not attribute any to them.

Afterwards he separates these combinations into two classes, the class
of the existent and the class of the non-existent, and till further
orders this separation is entirely arbitrary. Every affirmative
statement tells us that a certain combination belongs to the class of
the existent; every negative statement tells us that a certain
combination belongs to the class of the non-existent.


VII

Note now a difference of the highest importance. For Russell any object
whatsoever, which he designates by _x_, is an object absolutely
undetermined and about which he supposes nothing; for Hilbert it is one
of the combinations formed with the symbols 1 and =; he could not
conceive of the introduction of anything other than combinations of
objects already defined. Moreover Hilbert formulates his thought in the
neatest way, and I think I must reproduce _in extenso_ his statement (p.
348):

"In the assumptions the arbitraries (as equivalent for the concept
'every' and 'all' in the customary logic) represent only those
thought-things and their combinations with one another, which at this
stage are laid down as fundamental or are to be newly defined.
Therefore in the deduction of inferences from the assumptions, the
arbitraries, which occur in the assumptions, can be replaced only by
such thought-things and their combinations.

"Also we must duly remember, that through the super-addition and making
fundamental of a new thought-thing the preceding assumptions undergo an
enlargement of their validity, and where necessary, are to be subjected
to a change in conformity with the sense."

The contrast with Russell's view-point is complete. For this philosopher
we may substitute for _x_ not only objects already known, but anything.

Russell is faithful to his point of view, which is that of
comprehension. He starts from the general idea of being, and enriches it
more and more while restricting it, by adding new qualities. Hilbert on
the contrary recognizes as possible beings only combinations of objects
already known; so that (looking at only one side of his thought) we
might say he takes the view-point of extension.


VIII

Let us continue with the exposition of Hilbert's ideas. He introduces
two assumptions which he states in his symbolic language but which
signify, in the language of the uninitiated, that every quality is equal
to itself and that every operation performed upon two identical
quantities gives identical results.

So stated, they are evident, but thus to present them would be to
misrepresent Hilbert's thought. For him mathematics has to combine only
pure symbols, and a true mathematician should reason upon them without
preconceptions as to their meaning. So his assumptions are not for him
what they are for the common people.

He considers them as representing the definition by postulates of the
symbol (=) heretofore void of all signification. But to justify this
definition we must show that these two assumptions lead to no
contradiction. For this Hilbert used the reasoning of our number III,
without appearing to perceive that he is using complete induction.


IX

The end of Hilbert's memoir is altogether enigmatic and I shall not lay
stress upon it. Contradictions accumulate; we feel that the author is
dimly conscious of the _petitio principii_ he has committed, and that he
seeks vainly to patch up the holes in his argument.

What does this mean? At the point of proving that the definition of the
whole number by the assumption of complete induction implies no
contradiction, Hilbert withdraws as Russell and Couturat withdrew,
because the difficulty is too great.


X

_Geometry_

Geometry, says M. Couturat, is a vast body of doctrine wherein the
principle of complete induction does not enter. That is true in a
certain measure; we can not say it is entirely absent, but it enters
very slightly. If we refer to the _Rational Geometry_ of Dr. Halsted
(New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1904) built up in accordance with the
principles of Hilbert, we see the principle of induction enter for the
first time on page 114 (unless I have made an oversight, which is quite
possible).[14]

  [14] Second ed., 1907, p. 86; French ed., 1911, p. 97. G. B. H.

So geometry, which only a few years ago seemed the domain where the
reign of intuition was uncontested, is to-day the realm where the
logicians seem to triumph. Nothing could better measure the importance
of the geometric works of Hilbert and the profound impress they have
left on our conceptions.

But be not deceived. What is after all the fundamental theorem of
geometry? It is that the assumptions of geometry imply no contradiction,
and this we can not prove without the principle of induction.

How does Hilbert demonstrate this essential point? By leaning upon
analysis and through it upon arithmetic and through it upon the
principle of induction.

And if ever one invents another demonstration, it will still be
necessary to lean upon this principle, since the possible consequences
of the assumptions, of which it is necessary to show that they are not
contradictory, are infinite in number.


XI

_Conclusion_

Our conclusion straightway is that the principle of induction can not be
regarded as the disguised definition of the entire world.

Here are three truths: (1) The principle of complete induction; (2)
Euclid's postulate; (3) the physical law according to which phosphorus
melts at 44° (cited by M. Le Roy).

These are said to be three disguised definitions: the first, that of the
whole number; the second, that of the straight line; the third, that of
phosphorus.

I grant it for the second; I do not admit it for the other two. I must
explain the reason for this apparent inconsistency.

First, we have seen that a definition is acceptable only on condition
that it implies no contradiction. We have shown likewise that for the
first definition this demonstration is impossible; on the other hand, we
have just recalled that for the second Hilbert has given a complete
proof.

As to the third, evidently it implies no contradiction. Does this mean
that the definition guarantees, as it should, the existence of the
object defined? We are here no longer in the mathematical sciences, but
in the physical, and the word existence has no longer the same meaning.
It no longer signifies absence of contradiction; it means objective
existence.

You already see a first reason for the distinction I made between the
three cases; there is a second. In the applications we have to make of
these three concepts, do they present themselves to us as defined by
these three postulates?

The possible applications of the principle of induction are innumerable;
take, for example, one of those we have expounded above, and where it is
sought to prove that an aggregate of assumptions can lead to no
contradiction. For this we consider one of the series of syllogisms we
may go on with in starting from these assumptions as premises. When we
have finished the _n_th syllogism, we see we can make still another and
this is the _n_ + 1th. Thus the number _n_ serves to count a series of
successive operations; it is a number obtainable by successive
additions. This therefore is a number from which we may go back to
unity by _successive subtractions_. Evidently we could not do this if we
had _n_ = _n_ - 1, since then by subtraction we should always obtain
again the same number. So the way we have been led to consider this
number _n_ implies a definition of the finite whole number and this
definition is the following: A finite whole number is that which can be
obtained by successive additions; it is such that _n_ is not equal to
_n_ - 1.

That granted, what do we do? We show that if there has been no
contradiction up to the _n_th syllogism, no more will there be up to the
_n_ + 1th, and we conclude there never will be. You say: I have the
right to draw this conclusion, since the whole numbers are by definition
those for which a like reasoning is legitimate. But that implies another
definition of the whole number, which is as follows: A whole number is
that on which we may reason by recurrence. In the particular case it is
that of which we may say that, if the absence of contradiction up to the
time of a syllogism of which the number is an integer carries with it
the absence of contradiction up to the time of the syllogism whose
number is the following integer, we need fear no contradiction for any
of the syllogisms whose number is an integer.

The two definitions are not identical; they are doubtless equivalent,
but only in virtue of a synthetic judgment _a priori_; we can not pass
from one to the other by a purely logical procedure. Consequently we
have no right to adopt the second, after having introduced the whole
number by a way that presupposes the first.

On the other hand, what happens with regard to the straight line? I have
already explained this so often that I hesitate to repeat it again, and
shall confine myself to a brief recapitulation of my thought. We have
not, as in the preceding case, two equivalent definitions logically
irreducible one to the other. We have only one expressible in words.
Will it be said there is another which we feel without being able to
word it, since we have the intuition of the straight line or since we
represent to ourselves the straight line? First of all, we can not
represent it to ourselves in geometric space, but only in representative
space, and then we can represent to ourselves just as well the objects
which possess the other properties of the straight line, save that of
satisfying Euclid's postulate. These objects are 'the non-Euclidean
straights,' which from a certain point of view are not entities void of
sense, but circles (true circles of true space) orthogonal to a certain
sphere. If, among these objects equally capable of representation, it is
the first (the Euclidean straights) which we call straights, and not the
latter (the non-Euclidean straights), this is properly by definition.

And arriving finally at the third example, the definition of phosphorus,
we see the true definition would be: Phosphorus is the bit of matter I
see in yonder flask.


XII

And since I am on this subject, still another word. Of the phosphorus
example I said: "This proposition is a real verifiable physical law,
because it means that all bodies having all the other properties of
phosphorus, save its point of fusion, melt like it at 44°." And it was
answered: "No, this law is not verifiable, because if it were shown that
two bodies resembling phosphorus melt one at 44° and the other at 50°,
it might always be said that doubtless, besides the point of fusion,
there is some other unknown property by which they differ."

That was not quite what I meant to say. I should have written, "All
bodies possessing such and such properties finite in number (to wit, the
properties of phosphorus stated in the books on chemistry, the
fusion-point excepted) melt at 44°."

And the better to make evident the difference between the case of the
straight and that of phosphorus, one more remark. The straight has in
nature many images more or less imperfect, of which the chief are the
light rays and the rotation axis of the solid. Suppose we find the ray
of light does not satisfy Euclid's postulate (for example by showing
that a star has a negative parallax), what shall we do? Shall we
conclude that the straight being by definition the trajectory of light
does not satisfy the postulate, or, on the other hand, that the straight
by definition satisfying the postulate, the ray of light is not
straight?

Assuredly we are free to adopt the one or the other definition and
consequently the one or the other conclusion; but to adopt the first
would be stupid, because the ray of light probably satisfies only
imperfectly not merely Euclid's postulate, but the other properties of
the straight line, so that if it deviates from the Euclidean straight,
it deviates no less from the rotation axis of solids which is another
imperfect image of the straight line; while finally it is doubtless
subject to change, so that such a line which yesterday was straight will
cease to be straight to-morrow if some physical circumstance has
changed.

Suppose now we find that phosphorus does not melt at 44°, but at 43.9°.
Shall we conclude that phosphorus being by definition that which melts
at 44°, this body that we did call phosphorus is not true phosphorus,
or, on the other hand, that phosphorous melts at 43.9°? Here again we
are free to adopt the one or the other definition and consequently the
one or the other conclusion; but to adopt the first would be stupid
because we can not be changing the name of a substance every time we
determine a new decimal of its fusion-point.


XIII

To sum up, Russell and Hilbert have each made a vigorous effort; they
have each written a work full of original views, profound and often well
warranted. These two works give us much to think about and we have much
to learn from them. Among their results, some, many even, are solid and
destined to live.

But to say that they have finally settled the debate between Kant and
Leibnitz and ruined the Kantian theory of mathematics is evidently
incorrect. I do not know whether they really believed they had done it,
but if they believed so, they deceived themselves.




