CHAPTER II

MECHANICS AND OPTICS


I

_Aberration_

You know in what the phenomenon of aberration, discovered by Bradley,
consists. The light issuing from a star takes a certain time to go
through a telescope; during this time, the telescope, carried along by
the motion of the earth, is displaced. If therefore the telescope were
pointed in the _true_ direction of the star, the image would be formed
at the point occupied by the crossing of the threads of the network when
the light has reached the objective; and this crossing would no longer
be at this same point when the light reached the plane of the network.
We would therefore be led to mis-point the telescope to bring the image
upon the crossing of the threads. Thence results that the astronomer
will not point the telescope in the direction of the absolute velocity
of the light, that is to say toward the true position of the star, but
just in the direction of the relative velocity of the light with
reference to the earth, that is to say toward what is called the
apparent position of the star.

The velocity of light is known; we might therefore suppose that we have
the means of calculating the _absolute_ velocity of the earth. (I shall
soon explain my use here of the word absolute.) Nothing of the sort; we
indeed know the apparent position of the star we observe; but we do not
know its true position; we know the velocity of the light only in
magnitude and not in direction.

If therefore the absolute velocity of the earth were straight and
uniform, we should never have suspected the phenomenon of aberration;
but it is variable; it is composed of two parts: the velocity of the
solar system, which is straight and uniform; the velocity of the earth
with reference to the sun, which is variable. If the velocity of the
solar system, that is to say if the constant part existed alone, the
observed direction would be invariable. This position that one would
thus observe is called the _mean_ apparent position of the star.

Taking account now at the same time of the two parts of the velocity of
the earth, we shall have the actual apparent position, which describes a
little ellipse around the mean apparent position, and it is this ellipse
that we observe.

Neglecting very small quantities, we shall see that the dimensions of
this ellipse depend only upon the ratio of the velocity of the earth
with reference to the sun to the velocity of light, so that the relative
velocity of the earth with regard to the sun has alone come in.

But wait! This result is not exact, it is only approximate; let us push
the approximation a little farther. The dimensions of the ellipse will
depend then upon the absolute velocity of the earth. Let us compare the
major axes of the ellipse for the different stars: we shall have,
theoretically at least, the means of determining this absolute velocity.

That would be perhaps less shocking than it at first seems; it is a
question, in fact, not of the velocity with reference to an absolute
void, but of the velocity with regard to the ether, which is taken _by
definition_ as being absolutely at rest.

Besides, this method is purely theoretical. In fact, the aberration is
very small; the possible variations of the ellipse of aberration are
much smaller yet, and, if we consider the aberration as of the first
order, they should therefore be regarded as of the second order: about a
millionth of a second; they are absolutely inappreciable for our
instruments. We shall finally see, further on, why the preceding theory
should be rejected, and why we could not determine this absolute
velocity even if our instruments were ten thousand times more precise!

One might imagine some other means, and in fact, so one has. The
velocity of light is not the same in water as in air; could we not
compare the two apparent positions of a star seen through a telescope
first full of air, then full of water? The results have been negative;
the apparent laws of reflection and refraction are not altered by the
motion of the earth. This phenomenon is capable of two explanations:

1º It might be supposed that the ether is not at rest, but that it is
carried along by the body in motion. It would then not be astonishing
that the phenomena of refraction are not altered by the motion of the
earth, since all, prisms, telescopes and ether, are carried along
together in the same translation. As to the aberration itself, it would
be explained by a sort of refraction happening at the surface of
separation of the ether at rest in the interstellar spaces and the ether
carried along by the motion of the earth. It is upon this hypothesis
(bodily carrying along of the ether) that is founded the _theory of
Hertz_ on the electrodynamics of moving bodies.

2º Fresnel, on the contrary, supposes that the ether is at absolute rest
in the void, at rest almost absolute in the air, whatever be the
velocity of this air, and that it is partially carried along by
refractive media. Lorentz has given to this theory a more satisfactory
form. For him, the ether is at rest, only the electrons are in motion;
in the void, where it is only a question of the ether, in the air, where
this is almost the case, the carrying along is null or almost null; in
refractive media, where perturbation is produced at the same time by
vibrations of the ether and those of electrons put in swing by the
agitation of the ether, the undulations are _partially_ carried along.

To decide between the two hypotheses, we have Fizeau's experiment,
comparing by measurements of the fringes of interference, the velocity
of light in air at rest or in motion. These experiments have confirmed
Fresnel's hypothesis of partial carrying along. They have been repeated
with the same result by Michelson. _The theory of Hertz must therefore
be rejected._


II

_The Principle of Relativity_

But if the ether is not carried along by the motion of the earth, is it
possible to show, by means of optical phenomena, the absolute velocity
of the earth, or rather its velocity with respect to the unmoving ether?
Experiment has answered negatively, and yet the experimental procedures
have been varied in all possible ways. Whatever be the means employed
there will never be disclosed anything but relative velocities; I mean
the velocities of certain material bodies with reference to other
material bodies. In fact, if the source of light and the apparatus of
observation are on the earth and participate in its motion, the
experimental results have always been the same, whatever be the
orientation of the apparatus with reference to the orbital motion of the
earth. If astronomic aberration happens, it is because the source, a
star, is in motion with reference to the observer.

The hypotheses so far made perfectly account for this general result,
_if we neglect very small quantities of the order of the square of the
aberration_. The explanation rests upon the notion of _local time_,
introduced by Lorentz, which I shall try to make clear. Suppose two
observers, placed one at _A_, the other at _B_, and wishing to set their
watches by means of optical signals. They agree that _B_ shall send a
signal to _A_ when his watch marks an hour determined upon, and _A_ is
to put his watch to that hour the moment he sees the signal. If this
alone were done, there would be a systematic error, because as the light
takes a certain time _t_ to go from _B_ to _A_, _A_'s watch would be
behind _B_'s the time _t_. This error is easily corrected. It suffices
to cross the signals. _A_ in turn must signal _B_, and, after this new
adjustment, _B_'s watch will be behind _A_'s the time _t_. Then it will
be sufficient to take the arithmetic mean of the two adjustments.

But this way of doing supposes that light takes the same time to go from
_A_ to _B_ as to return from _B_ to _A_. That is true if the observers
are motionless; it is no longer so if they are carried along in a common
translation, since then _A_, for example, will go to meet the light
coming from _B_, while _B_ will flee before the light coming from _A_.
If therefore the observers are borne along in a common translation and
if they do not suspect it, their adjustment will be defective; their
watches will not indicate the same time; each will show the _local time_
belonging to the point where it is.

The two observers will have no way of perceiving this, if the unmoving
ether can transmit to them only luminous signals all of the same
velocity, and if the other signals they might send are transmitted by
media carried along with them in their translation. The phenomenon each
observes will be too soon or too late; it would be seen at the same
instant only if the translation did not exist; but as it will be
observed with a watch that is wrong, this will not be perceived and the
appearances will not be altered.

It results from this that the compensation is easy to explain so long as
we neglect the square of the aberration, and for a long time the
experiments were not sufficiently precise to warrant taking account of
it. But the day came when Michelson imagined a much more delicate
procedure: he made rays interfere which had traversed different courses,
after being reflected by mirrors; each of the paths approximating a
meter and the fringes of interference permitting the recognition of a
fraction of a thousandth of a millimeter, the square of the aberration
could no longer be neglected, and _yet the results were still negative_.
Therefore the theory required to be completed, and it has been by the
_Lorentz-Fitzgerald hypothesis_.

These two physicists suppose that all bodies carried along in a
translation undergo a contraction in the sense of this translation,
while their dimensions perpendicular to this translation remain
unchanged. _This contraction is the same for all bodies_; moreover, it
is very slight, about one two-hundred-millionth for a velocity such as
that of the earth. Furthermore our measuring instruments could not
disclose it, even if they were much more precise; our measuring rods in
fact undergo the same contraction as the objects to be measured. If the
meter exactly fits when applied to a body, if we point the body and
consequently the meter in the sense of the motion of the earth, it will
not cease to exactly fit in another orientation, and that although the
body and the meter have changed in length as well as orientation, and
precisely because the change is the same for one as for the other. But
it is quite different if we measure a length, not now with a meter, but
by the time taken by light to pass along it, and this is just what
Michelson has done.

A body, spherical when at rest, will take thus the form of a flattened
ellipsoid of revolution when in motion; but the observer will always
think it spherical, since he himself has undergone an analogous
deformation, as also all the objects serving as points of reference. On
the contrary, the surfaces of the waves of light, remaining rigorously
spherical, will seem to him elongated ellipsoids.

What happens then? Suppose an observer and a source of light carried
along together in the translation: the wave surfaces emanating from the
source will be spheres having as centers the successive positions of the
source; the distance from this center to the actual position of the
source will be proportional to the time elapsed after the emission, that
is to say to the radius of the sphere. All these spheres are therefore
homothetic one to the other, with relation to the actual position _S_ of
the source. But, for our observer, because of the contraction, all these
spheres will seem elongated ellipsoids, and all these ellipsoids will
moreover be homothetic, with reference to the point _S_; the
excentricity of all these ellipsoids is the same and depends solely upon
the velocity of the earth. _We shall so select the law of contraction
that the point S may be at the focus of the meridian section of the
ellipsoid._

This time the compensation is _rigorous_, and this it is which explains
Michelson's experiment.

I have said above that, according to the ordinary theories, observations
of the astronomic aberration would give us the absolute velocity of the
earth, if our instruments were a thousand times more precise. I must
modify this statement. Yes, the observed angles would be modified by the
effect of this absolute velocity, but the graduated circles we use to
measure the angles would be deformed by the translation: they would
become ellipses; thence would result an error in regard to the angle
measured, and _this second error would exactly compensate the first_.

This Lorentz-Fitzgerald hypothesis seems at first very extraordinary;
all we can say for the moment, in its favor, is that it is only the
immediate translation of Michelson's experimental result, if we _define_
lengths by the time taken by light to run along them.

However that may be, it is impossible to escape the impression that the
principle of relativity is a general law of nature, that one will never
be able by any imaginable means to show any but relative velocities, and
I mean by that not only the velocities of bodies with reference to the
ether, but the velocities of bodies with regard to one another. Too many
different experiments have given concordant results for us not to feel
tempted to attribute to this principle of relativity a value comparable
to that, for example, of the principle of equivalence. In any case, it
is proper to see to what consequences this way of looking at things
would lead us and then to submit these consequences to the control of
experiment.


III

_The Principle of Reaction_

Let us see what the principle of the equality of action and reaction
becomes in the theory of Lorentz. Consider an electron _A_ which for any
cause begins to move; it produces a perturbation in the ether; at the
end of a certain time, this perturbation reaches another electron _B_,
which will be disturbed from its position of equilibrium. In these
conditions there can not be equality between action and reaction, at
least if we do not consider the ether, but only the electrons, _which
alone are observable_, since our matter is made of electrons.

In fact it is the electron _A_ which has disturbed the electron _B_;
even in case the electron _B_ should react upon _A_, this reaction could
be equal to the action, but in no case simultaneous, since the electron
_B_ can begin to move only after a certain time, necessary for the
propagation. Submitting the problem to a more exact calculation, we
reach the following result: Suppose a Hertz discharger placed at the
focus of a parabolic mirror to which it is mechanically attached; this
discharger emits electromagnetic waves, and the mirror reflects all
these waves in the same direction; the discharger therefore will radiate
energy in a determinate direction. Well, the calculation shows that _the
discharger recoils_ like a cannon which has shot out a projectile. In
the case of the cannon, the recoil is the natural result of the equality
of action and reaction. The cannon recoils because the projectile upon
which it has acted reacts upon it. But here it is no longer the same.
What has been sent out is no longer a material projectile: it is energy,
and energy has no mass: it has no counterpart. And, in place of a
discharger, we could have considered just simply a lamp with a reflector
concentrating its rays in a single direction.

It is true that, if the energy sent out from the discharger or from the
lamp meets a material object, this object receives a mechanical push as
if it had been hit by a real projectile, and this push will be equal to
the recoil of the discharger and of the lamp, if no energy has been lost
on the way and if the object absorbs the whole of the energy. Therefore
one is tempted to say that there still is compensation between the
action and the reaction. But this compensation, even should it be
complete, is always belated. It never happens if the light, after
leaving its source, wanders through interstellar spaces without ever
meeting a material body; it is incomplete, if the body it strikes is not
perfectly absorbent.

Are these mechanical actions too small to be measured, or are they
accessible to experiment? These actions are nothing other than those due
to the _Maxwell-Bartholi_ pressures; Maxwell had predicted these
pressures from calculations relative to electrostatics and magnetism;
Bartholi reached the same result by thermodynamic considerations.

This is how the _tails of comets_ are explained. Little particles detach
themselves from the nucleus of the comet; they are struck by the light
of the sun, which pushes them back as would a rain of projectiles coming
from the sun. The mass of these particles is so little that this
repulsion sweeps it away against the Newtonian attraction; so in moving
away from the sun they form the tails.

The direct experimental verification was not easy to obtain. The first
endeavor led to the construction of the _radiometer_. But this
instrument _turns backward_, in the sense opposite to the theoretic
sense, and the explanation of its rotation, since discovered, is wholly
different. At last success came, by making the vacuum more complete, on
the one hand, and on the other by not blackening one of the faces of the
paddles and directing a pencil of luminous rays upon one of the faces.
The radiometric effects and the other disturbing causes are eliminated
by a series of pains-taking precautions, and one obtains a deviation
which is very minute, but which is, it would seem, in conformity with
the theory.

The same effects of the Maxwell-Bartholi pressure are forecast likewise
by the theory of Hertz of which we have before spoken, and by that of
Lorentz. But there is a difference. Suppose that the energy, under the
form of light, for example, proceeds from a luminous source to any body
through a transparent medium. The Maxwell-Bartholi pressure will act,
not alone upon the source at the departure, and on the body lit up at
the arrival, but upon the matter of the transparent medium which it
traverses. At the moment when the luminous wave reaches a new region of
this medium, this pressure will push forward the matter there
distributed and will put it back when the wave leaves this region. So
that the recoil of the source has for counterpart the forward movement
of the transparent matter which is in contact with this source; a little
later, the recoil of this same matter has for counterpart the forward
movement of the transparent matter which lies a little further on, and
so on.

Only, is the compensation perfect? Is the action of the Maxwell-Bartholi
pressure upon the matter of the transparent medium equal to its reaction
upon the source, and that whatever be this matter? Or is this action by
so much the less as the medium is less refractive and more rarefied,
becoming null in the void?

If we admit the theory of Hertz, who regards matter as mechanically
bound to the ether, so that the ether may be entirely carried along by
matter, it would be necessary to answer yes to the first question and no
to the second.

There would then be perfect compensation, as required by the principle
of the equality of action and reaction, even in the least refractive
media, even in the air, even in the interplanetary void, where it would
suffice to suppose a residue of matter, however subtile. If on the
contrary we admit the theory of Lorentz, the compensation, always
imperfect, is insensible in the air and becomes null in the void.

But we have seen above that Fizeau's experiment does not permit of our
retaining the theory of Hertz; it is necessary therefore to adopt the
theory of Lorentz, and consequently _to renounce the principle of
reaction_.


IV

_Consequences of the Principle of Relativity_

We have seen above the reasons which impel us to regard the principle of
relativity as a general law of nature. Let us see to what consequences
this principle would lead, should it be regarded as finally
demonstrated.

First, it obliges us to generalize the hypothesis of Lorentz and
Fitzgerald on the contraction of all bodies in the sense of the
translation. In particular, we must extend this hypothesis to the
electrons themselves. Abraham considered these electrons as spherical
and indeformable; it will be necessary for us to admit that these
electrons, spherical when in repose, undergo the Lorentz contraction
when in motion and take then the form of flattened ellipsoids.

This deformation of the electrons will influence their mechanical
properties. In fact I have said that the displacement of these charged
electrons is a veritable current of convection and that their apparent
inertia is due to the self-induction of this current: exclusively as
concerns the negative electrons; exclusively or not, we do not yet know,
for the positive electrons. Well, the deformation of the electrons, a
deformation which depends upon their velocity, will modify the
distribution of the electricity upon their surface, consequently the
intensity of the convection current they produce, consequently the laws
according to which the self-induction of this current will vary as a
function of the velocity.

At this price, the compensation will be perfect and will conform to the
requirements of the principle of relativity, but only upon two
conditions:

1º That the positive electrons have no real mass, but only a fictitious
electromagnetic mass; or at least that their real mass, if it exists, is
not constant and varies with the velocity according to the same laws as
their fictitious mass;

2º That all forces are of electromagnetic origin, or at least that they
vary with the velocity according to the same laws as the forces of
electromagnetic origin.

It still is Lorentz who has made this remarkable synthesis; stop a
moment and see what follows therefrom. First, there is no more matter,
since the positive electrons no longer have real mass, or at least no
constant real mass. The present principles of our mechanics, founded
upon the constancy of mass, must therefore be modified. Again, an
electromagnetic explanation must be sought of all the known forces, in
particular of gravitation, or at least the law of gravitation must be so
modified that this force is altered by velocity in the same way as the
electromagnetic forces. We shall return to this point.

All that appears, at first sight, a little artificial. In particular,
this deformation of electrons seems quite hypothetical. But the thing
may be presented otherwise, so as to avoid putting this hypothesis of
deformation at the foundation of the reasoning. Consider the electrons
as material points and ask how their mass should vary as function of the
velocity not to contravene the principle of relativity. Or, still
better, ask what should be their acceleration under the influence of an
electric or magnetic field, that this principle be not violated and that
we come back to the ordinary laws when we suppose the velocity very
slight. We shall find that the variations of this mass, or of these
accelerations, must be _as if_ the electron underwent the Lorentz
deformation.


V

_Kaufmann's Experiment_

We have before us, then, two theories: one where the electrons are
indeformable, this is that of Abraham; the other where they undergo the
Lorentz deformation. In both cases, their mass increases with the
velocity, becoming infinite when this velocity becomes equal to that of
light; but the law of the variation is not the same. The method employed
by Kaufmann to bring to light the law of variation of the mass seems
therefore to give us an experimental means of deciding between the two
theories.

Unhappily, his first experiments were not sufficiently precise for that;
so he decided to repeat them with more precautions, and measuring with
great care the intensity of the fields. Under their new form _they are
in favor of the theory of Abraham_. Then the principle of relativity
would not have the rigorous value we were tempted to attribute to it;
there would no longer be reason for believing the positive electrons
denuded of real mass like the negative electrons. However, before
definitely adopting this conclusion, a little reflection is necessary.
The question is of such importance that it is to be wished Kaufmann's
experiment were repeated by another experimenter.[17] Unhappily, this
experiment is very delicate and could be carried out successfully only
by a physicist of the same ability as Kaufmann. All precautions have
been properly taken and we hardly see what objection could be made.

  [17] At the moment of going to press we learn that M. Bucherer has
       repeated the experiment, taking new precautions, and that he
       has obtained, contrary to Kaufmann, results confirming the
       views of Lorentz.

There is one point however to which I wish to draw attention: that is to
the measurement of the electrostatic field, a measurement upon which all
depends. This field was produced between the two armatures of a
condenser; and, between these armatures, there was to be made an
extremely perfect vacuum, in order to obtain a complete isolation. Then
the difference of potential of the two armatures was measured, and the
field obtained by dividing this difference by the distance apart of the
armatures. That supposes the field uniform; is this certain? Might there
not be an abrupt fall of potential in the neighborhood of one of the
armatures, of the negative armature, for example? There may be a
difference of potential at the meeting of the metal and the vacuum, and
it may be that this difference is not the same on the positive side and
on the negative side; what would lead me to think so is the electric
valve effects between mercury and vacuum. However slight the probability
that it is so, it seems that it should be considered.


VI

_The Principle of Inertia_

In the new dynamics, the principle of inertia is still true, that is to
say that an _isolated_ electron will have a straight and uniform motion.
At least this is generally assumed; however, Lindemann has made
objections to this view; I do not wish to take part in this discussion,
which I can not here expound because of its too difficult character. In
any case, slight modifications to the theory would suffice to shelter it
from Lindemann's objections.

We know that a body submerged in a fluid experiences, when in motion,
considerable resistance, but this is because our fluids are viscous; in
an ideal fluid, perfectly free from viscosity, the body would stir up
behind it a liquid hill, a sort of wake; upon departure, a great effort
would be necessary to put it in motion, since it would be necessary to
move not only the body itself, but the liquid of its wake. But, the
motion once acquired, it would perpetuate itself without resistance,
since the body, in advancing, would simply carry with it the
perturbation of the liquid, without the total vis viva of the liquid
augmenting. Everything would happen therefore as if its inertia was
augmented. An electron advancing in the ether would behave in the same
way: around it, the ether would be stirred up, but this perturbation
would accompany the body in its motion; so that, for an observer carried
along with the electron, the electric and magnetic fields accompanying
this electron would appear invariable, and would change only if the
velocity of the electron varied. An effort would therefore be necessary
to put the electron in motion, since it would be necessary to create the
energy of these fields; on the contrary, once the movement acquired, no
effort would be necessary to maintain it, since the created energy would
only have to go along behind the electron as a wake. This energy,
therefore, could only augment the inertia of the electron, as the
agitation of the liquid augments that of the body submerged in a perfect
fluid. And anyhow, the negative electrons at least have no other inertia
except that.

In the hypothesis of Lorentz, the vis viva, which is only the energy of
the ether, is not proportional to _v_^{2}. Doubtless if _v_ is very
slight, the vis viva is sensibly proportional to _v_^{2}, the quantity
of motion sensibly proportional to _v_, the two masses sensibly constant
and equal to each other. But _when the velocity tends toward the
velocity of light, the vis viva, the quantity of motion and the two
masses increase beyond all limit_.

In the hypothesis of Abraham, the expressions are a little more
complicated; but what we have just said remains true in essentials.

So the mass, the quantity of motion, the vis viva become infinite when
the velocity is equal to that of light.

Thence results that _no body can attain in any way a velocity beyond
that of light_. And in fact, in proportion as its velocity increases,
its mass increases, so that its inertia opposes to any new increase of
velocity a greater and greater obstacle.

A question then suggests itself: let us admit the principle of
relativity; an observer in motion would not have any means of perceiving
his own motion. If therefore no body in its absolute motion can exceed
the velocity of light, but may approach it as nearly as you choose, it
should be the same concerning its relative motion with reference to our
observer. And then we might be tempted to reason as follows: The
observer may attain a velocity of 200,000 kilometers; the body in its
relative motion with reference to the observer may attain the same
velocity; its absolute velocity will then be 400,000 kilometers, which
is impossible, since this is beyond the velocity of light. This is only
a seeming, which vanishes when account is taken of how Lorentz evaluates
local time.


VII

_The Wave of Acceleration_

When an electron is in motion, it produces a perturbation in the ether
surrounding it; if its motion is straight and uniform, this perturbation
reduces to the wake of which we have spoken in the preceding section.
But it is no longer the same, if the motion be curvilinear or varied.
The perturbation may then be regarded as the superposition of two
others, to which Langevin has given the names _wave of velocity_ and
_wave of acceleration_. The wave of velocity is only the wave which
happens in uniform motion.

As to the wave of acceleration, this is a perturbation altogether
analogous to light waves, which starts from the electron at the instant
when it undergoes an acceleration, and which is then propagated by
successive spherical waves with the velocity of light. Whence follows:
in a straight and uniform motion, the energy is wholly conserved; but,
when there is an acceleration, there is loss of energy, which is
dissipated under the form of luminous waves and goes out to infinity
across the ether.

However, the effects of this wave of acceleration, in particular the
corresponding loss of energy, are in most cases negligible, that is to
say not only in ordinary mechanics and in the motions of the heavenly
bodies, but even in the radium rays, where the velocity is very great
without the acceleration being so. We may then confine ourselves to
applying the laws of mechanics, putting the force equal to the product
of acceleration by mass, this mass, however, varying with the velocity
according to the laws explained above. We then say the motion is
_quasi-stationary_.

It would not be the same in all cases where the acceleration is great,
of which the chief are the following:

1º In incandescent gases certain electrons take an oscillatory motion of
very high frequency; the displacements are very small, the velocities
are finite, and the accelerations very great; energy is then
communicated to the ether, and this is why these gases radiate light of
the same period as the oscillations of the electron;

2º Inversely, when a gas receives light, these same electrons are put in
swing with strong accelerations and they absorb light;

3º In the Hertz discharger, the electrons which circulate in the
metallic mass undergo, at the instant of the discharge, an abrupt
acceleration and take then an oscillatory motion of high frequency.
Thence results that a part of the energy radiates under the form of
Hertzian waves;

4º In an incandescent metal, the electrons enclosed in this metal are
impelled with great velocity; upon reaching the surface of the metal,
which they can not get through, they are reflected and thus undergo a
considerable acceleration. This is why the metal emits light. The
details of the laws of the emission of light by dark bodies are
perfectly explained by this hypothesis;

5º Finally when the cathode rays strike the anticathode, the negative
electrons, constituting these rays, which are impelled with very great
velocity, are abruptly arrested. Because of the acceleration they thus
undergo, they produce undulations in the ether. This, according to
certain physicists, is the origin of the Röntgen rays, which would only
be light rays of very short wave-length.




