IV

DEFINITIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS

The existence of such principles is a difficulty for the uncompromising
logicians; how do they pretend to get out of it? The principle of
complete induction, they say, is not an assumption properly so called or
a synthetic judgment _a priori_; it is just simply the definition of
whole number. It is therefore a simple convention. To discuss this way
of looking at it, we must examine a little closely the relations between
definitions and assumptions.

Let us go back first to an article by M. Couturat on mathematical
definitions which appeared in _l'Enseignement mathématique_, a magazine
published by Gauthier-Villars and by Georg at Geneva. We shall see there
a distinction between the _direct definition and the definition by
postulates_.

"The definition by postulates," says M. Couturat, "applies not to a
single notion, but to a system of notions; it consists in enumerating
the fundamental relations which unite them and which enable us to
demonstrate all their other properties; these relations are postulates."

If previously have been defined all these notions but one, then this
last will be by definition the thing which verifies these postulates.
Thus certain indemonstrable assumptions of mathematics would be only
disguised definitions. This point of view is often legitimate; and I
have myself admitted it in regard for instance to Euclid's postulate.

The other assumptions of geometry do not suffice to completely define
distance; the distance then will be, by definition, among all the
magnitudes which satisfy these other assumptions, that which is such as
to make Euclid's postulate true.

Well the logicians suppose true for the principle of complete induction
what I admit for Euclid's postulate; they want to see in it only a
disguised definition.

But to give them this right, two conditions must be fulfilled. Stuart
Mill says every definition implies an assumption, that by which the
existence of the defined object is affirmed. According to that, it
would no longer be the assumption which might be a disguised definition,
it would on the contrary be the definition which would be a disguised
assumption. Stuart Mill meant the word existence in a material and
empirical sense; he meant to say that in defining the circle we affirm
there are round things in nature.

Under this form, his opinion is inadmissible. Mathematics is independent
of the existence of material objects; in mathematics the word exist can
have only one meaning, it means free from contradiction. Thus rectified,
Stuart Mill's thought becomes exact; in defining a thing, we affirm that
the definition implies no contradiction.

If therefore we have a system of postulates, and if we can demonstrate
that these postulates imply no contradiction, we shall have the right to
consider them as representing the definition of one of the notions
entering therein. If we can not demonstrate that, it must be admitted
without proof, and that then will be an assumption; so that, seeking the
definition under the postulate, we should find the assumption under the
definition.

Usually, to show that a definition implies no contradiction, we proceed
by _example_, we try to make an example of a thing satisfying the
definition. Take the case of a definition by postulates; we wish to
define a notion _A_, and we say that, by definition, an _A_ is anything
for which certain postulates are true. If we can prove directly that all
these postulates are true of a certain object _B_, the definition will
be justified; the object _B_ will be an _example_ of an _A_. We shall be
certain that the postulates are not contradictory, since there are cases
where they are all true at the same time.

But such a direct demonstration by example is not always possible.

To establish that the postulates imply no contradiction, it is then
necessary to consider all the propositions deducible from these
postulates considered as premises, and to show that, among these
propositions, no two are contradictory. If these propositions are finite
in number, a direct verification is possible. This case is infrequent
and uninteresting. If these propositions are infinite in number, this
direct verification can no longer be made; recourse must be had to
procedures where in general it is necessary to invoke just this
principle of complete induction which is precisely the thing to be
proved.

This is an explanation of one of the conditions the logicians should
satisfy, _and further on we shall see they have not done it_.


V

There is a second. When we give a definition, it is to use it.

We therefore shall find in the sequel of the exposition the word
defined; have we the right to affirm, of the thing represented by this
word, the postulate which has served for definition? Yes, evidently, if
the word has retained its meaning, if we do not attribute to it
implicitly a different meaning. Now this is what sometimes happens and
it is usually difficult to perceive it; it is needful to see how this
word comes into our discourse, and if the gate by which it has entered
does not imply in reality a definition other than that stated.

This difficulty presents itself in all the applications of mathematics.
The mathematical notion has been given a definition very refined and
very rigorous; and for the pure mathematician all doubt has disappeared;
but if one wishes to apply it to the physical sciences for instance, it
is no longer a question of this pure notion, but of a concrete object
which is often only a rough image of it. To say that this object
satisfies, at least approximately, the definition, is to state a new
truth, which experience alone can put beyond doubt, and which no longer
has the character of a conventional postulate.

But without going beyond pure mathematics, we also meet the same
difficulty.

You give a subtile definition of numbers; then, once this definition
given, you think no more of it; because, in reality, it is not it which
has taught you what number is; you long ago knew that, and when the word
number further on is found under your pen, you give it the same sense as
the first comer. To know what is this meaning and whether it is the same
in this phrase or that, it is needful to see how you have been led to
speak of number and to introduce this word into these two phrases. I
shall not for the moment dilate upon this point, because we shall have
occasion to return to it.

Thus consider a word of which we have given explicitly a definition _A_;
afterwards in the discourse we make a use of it which implicitly
supposes another definition _B_. It is possible that these two
definitions designate the same thing. But that this is so is a new truth
which must either be demonstrated or admitted as an independent
assumption.

_We shall see farther on that the logicians have not fulfilled the
second condition any better than the first._


VI

The definitions of number are very numerous and very different; I forego
the enumeration even of the names of their authors. We should not be
astonished that there are so many. If one among them was satisfactory,
no new one would be given. If each new philosopher occupying himself
with this question has thought he must invent another one, this was
because he was not satisfied with those of his predecessors, and he was
not satisfied with them because he thought he saw a petitio principii.

I have always felt, in reading the writings devoted to this problem, a
profound feeling of discomfort; I was always expecting to run against a
petitio principii, and when I did not immediately perceive it, I feared
I had overlooked it.

This is because it is impossible to give a definition without using a
sentence, and difficult to make a sentence without using a number word,
or at least the word several, or at least a word in the plural. And then
the declivity is slippery and at each instant there is risk of a fall
into petitio principii.

I shall devote my attention in what follows only to those of these
definitions where the petitio principii is most ably concealed.


