BOOK II


MATHEMATICAL REASONING




CHAPTER I

THE RELATIVITY OF SPACE


I

It is impossible to represent to oneself empty space; all our efforts to
imagine a pure space, whence should be excluded the changing images of
material objects, can result only in a representation where vividly
colored surfaces, for example, are replaced by lines of faint
coloration, and we can not go to the very end in this way without all
vanishing and terminating in nothingness. Thence comes the irreducible
relativity of space.

Whoever speaks of absolute space uses a meaningless phrase. This is a
truth long proclaimed by all who have reflected upon the matter, but
which we are too often led to forget.

I am at a determinate point in Paris, place du Panthéon for instance,
and I say: I shall come back _here_ to-morrow. If I be asked: Do you
mean you will return to the same point of space, I shall be tempted to
answer: yes; and yet I shall be wrong, since by to-morrow the earth will
have journeyed hence, carrying with it the place du Panthéon, which will
have traveled over more than two million kilometers. And if I tried to
speak more precisely, I should gain nothing, since our globe has run
over these two million kilometers in its motion with relation to the
sun, while the sun in its turn is displaced with reference to the Milky
Way, while the Milky Way itself is doubtless in motion without our being
able to perceive its velocity. So that we are completely ignorant, and
always shall be, of how much the place du Panthéon is displaced in a
day.

In sum, I meant to say: To-morrow I shall see again the dome and the
pediment of the Panthéon, and if there were no Panthéon my phrase would
be meaningless and space would vanish.

This is one of the most commonplace forms of the principle of the
relativity of space; but there is another, upon which Delbeuf has
particularly insisted. Suppose that in the night all the dimensions of
the universe become a thousand times greater: the world will have
remained _similar_ to itself, giving to the word _similitude_ the same
meaning as in Euclid, Book VI. Only what was a meter long will measure
thenceforth a kilometer, what was a millimeter long will become a meter.
The bed whereon I lie and my body itself will be enlarged in the same
proportion.

When I awake to-morrow morning, what sensation shall I feel in presence
of such an astounding transformation? Well, I shall perceive nothing at
all. The most precise measurements will be incapable of revealing to me
anything of this immense convulsion, since the measures I use will have
varied precisely in the same proportion as the objects I seek to
measure. In reality, this convulsion exists only for those who reason as
if space were absolute. If I for a moment have reasoned as they do, it
is the better to bring out that their way of seeing implies
contradiction. In fact it would be better to say that, space being
relative, nothing at all has happened, which is why we have perceived
nothing.

Has one the right, therefore, to say he knows the distance between two
points? No, since this distance could undergo enormous variations
without our being able to perceive them, provided the other distances
have varied in the same proportion. We have just seen that when I say: I
shall be here to-morrow, this does not mean: To-morrow I shall be at the
same point of space where I am to-day, but rather: To-morrow I shall be
at the same distance from the Panthéon as to-day. And we see that this
statement is no longer sufficient and that I should say: To-morrow and
to-day my distance from the Panthéon will be equal to the same number of
times the height of my body.

But this is not all; I have supposed the dimensions of the world to
vary, but that at least the world remained always similar to itself. We
might go much further, and one of the most astonishing theories of
modern physics furnishes us the occasion.

According to Lorentz and Fitzgerald, all the bodies borne along in the
motion of the earth undergo a deformation.

This deformation is, in reality, very slight, since all dimensions
parallel to the movement of the earth diminish by a hundred millionth,
while the dimensions perpendicular to this movement are unchanged. But
it matters little that it is slight, that it exists suffices for the
conclusion I am about to draw. And besides, I have said it was slight,
but in reality I know nothing about it; I have myself been victim of the
tenacious illusion which makes us believe we conceive an absolute space;
I have thought of the motion of the earth in its elliptic orbit around
the sun, and I have allowed thirty kilometers as its velocity. But its
real velocity (I mean, this time, not its absolute velocity, which is
meaningless, but its velocity with relation to the ether), I do not know
that, and have no means of knowing it: it is perhaps, 10, 100 times
greater, and then the deformation will be 100, 10,000 times more.

Can we show this deformation? Evidently not; here is a cube with edge
one meter; in consequence of the earth's displacement it is deformed,
one of its edges, that parallel to the motion, becomes smaller, the
others do not change. If I wish to assure myself of it by aid of a meter
measure, I shall measure first one of the edges perpendicular to the
motion and shall find that my standard meter fits this edge exactly; and
in fact neither of these two lengths is changed, since both are
perpendicular to the motion. Then I wish to measure the other edge, that
parallel to the motion; to do this I displace my meter and turn it so as
to apply it to the edge. But the meter, having changed orientation and
become parallel to the motion, has undergone, in its turn, the
deformation, so that though the edge be not a meter long, it will fit
exactly, I shall find out nothing.

You ask then of what use is the hypothesis of Lorentz and of Fitzgerald
if no experiment can permit of its verification? It is my exposition
that has been incomplete; I have spoken only of measurements that can be
made with a meter; but we can also measure a length by the time it takes
light to traverse it, on condition we suppose the velocity of light
constant and independent of direction. Lorentz could have accounted for
the facts by supposing the velocity of light greater in the direction
of the earth's motion than in the perpendicular direction. He preferred
to suppose that the velocity is the same in these different directions
but that the bodies are smaller in the one than in the other. If the
wave surfaces of light had undergone the same deformations as the
material bodies we should never have perceived the Lorentz-Fitzgerald
deformation.

In either case, it is not a question of absolute magnitude, but of the
measure of this magnitude by means of some instrument; this instrument
may be a meter, or the path traversed by light; it is only the relation
of the magnitude to the instrument that we measure; and if this relation
is altered, we have no way of knowing whether it is the magnitude or the
instrument which has changed.

But what I wish to bring out is, that in this deformation the world has
not remained similar to itself; squares have become rectangles, circles
ellipses, spheres ellipsoids. And yet we have no way of knowing whether
this deformation be real.

Evidently one could go much further: in place of the Lorentz-Fitzgerald
deformation, whose laws are particularly simple, we could imagine any
deformation whatsoever. Bodies could be deformed according to any laws,
as complicated as we might wish, we never should notice it provided all
bodies without exception were deformed according to the same laws. In
saying, all bodies without exception, I include of course our own body
and the light rays emanating from different objects.

If we look at the world in one of those mirrors of complicated shape
which deform objects in a bizarre way, the mutual relations of the
different parts of this world would not be altered; if, in fact two real
objects touch, their images likewise seem to touch. Of course when we
look in such a mirror we see indeed the deformation, but this is because
the real world subsists alongside of its deformed image; and then even
were this real world hidden from us, something there is could not be
hidden, ourself; we could not cease to see, or at least to feel, our
body and our limbs which have not been deformed and which continue to
serve us as instruments of measure.

But if we imagine our body itself deformed in the same way as if seen
in the mirror, these instruments of measure in their turn will fail us
and the deformation will no longer be ascertainable.

Consider in the same way two worlds images of one another; to each
object _P_ of the world _A_ corresponds in the world _B_ an object _P'_,
its image; the coordinates of this image _P'_ are determinate functions
of those of the object _P_; moreover these functions may be any
whatsoever; I only suppose them chosen once for all. Between the
position of _P_ and that of _P'_ there is a constant relation; what this
relation is, matters not; enough that it be constant.

Well, these two worlds will be indistinguishable one from the other. I
mean the first will be for its inhabitants what the second is for its.
And so it will be as long as the two worlds remain strangers to each
other. Suppose we lived in world _A_, we shall have constructed our
science and in particular our geometry; during this time the inhabitants
of world _B_ will have constructed a science, and as their world is the
image of ours, their geometry will also be the image of ours or, better,
it will be the same. But if for us some day a window is opened upon
world _B_, how we shall pity them: "Poor things," we shall say, "they
think they have made a geometry, but what they call so is only a
grotesque image of ours; their straights are all twisted, their circles
are humped, their spheres have capricious inequalities." And we shall
never suspect they say the same of us, and one never will know who is
right.

We see in how broad a sense should be understood the relativity of
space; space is in reality amorphous and the things which are therein
alone give it a form. What then should be thought of that direct
intuition we should have of the straight or of distance? So little have
we intuition of distance in itself that in the night, as we have said, a
distance might become a thousand times greater without our being able to
perceive it, if all other distances had undergone the same alteration.
And even in a night the world _B_ might be substituted for the world _A_
without our having any way of knowing it, and then the straight lines of
yesterday would have ceased to be straight and we should never notice.

One part of space is not by itself and in the absolute sense of the word
equal to another part of space; because if so it is for us, it would not
be for the dwellers in world _B_; and these have just as much right to
reject our opinion as we to condemn theirs.

I have elsewhere shown what are the consequences of these facts from the
viewpoint of the idea we should form of non-Euclidean geometry and other
analogous geometries; to that I do not care to return; and to-day I
shall take a somewhat different point of view.


II

If this intuition of distance, of direction, of the straight line, if
this direct intuition of space in a word does not exist, whence comes
our belief that we have it? If this is only an illusion, why is this
illusion so tenacious? It is proper to examine into this. We have said
there is no direct intuition of size and we can only arrive at the
relation of this magnitude to our instruments of measure. We should
therefore not have been able to construct space if we had not had an
instrument to measure it; well, this instrument to which we relate
everything, which we use instinctively, it is our own body. It is in
relation to our body that we place exterior objects, and the only
spatial relations of these objects that we can represent are their
relations to our body. It is our body which serves us, so to speak, as
system of axes of coordinates.

For example, at an instant [alpha], the presence of the object _A_ is
revealed to me by the sense of sight; at another instant, [beta], the
presence of another object, _B_, is revealed to me by another sense,
that of hearing or of touch, for instance. I judge that this object _B_
occupies the same place as the object _A_. What does that mean? First
that does not signify that these two objects occupy, at two different
moments, the same point of an absolute space, which even if it existed
would escape our cognition, since, between the instants [alpha] and
[beta], the solar system has moved and we can not know its displacement.
That means these two objects occupy the same relative position with
reference to our body.

But even this, what does it mean? The impressions that have come to us
from these objects have followed paths absolutely different, the optic
nerve for the object _A_, the acoustic nerve for the object _B_.
They have nothing in common from the qualitative point of view. The
representations we are able to make of these two objects are absolutely
heterogeneous, irreducible one to the other. Only I know that to reach
the object _A_ I have just to extend the right arm in a certain way;
even when I abstain from doing it, I represent to myself the muscular
sensations and other analogous sensations which would accompany this
extension, and this representation is associated with that of the
object _A_.

Now, I likewise know I can reach the object _B_ by extending my right
arm in the same manner, an extension accompanied by the same train of
muscular sensations. And when I say these two objects occupy the same
place, I mean nothing more.

I also know I could have reached the object _A_ by another appropriate
motion of the left arm and I represent to myself the muscular sensations
which would have accompanied this movement; and by this same motion of
the left arm, accompanied by the same sensations, I likewise could have
reached the object _B_.

And that is very important, since thus I can defend myself against
dangers menacing me from the object _A_ or the object _B_. With each of
the blows we can be hit, nature has associated one or more parries which
permit of our guarding ourselves. The same parry may respond to several
strokes; and so it is, for instance, that the same motion of the right
arm would have allowed us to guard at the instant [alpha] against the
object _A_ and at the instant [beta] against the object _B_. Just so,
the same stroke can be parried in several ways, and we have said, for
instance, the object _A_ could be reached indifferently either by a
certain movement of the right arm or by a certain movement of the left
arm.

All these parries have nothing in common except warding off the same
blow, and this it is, and nothing else, which is meant when we say they
are movements terminating at the same point of space. Just so, these
objects, of which we say they occupy the same point of space, have
nothing in common, except that the same parry guards against them.

Or, if you choose, imagine innumerable telegraph wires, some
centripetal, others centrifugal. The centripetal wires warn us of
accidents happening without; the centrifugal wires carry the reparation.
Connections are so established that when a centripetal wire is traversed
by a current this acts on a relay and so starts a current in one of the
centrifugal wires, and things are so arranged that several centripetal
wires may act on the same centrifugal wire if the same remedy suits
several ills, and that a centripetal wire may agitate different
centrifugal wires, either simultaneously or in lieu one of the other
when the same ill may be cured by several remedies.

It is this complex system of associations, it is this table of
distribution, so to speak, which is all our geometry or, if you wish,
all in our geometry that is instinctive. What we call our intuition of
the straight line or of distance is the consciousness we have of these
associations and of their imperious character.

And it is easy to understand whence comes this imperious character
itself. An association will seem to us by so much the more
indestructible as it is more ancient. But these associations are not,
for the most part, conquests of the individual, since their trace is
seen in the new-born babe: they are conquests of the race. Natural
selection had to bring about these conquests by so much the more quickly
as they were the more necessary.

On this account, those of which we speak must have been of the earliest
in date, since without them the defense of the organism would have been
impossible. From the time when the cellules were no longer merely
juxtaposed, but were called upon to give mutual aid, it was needful that
a mechanism organize analogous to what we have described, so that this
aid miss not its way, but forestall the peril.

When a frog is decapitated, and a drop of acid is placed on a point of
its skin, it seeks to wipe off the acid with the nearest foot, and, if
this foot be amputated, it sweeps it off with the foot of the opposite
side. There we have the double parry of which I have just spoken,
allowing the combating of an ill by a second remedy, if the first fails.
And it is this multiplicity of parries, and the resulting coordination,
which is space.

We see to what depths of the unconscious we must descend to find the
first traces of these spatial associations, since only the inferior
parts of the nervous system are involved. Why be astonished then at the
resistance we oppose to every attempt made to dissociate what so long
has been associated? Now, it is just this resistance that we call the
evidence for the geometric truths; this evidence is nothing but the
repugnance we feel toward breaking with very old habits which have
always proved good.


III

The space so created is only a little space extending no farther than my
arm can reach; the intervention of the memory is necessary to push back
its limits. There are points which will remain out of my reach, whatever
effort I make to stretch forth my hand; if I were fastened to the ground
like a hydra polyp, for instance, which can only extend its tentacles,
all these points would be outside of space, since the sensations we
could experience from the action of bodies there situated, would be
associated with the idea of no movement allowing us to reach them, of no
appropriate parry. These sensations would not seem to us to have any
spatial character and we should not seek to localize them.

But we are not fixed to the ground like the lower animals; we can, if
the enemy be too far away, advance toward him first and extend the hand
when we are sufficiently near. This is still a parry, but a parry at
long range. On the other hand, it is a complex parry, and into the
representation we make of it enter the representation of the muscular
sensations caused by the movements of the legs, that of the muscular
sensations caused by the final movement of the arm, that of the
sensations of the semicircular canals, etc. We must, besides, represent
to ourselves, not a complex of simultaneous sensations, but a complex of
successive sensations, following each other in a determinate order, and
this is why I have just said the intervention of memory was necessary.
Notice moreover that, to reach the same point, I may approach nearer the
mark to be attained, so as to have to stretch my arm less. What more? It
is not one, it is a thousand parries I can oppose to the same danger.
All these parries are made of sensations which may have nothing in
common and yet we regard them as defining the same point of space, since
they may respond to the same danger and are all associated with the
notion of this danger. It is the potentiality of warding off the same
stroke which makes the unity of these different parries, as it is the
possibility of being parried in the same way which makes the unity of
the strokes so different in kind, which may menace us from the same
point of space. It is this double unity which makes the individuality of
each point of space, and, in the notion of point, there is nothing else.

The space before considered, which might be called _restricted space_,
was referred to coordinate axes bound to my body; these axes were fixed,
since my body did not move and only my members were displaced. What are
the axes to which we naturally refer the _extended space_? that is to
say the new space just defined. We define a point by the sequence of
movements to be made to reach it, starting from a certain initial
position of the body. The axes are therefore fixed to this initial
position of the body.

But the position I call initial may be arbitrarily chosen among all the
positions my body has successively occupied; if the memory more or less
unconscious of these successive positions is necessary for the genesis
of the notion of space, this memory may go back more or less far into
the past. Thence results in the definition itself of space a certain
indetermination, and it is precisely this indetermination which
constitutes its relativity.

There is no absolute space, there is only space relative to a certain
initial position of the body. For a conscious being fixed to the ground
like the lower animals, and consequently knowing only restricted space,
space would still be relative (since it would have reference to his
body), but this being would not be conscious of this relativity, because
the axes of reference for this restricted space would be unchanging!
Doubtless the rock to which this being would be fettered would not be
motionless, since it would be carried along in the movement of our
planet; for us consequently these axes would change at each instant; but
for him they would be changeless. We have the faculty of referring our
extended space now to the position _A_ of our body, considered as
initial, again to the position _B_, which it had some moments afterward,
and which we are free to regard in its turn as initial; we make
therefore at each instant unconscious transformations of coordinates.
This faculty would be lacking in our imaginary being, and from not
having traveled, he would think space absolute. At every instant, his
system of axes would be imposed upon him; this system would have to
change greatly in reality, but for him it would be always the same,
since it would be always the _only_ system. Quite otherwise is it with
us, who at each instant have many systems between which we may choose at
will, on condition of going back by memory more or less far into the
past.

This is not all; restricted space would not be homogeneous; the
different points of this space could not be regarded as equivalent,
since some could be reached only at the cost of the greatest efforts,
while others could be easily attained. On the contrary, our extended
space seems to us homogeneous, and we say all its points are equivalent.
What does that mean?

If we start from a certain place _A_, we can, from this position, make
certain movements, _M_, characterized by a certain complex of muscular
sensations. But, starting from another position, _B_, we make movements
_M'_ characterized by the same muscular sensations. Let _a_, then, be
the situation of a certain point of the body, the end of the index
finger of the right hand for example, in the initial position _A_, and
_b_ the situation of this same index when, starting from this position
_A_, we have made the motions _M_. Afterwards, let _a'_ be the situation
of this index in the position _B_, and _b'_ its situation when, starting
from the position _B_, we have made the motions _M'_.

Well, I am accustomed to say that the points of space _a_ and _b_ are
related to each other just as the points _a'_ and _b'_, and this simply
means that the two series of movements _M_ and _M'_ are accompanied by
the same muscular sensations. And as I am conscious that, in passing
from the position _A_ to the position _B_, my body has remained capable
of the same movements, I know there is a point of space related to the
point _a'_ just as any point _b_ is to the point _a_, so that the two
points _a_ and _a'_ are equivalent. This is what is called the
homogeneity of space. And, at the same time, this is why space is
relative, since its properties remain the same whether it be referred to
the axes _A_ or to the axes _B_. So that the relativity of space and its
homogeneity are one sole and same thing.

Now, if I wish to pass to the great space, which no longer serves only
for me, but where I may lodge the universe, I get there by an act of
imagination. I imagine how a giant would feel who could reach the
planets in a few steps; or, if you choose, what I myself should feel in
presence of a miniature world where these planets were replaced by
little balls, while on one of these little balls moved a liliputian I
should call myself. But this act of imagination would be impossible for
me had I not previously constructed my restricted space and my extended
space for my own use.


IV

Why now have all these spaces three dimensions? Go back to the "table of
distribution" of which we have spoken. We have on the one side the list
of the different possible dangers; designate them by _A1_, _A2_, etc.;
and, on the other side, the list of the different remedies which I shall
call in the same way _B1_, _B2_, etc. We have then connections between
the contact studs or push buttons of the first list and those of the
second, so that when, for instance, the announcer of danger _A3_
functions, it will put or may put in action the relay corresponding to
the parry _B4_.

As I have spoken above of centripetal or centrifugal wires, I fear lest
one see in all this, not a simple comparison, but a description of the
nervous system. Such is not my thought, and that for several reasons:
first I should not permit myself to put forth an opinion on the
structure of the nervous system which I do not know, while those who
have studied it speak only circumspectly; again because, despite my
incompetence, I well know this scheme would be too simplistic; and
finally because on my list of parries, some would figure very complex,
which might even, in the case of extended space, as we have seen above,
consist of many steps followed by a movement of the arm. It is not a
question then of physical connection between two real conductors but of
psychologic association between two series of sensations.

If _A1_ and _A2_ for instance are both associated with the parry _B1_,
and if _A1_ is likewise associated with the parry _B2_, it will
generally happen that _A2_ and _B2_ will also themselves be associated.
If this fundamental law were not generally true, there would exist only
an immense confusion and there would be nothing resembling a conception
of space or a geometry. How in fact have we defined a point of space. We
have done it in two ways: it is on the one hand the aggregate of
announcers _A_ in connection with the same parry _B_; it is on the other
hand the aggregate of parries _B_ in connection with the same announcer
_A_. If our law was not true, we should say _A1_ and _A2_ correspond to
the same point since they are both in connection with _B1_; but we
should likewise say they do not correspond to the same point, since _A1_
would be in connection with _B2_ and the same would not be true of _A2_.
This would be a contradiction.

But, from another side, if the law were rigorously and always true,
space would be very different from what it is. We should have categories
strongly contrasted between which would be portioned out on the one hand
the announcers _A_, on the other hand the parries _B_; these categories
would be excessively numerous, but they would be entirely separated one
from another. Space would be composed of points very numerous, but
discrete; it would be _discontinuous_. There would be no reason for
ranging these points in one order rather than another, nor consequently
for attributing to space three dimensions.

But it is not so; permit me to resume for a moment the language of those
who already know geometry; this is quite proper since this is the
language best understood by those I wish to make understand me.

When I desire to parry the stroke, I seek to attain the point whence
comes this blow, but it suffices that I approach quite near. Then the
parry _B1_ may answer for _A1_ and for _A2_, if the point which
corresponds to _B1_ is sufficiently near both to that corresponding to
_A1_ and to that corresponding to _A2_. But it may happen that the point
corresponding to another parry _B2_ may be sufficiently near to the
point corresponding to A1 and not sufficiently near the point
corresponding to _A2_; so that the parry _B2_ may answer for _A1_
without answering for _A2_. For one who does not yet know geometry, this
translates itself simply by a derogation of the law stated above. And
then things will happen thus:

Two parries _B1_ and _B2_ will be associated with the same warning _A1_
and with a large number of warnings which we shall range in the same
category as _A1_ and which we shall make correspond to the same point of
space. But we may find warnings _A2_ which will be associated with _B2_
without being associated with _B1_, and which in compensation will be
associated with _B3_, which _B3_ was not associated with _A1_, and so
forth, so that we may write the series

  _B1_, _A1_, _B2_, _A2_, _B3_, _A3_, _B4_, _A4_,

where each term is associated with the following and the preceding, but
not with the terms several places away.

Needless to add that each of the terms of these series is not isolated,
but forms part of a very numerous category of other warnings or of other
parries which have the same connections as it, and which may be regarded
as belonging to the same point of space.

The fundamental law, though admitting of exceptions, remains therefore
almost always true. Only, in consequence of these exceptions, these
categories, in place of being entirely separated, encroach partially one
upon another and mutually penetrate in a certain measure, so that space
becomes continuous.

On the other hand, the order in which these categories are to be ranged
is no longer arbitrary, and if we refer to the preceding series, we see
it is necessary to put _B2_ between _A1_ and _A2_ and consequently
between _B1_ and _B3_ and that we could not for instance put it between
_B3_ and _B4_.

There is therefore an order in which are naturally arranged our
categories which correspond to the points of space, and experience
teaches us that this order presents itself under the form of a table
of triple entry, and this is why space has three dimensions.


V

So the characteristic property of space, that of having three
dimensions, is only a property of our table of distribution, an internal
property of the human intelligence, so to speak. It would suffice to
destroy certain of these connections, that is to say of the associations
of ideas to give a different table of distribution, and that might be
enough for space to acquire a fourth dimension.

Some persons will be astonished at such a result. The external world,
they will think, should count for something. If the number of dimensions
comes from the way we are made, there might be thinking beings living in
our world, but who might be made differently from us and who would
believe space has more or less than three dimensions. Has not M. de Cyon
said that the Japanese mice, having only two pair of semicircular
canals, believe that space is two-dimensional? And then this thinking
being, if he is capable of constructing a physics, would he not make a
physics of two or of four dimensions, and which in a sense would still
be the same as ours, since it would be the description of the same world
in another language?

It seems in fact that it would be possible to translate our physics into
the language of geometry of four dimensions; to attempt this translation
would be to take great pains for little profit, and I shall confine
myself to citing the mechanics of Hertz where we have something
analogous. However, it seems that the translation would always be less
simple than the text, and that it would always have the air of a
translation, that the language of three dimensions seems the better
fitted to the description of our world, although this description can be
rigorously made in another idiom. Besides, our table of distribution was
not made at random. There is connection between the warning _A1_ and the
parry _B1_, this is an internal property of our intelligence; but why
this connection? It is because the parry _B1_ affords means effectively
to guard against the danger _A1_; and this is a fact exterior to us,
this is a property of the exterior world. Our table of distribution is
therefore only the translation of an aggregate of exterior facts; if it
has three dimensions, this is because it has adapted itself to a world
having certain properties; and the chief of these properties is that
there exist natural solids whose displacements follow sensibly the laws
we call laws of motion of rigid solids. If therefore the language of
three dimensions is that which permits us most easily to describe our
world, we should not be astonished; this language is copied from our
table of distribution; and it is in order to be able to live in this
world that this table has been established.

I have said we could conceive, living in our world, thinking beings
whose table of distribution would be four-dimensional and who
consequently would think in hyperspace. It is not certain however that
such beings, admitting they were born there, could live there and defend
themselves against the thousand dangers by which they would there be
assailed.


VI

A few remarks to end with. There is a striking contrast between the
roughness of this primitive geometry, reducible to what I call a table
of distribution, and the infinite precision of the geometers' geometry.
And yet this is born of that; but not of that alone; it must be made
fecund by the faculty we have of constructing mathematical concepts,
such as that of group, for instance; it was needful to seek among the
pure concepts that which best adapts itself to this rough space whose
genesis I have sought to explain and which is common to us and the
higher animals.

The evidence for certain geometric postulates, we have said, is only our
repugnance to renouncing very old habits. But these postulates are
infinitely precise, while these habits have something about them
essentially pliant. When we wish to think, we need postulates infinitely
precise, since this is the only way to avoid contradiction; but among
all the possible systems of postulates, there are some we dislike to
choose because they are not sufficiently in accord with our habits;
however pliant, however elastic they may be, these have a limit of
elasticity.

We see that if geometry is not an experimental science, it is a science
born apropos of experience; that we have created the space it studies,
but adapting it to the world wherein we live. We have selected the most
convenient space, but experience has guided our choice; as this choice
has been unconscious, we think it has been imposed upon us; some say
experience imposes it, others that we are born with our space ready
made; we see from the preceding considerations, what in these two
opinions is the part of truth, what of error.

In this progressive education whose outcome has been the construction of
space, it is very difficult to determine what is the part of the
individual, what the part of the race. How far could one of us,
transported from birth to an entirely different world, where were
dominant, for instance, bodies moving in conformity to the laws of
motion of non-Euclidean solids, renounce the ancestral space to build a
space completely new?

The part of the race seems indeed preponderant; yet if to it we owe
rough space, the soft space I have spoken of, the space of the higher
animals, is it not to the unconscious experience of the individual we
owe the infinitely precise space of the geometer? This is a question not
easy to solve. Yet we cite a fact showing that the space our ancestors
have bequeathed us still retains a certain plasticity. Some hunters
learn to shoot fish under water, though the image of these fish be
turned up by refraction. Besides they do it instinctively: they
therefore have learned to modify their old instinct of direction; or, if
you choose, to substitute for the association _A1_, _B1_, another
association _A1_, _B2_, because experience showed them the first would
not work.




