BOOK I


SCIENCE AND THE SCIENTIST




CHAPTER I

THE CHOICE OF FACTS


Tolstoi somewhere explains why 'science for its own sake' is in his eyes
an absurd conception. We can not know _all_ facts, since their number is
practically infinite. It is necessary to choose; then we may let this
choice depend on the pure caprice of our curiosity; would it not be
better to let ourselves be guided by utility, by our practical and above
all by our moral needs; have we nothing better to do than to count the
number of lady-bugs on our planet?

It is clear the word utility has not for him the sense men of affairs
give it, and following them most of our contemporaries. Little cares he
for industrial applications, for the marvels of electricity or of
automobilism, which he regards rather as obstacles to moral progress;
utility for him is solely what can make man better.

For my part, it need scarce be said, I could never be content with
either the one or the other ideal; I want neither that plutocracy
grasping and mean, nor that democracy goody and mediocre, occupied
solely in turning the other cheek, where would dwell sages without
curiosity, who, shunning excess, would not die of disease, but would
surely die of ennui. But that is a matter of taste and is not what I
wish to discuss.

The question nevertheless remains and should fix our attention; if our
choice can only be determined by caprice or by immediate utility, there
can be no science for its own sake, and consequently no science. But is
that true? That a choice must be made is incontestable; whatever be our
activity, facts go quicker than we, and we can not catch them; while the
scientist discovers one fact, there happen milliards of milliards in a
cubic millimeter of his body. To wish to comprise nature in science
would be to want to put the whole into the part.

But scientists believe there is a hierarchy of facts and that among them
may be made a judicious choice. They are right, since otherwise there
would be no science, yet science exists. One need only open the eyes to
see that the conquests of industry which have enriched so many practical
men would never have seen the light, if these practical men alone had
existed and if they had not been preceded by unselfish devotees who died
poor, who never thought of utility, and yet had a guide far other than
caprice.

As Mach says, these devotees have spared their successors the trouble of
thinking. Those who might have worked solely in view of an immediate
application would have left nothing behind them, and, in face of a new
need, all must have been begun over again. Now most men do not love to
think, and this is perhaps fortunate when instinct guides them, for most
often, when they pursue an aim which is immediate and ever the same,
instinct guides them better than reason would guide a pure intelligence.
But instinct is routine, and if thought did not fecundate it, it would
no more progress in man than in the bee or ant. It is needful then to
think for those who love not thinking, and, as they are numerous, it is
needful that each of our thoughts be as often useful as possible, and
this is why a law will be the more precious the more general it is.

This shows us how we should choose: the most interesting facts are those
which may serve many times; these are the facts which have a chance of
coming up again. We have been so fortunate as to be born in a world
where there are such. Suppose that instead of 60 chemical elements there
were 60 milliards of them, that they were not some common, the others
rare, but that they were uniformly distributed. Then, every time we
picked up a new pebble there would be great probability of its being
formed of some unknown substance; all that we knew of other pebbles
would be worthless for it; before each new object we should be as the
new-born babe; like it we could only obey our caprices or our needs.
Biologists would be just as much at a loss if there were only
individuals and no species and if heredity did not make sons like their
fathers.

In such a world there would be no science; perhaps thought and even life
would be impossible, since evolution could not there develop the
preservational instincts. Happily it is not so; like all good fortune to
which we are accustomed, this is not appreciated at its true worth.

Which then are the facts likely to reappear? They are first the simple
facts. It is clear that in a complex fact a thousand circumstances are
united by chance, and that only a chance still much less probable could
reunite them anew. But are there any simple facts? And if there are, how
recognize them? What assurance is there that a thing we think simple
does not hide a dreadful complexity? All we can say is that we ought to
prefer the facts which _seem_ simple to those where our crude eye
discerns unlike elements. And then one of two things: either this
simplicity is real, or else the elements are so intimately mingled as
not to be distinguishable. In the first case there is chance of our
meeting anew this same simple fact, either in all its purity or entering
itself as element in a complex manifold. In the second case this
intimate mixture has likewise more chances of recurring than a
heterogeneous assemblage; chance knows how to mix, it knows not how to
disentangle, and to make with multiple elements a well-ordered edifice
in which something is distinguishable, it must be made expressly. The
facts which appear simple, even if they are not so, will therefore be
more easily revived by chance. This it is which justifies the method
instinctively adopted by the scientist, and what justifies it still
better, perhaps, is that oft-recurring facts appear to us simple,
precisely because we are used to them.

But where is the simple fact? Scientists have been seeking it in the two
extremes, in the infinitely great and in the infinitely small. The
astronomer has found it because the distances of the stars are immense,
so great that each of them appears but as a point, so great that the
qualitative differences are effaced, and because a point is simpler than
a body which has form and qualities. The physicist on the other hand has
sought the elementary phenomenon in fictively cutting up bodies into
infinitesimal cubes, because the conditions of the problem, which
undergo slow and continuous variation in passing from one point of the
body to another, may be regarded as constant in the interior of each of
these little cubes. In the same way the biologist has been instinctively
led to regard the cell as more interesting than the whole animal, and
the outcome has shown his wisdom, since cells belonging to organisms the
most different are more alike, for the one who can recognize their
resemblances, than are these organisms themselves. The sociologist is
more embarrassed; the elements, which for him are men, are too unlike,
too variable, too capricious, in a word, too complex; besides, history
never begins over again. How then choose the interesting fact, which is
that which begins again? Method is precisely the choice of facts; it is
needful then to be occupied first with creating a method, and many have
been imagined, since none imposes itself, so that sociology is the
science which has the most methods and the fewest results.

Therefore it is by the regular facts that it is proper to begin; but
after the rule is well established, after it is beyond all doubt, the
facts in full conformity with it are erelong without interest since they
no longer teach us anything new. It is then the exception which becomes
important. We cease to seek resemblances; we devote ourselves above all
to the differences, and among the differences are chosen first the most
accentuated, not only because they are the most striking, but because
they will be the most instructive. A simple example will make my thought
plainer: Suppose one wishes to determine a curve by observing some of
its points. The practician who concerns himself only with immediate
utility would observe only the points he might need for some special
object. These points would be badly distributed on the curve; they would
be crowded in certain regions, rare in others, so that it would be
impossible to join them by a continuous line, and they would be
unavailable for other applications. The scientist will proceed
differently; as he wishes to study the curve for itself, he will
distribute regularly the points to be observed, and when enough are
known he will join them by a regular line and then he will have the
entire curve. But for that how does he proceed? If he has determined an
extreme point of the curve, he does not stay near this extremity, but
goes first to the other end; after the two extremities the most
instructive point will be the mid-point, and so on.

So when a rule is established we should first seek the cases where this
rule has the greatest chance of failing. Thence, among other reasons,
come the interest of astronomic facts, and the interest of the geologic
past; by going very far away in space or very far away in time, we may
find our usual rules entirely overturned, and these grand overturnings
aid us the better to see or the better to understand the little changes
which may happen nearer to us, in the little corner of the world where
we are called to live and act. We shall better know this corner for
having traveled in distant countries with which we have nothing to do.

But what we ought to aim at is less the ascertainment of resemblances
and differences than the recognition of likenesses hidden under apparent
divergences. Particular rules seem at first discordant, but looking more
closely we see in general that they resemble each other; different as to
matter, they are alike as to form, as to the order of their parts. When
we look at them with this bias, we shall see them enlarge and tend to
embrace everything. And this it is which makes the value of certain
facts which come to complete an assemblage and to show that it is the
faithful image of other known assemblages.

I will not further insist, but these few words suffice to show that the
scientist does not choose at random the facts he observes. He does not,
as Tolstoi says, count the lady-bugs, because, however interesting
lady-bugs may be, their number is subject to capricious variations. He
seeks to condense much experience and much thought into a slender
volume; and that is why a little book on physics contains so many past
experiences and a thousand times as many possible experiences whose
result is known beforehand.

But we have as yet looked at only one side of the question. The
scientist does not study nature because it is useful; he studies it
because he delights in it, and he delights in it because it is
beautiful. If nature were not beautiful, it would not be worth knowing,
and if nature were not worth knowing, life would not be worth living. Of
course I do not here speak of that beauty which strikes the senses, the
beauty of qualities and of appearances; not that I undervalue such
beauty, far from it, but it has nothing to do with science; I mean that
profounder beauty which comes from the harmonious order of the parts
and which a pure intelligence can grasp. This it is which gives body, a
structure so to speak, to the iridescent appearances which flatter our
senses, and without this support the beauty of these fugitive dreams
would be only imperfect, because it would be vague and always fleeting.
On the contrary, intellectual beauty is sufficient unto itself, and it
is for its sake, more perhaps than for the future good of humanity, that
the scientist devotes himself to long and difficult labors.

It is, therefore, the quest of this especial beauty, the sense of the
harmony of the cosmos, which makes us choose the facts most fitting to
contribute to this harmony, just as the artist chooses from among the
features of his model those which perfect the picture and give it
character and life. And we need not fear that this instinctive and
unavowed prepossession will turn the scientist aside from the search for
the true. One may dream a harmonious world, but how far the real world
will leave it behind! The greatest artists that ever lived, the Greeks,
made their heavens; how shabby it is beside the true heavens, ours!

And it is because simplicity, because grandeur, is beautiful, that we
preferably seek simple facts, sublime facts, that we delight now to
follow the majestic course of the stars, now to examine with the
microscope that prodigious littleness which is also a grandeur, now to
seek in geologic time the traces of a past which attracts because it is
far away.

We see too that the longing for the beautiful leads us to the same
choice as the longing for the useful. And so it is that this economy of
thought, this economy of effort, which is, according to Mach, the
constant tendency of science, is at the same time a source of beauty and
a practical advantage. The edifices that we admire are those where the
architect has known how to proportion the means to the end, where the
columns seem to carry gaily, without effort, the weight placed upon
them, like the gracious caryatids of the Erechtheum.

Whence comes this concordance? Is it simply that the things which seem
to us beautiful are those which best adapt themselves to our
intelligence, and that consequently they are at the same time the
implement this intelligence knows best how to use? Or is there here a
play of evolution and natural selection? Have the peoples whose ideal
most conformed to their highest interest exterminated the others and
taken their place? All pursued their ideals without reference to
consequences, but while this quest led some to destruction, to others it
gave empire. One is tempted to believe it. If the Greeks triumphed over
the barbarians and if Europe, heir of Greek thought, dominates the
world, it is because the savages loved loud colors and the clamorous
tones of the drum which occupied only their senses, while the Greeks
loved the intellectual beauty which hides beneath sensuous beauty, and
this intellectual beauty it is which makes intelligence sure and strong.

Doubtless such a triumph would horrify Tolstoi, and he would not like to
acknowledge that it might be truly useful. But this disinterested quest
of the true for its own beauty is sane also and able to make man better.
I well know that there are mistakes, that the thinker does not always
draw thence the serenity he should find therein, and even that there are
scientists of bad character. Must we, therefore, abandon science and
study only morals? What! Do you think the moralists themselves are
irreproachable when they come down from their pedestal?




