CHAPTER XXV

THE BEAUTIFUL WORLD

David found many new songs in his violin those early winter days, and
they were very beautiful ones. To begin with, there were all the kindly
looks and deeds that were showered upon him from every side. There was
the first snowstorm, too, with the feathery flakes turning all the
world to fairy whiteness. This song David played to Mr. Streeter, one
day, and great was his disappointment that the man could not seem to
understand what the song said.

"But don't you see?" pleaded David. "I'm telling you that it's your
pear-tree blossoms come back to say how glad they are that you didn't
kill them that day."

"Pear-tree blossoms--come back!" ejaculated the old man. "Well, no, I
can't see. Where's yer pear-tree blossoms?"

"Why, there--out of the window--everywhere," urged the boy.

"THERE! By ginger! boy--ye don't mean--ye CAN'T mean the SNOW!"

"Of course I do! Now, can't you see it? Why, the whole tree was just a
great big cloud of snowflakes. Don't you remember? Well, now it's gone
away and got a whole lot more trees, and all the little white petals
have come dancing down to celebrate, and to tell you they sure are
coming back next year."

"Well, by ginger!" exclaimed the man again. Then, suddenly, he threw
back his head with a hearty laugh. David did not quite like the laugh,
neither did he care for the five-cent piece that the man thrust into
his fingers a little later; though--had David but known it--both the
laugh and the five-cent piece gift were--for the uncomprehending man
who gave them--white milestones along an unfamiliar way.

It was soon after this that there came to David the great surprise--his
beloved Lady of the Roses and his no less beloved Mr. Jack were to be
married at the beginning of the New Year. So very surprised, indeed,
was David at this, that even his violin was mute, and had nothing, at
first, to say about it. But to Mr. Jack, as man to man, David said one
day:--

"I thought men, when they married women, went courting. In story-books
they do. And you--you hardly ever said a word to my beautiful Lady of
the Roses; and you spoke once--long ago--as if you scarcely remembered
her at all. Now, what do you mean by that?"

And Mr. Jack laughed, but he grew red, too,--and then he told it
all,--that it was just the story of "The Princess and the Pauper," and
that he, David, had been the one, as it happened, to do part of their
courting for them.

And how David had laughed then, and how he had fairly hugged himself
for joy! And when next he had picked up his violin, what a beautiful,
beautiful song he had found about it in the vibrant strings!

It was this same song, as it chanced, that he was playing in his room
that Saturday afternoon when the letter from Simeon Holly's long-lost
son John came to the Holly farmhouse.

Downstairs in the kitchen, Simeon Holly stood, with the letter in his
hand.

"Ellen, we've got a letter from--John," he said. That Simeon Holly
spoke of it at all showed how very far along HIS unfamiliar way he had
come since the last letter from John had arrived.

"From--John? Oh, Simeon! From John?"

"Yes."

Simeon sat down and tried to hide the shaking of his hand as he ran the
point of his knife under the flap of the envelope. "We'll see what--he
says." And to hear him, one might have thought that letters from John
were everyday occurrences.


DEAR FATHER: Twice before I have written [ran the letter], and received
no answer. But I'm going to make one more effort for forgiveness. May I
not come to you this Christmas? I have a little boy of my own now, and
my heart aches for you. I know how I should feel, should he, in years
to come, do as I did.

I'll not deceive you--I have not given up my art. You told me once to
choose between you and it--and I chose, I suppose; at least, I ran
away. Yet in the face of all that, I ask you again, may I not come to
you at Christmas? I want you, father, and I want mother. And I want you
to see my boy.


"Well?" said Simeon Holly, trying to speak with a steady coldness that
would not show how deeply moved he was. "Well, Ellen?"

"Yes, Simeon, yes!" choked his wife, a world of mother-love and longing
in her pleading eyes and voice. "Yes--you'll let it be--'Yes'!"

"Uncle Simeon, Aunt Ellen," called David, clattering down the stairs
from his room, "I've found such a beautiful song in my violin, and I'm
going to play it over and over so as to be sure and remember it for
father--for it is a beautiful world, Uncle Simeon, isn't it? Now,
listen!"

And Simeon Holly listened--but it was not the violin that he heard. It
was the voice of a little curly-headed boy out of the past.

When David stopped playing some time later, only the woman sat watching
him--the man was over at his desk, pen in hand.

John, John's wife, and John's boy came the day before Christmas, and
great was the excitement in the Holly farmhouse. John was found to be
big, strong, and bronzed with the outdoor life of many a sketching
trip--a son to be proud of, and to be leaned upon in one's old age.
Mrs. John, according to Perry Larson, was "the slickest little woman
goin'." According to John's mother, she was an almost unbelievable
incarnation of a long-dreamed-of, long-despaired-of daughter--sweet,
lovable, and charmingly beautiful. Little John--little John was
himself; and he could not have been more had he been an angel-cherub
straight from heaven--which, in fact, he was, in his doting
grandparents' eyes.

John Holly had been at his old home less than four hours when he
chanced upon David's violin. He was with his father and mother at the
time. There was no one else in the room. With a sidelong glance at his
parents, he picked up the instrument--John Holly had not forgotten his
own youth. His violin-playing in the old days had not been welcome, he
remembered.

"A fiddle! Who plays?" he asked.

"David."

"Oh, the boy. You say you--took him in? By the way, what an odd little
shaver he is! Never did I see a BOY like HIM." Simeon Holly's head came
up almost aggressively.

"David is a good boy--a very good boy, indeed, John. We think a great
deal of him."

John Holly laughed lightly, yet his brow carried a puzzled frown. Two
things John Holly had not been able thus far to understand: an
indefinable change in his father, and the position of the boy David, in
the household--John Holly was still remembering his own repressed youth.

"Hm-m," he murmured, softly picking the strings, then drawing across
them a tentative bow. "I've a fiddle at home that I play sometimes. Do
you mind if I--tune her up?"

A flicker of something that was very near to humor flashed from his
father's eyes.

"Oh, no. We are used to that--now." And again John Holly remembered his
youth.

"Jove! but he's got the dandy instrument here," cried the player,
dropping his bow after the first half-dozen superbly vibrant tones, and
carrying the violin to the window. A moment later he gave an amazed
ejaculation and turned on his father a dumfounded face.

"Great Scott, father! Where did that boy get this instrument? I KNOW
something of violins, if I can't play them much; and this--! Where DID
he get it?"

"Of his father, I suppose. He had it when he came here, anyway."

"'Had it when he came'! But, father, you said he was a tramp, and--oh,
come, tell me, what is the secret behind this? Here I come home and
find calmly reposing on my father's sitting-room table a violin that's
priceless, for all I know. Anyhow, I do know that its value is reckoned
in the thousands, not hundreds: and yet you, with equal calmness, tell
me it's owned by this boy who, it's safe to say, doesn't know how to
play sixteen notes on it correctly, to say nothing of appreciating
those he does play; and who, by your own account, is nothing but--" A
swiftly uplifted hand of warning stayed the words on his lips. He
turned to see David himself in the doorway.

"Come in, David," said Simeon Holly quietly. "My son wants to hear you
play. I don't think he has heard you." And again there flashed from
Simeon Holly's eyes a something very much like humor.

With obvious hesitation John Holly relinquished the violin. From the
expression on his face it was plain to be seen the sort of torture he
deemed was before him. But, as if constrained to ask the question, he
did say:--

"Where did you get this violin, boy?"

"I don't know. We've always had it, ever since I could remember--this
and the other one."

"The OTHER one!"

"Father's."

"Oh!" He hesitated; then, a little severely, he observed: "This is a
fine instrument, boy,--a very fine instrument."

"Yes," nodded David, with a cheerful smile. "Father said it was. I like
it, too. This is an Amati, but the other is a Stradivarius. I don't
know which I do like best, sometimes, only this is mine."

With a half-smothered ejaculation John Holly fell back limply.

"Then you--do--know?" he challenged.

"Know--what?"

"The value of that violin in your hands."

There was no answer. The boy's eyes were questioning.

"The worth, I mean,--what it's worth."

"Why, no--yes--that is, it's worth everything--to me," answered David,
in a puzzled voice.

With an impatient gesture John Holly brushed this aside.

"But the other one--where is that?"

"At Joe Glaspell's. I gave it to him to play on, because he had n't
any, and he liked to play so well."

"You GAVE it to him--a Stradivarius!"

"I loaned it to him," corrected David, in a troubled voice. "Being
father's, I couldn't bear to give it away. But Joe--Joe had to have
something to play on."

"'Something to play on'! Father, he doesn't mean the River Street
Glaspells?" cried John Holly.

"I think he does. Joe is old Peleg Glaspell's grandson." John Holly
threw up both his hands.

"A Stradivarius--to old Peleg's grandson! Oh, ye gods!" he muttered.
"Well, I'll be--" He did not finish his sentence. At another word from
Simeon Holly, David had begun to play.

From his seat by the stove Simeon Holly watched his son's face--and
smiled. He saw amazement, unbelief, and delight struggle for the
mastery; but before the playing had ceased, he was summoned by Perry
Larson to the kitchen on a matter of business. So it was into the
kitchen that John Holly burst a little later, eyes and cheek aflame.

"Father, where in Heaven's name DID you get that boy?" he demanded.
"Who taught  him to play like that? I've been trying to find out from
him, but I'd defy Sherlock Holmes himself to make head or tail of the
sort of lingo he talks, about mountain homes and the Orchestra of Life!
Father, what DOES it mean?"

Obediently Simeon Holly told the story then, more fully than he had
told it before. He brought forward the letter, too, with its mysterious
signature.

"Perhaps you can make it out, son," he laughed. "None of the rest of us
can, though I haven't shown it to anybody now for a long time. I got
discouraged long ago of anybody's ever making it out."

"Make it out--make it out!" cried John Holly excitedly; "I should say I
could! It's a name known the world over. It's the name of one of the
greatest violinists that ever lived."

"But how--what--how came he in my barn?" demanded Simeon Holly.

"Easily guessed, from the letter, and from what the world knows,"
returned John, his voice still shaking with excitement. "He was always
a queer chap, they say, and full of his notions. Six or eight years ago
his wife died. They say he worshiped her, and for weeks refused even to
touch his violin. Then, very suddenly, he, with his four-year-old son,
disappeared--dropped quite out of sight. Some people guessed the
reason. I knew a man who was well acquainted with him, and at the time
of the disappearance he told me quite a lot about him. He said he was
n't a bit surprised at what had happened. That already half a dozen
relatives were interfering with the way he wanted to bring the boy up,
and that David was in a fair way to be spoiled, even then, with so much
attention and flattery. The father had determined to make a wonderful
artist of his son, and he was known to have said that he believed--as
do so many others--that the first dozen years of a child's life are the
making of the man, and that if he could have the boy to himself that
long he would risk the rest. So it seems he carried out his notion
until he was taken sick, and had to quit--poor chap!"

"But why didn't he tell us plainly in that note who he was, then?"
fumed Simeon Holly, in manifest irritation.

"He did, he thought," laughed the other. "He signed his name, and he
supposed that was so well known that just to mention it would be
enough. That's why he kept it so secret while he was living on the
mountain, you see, and that's why even David himself didn't know it. Of
course, if anybody found out who he was, that ended his scheme, and he
knew it. So he supposed all he had to do at the last was to sign his
name to that note, and everybody would know who he was, and David would
at once be sent to his own people. (There's an aunt and some cousins, I
believe.) You see he didn't reckon on nobody's being able to READ his
name! Besides, being so ill, he probably wasn't quite sane, anyway."

"I see, I see," nodded Simeon Holly, frowning a little. "And of course
if we had made it out, some of us here would have known it, probably.
Now that you call it to mind I think I have heard it myself in days
gone by--though such names mean little to me. But doubtless somebody
would have known. However, that is all past and gone now."

"Oh, yes, and no harm done. He fell into good hands, luckily. You'll
soon see the last of him now, of course."

"Last of him? Oh, no, I shall keep David," said Simeon Holly, with
decision.

"Keep him! Why, father, you forget who he is! There are friends,
relatives, an adoring public, and a mint of money awaiting that boy.
You can't keep him. You could never have kept him this long if this
little town of yours hadn't been buried in this forgotten valley up
among these hills. You'll have the whole world at your doors the minute
they find out he is here--hills or no hills! Besides, there are his
people; they have some claim."

There was no answer. With a suddenly old, drawn look on his face, the
elder man had turned away.

Half an hour later Simeon Holly climbed the stairs to David's room, and
as gently and plainly as he could told the boy of this great, good
thing that had come to him.

David was amazed, but overjoyed. That he was found to be the son of a
famous man affected him not at all, only so far as it seemed to set his
father right in other eyes--in David's own, the man had always been
supreme. But the going away--the marvelous going away--filled him with
excited wonder.

"You mean, I shall go away and study--practice--learn more of my
violin?"

"Yes, David."

"And hear beautiful music like the organ in church, only
more--bigger--better?"

"I suppose so.".

"And know people--dear people--who will understand what I say when I
play?"

Simeon Holly's face paled a little; still, he knew David had not meant
to make it so hard.

"Yes."

"Why, it's my 'start'--just what I was going to have with the
gold-pieces," cried David joyously. Then, uttering a sharp cry of
consternation, he clapped his fingers to his lips.

"Your--what?" asked the man.

"N--nothing, really, Mr. Holly,--Uncle Simeon,--n--nothing."

Something, either the boy's agitation, or the luckless mention of the
gold-pieces sent a sudden dismayed suspicion into Simeon Holly's eyes.

"Your 'start'?--the 'gold-pieces'? David, what do you mean?"

David shook his head. He did not intend to tell. But gently,
persistently, Simeon Holly questioned until the whole piteous little
tale lay bare before him: the hopes, the house of dreams, the sacrifice.

David saw then what it means when a strong man is shaken by an emotion
that has mastered him; and the sight awed and frightened the boy.

"Mr. Holly, is it because I'm--going--that you care--so much? I never
thought--or supposed--you'd--CARE," he faltered.

There was no answer. Simeon Holly's eyes were turned quite away.

"Uncle Simeon--PLEASE! I--I think I don't want to go, anyway. I--I'm
sure I don't want to go--and leave YOU!"

Simeon Holly turned then, and spoke.

"Go? Of course you'll go, David. Do you think I'd tie you here to
me--NOW?" he choked. "What don't I owe to you--home, son, happiness!
Go?--of course you'll go. I wonder if you really think I'd let you
stay! Come, we'll go down to mother and tell her. I suspect she'll want
to start in to-night to get your socks all mended up!" And with head
erect and a determined step, Simeon Holly faced the mighty sacrifice in
his turn, and led the way downstairs.

      *      *      *      *      *

The friends, the relatives, the adoring public, the mint of money--they
are all David's now. But once each year, man grown though he is, he
picks up his violin and journeys to a little village far up among the
hills. There in a quiet kitchen he plays to an old man and an old
woman; and always to himself he says that he is practicing against the
time when, his violin at his chin and the bow drawn across the strings,
he shall go to meet his father in the far-away land, and tell him of
the beautiful world he has left.


