CHAPTER XXIV

A STORY REMODELED

The pretended Halloween was a great success. So very excited, indeed,
did David become over the swinging apples and popping nuts that he
quite forgot to tell Mr. Jack what the Lady of the Roses had said until
Jill had gone up to bed and he himself was about to take from Mr.
Jack's hand the little lighted lamp.

"Oh, Mr. Jack, I forgot," he cried then. "There was something I was
going to tell you."

"Never mind to-night, David; it's so late. Suppose we leave it until
to-morrow," suggested Mr. Jack, still with the lamp extended in his
hand.

"But I promised the Lady of the Roses that I'd say it to-night,"
demurred the boy, in a troubled voice.

The man drew his lamp halfway back suddenly.

"The Lady of the Roses! Do you mean--she sent a message--to ME?" he
demanded.

"Yes; about the story, 'The Princess and the Pauper,' you know."

With an abrupt exclamation Mr. Jack set the lamp on the table and
turned to a chair. He had apparently lost his haste to go to bed.

"See here, David, suppose you come and sit down, and tell me just what
you're talking about. And first--just what does the Lady of the Roses
know about that--that 'Princess and the Pauper'?"

"Why, she knows it all, of course," returned the boy in surprise. "I
told it to her."

"You--told--it--to her!" Mr. Jack relaxed in his chair. "David!"

"Yes. And she was just as interested as could be."

"I don't doubt it!" Mr. Jack's lips snapped together a little grimly.

"Only she didn't like the ending, either."

Mr. Jack sat up suddenly.

"She didn't like--David, are you sure? Did she SAY that?"

David frowned in thought.

"Well, I don't know as I can tell, exactly, but I'm sure she did n't
like it, because just before she told me WHAT to say to you, she said
that--that what she was going to say would probably have something to
do with the ending, anyway. Still--" David paused in yet deeper
thought. "Come to think of it, there really isn't anything--not in what
she said--that CHANGED that ending, as I can see. They didn't get
married and live happy ever after, anyhow."

"Yes, but what did she say?" asked Mr. Jack in a voice that was not
quite steady. "Now, be careful, David, and tell it just as she said it."

"Oh, I will," nodded David.  "SHE said to do that, too."

"Did she?" Mr. Jack leaned farther forward in his chair. "But tell me,
how did she happen to--to say anything about it? Suppose you begin at
the beginning--away back, David. I want to hear it all--all!"

David gave a contented sigh, and settled himself more comfortably.

"Well, to begin with, you see, I told her the story long ago, before I
was sick, and she was ever so interested then, and asked lots of
questions. Then the other day something came up--I've forgotten
how--about the ending, and I told her how hard I'd tried to have you
change it, but you wouldn't. And she spoke right up quick and said
probably you didn't want to change it, anyhow. But of course I settled
THAT question without any trouble," went on David confidently, "by just
telling her how you said you'd give anything in the world to change it."

"And you told her that--just that, David?" cried the man.

"Why, yes, I had to," answered David, in surprise, "else she wouldn't
have known that you DID want to change it. Don't you see?"

"Oh, yes! I--see--a good deal that I'm thinking you don't," muttered
Mr. Jack, falling back in his chair.

"Well, then is when I told her about the logical ending--what you said,
you know,--oh, yes! and that was when I found out she did n't like the
ending, because she laughed such a funny little laugh and colored up,
and said that she wasn't sure she could tell me what a logical ending
was, but that she would try to find out, and that, anyhow, YOUR ending
wouldn't be hers--she was sure of that."

"David, did she say that--really?" Mr. Jack was on his feet now.

"She did; and then yesterday she asked me to come over, and she said
some more things,--about the story, I mean,--but she didn't say another
thing about the ending. She didn't ever say anything about that except
that little bit I told you of a minute ago."

"Yes, yes, but what did she say?" demanded Mr. Jack, stopping short in
his walk up and down the room.

"She said: 'You tell Mr. Jack that I know something about that story of
his that perhaps he doesn't. In the first place, I know the Princess a
lot better than he does, and she isn't a bit the kind of girl he's
pictured her."

"Yes! Go on--go on!"

"'Now, for instance,' she says, 'when the boy made that call, after the
girl first came back, and when the boy didn't like it because they
talked of colleges and travels, and such things, you tell him that I
happen to know that that girl was just hoping and hoping he'd speak of
the old days and games; but that she could n't speak, of course, when
he hadn't been even once to see her during all those weeks, and when
he'd acted in every way just as if he'd forgotten.'"

"But she hadn't waved--that Princess hadn't waved--once!" argued Mr.
Jack; "and he looked and looked for it."

"Yes, SHE spoke of that," returned David. "But SHE said she shouldn't
think the Princess would have waved, when she'd got to be such a great
big girl as that--WAVING to a BOY! She said that for her part she
should have been ashamed of her if she had!"

"Oh, did she!" murmured Mr. Jack blankly, dropping suddenly into his
chair.

"Yes, she did," repeated David, with a little virtuous uplifting of his
chin.

It was plain to be seen that David's sympathies had unaccountably met
with a change of heart.

"But--the Pauper--"

"Oh, yes, and that's another thing," interrupted David. "The Lady of
the Roses said that she didn't like that name one bit; that it wasn't
true, anyway, because he wasn't a pauper. And she said, too, that as
for his picturing the Princess as being perfectly happy in all that
magnificence, he didn't get it right at all. For SHE knew that the
Princess wasn't one bit happy, because she was so lonesome for things
and people she had known when she was just the girl."

Again Mr. Jack sprang to his feet. For a minute he strode up and down
the room in silence; then in a shaking voice he asked:--

"David, you--you aren't making all this up, are you? You're saying just
what--what Miss Holbrook told you to?"

"Why, of course, I'm not making it up," protested the boy aggrievedly.
"This is the Lady of the Roses' story--SHE made it up--only she talked
it as if 't was real, of course, just as you did. She said another
thing, too. She said that she happened to know that the Princess had
got all that magnificence around her in the first place just to see if
it wouldn't make her happy, but that it hadn't, and that now she had
one place--a little room--that was left just as it used to be when she
was the girl, and that she went there and sat very often. And she said
it was right in sight of where the boy lived, too, where he could see
it every day; and that if he hadn't been so blind he could have looked
right through those gray walls and seen that, and seen lots of other
things. And what did she mean by that, Mr. Jack?"

"I don't know--I don't know, David," half-groaned Mr. Jack. "Sometimes
I think she means--and then I think that can't be--true."

"But do you think it's helped it any--the story?" persisted the boy.
"She's only talked a little about the Princess. She didn't really
change things any--not the ending."

"But she said it might, David--she said it might! Don't you remember?"
cried the man eagerly. And to David, his eagerness did not seem at all
strange. Mr. Jack had said before--long ago--that he would be very glad
indeed to have a happier ending to this tale. "Think now," continued
the man. "Perhaps she said something else, too. Did she say anything
else, David?"

David shook his head slowly.

"No, only--yes, there was a little something, but it doesn't CHANGE
things any, for it was only a 'supposing.' She said: 'Just supposing,
after long years, that the Princess found out about how the boy felt
long ago, and suppose he should look up at the tower some day, at the
old time, and see a ONE--TWO wave, which meant, "Come over to see me."
Just what do you suppose he would do?' But of course, THAT can't do any
good," finished David gloomily, as he rose to go to bed, "for that was
only a 'supposing.'"

"Of course," agreed Mr. Jack steadily; and David did not know that only
stern self-control had forced the steadiness into that voice, nor that,
for Mr. Jack, the whole world had burst suddenly into song.

Neither did David, the next morning, know that long before eight
o'clock Mr. Jack stood at a certain window, his eyes unswervingly fixed
on the gray towers of Sunnycrest. What David did know, however, was
that just after eight, Mr. Jack strode through the room where he and
Jill were playing checkers, flung himself into his hat and coat, and
then fairly leaped down the steps toward the path that led to the
footbridge at the bottom of the hill.

"Why, whatever in the world ails Jack?" gasped Jill. Then, after a
startled pause, she asked. "David, do folks ever go crazy for joy?
Yesterday, you see, Jack got two splendid pieces of news. One was from
his doctor. He was examined, and he's fine, the doctor says; all well,
so he can go back, now any time, to the city and work. I shall go to
school then, you know,--a young ladies' school," she finished, a little
importantly.

"He's well? How splendid! But what was the other news? You said there
were two; only it couldn't have been nicer than that was; to be
well--all well!"

"The other? Well, that was only that his old place in the city was
waiting for him. He was with a firm of big lawyers, you know, and of
course it is nice to have a place all waiting. But I can't see anything
in those things to make him act like this, now. Can you?"

"Why, yes, maybe," declared David. "He's found his work--don't you
see?--out in the world, and he's going to do it. I know how I'd feel if
I had found mine that father told me of! Only what I can't understand
is, if Mr. Jack knew all this yesterday, why did n't he act like this
then, instead of waiting till to-day?"

"I wonder," said Jill.



