CHAPTER XX

THE UNFAMILIAR WAY

In September David entered the village school. School and David did not
assimilate at once. Very confidently the teacher set to work to grade
her new pupil; but she was not so confident when she found that while
in Latin he was perilously near herself (and in French--which she was
not required to teach--disastrously beyond her!), in United States
history he knew only the barest outlines of certain portions, and could
not name a single battle in any of its wars. In most studies he was far
beyond boys of his own age, yet at every turn she encountered these
puzzling spots of discrepancy, which rendered grading in the ordinary
way out of the question.

David's methods of recitation, too, were peculiar, and somewhat
disconcerting. He also did not hesitate to speak aloud when he chose,
nor to rise from his seat and move to any part of the room as the whim
seized him. In time, of course, all this was changed; but it was
several days before the boy learned so to conduct himself that he did
not shatter to atoms the peace and propriety of the schoolroom.

Outside of school David had little work to do now, though there were
still left a few light tasks about the house. Home life at the Holly
farmhouse was the same for David, yet with a difference--the difference
that comes from being really wanted instead of being merely dutifully
kept. There were other differences, too, subtle differences that did
not show, perhaps, but that still were there.

Mr. and Mrs. Holly, more than ever now, were learning to look at the
world through David's eyes. One day--one wonderful day--they even went
to walk in the woods with the boy; and whenever before had Simeon Holly
left his work for so frivolous a thing as a walk in the woods!

It was not accomplished, however, without a struggle, as David could
have told. The day was a Saturday, clear, crisp, and beautiful, with a
promise of October in the air; and David fairly tingled to be free and
away. Mrs. Holly was baking--and the birds sang unheard outside her
pantry window. Mr. Holly was digging potatoes--and the clouds sailed
unnoticed above his head.

All the morning David urged and begged. If for once, just this once,
they would leave everything and come, they would not regret it, he was
sure. But they shook their heads and said, "No, no, impossible!" In the
afternoon the pies were done and the potatoes dug, and David urged and
pleaded again. If once, only this once, they would go to walk with him
in the woods, he would be so happy, so very happy! And to please the
boy--they went.

It was a curious walk. Ellen Holly trod softly, with timid feet. She
threw hurried, frightened glances from side to side. It was plain that
Ellen Holly did not know how to play. Simeon Holly stalked at her
elbow, stern, silent, and preoccupied. It was plain that Simeon Holly
not only did not know how to play, but did not even care to find out.

The boy tripped ahead and talked. He had the air of a monarch
displaying his kingdom. On one side was a bit of moss worthy of the
closest attention; on another, a vine that carried allurement in every
tendril. Here was a flower that was like a story for interest, and
there was a bush that bore a secret worth the telling. Even Simeon
Holly glowed into a semblance of life when David had unerringly picked
out and called by name the spruce, and fir, and pine, and larch, and
then, in answer to Mrs. Holly's murmured: "But, David, where's the
difference? They look so much alike!" he had said:--

"Oh, but they aren't, you know. Just see how much more pointed at the
top that fir is than that spruce back there; and the branches grow
straight out, too, like arms, and they're all smooth and tapering at
the ends like a pussy-cat's tail. But the spruce back there--ITS
branches turned down and out--didn't you notice?--and they're all bushy
at the ends like a squirrel's tail. Oh, they're lots different! That's
a larch 'way ahead--that one with the branches all scraggly and close
down to the ground. I could start to climb that easy; but I couldn't
that pine over there. See, it's 'way up, up, before there's a place for
your foot! But I love pines. Up there on the mountains where I lived,
the pines were so tall that it seemed as if God used them sometimes to
hold up the sky."

And Simeon Holly heard, and said nothing; and that he did say
nothing--especially nothing in answer to David's confident assertions
concerning celestial and terrestrial architecture--only goes to show
how well, indeed, the man was learning to look at the world through
David's eyes.

Nor were these all of David's friends to whom Mr. and Mrs. Holly were
introduced on that memorable walk. There were the birds, and the
squirrels, and, in fact, everything that had life. And each one he
greeted joyously by name, as he would greet a friend whose home and
habits he knew. Here was a wonderful woodpecker, there was a beautiful
bluejay. Ahead, that brilliant bit of color that flashed across their
path was a tanager. Once, far up in the sky, as they crossed an open
space, David spied a long black streak moving southward.

"Oh, see!" he exclaimed. "The crows! See them?--'way up there? Wouldn't
it be fun if we could do that, and fly hundreds and hundreds of miles,
maybe a thousand?"

"Oh, David," remonstrated Mrs. Holly, unbelievingly.

"But they do! These look as if they'd started on their winter journey
South, too; but if they have, they're early. Most of them don't go till
October. They come back in March, you know. Though I've had them, on
the mountain, that stayed all the year with me."

"My! but I love to watch them go," murmured David, his eyes following
the rapidly disappearing blackline. "Lots of birds you can't see, you
know, when they start for the South. They fly at night--the woodpeckers
and orioles and cuckoos, and lots of others. They're afraid, I guess,
don't you? But I've seen them. I've watched them. They tell each other
when they're going to start."

"Oh, David," remonstrated Mrs. Holly, again, her eyes reproving, but
plainly enthralled.

"But they do tell each other," claimed the boy, with sparkling eyes.
"They must! For, all of a sudden, some night, you'll hear the signal,
and then they'll begin to gather from all directions. I've seen them.
Then, suddenly, they're all up and off to the South--not in one big
flock, but broken up into little flocks, following one after another,
with such a beautiful whir of wings. Oof--OOF--OOF!--and they're gone!
And I don't see them again till next year. But you've seen the
swallows, haven't you? They go in the daytime, and they're the easiest
to tell of any of them. They fly so swift and straight. Haven't you
seen the swallows go?"

"Why, I--I don't know, David," murmured Mrs. Holly, with a helpless
glance at her husband stalking on ahead. "I--I didn't know there were
such things to--to know."

There was more, much more, that David said before the walk came to an
end. And though, when it did end, neither Simeon Holly nor his wife
said a word of its having been a pleasure or a profit, there was yet on
their faces something of the peace and rest and quietness that belonged
to the woods they had left.

It was a beautiful month--that September, and David made the most of
it. Out of school meant out of doors for him. He saw Mr. Jack and Jill
often. He spent much time, too, with the Lady of the Roses. She was
still the Lady of the ROSES to David, though in the garden now were the
purple and scarlet and yellow of the asters, salvia, and golden glow,
instead of the blush and perfume of the roses.

David was very much at home at Sunnycrest. He was welcome, he knew, to
go where he pleased. Even the servants were kind to him, as well as was
the elderly cousin whom he seldom saw, but who, he knew, lived there as
company for his Lady of the Roses.

Perhaps best, next to the garden, David loved the tower room; possibly
because Miss Holbrook herself so often suggested that they go there.
And it was there that they were when he said, dreamily, one day:--

"I like this place--up here so high, only sometimes it does make me
think of that Princess, because it was in a tower like this that she
was, you know."

"Fairy stories, David?" asked Miss Holbrook lightly.

"No, not exactly, though there was a Princess in it. Mr. Jack told it."
David's eyes were still out of the window.

"Oh, Mr. Jack! And does Mr. Jack often tell you stories?"

"No. He never told only this one--and maybe that's why I remember it
so."

"Well, and what did the Princess do?" Miss Holbrook's voice was still
light, still carelessly preoccupied. Her attention, plainly, was given
to the sewing in her hand.

"She didn't do and that's what was the trouble," sighed David. "She
didn't wave, you know."

The needle in Miss Holbrook's fingers stopped short in mid-air, the
thread half-drawn.

"Didn't--wave!" she stammered. "What do you--mean?"

"Nothing," laughed the boy, turning away from the window. "I forgot
that you didn't know the story."

"But maybe I do--that is--what was the story?" asked Miss Holbrook,
wetting her lips as if they had grown suddenly very dry.

"Oh, do you? I wonder now! It wasn't 'The PRINCE and the Pauper,' but
the PRINCESS and the Pauper," cited David; "and they used to wave
signals, and answer with flags. Do you know the story?"

There was no answer. Miss Holbrook was putting away her work,
hurriedly, and with hands that shook. David noticed that she even
pricked herself in her anxiety to get the needle tucked away. Then she
drew him to a low stool at her side.

"David, I want you to tell me that story, please," she said, "just as
Mr. Jack told it to you. Now, be careful and put it all in, because
I--I want to hear it," she finished, with an odd little laugh that
seemed to bring two bright red spots to her cheeks.

"Oh, do you want to hear it? Then I will tell it," cried David
joyfully. To David, almost as delightful as to hear a story was to tell
one himself. "You see, first--" And he plunged headlong into the
introduction.

David knew it well--that story: and there was, perhaps, little that he
forgot. It might not have been always told in Mr. Jack's language; but
his meaning was there, and very intently Miss Holbrook listened while
David told of the boy and the girl, the wavings, and the flags that
were blue, black, and red. She laughed once,--that was at the little
joke with the bells that the girl played,--but she did not speak until
sometime later when David was telling of the first home-coming of the
Princess, and of the time when the boy on his tiny piazza watched and
watched in vain for a waving white signal from the tower.

"Do you mean to say," interposed Miss Holbrook then, almost starting to
her feet, "that that boy expected--" She stopped suddenly, and fell
back in her chair. The two red spots on her cheeks had become a rosy
glow now, all over her face.

"Expected what?" asked David.

"N--nothing. Go on. I was so--so interested," explained Miss Holbrook
faintly. "Go on."

And David did go on; nor did the story lose by his telling. It gained,
indeed, something, for now it had woven through it the very strong
sympathy of a boy who loved the Pauper for his sorrow and hated the
Princess for causing that sorrow.

"And so," he concluded mournfully, "you see it isn't a very nice story,
after all, for it didn't end well a bit. They ought to have got married
and lived happy ever after. But they didn't."

Miss Holbrook drew in her breath a little uncertainly, and put her hand
to her throat. Her face now, instead of being red, was very white.

"But, David," she faltered, after a moment, "perhaps
he--the--Pauper--did not--not love the Princess any longer."

"Mr. Jack said that he did."

The white face went suddenly pink again.

"Then, why didn't he go to her and--and--tell her?"

David lifted his chin. With all his dignity he answered, and his words
and accent were Mr. Jack's.

"Paupers don't go to Princesses, and say 'I love you.'"

"But perhaps if they did--that is--if--" Miss Holbrook bit her lips and
did not finish her sentence. She did not, indeed, say anything more for
a long time. But she had not forgotten the story. David knew that,
because later she began to question him carefully about many little
points--points that he was very sure he had already made quite plain.
She talked about it, indeed, until he wondered if perhaps she were
going to tell it to some one else sometime. He asked her if she were;
but she only shook her head. And after that she did not question him
any more. And a little later David went home.



