CHAPTER XXI

HEAVY HEARTS

For a week David had not been near the House that Jack Built, and that,
too, when Jill had been confined within doors for several days with a
cold. Jill, indeed, was inclined to be grieved at this apparent lack of
interest on the part of her favorite playfellow; but upon her return
from her first day of school, after her recovery, she met her brother
with startled eyes.

"Jack, it hasn't been David's fault at all," she cried remorsefully.
"He's sick."

"Sick!"

"Yes; awfully sick. They've had to send away for doctors and
everything."

"Why, Jill, are you sure? Where did you hear this?"

"At school to-day. Every one was talking about it."

"But what is the matter?"

"Fever--some sort. Some say it's typhoid, and some scarlet, and some
say another kind that I can't remember; but everybody says he's awfully
sick. He got it down to Glaspell's, some say,--and some say he didn't.
But, anyhow, Betty Glaspell has been sick with something, and they
haven't let folks in there this week," finished Jill, her eyes big with
terror.

"The Glaspells? But what was David doing down there?"

"Why, you know,--he told us once,--teaching Joe to play. He's been
there lots. Joe is blind, you know, and can't see, but he just loves
music, and was crazy over David's violin; so David took down his other
one--the one that was his father's, you know--and showed him how to
pick out little tunes, just to take up his time so he wouldn't mind so
much that he couldn't see. Now, Jack, wasn't that just like David?
Jack, I can't have anything happen to David!"

"No, dear, no; of course not! I'm afraid we can't any of us, for that
matter," sighed Jack, his forehead drawn into anxious lines. "I'll go
down to the Hollys', Jill, the first thing tomorrow morning, and see
how he is and if there's anything we can do. Meanwhile, don't take it
too much to heart, dear. It may not be half so bad as you think.
School-children always get things like that exaggerated, you must
remember," he finished, speaking with a lightness that he did not feel.

To himself the man owned that he was troubled, seriously troubled. He
had to admit that Jill's story bore the earmarks of truth; and
overwhelmingly he realized now just how big a place this somewhat
puzzling small boy had come to fill in his own heart. He did not need
Jill's anxious "Now, hurry, Jack," the next morning to start him off in
all haste for the Holly farmhouse. A dozen rods from the driveway he
met Perry Larson and stopped him abruptly.

"Good morning, Larson; I hope this isn't true--what I hear--that David
is very ill."

Larson pulled off his hat and with his free hand sought the one
particular spot on his head to which he always appealed when he was
very much troubled.

"Well, yes, sir, I'm afraid 't is, Mr. Jack--er--Mr. Gurnsey, I mean.
He is turrible sick, poor little chap, an' it's too bad--that's what it
is--too bad!"

"Oh, I'm sorry! I hoped the report was exaggerated. I came down to see
if--if there wasn't something I could do."

"Well, 'course you can ask--there ain't no law ag'in' that; an' ye
needn't be afraid, neither. The report has got 'round that it's
ketchin'--what he's got, and that he got it down to the Glaspells'; but
't ain't so. The doctor says he didn't ketch nothin', an' he can't give
nothin'. It's his head an' brain that ain't right, an' he's got a
mighty bad fever. He's been kind of flighty an' nervous, anyhow, lately.

"As I was sayin', 'course you can ask, but I'm thinkin' there won't be
nothin' you can do ter help. Ev'rythin' that can be done is bein' done.
In fact, there ain't much of anythin' else that is bein' done down
there jest now but, tendin' ter him. They've got one o' them 'ere
edyercated nurses from the Junction--what wears caps, ye know, an'
makes yer feel as if they knew it all, an' you didn't know nothin'. An'
then there's Mr. an' Mis' Holly besides. If they had THEIR way, there
wouldn't neither of, em let him out o' their sight fur a minute,
they're that cut up about it."

"I fancy they think a good deal of the boy--as we all do," murmured the
younger man, a little unsteadily.

Larson wrinkled his forehead in deep thought.

"Yes; an' that's what beats me," he answered slowly; "'bout HIM,--Mr.
Holly, I mean. 'Course we'd 'a' expected it of HER--losin' her own boy
as she did, an' bein' jest naturally so sweet an' lovin'-hearted. But
HIM--that's diff'rent. Now, you know jest as well as I do what Mr.
Holly is--every one does, so I ain't sayin' nothin' sland'rous. He's a
good man--a powerful good man; an' there ain't a squarer man goin' ter
work fur. But the fact is, he was made up wrong side out, an' the seams
has always showed bad--turrible bad, with ravelin's all stickin' out
every which way ter ketch an' pull. But, gosh! I'm blamed if that, ere
boy ain't got him so smoothed down, you wouldn't know, scursely, that
he had a seam on him, sometimes; though how he's done it beats me. Now,
there's Mis' Holly--she's tried ter smooth 'em, I'll warrant, lots of
times. But I'm free ter say she hain't never so much as clipped a
ravelin' in all them forty years they've lived tergether. Fact is, it's
worked the other way with her. All that HER rubbin' up ag'in' them
seams has amounted to is ter git herself so smoothed down that she
don't never dare ter say her soul's her own, most generally,--anyhow,
not if he happens ter intermate it belongs ter anybody else!"

Jack Gurnsey suddenly choked over a cough.

"I wish I could--do something," he murmured uncertainly.

"'T ain't likely ye can--not so long as Mr. an' Mis' Holly is on their
two feet. Why, there ain't nothin' they won't do, an' you'll believe
it, maybe, when I tell you that yesterday Mr. Holly, he tramped all
through Sawyer's woods in the rain, jest ter find a little bit of moss
that the boy was callin' for. Think o' that, will ye? Simeon Holly
huntin' moss! An' he got it, too, an' brung it home, an' they say it
cut him up somethin' turrible when the boy jest turned away, and didn't
take no notice. You understand, 'course, sir, the little chap ain't
right in his head, an' so half the time he don't know what he says."

"Oh, I'm sorry, sorry!" exclaimed Gurnsey, as he turned away, and
hurried toward the farmhouse.

Mrs. Holly herself answered his low knock. She looked worn and pale.

"Thank you, sir," she said gratefully, in reply to his offer of
assistance, "but there isn't anything you can do, Mr. Gurnsey. We're
having everything done that can be, and every one is very kind. We have
a very good nurse, and Dr. Kennedy has had consultation with Dr. Benson
from the Junction. They are doing all in their power, of course, but
they say that--that it's going to be the nursing that will count now."

"Then I don't fear for him, surely" declared the man, with fervor.

"I know, but--well, he shall have the very best possible--of that."

"I know he will; but isn't there anything--anything that I can do?"

She shook her head.

"No. Of course, if he gets better--" She hesitated; then lifted her
chin a little higher; "WHEN he gets better," she corrected with
courageous emphasis, "he will want to see you."

"And he shall see me," asserted Gurnsey. "And he will be better, Mrs.
Holly,--I'm sure he will."

"Yes, yes, of course, only--oh, Mr. Jack, he's so sick--so very sick!
The doctor says he's a peculiarly sensitive nature, and that he thinks
something's been troubling him lately." Her voice broke.

"Poor little chap!" Mr. Jack's voice, too, was husky.

She looked up with swift gratefulness for his sympathy.

"And you loved him, too, I know" she choked. "He talks of you
often--very often."

"Indeed I love him! Who could help it?"

"There couldn't anybody, Mr. Jack,--and that's just it. Now, since he's
been sick, we've wondered more than ever who he is. You see, I can't
help thinking that somewhere he's got friends who ought to know about
him--now."

"Yes, I see," nodded the man.

"He isn't an ordinary boy, Mr. Jack. He's been trained in lots of
ways--about his manners, and at the table, and all that. And lots of
things his father has told him are beautiful, just beautiful! He isn't
a tramp. He never was one. And there's his playing. YOU know how he can
play."

"Indeed I do! You must miss his playing, too."

"I do; he talks of that, also," she hurried on, working her fingers
nervously together; "but oftenest he--he speaks of singing, and I can't
quite understand that, for he didn't ever sing, you know."

"Singing? What does he say?" The man asked the question because he saw
that it was affording the overwrought little woman real relief to free
her mind; but at the first words of her reply he became suddenly alert.

"It's 'his song,' as he calls it, that he talks about, always. It isn't
much--what he says--but I noticed it because he always says the same
thing, like this: I'll just hold up my chin and march straight on and
on, and I'll sing it with all my might and main.' And when I ask him
what he's going to sing, he always says, 'My song--my song,' just like
that. Do you think, Mr. Jack, he did have--a song?"

For a moment the man did not answer. Something in his throat tightened,
and held the words. Then, in a low voice he managed to stammer:--

"I think he did, Mrs. Holly, and--I think he sang it, too." The next
moment, with a quick lifting of his hat and a murmured "I'll call again
soon," he turned and walked swiftly down the driveway.

So very swiftly, indeed, was Mr. Jack walking, and so self-absorbed was
he, that he did not see the carriage until it was almost upon him; then
he stepped aside to let it pass. What he saw as he gravely raised his
hat was a handsome span of black horses, a liveried coachman, and a
pair of startled eyes looking straight into his. What he did not see
was the quick gesture with which Miss Holbrook almost ordered her
carriage stopped the minute it had passed him by.



