Chapter III.


Delbœuf.

=98.= M. Delbœuf's four articles in the Revue Philosophique contain
much matter that has already been dealt with in the criticism of
Lotze, and much that is irrelevant for our present purpose. The only
point, which I wish to discuss here, is the question of absolute
magnitude, as it is called--the question, that is, whether the
possibility of similar but unequal geometrical figures can be known
_à priori_[109].

In discussing this question, it is important, to begin with, to
distinguish clearly the sense in which absolute magnitude _is_
required in non-Euclidean Geometry, from another sense, in which
it would be absurd to regard any magnitude as absolute. Judgments
of magnitude can only result from comparison, and if Metageometry
required magnitudes which could be determined without comparison, it
would certainly deserve condemnation. But this is not required. All
we require is, that it shall be impossible, while the rest of space
is unaffected, to alter the magnitude of any figure, as compared with
other figures, while leaving the relative internal magnitudes of its
parts unchanged. This construction, which is possible in Euclid,
is impossible in Metageometry. We have to discuss whether such an
impossibility renders non-Euclidean spaces logically faulty.

M. Delbœuf's position on this axiom--which he calls the postulate
of homogeneity[110]--is, that all Geometry must presuppose it, and
that Metageometry, consequently, though logically sound, is logically
subsequent to Euclid, and can only make its constructions within a
Euclidean "homogeneous" space (Rev. Phil. Vol. XXXVII., pp. 380-1).
He would appear to think, nevertheless, that homogeneity (in his
sense) is learnt from experience, though on this point he is not
very explicit. (See Vol. XXXVIII., p. 129.) No _à priori_ proof, at
any rate, is offered in his articles. As a result of experience,
every one would admit, similarity is known to be possible within the
limits of observation; but the fact that this possibility extends to
Ordnance maps, which deal with a spherical surface, should make us
chary of inferring, from such a datum, the certainty of Euclid for
large spaces. Moreover if homogeneity be empirical, Metageometry,
which dispenses with it, is not necessarily in _logical_ dependence
upon Euclid, since homogeneity and isogeneity are _logically_
separable. I shall assume, therefore, as the only contention which
can be interesting to our argument, that homogeneity is regarded as
_à priori_, and as logically essential to Geometry.

=99.= Now we saw, in discussing Erdmann's views of the judgment of
quantity, that in non-Euclidean space, as in Euclidean, a change
of all spatial magnitudes, in the same ratio, would be no change
at all; the ratios of all magnitudes to the space-constant would
be unchanged, and the space-constant, as the ultimate standard of
comparison, cannot, in any intelligible sense, be said to have any
particular magnitude. The absolute magnitudes of Metageometry,
therefore, are absolute only as against any other _particular_
magnitude, not as against other magnitudes in general. If this were
not the case, the comparative nature of the judgment of magnitude
would be contradicted, and metrical Metageometry would become absurd.
But as it is, the difference from Euclid consists only in this: that
in Metageometry we have, while in Euclid we have not, a standard of
comparison involved in the nature of our space as a whole, which we
call the space-constant. We have to discuss whether the assertion of
such a standard involves an undue reification of space.

I do not believe that this is the case. For an undue reification of
space would only arise, if we were no longer able to regard position
as wholly relative, and as geometrically definable only by departure
from other positions. But the relativity of position, as we have
abundantly seen, is preserved by all spaces of constant curvature--in
all of these, positions can only be defined, geometrically, by
relations to fresh positions[111]. This series of definitions may
lead to an infinite regress, but it may also, as in spherical space,
form a vicious circle, and return again to the position from which
it started. No reification of space, no independent existence of
mere relations, seems involved in such a procedure. The whole of
Metageometry, in short, is a proof that the relativity of position
is compatible with absolute magnitude, in the only sense required
by non-Euclidean spaces. We must conclude, therefore, that there
is nothing incompatible, in a denial of homogeneity (in Delbœuf's
sense), either with the relational nature of space, or with the
comparative nature of magnitude. This last _à priori_ objection to
Metageometry, therefore, cannot be maintained, and the issue must be
decided on empirical grounds alone.

=100.= The foundations of Geometry have been the subject of much
recent speculation in France, and this seems to demand some notice.
But in spite of the splendid work which the French have done on the
allied question of number and continuous quantity, I cannot persuade
myself that they have succeeded in greatly advancing the subject
of geometrical philosophy. The chief writers have been, from the
mathematical side, _Calinon_ and _Poincaré_, from the philosophical,
_Renouvier_ and _Delbœuf_; as a mediator between mathematics and
philosophy, _Lechalas_.

_Calinon_, in an interesting article on the geometrical
indeterminateness of the universe, maintains that any Geometry may be
applied to the actual world by a suitable hypothesis as to the course
of light-rays. For the earth only is known to us otherwise than by
Optics, and the earth is an infinitesimal part of the universe.
This line of argument has been already discussed in connection with
Lotze, but Calinon adds a new suggestion, that the space-constant may
perhaps vary with the time. This would involve a causal connection
between space and other things, which seems hardly conceivable, and
which, if regarded as possible, must surely destroy Geometry, since
Geometry depends throughout on the irrelevance of Causation[112].
Moreover, in all operations of measurement, some time is spent;
unless we knew that space was unchanging throughout the operation,
it is hard to see how our results could be trustworthy, and how,
consequently, a change in the parameter could be discovered. The
same difficulties would arise, in fact, as those which result from
supposing space not homogeneous.

_Poincaré_ maintains that the question, whether Euclid or
Metageometry should be accepted, is one of convenience and
convention, not of truth; axioms are definitions in disguise, and the
choice between definitions is arbitrary. This view has been discussed
in Chapter I., in connection with Cayley's theory of distance, on
which it depends.

_Lechalas_ is a philosophical disciple of Calinon. He is a
rationalist of the pre-Kantian type, but a believer in the validity
of Metageometry. He holds that Geometry can dispense with all purely
spatial postulates, and work with axioms of magnitude alone[113],
which, in his opinion, are purely analytic. The principle of
contradiction, to him, is the sole and only test of truth; we make
long chains of reasoning from our premisses to see if contradictions
will emerge. It might be objected that this view, though it saves
general Geometry from being logically empirical, leaves it only
empirically logical; this must, in fact, be the fate of every piece
of _à priori_ knowledge, if M. Lechalas's were the only test of
truth. However, he concludes that general Geometry is apodeictic,
while the space of our actual world, like all other phenomena, is
contingent.

_Delbœuf_ criticizes non-Euclidean space from an ultra-realist
standpoint: he holds that _real_ space is neither homogeneous nor
isogeneous, but that _conceived_ space, as abstracted from real
space, has both these properties. He offers no justification for
his real space, which seems to be maintained in the spirit of naïve
realism, nor does he show how he has acquired his intimate knowledge
of its constitution[114]. His arguments against Metageometry, in so
far as they are not repetitions of Lotze, have been discussed above.

_Renouvier_, finally, is a pure Kantian, of the most orthodox type.
His views as to the importance, for Geometry, of the distinction
between synthetic and analytic judgments, have been discussed, in
connection with Kant, at the beginning of the present Chapter[115].

=101.= Before beginning the constructive argument of the next
Chapter, let us endeavour briefly to sum up the theories which
have been polemically advocated throughout the criticisms we have
just concluded. We agreed to accept, with Kant, necessity for any
possible experience as the test of the _à priori_, but we refused,
for the present, to discuss the connection of the _à priori_ with
the subjective, regarding the purely logical test as sufficient for
our immediate purpose. We also refused to attach importance to the
distinction of analytic and synthetic, since it seemed to apply, not
to different judgments, but only to different aspects of any judgment.

We then discussed Riemann's attempt to identify the empirical element
in Geometry with the element not deducible from ideas of magnitude,
and we decided that this identification was due to a confusion as
to the nature of magnitude. For judgments of magnitude, we said,
require always some qualitative basis, which is not quantitatively
expressible.

In criticizing Helmholtz, we decided that Mechanics logically
presupposes Geometry, though space presupposes matter; but that the
matter which space presupposes, and to which Geometry indirectly
refers, is a more abstract matter than that of Mechanics, a matter
destitute of force and of causal attributes, and possessed only
of the purely spatial attributes required for the possibility
of spatial figures. But we conceded that Geometry, when applied
to mixed mathematics or to daily life, demands more than this,
demands, in fact, some means of discovering, in the more concrete
matter of Mechanics, either a rigid body, or a body whose departure
from rigidity follows some empirically discoverable law. _Actual_
measurement, therefore, we agreed to regard as empirical.

Our conclusions, as regards the empiricism of Riemann and Helmholtz,
were reinforced by a criticism of Erdmann. We then had an opposite
task to perform, in defending Metageometry against Lotze. Here we
saw that there are two senses in which Metageometry is possible. The
first concerns our actual space, and asserts that it may have a very
small space-constant; the second concerns philosophical theories
of space, and asserts a purely logical possibility, which leaves
the decision to experience. We saw also that Lotze's mathematical
strictures arose from insufficient knowledge of the subject, and
could all be refuted by a better acquaintance with Metageometry.

Finally, we discussed the question of absolute magnitude, and found
in it no logical obstacle to non-Euclidean spaces. Our conclusion,
then, in so far as we are as yet entitled to a conclusion, is
that all spaces with a space-constant are _à priori_ justifiable,
and that the decision between them must be the work of experience.
Spaces without a space-constant, on the other hand, spaces, that is,
which are not homogeneous throughout, we found logically unsound
and impossible to know, and therefore to be condemned _à priori_.
The constructive proof of this thesis will form the argument of the
following chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[67] The Critical Philosophy of Kant, Vol. I. p. 287.

[68] For a discussion of Kant from a less purely mathematical
standpoint, see Chap. IV.

[69] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 202, 265. Also p. 336 ff.

[70] E.g. second edition, p. 39: "So werden auch alle geometrischen
Grundsätze, z. B. dass in einem Triangel zwei Seiten zusammen grösser
sind als die dritte, niemals aus allgemeinen Begriffen von Linie
und Triangel, sondern aus der Anschauung, und zwar _à priori_ mit
apodiktischer Gewissheit abgeleitet."

[71] Cf. Bradley's Logic, Bk. III. Pt. I. Chap. VI.; Bosanquet's
Logic, Bk. I. Chap. I. pp. 97-103.

[72] Philosophie de la Règle et du Compas, Année Philosophique, II.
pp. 1-66.

[73] I have stated this doctrine dogmatically, as a proof would
require a whole treatise on Logic. I accept the proofs offered by
Bradley and Bosanquet, to which the reader is referred.

[74] For a further discussion of this point, see Chaps. III. and IV.

[75] See Chap. IV. for a discussion of this argument.

[76] See Chap. IV. § 185.

[77] An Otherness of substance, rather than of attribute, is here
intended; an Otherness which may perhaps be called real as opposed to
logical diversity.

[78] This proposition will be argued at length in Chap. IV.

[79] See Psychologie als Wissenschaft, I. Section III. Chap. VII.;
II. Section I. Chap. III. and Section II. Chap. III. Compare also
Synechologie, Section I. Chaps. II. and III.

[80] On the influence of Herbart on Riemann, compare Erdmann, Die
Axiome der Geometrie, p. 30.

[81] I do not mean that measurement of colours is effected without
reference to their relations, since all measurement is essentially
comparison. But in colours, it is the elements which are compared,
while in space, it is the relations between elements.

[82] For a discussion of this point, see Chap. III. Sec. B, § 176.

[83] The works of Helmholtz on geometrical philosophy comprise, in
addition to the articles quoted in Chap. I., the following articles:
"Ursprung und Sinn der geometrischen Axiome, gegen Land," Wiss. Abh.
Vol. II. p. 640, 1878. (Also Mind, Vol. III.: an answer to Land in
Mind, Vol. II.) "Ursprung und Bedeutung der geometrischen Axiome,"
1870, Vorträge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 1. (Also Mind, Vol. I.) Two
Appendices to "Die Thatsachen in der Wahrnehmung," entitled: II. "Der
Raum kann transcendental sein, ohne dass es die Axiome sind"; and
III. "Die Anwendbarkeit der Axiome auf die physische Welt," 1878,
Vorträge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 256 ff.

The two Appendices last mentioned are popularizings and expansions of
the article in Mind, Vol. III. The most widely read, though also, to
my mind, the least valuable, of all Helmholtz's writings on Geometry,
is the article in Mind, Vol. I. This contains the famous and much
misunderstood analogies of Flatland and Sphereland, which will be
discussed, and as far as possible defended, in answering Lotze's
attack on Metageometry--an attack based, apparently, almost entirely
on this one popular article. The present discussion, therefore, may
be confined almost entirely to Mind, Vol. III., and the philosophical
portions of the two papers quoted in Chap. I., _i.e._ to the articles
in Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. pp. 610-660. His other works are popular, and
important only because of the large public to which they appeal.

[84] In the answer to Land, Mind, Vol. III. and Wiss. Abh. II. p. 640.

[85] See also Die Thatsachen in der Wahrnehmung, Zusatz II., Der Raum
kann transcendental sein, ohne dass es die Axiome sind. Vorträge und
Reden, Vol. II.

[86] See below, criticism of Erdmann, § 84.

[87] See Prof. Land, in Mind, Vol. II.

[88] See concluding paragraph of Helmholtz's article in Mind, Vol.
III.

[89] Cf. Veronese, Grundzüge der Geometrie (German translation), p.
ix. Also pp. xxxiv, 304, and Note II. pp. 692-4.

[90] See Chap. IV. § 197 ff.

[91] Cf. the opinion of Bolyai, quoted by Erdmann, Axiome, p. 26; cf.
also ib. p. 60.

[92] Die Axiome der Geometrie: Eine philosophische Untersuchung der
Riemann-Helmholtz'schen Raumtheorie, Leipzig, 1877.

[93] On the influence of Mill, cf. Stallo, Concepts of Modern
Physics, p. 216.

[94] This view seems to be derived, through Riemann, from Herbart.
See Psych. als Wiss. ed. Hart. Vol. V. p. 262.

[95] The same irreducibility of space to mere magnitude is proved by
Kant's hands and spherical triangles, in which a difference persists
in spite of complete quantitative equality.

[96] See §§ 146-7.

[97] "Jeder Versuch, Kant's Lehre von der Apriorität als
des subjectiven, von aller Erfahrung absolut unabhängigen
Erkenntnissfactors, trotzdem zu halten, ist deshalb von voruherein
aussichtslos."

[98] Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd edition, pp. xxii. xxiii.

[99] See § 129 ff.

[100] Metaphysik, Book II. Chap. II. My references are to the
original.

[101] See Lectures and Essays, Vol. I. p. 261.

[102] On the meaning of geometrical possibility, cf. Veronese,
Grundzüge der Geometrie (German translation), pp. xi.-xiii.

[103] Compare Calinon, "Sur l'Indétermination géométrique de
l'Univers," Revue Philosophique, 1893, Vol. XXXVI. pp. 595-607.

[104] Vorträge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 9: "Parallele Linien würden
die Bewohner der Kugel gar nicht kennen. Sie würden behaupten, dass
jede beliebige zwei _geradeste_ Linien, gehörig verlangert, sich
schliesslich nicht nur in einem, sondern in zwei Punkten schneiden
müssten." (The italics are mine.) The omission of _straight_ in such
phrases is a frequent laxity of mathematicians.

[105] It has been suggested to me that Lotze regards the meridians
as projected on to a plane, as in a map. If this be so, there is an
obviously illegitimate introduction of the third dimension.

[106] This is proved by Helmholtz's remark at the end of a detailed
attempt to make spherical and pseudo-spherical spaces imaginable
(l.c. p. 28): "Anders ist es mit den drei Dimensionen des Raumes. Da
alle unsere Mittel sinnlicher Anschauung sich nur auf einen Raum von
drei Dimensionen erstrecken, und die vierte Dimension nicht bloss
eine Abänderung von Vorhandenem, sondern etwas vollkommen Neues wäre,
so befinden wir uns schon wegen unserer körperlichen Organisation in
der absoluten Unmöglichkeit, uns eine Anschauungsweise einer vierten
Dimension vorzustellen."

[107] Cf. Grassmann, Ausdehnungslehre von 1844, 2nd Edition, p. xxiii.

[108] See especially Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics,
International Science Series, Vol. XLII. Chaps. XIII. and
XIV.; Renouvier, "Philosophie de la règle et du compas," Année
Philosophique, II.; Delbœuf, "L'ancienne et les nouvelles
géométries," Revue Philosophique, Vols. XXXVI.-XXXIX.

[109] M. Delbœuf deserves credit for having based Euclid, already in
1860, in his "Prolégomènes Philosophiques de la Géométrie," on this
axiom--certainly a better basis, at first sight, than the axiom of
parallels.

[110] This meaning of homogeneity must not be confounded with the
sense in which I have used the word. In Delbœuf's sense, it means
that figures may be similar though of different sizes; in my sense it
means that figures may be similar though in different places. This
property of space is called by Delbœuf isogeneity.

[111] For a full proof of this proposition, see Chap. III.

[112] See Chap. III., especially § 133.

[113] For a criticism of this view, see the above discussions on
Riemann and Erdmann.

[114] Cf. Couturat, "De l'Infini Mathématique," Paris, Félix Alcan,
1896, p. 544.

[115] The following is a list of the most important recent French
philosophical writings on Geometry, so far as I am acquainted with
them.

  Andrade: "Les bases expérimentales de la géométrie euclidienne";
  Rev. Phil. 1890, II., and 1891, I.

  Bonnel: "Les hypothèses dans la géométrie"; Gauthier-Villars,
  1897.

  L'Abbé de Broglie: "La géométrie non-euclidienne," two articles;
  Annales de Phil. Chrét. 1890.

  Calinon: "Les espaces géométriques"; Rev. Phil. 1889, I., and
  1891, II. "Sur l'indétermination géométrique de l'univers"; ib.
  1893, II.

  Couturat: "L'Année Philosophique de F. Pillon," Rev. de Mét. et
  de Morale, Jan. 1893.

  "Note sur la géométrie non-euclidienne et la relativité de
  l'espace"; ib., May, 1893.

  "Études sur l'espace et le temps," ib. Sep. 1896.

  Delbœuf: "L'ancienne et les nouvelles géométries," four articles;
  Rev. Phil. 1893-5.

  Lechalas: "La géométrie générale"; Crit. Phil. 1889.

  "La géométrie générale et les jugements synthétiques à priori"
  and "Les bases expérimentales de la géométrie"; Rev. Phil. 1890,
  II.

  "M. Delbœuf et Le problème des mondes semblables"; ib. 1894, I.

  "Note sur la géométrie non-euclidienne et le principe de
  similitude"; Rev. de Mét. et de Morale, March, 1893.

  "La courbure et la distance en géométrie générale"; ib., March,
  1896.

  "La géométrie générale et l'intuition"; Annales de Phil. Chrét.,
  1890.

  "Etude sur l'espace et le temps"; Paris, Alcan, 1896.

  Liard: "Des définitions géométrie et des définitions empiriques,"
  2nd ed.; Paris, Alcan, 1888.

  Mansion: "Premiers principes de la métagéométrie"; two
  articles in Rev. Néo-Scholastique, 1896. Separately published,
  Gauthier-Villars, 1896.

  Milhaud: "La géométrie non-euclidienne et la théorie de la
  connaissance"; Rev. Phil. 1888, I.

  Poincaré: "Non-Euclidian Geometry"; Nature, Vol. XLV., 1891-2.

  "L'espace et la géométrie"; Rev. de Mét. et de Morale, Nov. 1895.

  "Résponse à quelques critiques," ib. Jan. 1897.

  Renouvier: "Philosophie de la règle et du compas"; Crit. Phil.,
  1889, and L'Année Phil., II^{me} année, 1891.

  Sorel: "Sur la géométrie non-euclidienne"; Rev. Phil., 1891, I.

  Tannery: "Théorie de la connaissance mathématique"; Rev. Phil.,
  1894, II.




