CHAPTER IV.

PHILOSOPHICAL CONSEQUENCES.


=180.= In the present chapter, we have to discuss two questions
which, though scarcely geometrical, are of fundamental importance
to the theory of Geometry propounded above. The first of these
questions is this: What relation can a purely logical and deductive
proof, like that from the nature of a form of externality, bear to an
experienced subject-matter such as space? You have merely framed a
general conception, I may be told, containing space as a particular
species, and you have then shown, what should have been obvious from
the beginning, that this general conception contained some of the
attributes of space. But what ground does this give for regarding
these attributes as _à priori_? The conception Mammal has some of the
attributes of a horse; but are these attributes therefore _à priori_
adjectives of the horse? The answer to this obvious objection is so
difficult, and involves so much general philosophy, that I have kept
it for a final chapter, in order not to interrupt the argument on
specially geometrical topics.

=181.= I have already indicated, in general terms, the ground for
regarding as _à priori_ the properties of any form of externality.
This ground is transcendental, _i.e._ it is to be found in the
conditions required for the possibility of experience. The form of
externality, like Riemann's manifolds, is a general class-conception,
including time as well as Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces. It
is not motived, however, like the manifolds, by a _quantitative_
resemblance to space, but by the fact that it fulfils, if it has
more than one dimension, all those functions which, in our actual
world, are fulfilled by space. But a form of externality, in order
to accomplish this, must be, not a mere conception, but an actually
experienced intuition. Hence the conception of such a form is the
general _conception_, containing under it every logically possible
_intuition_ which can fulfil the function actually fulfilled by
space. And this function is, to render possible experience of
diverse but interrelated things. Some form in sense-perception,
then, whose conception is included under our form of externality,
is _à priori_ necessary to experience of diversity in relation, and
without experience of this, we should, as modern logic shows, have no
experience at all. This still leaves untouched the relation of the
_à priori_ to the subjective: the form of externality is necessary
to experience, but is not, _on that account_, to be declared purely
subjective. Of course, necessity for experience can only arise from
the nature of the mind which experiences; but it does not follow that
the necessary conditions could be fulfilled, unless the objective
world had certain properties. The _ground_ of necessity, we may
safely say, arises from the mind; but it by no means follows that
the _truth_ of what is necessary depends only on the constitution of
the mind. Where this is not the case, our conclusion, when a piece
of knowledge has been declared _à priori_, can only be: Owing to the
constitution of the _mind_, experience will be impossible unless the
_world_ accepts certain adjectives.

Such, in outline, will be the argument of the first half of this
chapter, and such will be the justification for regarding as _à
priori_ those axioms of Geometry, which were deduced above from the
conception of a form of externality. For these axioms, and these
only, are necessarily true of any world in which experience is
possible.

=182[178].= The view suggested has, obviously, much in common with
that of the Transcendental Aesthetic. Indeed the whole of it, I
believe, can be obtained by a certain limitation and interpretation
of Kant's classic arguments. But as it differs, in many important
points, from the conclusions aimed at by Kant, and as the agreement
may easily seem greater than it is, I will begin by a brief
comparison, and endeavour, by reference to authoritative criticisms,
to establish the legitimacy of my divergence from him.

=183.= In the first place, the psychological element is much larger
in Kant's thesis than in mine. I shall contend, it is true, that a
form of externality, if it is to do its work, must not be a mere
conception or a mere inference, but must be a given element in
sense-perception--not, of course, originally given in isolation,
but discoverable, through analysis, by attention to the object of
sense-perception[179]. But Kant contended, not only that this element
is given, but also that it is subjective. Space, for him, is, on the
one hand, not conceptual, but on the other hand, not sensational.
It forms, for him, no part of the data of sense, but is added by a
subjective intuition, which he regards as not only logically, but
psychologically, prior to objects in space[180].

This part of Kant's argument is wholly irrelevant for us. Whether a
form of externality be given in sense, or in a pure intuition, is for
us unimportant, since we neglect the question as to the connection
of the _à priori_ and the subjective; while the temporal priority of
space to objects in it has been generally recognized as irrelevant
to Epistemology, and has often been regarded as forming no part of
Kant's thesis[181]. If we call intuitional whatever is given in
sense-perception, then we may contend that a form of externality must
be intuitional; but whether it is a pure intuition, in Kant's sense,
or not, is irrelevant to us, as is its priority to the objects in it.

That the non-sensational nature of space is no essential part of
Kant's _logical_ teaching, appears from an examination of his
argument. He has made, in the introduction, the purely logical
distinction of matter and form, but has given to this distinction,
in the very moment of suggesting it, a psychological implication.
This he does by the assertion that the form, in which the matter
of sensations is ordered, cannot itself be sensational. From this
assumption it follows, of course, that space cannot be sensational.
But the assumption is totally unsupported by argument, being set
forth, apparently, as a self-evident axiom; it has been severely
criticized by Stumpf[182] and others[183], and has been described by
Vaihinger as a fatal _petitio principii_[184]; it is irrelevant to
the logical argument, when this argument is separated, as we have
separated it, from all connection with psychological subjectivity;
and finally, it leaves us a prey to psychological theories of space,
which have seemed, of late, but little favourable to the pure Kantian
doctrine.

=184.= We have a right, therefore, in an epistemological inquiry, to
neglect Kant's psychological teaching--in so far, at any rate, as it
distinguishes spatial intuition from sensation--and attend rather to
the logical aspect alone. That part of his psychological teaching,
which maintains that space is not a mere conception, is, with certain
limitations, sufficiently evident as applied to actual space; but for
us, it must be transformed into a much more difficult thesis, namely,
that _no_ form of externality, which renders experience of diversity
in relation possible, can be merely conceptual. This question, to
which we must return later, is no longer psychological, but belongs
wholly to Epistemology.

=185.= What, then, remains the kernel, for our purposes, of Kant's
first argument for the apriority of space? His argument, in the form
in which he gave it, is concerned with the eccentric projection
of sensations. In order that I may refer sensations, he says,
to something outside myself, I must already have the subjective
space-form in the mind. In this shape, as Vaihinger points out
(Commentar, II. pp. 69, 165), the argument rests on a _petitio
principii_, for only if sensations are necessarily non-spatial does
their projection demand a subjective space-form. But, further, is the
logical apriority of space concerned with the externality of things
to ourselves?

Space _seems_ to perform two functions: on the one hand, it reveals
things, by the eccentric projection of sensations, as external
to the self, while, on the other hand, it reveals simultaneously
presented things as mutually external. These two functions, though
often treated as coordinate and almost equivalent[185], seem to me
widely different. Before we discuss the apriority of space, we must
carefully distinguish, I think, between these two functions, and
decide which of them we are to argue about.

Now externality to the Self, it would seem, must necessarily raise
the whole question of the nature and limits of the Ego, and what is
more, it cannot be derived from spatial presentation, unless we give
the Self a definite position in space. But things acquire a position
in space only when they can appear in sense-perception; we are
forced, therefore, if we adopt this view of the function of space, to
regard the Self as a phenomenon presented to sense-perception. But
this reduces externality to the Self to externality to the body. The
body, however, is a presented object like any other, and externality
of objects to it is, therefore, a special case of the mutual
externality of presented things. Hence we cannot regard space as
giving, primarily at any rate, externality to the Self, but only the
mutual externality of the things presented to sense-perception[186].

=186.= This, then, is the kind of externality we are to expect
from space, and our question must be: Would the existence of
diverse but interrelated things be unknowable, if there were not,
in sense-perception, some form of externality? This is the crucial
question, on which turns the apriority of our form, and hence of the
necessary axioms of Geometry.

=187.= The converse argument to mine, the argument from the
spatio-temporal element in perception to a world of interrelated
but diverse things, is developed at length in Bradley's Logic. It
is put briefly in the following sentence (p. 44, note): "If space
and time are continuous, and if all appearance must occupy some time
or space--and it is not hard to support both these _theses_--we can
at once proceed to the conclusion, no mere particular exists. Every
phenomenon will exist in more times or spaces than one; and against
that diversity will be itself an universal[187]." The importance of
this fact appears, when we consider that, if any _mere_ particular
existed, all judgment and inference as to that particular would be
impossible, since all judgment and inference necessarily operate
by means of universal. But all reality is constructed from the
_This_ of immediate presentation, from which judgment and inference
necessarily spring. Owing, however, to the continuity and relativity
of space and time, no _This_ can be regarded either as simple or
as self-subsistent. Every _This_, on the one hand, can be analyzed
into _Thises_, and on the other hand, is found to be necessarily
related to other things, outside the limits of the given object of
sense-perception. This function of space and time is presupposed in
the following statement from Bosanquet's Logic (Vol. I. pp. 77-78):
"Reality is given for me _in_ present sensuous perception, and _in_
the immediate feeling of my own sentient existence that goes with
it. The real world, as a definite organized system, is _for me_ an
extension of this present sensation and self feeling by means of
judgment, and it is the essence of judgment to effect and sustain
such an extension.... The subject in every judgment of Perception
is some given spot or point in sensuous contact with the percipient
self. But, as all reality is continuous, the subject is not _merely_
this given spot or point."

=188.= This doctrine of Bradley and Bosanquet is the converse of
the epistemological doctrine I have to advocate. Owing to the
continuity and relativity of space and time, they say, we are able
to construct a systematic world, by judgment and inference, out of
that fragmentary and yet necessarily complex existence which is
given in sense-perception. My contention is, conversely, that since
all knowledge is necessarily derived by an extension of the _This_
of sense-perception, and since such extension is only possible if
the _This_ has that fragmentary and yet complex character conferred
by a form of externality, therefore some form of externality,
given with the _This_, is essential to all knowledge, and is thus
logically _à priori_. Bradley's argument, if sound, already proves
this contention; for while, on the one hand, he uses no properties of
space and time but those which belong to every form of externality,
he proves, on the other hand, that judgment and inference require
the _This_ to be neither single nor self-subsistent. But I will
endeavour, since the point is of fundamental importance, to
reproduce the proof, in a form more suited than Bradley's to the
epistemological question.

=189.= The essence of my contention is that, if experience is to be
possible, every sensational _This_ must, when attended to, be found,
on the one hand, resolvable into _Thises_, and on the other hand
dependent, for some of its adjectives, on external reference. The
second of these theses follows from the first, for if we take one
of the _Thises_ contained in the first _This_, we get a new _This_
necessarily related to the other _Thises_ which make up the original
_This_. I may, therefore, confine myself to the first proposition,
which affirms that the object of perception must contain a diversity,
not only of conceptual content, but of existence, and that this can
only be known if sense-perception contains, as an element, some form
of externality.

My premiss, in this argument, is that all knowledge involves a
recognition of diversity in relation, or, if we prefer it, of
identity in difference. This premiss I accept from Logic, as
resulting from the analysis of judgment and inference. To prove
such a premiss, would require a treatise on Logic; I must refer the
reader, therefore, to the works of Bradley and Bosanquet on the
subject. It follows at once, from my premiss, that knowledge would be
impossible, unless the object of attention could be complex, _i.e._
not a _mere_ particular. Now could the mental object--_i.e._, in this
connection, the object of a cognition--be complex, if the object of
immediate perception were always simple?

=190.= We might be inclined, at first sight, to answer this question
affirmatively. But several difficulties, I think, would prevent
such an answer. In the first place, knowledge must start from
perception. Hence, either we could have no knowledge except of our
present perception, or else we must be able to contrast and compare
it with some other perception. Now in the first case, since the
present perception, by hypothesis, is a mere particular, knowledge
of it is impossible, according to our premiss. But in the second
case, the other perception, with which we compare our first, must
have occurred at some other time, and with time, we have at once a
form of externality. But what is more, our present perception is
no longer a mere particular. For the power of comparing it with
another perception involves a point of identity between the two, and
thus renders both complex. Moreover, time must be continuous, and
the present, as Bradley points out, is no mere point of time[188].
Thus our present perception contains the complexity involved in
duration throughout the specious present: its mere particularity
and its simplicity are lost. Its self-subsistence is also lost, for
beyond the specious present, lie the past and the future, to which
our present perception thus unavoidably refers us. Time at least,
therefore, is essential to that identity in difference, which all
knowledge postulates.

=191.= But we have derived, from all this, no ground for affirming a
multiplicity of real things, or a form of externality of more than
one dimension, which, we saw, was necessary for the truth of two out
of our three axioms. This brings us to the question: Have we enough,
with time alone as a form of externality, for the possibility of
knowledge?

This question we must, I think, answer in the negative. With time
alone, we have seen, our presented object must be complex, but its
complexity must, if I may use such a phrase, be merely adjectival.
Without a second form of externality, only one thing can be given at
one moment[189], and this one thing, therefore, must constitute the
whole of our world. The object of past perception must--since our one
thing has nothing external to it, by which it could be created or
destroyed--be regarded as the same thing in a different state. The
complexity, therefore, will lie only in the changing states of our
one thing--it will be adjectival, not substantival. Moreover we have
the following dilemma: Either the one thing must be ourselves, or
else self-consciousness could never arise. But the chief difficulty
of such a world would lie in the changes of the thing. What could
cause these changes, since we should know of nothing external to our
thing? It would be like a Leibnitzian monad, without any God outside
it to prearrange its changes. Causality, in such a world, could not
be applied, and change would be wholly inexplicable.

Hence we require also the possibility of a diversity of
simultaneously existing things, not merely of successive adjectives;
and this, we have seen, cannot be given by time alone, but only by
a form of externality for simultaneous parts of one presentation.
We could never, in other words, infer the existence of diverse but
interrelated things, unless the object of sense-perception could have
substantival complexity, and for such complexity we require a form
of externality other than time. Such a form, moreover, as was shown
in Chapter III., Section A (§ 135), can only fulfil its functions
if it has more than one dimension. In our actual world, this form
is given by space; in any world, knowable to beings with our laws
of thought, some such form, as we have now seen, must be given in
sense-perception.

This argument may be briefly summed up, by assuming the doctrine
of Bradley, that all knowledge is obtained by inference from the
_This_ of sense-perception. For, if this be so, the _This_--in
order that inference, which depends on identity in difference, may
be possible at all--must itself be complex, and must, on analysis,
reveal adjectives having a reference beyond itself. But this, as was
shown above, can only happen by means of a form of externality. This
establishes the à priori axioms of Geometry, as necessarily having
existential import and validity in any intelligible world.

=192.= The above argument, I hope, has explained why I hold it
possible to deduce, from a mere conception like that of a form
of externality, the logical apriority of certain axioms as to
experienced space. The Kantian argument--which was correct, if our
reasoning has been sound, in asserting that real diversity, in our
actual world, could only be known by the help of space--was only
mistaken, so far as its purely logical scope extends, in overlooking
the possibility of other forms of externality, which could, if they
existed, perform the same task with equal efficiency. In so far as
space differs, therefore, from these other conceptions of possible
intuitional forms, it is a mere experienced fact, while in so far as
its properties are those which all such forms must have, it is _à
priori_ necessary to the possibility of experience.

I cannot hope, however, that no difficulty will remain, for the
reader, in such a deduction, from abstract conceptions, of the
properties of an actual _datum_ in sense-perception. Let us consider,
for example, such a property as impenetrability. To suppose two
things simultaneously in the same position in a form of externality,
is a logical contradiction; but can we say as much of actual space
and time? Is not the impossibility, here, a matter of experience
rather than of logic? Not if the above argument has been sound,
I reply. For in that case, we infer real diversity, _i.e._ the
existence of different things, only from difference of position in
space or time. It follows, that to suppose two things in the same
point of space and time, is still a logical contradiction: not
because we have constructed the data of sense out of logic, but
because logic is dependent, as regards its application, on the nature
of these data. This instance illustrates, what I am anxious to make
plain, that my argument has not attempted to construct the living
wealth of sense-perception out of "bloodless categories," but only to
point out that, unless sense-perception contained a certain element,
these categories would be powerless to grapple with it.

=193.= How we are to account for the fortunate realization of these
requirements--whether by a pre-established harmony, by Darwinian
adaptation to our environment, by the subjectivity of the necessary
element in sense-perception, or by a fundamental identity and unity
between ourselves and the rest of reality--is a further question,
belonging rather to metaphysics than to our present line of argument.
The _à priori_, we have said throughout, is that which is necessary
for the possibility of experience, and in this we have a purely
logical criterion, giving results which only Logic and Epistemology
can prove or disprove. What is subjective in experience, on the
contrary, is primarily a question for psychology, and should be
decided on psychological grounds alone. When these two questions have
been separately answered, but not till then, we may frame theories as
to the connection of the _à priori_ and the subjective; to allow such
theories to influence our decision, on either of the two previous
questions, is liable, surely, to confuse the issue, and prevent a
clear discrimination between fundamentally different points of view.

=194.= I come now to the second question with which this chapter
has to deal, the question, namely: What are we to do with the
contradictions which obtruded themselves in Chapter III., whenever we
came to a point which seemed fundamental? I shall treat this question
briefly, as I have little to add to answers with which we are all
familiar. I have only to prove, first, that the contradictions are
inevitable, and therefore form no objection to my argument; secondly,
that the first step in removing them is to restore the notion of
matter, as that which, in the data of sense-perception, is localized
and interrelated in space.

=195.= The contradictions in space are an ancient theme--as ancient,
in fact, as Zeno's refutation of motion. They are, roughly, of two
kinds, though the two kinds cannot be sharply divided. There are
the contradictions inherent in the notion of the continuum, and the
contradictions which spring from the fact that space, while it must,
to be knowable, be pure relativity, must also, it would seem, since
it is immediately experienced, be something more than mere relations.
The first class of contradictions has been encountered more
frequently in this essay, and is also, I think, the more definite,
and the more important for our present purpose. I doubt, however,
whether the two classes are really distinct; for any continuum,
I believe, in which the elements are not data, but intellectual
constructions resulting from analysis, can be shown to have the same
relational and yet not wholly relational character as belongs to
space.

The three following contradictions, which I shall discuss
successively, seem to me the most prominent in a theory of Geometry.

(1) Though the parts of space are intuitively distinguished, no
conception is adequate to differentiate them. Hence arises a
vain search for elements, by which the differentiation could be
accomplished, and for a whole, of which the parts of space are to be
components. Thus we get the point, or zero extension, as the spatial
element, and an infinite regress or a vicious circle in the search
for a whole.

(2) All positions being relative, positions can only be defined by
their relations, _i.e._ by the straight lines or planes through
them; but straight lines and planes, being all qualitatively similar,
can only be defined by the positions they relate. Hence, again, we
get a vicious circle.

(3) Spatial figures must be regarded as relations. But a relation
is necessarily indivisible, while spatial figures are necessarily
divisible _ad infinitum_.

=196.= (1) _Points._ The antinomy of the point--which arises wherever
a continuum is given, and elements have to be sought in it--is
fundamental to Geometry. It has been given, perhaps unintentionally,
by Veronese as the first axiom, in the form: "There are different
points. All points are identical" (_op. cit._ p. 226). We saw, in
discussing projective Geometry, that straight lines and planes must
be regarded, on the one hand as relations between points, and on the
other hand as made up of points[190]. We saw again, in dealing with
measurement, how space must be regarded as infinitely divisible,
and yet as mere relativity. But what is divisible and consists of
parts, as space does, must lead at last, by continued analysis, to
a simple and unanalyzable part, as the unit of differentiation. For
whatever can be divided, and has parts, possesses some thinghood,
and must, therefore, contain two ultimate units, the whole namely,
and the smallest element possessing thinghood. But in space this is
notoriously not the case. After hypostatizing space, as Geometry
is compelled to do, the mind imperatively demands elements, and
insists on having them, whether possible or not. Of this demand,
all the geometrical applications of the infinitesimal calculus are
evidence[191]. But what sort of elements do we thus obtain? Analysis,
being unable to find any earlier halting-place, finds its elements
in points, that is, in zero quanta of space. Such a conception is
a palpable contradiction, only rendered tolerable by its necessity
and familiarity. A point must be spatial, otherwise it would not
fulfil the function of a spatial element; but again it must contain
no space, for any finite extension is capable of further analysis.
Points can never be given in intuition, which has no concern with the
infinitesimal: they are a purely conceptual construction, arising
out of the need of terms between which spatial relations can hold.
If space be more than relativity, spatial relations must involve
spatial relata; but no relata appear, until we have analyzed our
spatial data down to nothing. The contradictory notion of the point,
as a thing in space without spatial magnitude, is the only outcome
of our search for spatial relata. This _reductio ad absurdum_ surely
suffices, by itself, to prove the essential relativity of space.

=197.= Thus Geometry is forced, since it wishes to regard space
as independent, to hypostatize its abstractions, and therefore to
invent a self-contradictory notion as the spatial element. A similar
absurdity appears, even more obviously, in the notion of a whole of
space. The antinomy may, therefore, be stated thus: Space, as we have
seen throughout, must, if knowledge of it is to be possible, be mere
relativity; but it must also, if _independent_ knowledge of it, such
as Geometry seeks, is to be possible, be something more than mere
relativity, since it is divisible and has parts. But we saw, in Chap.
III., Section A (§ 133) that knowledge of a form of externality must
be logically independent of the particular matter filling the form.
How then are we to extricate ourselves from this dilemma?

The only way, I think, is, not to make Geometry dependent on
Physics, which we have seen to be erroneous[192], but to give every
geometrical proposition a certain reference to matter in general. And
at this point an important distinction must be made. We have hitherto
spoken of space as relational, and of spatial figures as relations.
But space, it would seem, is rather relativity than relations--itself
not a relation, it gives the bare possibility of relations between
diverse things[193]. As applied to a spatial figure, which can only
arise by a differentiation of space, and hence by the introduction
of some differentiating matter, the word relation is, perhaps, less
misleading than any other; as applied to empty undifferentiated
space, it seems by no means an accurate description.

But a bare possibility cannot exist, or be given in sense-perception!
What becomes, then, of the arguments of the first part of this
chapter? I reply, it is not empty space, but spatial figures, which
sense-perception reveals, and spatial figures, as we have just seen,
involve a differentiation of space, and therefore a reference to the
matter which is in space. It is spatial figures, also, and not empty
space, with which Geometry has to deal. The antinomy discussed above
arises then--so it would seem--from the attempt to deal with empty
space, rather than with spatial figures and the matter to which they
necessarily refer.

=198.= Let us see whether, by this change, we can overcome the
antinomy of the point. Spatial figures, we shall now say, are
relations between the matter which differentiates empty space. Their
divisibility, which seemed to contradict their relational character,
may be explained in two ways: first, as holding of the figures
considered as parts of empty space, which is itself not a relation;
second, as denoting the possibility of continuous change in the
relation expressed by the spatial figure. These two ways are, at
bottom, the same; for empty space is a possibility of relations, and
the figure, when viewed in connection with empty space, thus becomes
a _possible_ relation, with which other possible relations may be
contrasted or compared. But the second way of regarding divisibility
is the better way, since it introduces a reference to the matter
which differentiates empty space, without which, spatial figures,
and therefore Geometry, could not exist. It is empty space, then--so
we must conclude--which gives rise to the antinomy in question; for
empty space is a bare possibility of relations, undifferentiated and
homogeneous, and thus wholly destitute of parts or of thinghood.
To speak of parts of a possibility is nonsense; the parts and
differentiations arise only through a reference to the matter which
is differentiated in space.

=199.= But what nature must we ascribe to this matter, which is
to be involved in all geometrical propositions? In criticizing
Helmholtz (Chap. II. § 73), it may be remembered, we decided that
Geometry refers to a peculiar and abstract kind of matter, which is
not regarded as possessing any causal qualities, as exerting or as
subject to the action of forces. And this is the matter, I think,
which we require for the needs of the moment. Not that we affirm,
of course, that actual matter can be destitute of the properties
with which Physics is cognizant, but that we abstract from these
properties, as being irrelevant to Geometry. All that we require, for
our immediate purpose, is a subject of that diversity which space
renders possible, or terms for those relations by which empty space,
if space is to be studied at all, must be differentiated. But how
must a matter, which is to fulfil this function, be regarded?

Empty space, we have said, is a possibility of diversity in
relation, but spatial figures, with which Geometry necessarily
deals, are the actual relations rendered possible by empty space.
Our matter, therefore, must supply the terms for these relations.
It must be differentiated, since such differentiation, as we have
seen, is the special work of space. We must find, therefore, in
our matter, that unit of differentiation, or atom[194], which in
space we could not find. This atom must be simple, _i.e._ it must
contain no real diversity; it must be a _This_ not resolvable into
_Thises_. Being simple, it can contain no relations within itself,
and consequently, since spatial figures are mere relations, it cannot
appear as a spatial figure; for every spatial figure involves some
diversity of matter. But our atom must have spatial relations with
other atoms, since to supply terms for these relations is its only
function. It is also capable of having these relations, since it is
differentiated from other atoms. Hence we obtain an unextended term
for spatial relations, precisely of the kind we require. So long as
we sought this term without reference to anything more than space,
the self-contradictory notion of the point was the only outcome
of our search; but now that we allow a reference to the matter
differentiated by space, we find at once the term which was needed,
namely, a non-spatial simple element, with spatial relations to other
elements. To Geometry such a term will appear, owing to its spatial
relations, as a point; but the contradiction of the point, as we now
see, is a result only of the undue abstraction with which Geometry
deals.

=200.= (2) _The circle in the definition of straight lines and
planes._ This difficulty need not long detain us, since we have
already, with the material atom, broken through the relativity
which caused our circle. Straight lines, in the purely geometrical
procedure, are defined only by points, and points only by straight
lines. But points, now, are replaced by material atoms: the duality
of points and lines, therefore, has disappeared, and the straight
line may be defined as the spatial relation between two unextended
atoms. These atoms have spatial adjectives, derived from their
relations to other atoms; but they have no _intrinsic_ spatial
adjectives, such as could belong to them if they had extension or
figure. Thus straight lines and planes are the true spatial units,
and points result only from the attempt to find, within space, those
terms for spatial relations which exist only in a more than spatial
matter. Straight lines, planes and volumes are the spatial relations
between two, three or four unextended atoms, and points are a merely
convenient geometrical fiction, by which possible atoms are replaced.
For, since space, as we saw, is a possibility, Geometry deals not
with actually realized spatial relations, but with the whole scheme
of possible relations.

=201.= (3) _Space is at once relational and more than relational._
We have already touched on the question how far space is other than
relations, but as this question is quite fundamental, as _relation_
is an ambiguous and dangerous word, as I have made constant use of
the relativity of space without attempting to define a relation, it
will be necessary to discuss this antinomy at length.

=202.= Now for this discussion it is essential to distinguish clearly
between empty space and spatial figures. Empty space, as a form
of externality, is not actual relations, but the possibility of
relations: if we ascribe existential import to it, as the ground,
in reality, of all diversity in relation, we at once have space as
something not itself relations, though giving the possibility of all
relations. In this sense, space is to be distinguished from spatial
order. Spatial order, it may be said, presupposes space, as that in
which this order is possible. Thus Stumpf says[195]: "There is no
order or relation without a positive absolute content, underlying
it, and making it possible to order anything in this manner. Why and
how should we otherwise distinguish one order from another?... To
distinguish different orders from one another, we must everywhere
recognize a particular absolute content, in relation to which the
order takes place. And so space, too, is not a mere order, but just
that by which the spatial order, side-by-sideness (_Nebeneinander_)
distinguishes itself from the rest."

May we not, then, resolve the antinomy very simply, by a reference to
this ambiguity of space? Bradley contends (Appearance and Reality,
pp. 36-7) that, on the one hand, space has parts, and is therefore
not mere relations, while on the other hand, when we try to say what
these parts are, we find them after all to be mere relations. But
cannot the space which has parts be regarded as empty space, Stumpf's
absolute underlying content, which is not mere relations, while the
parts, in so far as they turn out to be mere relations, are those
relations which constitute spatial order, not empty space? If this
can be maintained, the antinomy no longer exists.

But such an explanation, though I believe it to be a first step
towards a solution, will, I fear, itself demand almost as much
explanation as the original difficulty. For the connection of empty
space with spatial order is itself a question full of difficulty, to
be answered only after much labour.

=203.= Let us consider what this empty space is. (I speak of "empty"
space without necessarily implying the absence of matter, but only
to denote a space which is not a mere order of material things.)
Stumpf regards it as given in sense; Kant, in the last two arguments
of his metaphysical deduction, argues that it is an intuition, not
a concept, and must be known before spatial order becomes possible.
I wish to maintain, on the contrary, that it is wholly conceptual;
that space is given only as spatial order; that spatial relations,
being given, appear as more than mere relations, and so become
hypostatized; that when hypostatized, the whole collection of
them is regarded as contained in empty space; but that this empty
space itself, if it means more than the logical possibility of
space-relations, is an unnecessary and self-contradictory assumption.
Let us begin by considering Kant's arguments on this point.

Leibnitz had affirmed that space was only relations, while Newton
had maintained the objective reality of absolute space. Kant adopted
a middle course: he asserted absolute space, but regarded it as
purely subjective. The assertion of absolute space is the object of
his second argument; for if space were mere relations between things,
it would necessarily disappear with the disappearance of the things
in it; but this the second argument denies[196]. Now spatial order
obviously does disappear with matter, but absolute or empty space may
be supposed to remain. It is this, then, which Kant is arguing about,
and it is this which he affirms to be a pure intuition, necessarily
presupposed by spatial order[197].

=204.= But can we agree in regarding empty space, the "infinite
given whole," as really given? Must we not, in spite of Kant's
argument, regard it as wholly conceptual? It is not required, in
the first place, by the argument of the first half of this chapter,
which required only that every _This_ of sense-perception should
be resolvable into _Thises_, and thus involved only an order among
_Thises_, not anything given originally without reference to them
at all. In the second place, Kant's two arguments[198] designed to
prove that empty space is not conceptual, are inadequate to their
purpose. The argument that the parts of space are not contained
_under_ it, but _in_ it, proves certainly that space is not a general
conception, of which spatial figures are the instances; but it by
no means follows that empty space is not a conception. Empty space
is undifferentiated and homogeneous; parts of space, or spatial
figures, arise only by reference to some differentiating matter, and
thus belong rather to spatial order than to empty space. If empty
space be the pre-condition of spatial order, we cannot expect it
to be connected with spatial relations as genus with species. But
empty space may nevertheless be a universal conception; it may be
related to spatial order as the state to the citizens. These are not
instances of the state, but are contained in it; they also, in a
sense, presuppose it, for a man can only become a citizen by being
related to other citizens in a state[199].

The uniqueness of space, again, seems hardly a valid argument for
its intuitional nature; to regard it as an argument implies, indeed,
that all conceptions are abstracted from a series of instances--a
view which has been criticized in Chapter II. (§ 77), and need not be
further discussed here[200]. There is no ground, therefore, in Kant's
two arguments for the intuitional nature of empty space, which can be
maintained against criticism.

=205.= Another ground for condemning empty space is to be found in
the mathematical antinomies. For it is no solution, as Lotze points
out (Metaphysik, Bk. II. Chap. I., § 106), to regard empty space as
purely subjective: contradictions in a necessary subjective intuition
form as great a difficulty as in anything else. But these antinomies
arise only in connection with empty space, not with spatial order
as an aggregate of relations. For only when space is regarded as
possessed of some thinghood, can a whole or a true element be
demanded. This we have seen already in connection with the Point.
When space is regarded, so far as it is valid, as only spatial order,
unbounded extension and infinite divisibility both disappear. What
is divided is not spatial relations, but matter; and if matter, as
we have seen that Geometry requires, consists of unextended atoms
with spatial relations, there is no reason to regard matter either as
infinitely divisible, or as consisting of atoms of finite extension.

=206.= But whence arises, on this view, the paradox that we cannot
but regard space as having more or less thinghood, and as divisible
_ad infinitum_? This must be explained, I think, as a psychological
illusion, unavoidably arising from the fact that spatial relations
are immediately presented. They thus have a peculiar psychical
quality, as immediate experiences, by which quality they can be
distinguished from time-relations or any other order in which things
may be arranged. To Stumpf, whose problem is psychological, such a
psychical quality would constitute an absolute underlying content,
and would fully justify his thesis; to us, however, whose problem is
epistemological, it would not do so, but would leave the _meaning_ of
the spatial element in sense-perception free from any implication
of an absolute or empty space[201]. May we not, then, abandon empty
space, and say: Spatial order consists of _felt_ relations, and _quâ_
felt has, for Psychology, an existence not wholly resolvable into
relations, and unavoidably _seeming_ to be more than mere relations.
But when we examine the information, as to space, which we derive
from sense-perception, we find ourselves plunged in contradictions,
as soon as we allow this information to consist of more than
relations. This leaves spatial order alone in the field, and reduces
empty space to a mere name for the logical possibility of spatial
relations.

=207.= The apparent divisibility of the relations which constitute
spatial order, then, may be explained in two ways, though these are
at bottom equivalent. We may take the relation as considered in
connection with empty space, in which case it becomes more than a
relation; but being falsely hypostatized, it appears as a complex
thing, necessarily composed of elements, which elements, however,
nowhere emerge until we analyze the pseudo-thing down to nothing,
and arrive at the point. In this sense, the divisibility of spatial
relations is an unavoidable illusion. Or again, we may take the
relation in connection with the material atoms it relates. In this
case, other atoms may be imagined, differently localized by different
spatial relations. If they are localized on the straight line joining
two of the original atoms, this straight line appears as divided by
them. But the original relation is not really divided: all that has
happened is, that two or more equivalent relations have replaced
it, as two compounded relations of father and son may replace the
equivalent relation of grandfather and grandson. These two ways of
viewing the apparent divisibility are equivalent: for empty space, in
so far as it is not illusion, is a name for the aggregate of possible
space-relations. To regard a figure in empty space as divided,
therefore, means, if it means anything, to regard two or more other
possible relations as substituted for it, which gives the second way
of viewing the question.

The same reference to matter, then, by which the antinomy of the
Point was solved, solves also the antinomy as to the relational
nature of space. Space, if it is to be freed from contradictions,
must be regarded exclusively as spatial order, as relations between
unextended material atoms. Empty space, which arises, by an
inevitable illusion, out of the spatial element in sense-perception,
may be regarded, if we wish to retain it, as the bare principle of
relativity, the bare logical possibility of relations between diverse
things. In this sense, empty space is wholly conceptual; spatial
order alone is immediately experienced.

=208.= But in what sense does spatial order consist of relations?
We have hitherto spoken of externality as a relation, and in a
sense such a manner of speaking is justified. Externality, when
predicated of anything, is an adjective of that thing, and implies
a reference to some other thing. To this extent, then, externality
is analogous to other relations; and only to this extent, in our
previous arguments, has it been regarded as a relation. But when we
take account of further qualities of relations, externality begins to
appear, not so much as a relation, but rather as a necessary aspect
or element in every relation. And this is borne out by the necessity,
for the existence of relations, of some given form of externality.

Every relation, we may say, involves a diversity between the
related terms, but also some unity. Mere diversity does not give
a ground for that interaction, and that interdependence, which a
relation requires. Mere unity leaves the terms identical, and thus
destroys the reference of one to another required for a relation.
Mere externality, taken in abstraction, gives only the element of
diversity required for a relation, and is thus more abstract than any
actual relation. But mere diversity does not give that indivisible
whole of which any actual relation must consist, and is thus, when
regarded abstractly, not subject to the restrictions of ordinary
relations.

But with mere diversity, we seem to have returned to empty space, and
abandoned spatial order. Mere diversity, surely, is either complete
or non-existent; degrees of diversity, or a quantitative measure of
it, are nonsense. We cannot, therefore, reduce spatial order to mere
diversity. Two things, if they occupy different positions in space,
are necessarily diverse, but are as necessarily something more;
otherwise spatial order becomes unmeaning.

Empty space, then, in the above sense of the possibility of spatial
relations, contains only one aspect of a relation, namely the aspect
of diversity; but spatial order, by its reference to matter, becomes
more concrete, and contains also the element of unity, arising out
of the connection of the different material atoms. Spatial order,
then, consists of relations in the ordinary sense; its merely
spatial element, however--if one may make such a distinction--the
element, that is, which can be abstracted from matter and regarded
as constituting empty space, is only one aspect of a relation, but
an aspect which, in the concrete, must be inseparably bound up
with the other aspect. Here, once more, we see the ground of the
contradictions in empty space, and the reason why spatial order is
free from these contradictions.


_Conclusion._

=209.= We have now completed our review of the foundations of
Geometry. It will be well, before we take leave of the subject,
briefly to review and recapitulate the results we have won.

In the first chapter, we watched the development of a branch of
Mathematics designed, at first, only to establish the logical
independence of Euclid's axiom of parallels, and the possibility
of a self-consistent Geometry which dispensed with it. We found
the further development of the subject entangled, for a while, in
philosophical controversy; having shown one axiom to be superfluous,
the geometers of the second period hoped to prove the same conclusion
of all the others, but failed to construct any system free from three
fundamental axioms. Being concerned with analytical and metrical
Geometry, they tended to regard Algebra as _à priori_, but held that
those properties of spatial magnitudes, which were not deducible from
the laws of Algebra, must be empirical. In all this, they aimed as
much at discrediting Kant as at advancing Mathematics. But with the
third period, the interest in Philosophy diminishes, the opposition
to Euclid becomes less marked, and most important of all, measurement
is no longer regarded as fundamental, and space is dealt with by
descriptive rather than quantitative methods. But nevertheless,
three axioms, substantially the same as those retained in the second
period, are still retained by all geometers.

In the second chapter, we endeavoured, by a criticism of some
geometrical philosophies, to prepare the ground for a constructive
theory of Geometry. We saw that Kant, in applying the argument of
the Transcendental Aesthetic to space, had gone too far, since
its logical scope extended only to some form of externality in
general. We saw that Riemann, Helmholtz and Erdmann, misled by the
quantitative bias, overlooked the qualitative substratum required
by all judgments of quantity, and thus mistook the direction in
which the necessary axioms of Geometry are to be found. We rejected,
also, Helmholtz's view that Geometry depends on Physics, because we
found that Physics must assume a knowledge of Geometry before it
can become possible. But we admitted, in Geometry, a reference to
matter--not, however, to matter as empirically known in Physics, but
to a more abstract matter, whose sole function is to appear in space,
and supply the terms for spatial relations. We admitted, however,
besides this, that all _actual_ measurement must be effected by means
of _actual_ matter, and is only empirically possible, through the
empirical knowledge of approximately rigid bodies. In criticizing
Lotze, we saw that the most important sense, in which non-Euclidean
spaces are possible, is a philosophical sense, namely, that they are
not condemned by any _à priori_ argument as to the necessity of space
for experience, and that consequently, if they are not affirmed,
this must be on empirical grounds alone. Lotze's strictures on the
mathematical procedure of Metageometry we found to be wholly due to
ignorance of the subject.

Proceeding, in the third chapter, to a constructive theory of
Geometry, we saw that projective Geometry, which has no reference to
quantity, is necessarily true of any form of externality. Its three
axioms--homogeneity, dimensions, and the straight line--were all
deduced from the conception of a form of externality, and, since some
such form is necessary to experience, were all declared _à priori_.
In metrical Geometry, on the contrary, we found an empirical element,
arising out of the alternatives of Euclidean and non-Euclidean space.
Three _à priori_ axioms, common to these spaces, and necessary
conditions of the possibility of measurement, still remained; these
were the axiom of Free Mobility, the axiom that space has a finite
integral number of dimensions, and the axiom of distance. Except for
the new idea of motion, these were found equivalent to the projective
triad, and thus necessarily true of any form of externality. But
the remaining axioms of Euclid--the axiom of three dimensions, the
axiom that two straight lines can never enclose a space, and the
axiom of parallels--were regarded as empirical laws, derived from the
investigation and measurement of our actual space, and true only, as
far as the last two are concerned, within the limits set by errors of
observation.

In the present chapter, we completed our proof of the apriority
of the projective and equivalent metrical axioms, by showing the
necessity, for experience, of some form of externality, given by
sensation or intuition, and not merely inferred from other data.
Without this, we said, a knowledge of diverse but interrelated
things, the corner-stone of all experience, would be impossible.
Finally, we discussed the contradictions arising out of the
relativity and continuity of space, and endeavoured to overcome
them by a reference to matter. This matter, we found, must consist
of unextended atoms, localized by their spatial relations, and
appearing, in Geometry, as points. But the non-spatial adjectives
of matter, we contended, are irrelevant to Geometry, and its
causal properties may be left out of account. To deal with the new
contradictions, involved in such a notion of matter, would demand
a fresh treatise, leading us, through Kinematics, into the domains
of Dynamics and Physics. But to discuss the special difficulties
of space is all that is possible in an essay on the Foundations of
Geometry.

FOOTNOTES:

[178] Compare, with the following paragraphs, the admirable
discussion in Mr Hobhouse's Theory of Knowledge (Methuen 1896), Part
I. Chapter II.

[179] I speak of sense-perception instead of sensation, so as not to
prejudge the issue as to the sensational nature of space.

[180] See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 86-7, 168-171.

[181] See Caird, Critical Philosophy of Kant, Vol. I. p. 287.

[182] Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, pp. 12-30.

[183] See the references in Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 76 ff.

[184] Commentar, II. p. 71 ff.

[185] _E.g._ by Caird, _op. cit._ Vol. I. p. 286.

[186] I have no wish to deny, however, that space is essential in the
subsequent distinction of Self and not-Self.

[187] See also Book I. Chap II. passim; especially p. 51 ff. and pp.
70-1.

[188] Logic, p. 51 ff.

[189] For the _This_, on such a hypothesis, has a purely temporal
complexity, and is not resolvable into coexisting _Thises_.

[190] Chapter III. Section A, (§ 131).

[191] Cf. Hannequin, Essai critique sur l'hypothèse des atomes, Paris
1895, Chap. I. Section III.; especially p. 43.

[192] See Chapter II. § 69 ff.

[193] See third antinomy below, § 201 ff.

[194] This atom, of course, must not be confounded with the atom of
Chemistry.

[195] Ursprung der Raumvorstellung, p. 15.

[196] See Vaihinger's Commentar, II. pp. 189-190.

[197] See ibid. p. 224 ff. for Kant's inconsistencies on this point.

[198] The fourth and fifth in the first edition, the third and fourth
in the second.

[199] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 218.

[200] Cf. Vaihinger's Commentar, II. p. 207.

[201] Cf. James, Psychology, Vol. II., p. 148 ff.




  Cambridge:

  PRINTED BY J. AND C. F. CLAY,
  AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.




  TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Bold text is denoted by =equal signs=.

  A superscript is denoted by ^{x}. For example, y^{4} indicates y to
  the power 4.

  A subscript is denoted by {x}. For example, a{ik} indicates the ik-th
  element of array a.

  Algebraic expressions in the original text usually had the variables in
  italic. The italic underscore markup has been removed for readability,
  so for example: _dx_{i}_ = λ′_d_′_x_{i}_ + λ″_d″x_{i}_
  has been changed to: dx{i} = λ′d′x{i} + λ″d″x{i}

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained. For example,
  co-exist, coexist; every-day, everyday; connexion; assertorial;
  apodeictic; premisses.

  § 82, 'so Erdmannn confidently' replaced by 'so Erdmann confidently'.
  § 150 Footnote [157], 'Delboeuf' replaced by 'Delbœuf' for consistency.
  § 152, 'one subdivison must' replaced by 'one sub-division must'.
  § 159 Footnote [167], 'Delboeuf' replaced by 'Delbœuf' for consistency.
  § 204, 'and homogenous;' replaced by 'and homogeneous;'.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of An essay on the foundations of geometry, by 
Bertrand Russell

