Chapter III., that any metrical Geometry, which should endeavour to
dispense with this axiom, would be logically impossible. At present
I will only point out that Riemann, in spite of his desire to prove
that all the axioms can be dispensed with, has nevertheless, in his
mathematical work, retained three fundamental axioms, namely, Free
Mobility, the finite integral number of dimensions, and the axiom
that two points have a unique relation, namely distance. These, as we
shall see hereafter, are retained, in actual mathematical work, by
all metrical Metageometers, even when they believe, like Riemann and
Helmholtz, that no axioms are philosophically indispensable.

=24.= _Helmholtz_, the historically nearest follower of Riemann, was
guided by a similar empirical philosophy, and arrived independently
at a very similar method of formulating the axioms. Although
Helmholtz published nothing on the subject until after Riemann's
death, he had then only just seen Riemann's dissertation (which was
published posthumously), and had worked out his results, so far as
they were then completed, in entire independence both of Riemann
and of Lobatchewsky. Helmholtz is by far the most widely read of all
writers on Metageometry, and his writings, almost alone, represent
to philosophers the modern mathematical standpoint on this subject.
But his importance is much greater, in this domain, as a philosopher
than as a mathematician; almost his only original mathematical
result, as regards Geometry, is his proof of Riemann's formula for
the infinitesimal arc, and even this proof was far from rigid, until
Lie reformed it by his method of continuous groups. In this chapter,
therefore, only two of his writings need occupy us, namely the two
articles in the _Wissenschaftliche Abhandlungen_, Vol. II., entitled
respectively "Ueber die thatsächlichen Grundlagen der Geometrie,"
1866 (p. 610 ff.), and "Ueber die Thatsachen, die der Geometrie zum
Grunde liegen," 1868 (p. 618 ff.).

=25.= In the first of these, which is chiefly philosophical,
Helmholtz gives hints of his then uncompleted mathematical work,
but in the main contents himself with a statement of results. He
announces that he will prove Riemann's quadratic formula for the
infinitesimal arc; but for this purpose, he says, we have to _start_
with Congruence, since without it spatial measurement is impossible.
Nevertheless, he maintains that Congruence is proved by experience.
How we could, without the help of measurement, discover lapses
from Congruence, is a point which he leaves undiscussed. He then
enunciates the four axioms which he considers essential to Geometry,
as follows:

(1) _As regards continuity and dimensions._ In a space of _n_
dimensions, a point is uniquely determined by the measurement of _n_
continuous variables (coordinates).

(2) _As regards the existence of moveable rigid bodies._ Between the
2_n_ coordinates of any point-pair of a rigid body, there exists
an equation which is the same for all congruent point-pairs. By
considering a sufficient number of point-pairs, we get more equations
than unknown quantities: this gives us a method of determining the
form of these equations, so as to make it possible for them all to be
satisfied.

(3) _As regards free mobility._ Every point can pass freely and
continuously from one position to another. From (2) and (3) it
follows, that if two systems _A_ and _B_ can be brought into
congruence in any one position, this is also possible in every other
position.

(4) _As regards independence of rotation in rigid bodies_
(Monodromy). If (_n_ - 1) points of a body remain fixed, so that every
other point can only describe a certain curve, then that curve is
closed.

These axioms, says Helmholtz, suffice to give, with the axiom of
three dimensions, the Euclidean and non-Euclidean systems as the only
alternatives. That they _suffice_, mathematically, cannot be denied,
but they seem, in some respects, to go too far. In the first place,
there is no necessity to make the axiom of Congruence apply to actual
rigid bodies--on this subject I have enlarged in Chapter II.[29]
Again, Free Mobility, as distinct from Congruence, hardly needs to
be specially formulated: what barrier could empty space offer to a
point's progress? The axiom is involved in the homogeneity of space,
which is the same thing as the axiom of Congruence. Monodromy, also,
has been severely criticized; not only is it evident that it might
have been included in Congruence, but even from the purely analytical
point of view, Sophus Lie has proved it to be superfluous[30]. Thus
the axiom of Congruence, rightly formulated, includes Helmholtz's
third and fourth axioms and part of his second axiom. All the
four, or rather, as much of them as is relevant to Geometry, are
consequences, as we shall see hereafter, of the one fundamental
principle of the relativity of position.

=26.= The second article, which is mainly mathematical, supplies
the promised proof of the arc-formula, which is Helmholtz's most
important contribution to Geometry. Riemann had _assumed_ this
formula, as the simplest of a number of alternatives: Helmholtz
proved it to be a necessary consequence of his axioms. The present
paper begins with a short repetition of the first, including the
statement of the axioms, to which, at the end of the paper, two more
are added, (5) that space has three dimensions, and (6) that space is
infinite. It is supposed in the text, as also in the first paper,
that the measure of curvature cannot be negative, and, consequently,
that an infinite space must be Euclidean. This error in both papers
is corrected in notes, added after the appearance of Beltrami's paper
on negative curvature. It is a sample of the slightly unprofessional
nature of Helmholtz's mathematical work on this subject, which
elicits from Klein the following remarks[31]: "Helmholtz is not a
mathematician by profession, but a physicist and physiologist....
From this non-mathematical quality of Helmholtz, it follows naturally
that he does not treat the mathematical portion of his work with the
thoroughness which one would demand of a mathematician by trade (_von
Fach_)." He tells us himself that it was the physiological study of
vision which led him to the question of the axioms, and it is as a
physicist that he makes his axioms refer to actual rigid bodies.
Accordingly, we find errors in his mathematics, such as the axiom
of Monodromy, and the assumption that the measure of curvature must
be positive. Nevertheless, the proof of Riemann's arc-formula is
extremely able, and has, on the whole, been substantiated by Lie's
more thorough investigations.

=27.= Helmholtz's other writings on Geometry are almost wholly
philosophical, and will be discussed at length in Chapter II. For the
present, we may pass to the only other important writer of the second
period, _Beltrami_. As his work is purely mathematical, and contains
few controverted points, it need not, despite its great importance,
detain us long.

The "Saggio di Interpretazione della Geometria non-Euclidea[32],"
which is principally confined to two dimensions, interprets
Lobatchewsky's results by the characteristic method of the second
period. It shows, by a development of the work of Gauss and
Minding[33], that all the propositions in plane Geometry, which
Lobatchewsky had set forth, hold, within ordinary Euclidean space,
on surfaces of constant negative curvature. It is strange, as Klein
points out[34], that this interpretation, which was known to Riemann
and perhaps even to Gauss, should have remained so long without
explicit statement. This is the more strange, as Lobatchewsky's
"Géométrie Imaginaire" had appeared in Crelle, Vol. XVII.[35],
and Minding's article, from which the interpretation follows at
once, had appeared in Crelle, Vol. XIX. Minding had shewn that the
Geometry of surfaces of constant negative curvature, in particular
as regards geodesic triangles, could be deduced from that of the
sphere by giving the radius a purely imaginary value _ia_[36]. This
result, as we have seen, had also been obtained by Lobatchewsky for
his Geometry, and yet it took thirty years for the connection to be
brought to general notice.

=28.= In Beltrami's Saggio, straight lines are, of course, replaced
by geodesics; his coordinates are obtained through a point-by-point
correspondence with an auxiliary plane, in which straight lines
correspond to geodesics on the surface. Thus geodesics have linear
equations, and are always uniquely determined by two points.
Distances on the surface, however, are not equal to distances on
the plane; thus while the surface is infinite, the corresponding
portion of the plane is contained within a certain finite circle.
The distance of two points on the surface is a certain function of
the coordinates, not the ordinary function of elementary Geometry.
These relations of plane and surface are important in connection with
Cayley's theory of distance, which we shall have to consider next.
If we were to define distance on the plane as that function of the
coordinates which gives the corresponding distance on the surface, we
should obtain what Klein calls "a plane with a hyperbolic system of
measurement (_Massbestimmung_)" in which Cayley's theory of distance
would hold. It is evident, however, that the ordinary notion of
distance has been presupposed in setting up the coordinate system, so
that we do not really get alternative Geometries on one and the same
plane. The bearing of these remarks will appear more fully when we
come to consider Cayley and Klein.

=29.= The value of Beltrami's Saggio, in his own eyes, lies in
the intelligible Euclidean sense which it gives to Lobatchewsky's
planimetry: the corresponding system of Solid Geometry, since it has
no meaning for Euclidean space, is barely mentioned in this work.
In a second paper[37], however, almost contemporaneous with the
first, he proceeds to consider the general theory of _n_-dimensional
manifolds of constant negative curvature. This paper is greatly
influenced by Riemann's dissertation; it begins with the formula
for the linear element, and proves from this first, that Congruence
holds for such spaces, and next, that they have, according to
Riemann's definition, a constant negative measure of curvature. (It
is instructive to observe, that both in this and in the former Essay,
great stress is laid on the necessity of the Axiom of Congruence.)

This work has less philosophical interest than the former, since it
does little more than repeat, in a general form, the results which
the Saggio had obtained for two dimensions--results which sink,
when extended to _n_ dimensions, to the level of mere mathematical
constructions. Nevertheless, the paper is important, both as a
restoration of negative curvature, which had been overlooked
by Helmholtz, and as an analytical treatment of Lobatchewsky's
results--a treatment which, together with the Saggio, at last
restored to them the prominence they deserved.


Third Period.

=30.= The third period differs radically, alike in its methods and
aims, and in the underlying philosophical ideas, from the period
which it replaced. Whereas everything, in the second period, turned
on measurement, with its apparatus of Congruence, Free Mobility,
Rigid Bodies, and the rest, these vanish completely in the third
period, which, swinging to the opposite extreme, regards quantity
as a perfectly irrelevant category in Geometry, and dispenses with
congruence and the method of superposition. The ideas of this period,
unfortunately, have found no exponent so philosophical as Riemann or
Helmholtz, but have been set forth only by technical mathematicians.
Moreover the change of fundamental ideas, which is immense, has
not brought about an equally great change in actual procedure; for
though spatial quantity is no longer a part of projective Geometry,
quantity is still employed, and we still have equations, algebraic
transformations, and so on. This is apt to give rise to confusion,
especially in the mind of the student, who fails to realise that the
quantities used, so far as the propositions are really projective,
are mere names for points, and not, as in metrical Geometry, actual
spatial magnitudes.

Nevertheless, the fundamental difference between this period
and the former must strike any one at once. Whereas Riemann
and Helmholtz dealt with metrical ideas, and took, as their
foundations, the measure of curvature and the formula for the linear
element--both purely metrical--the new method is erected on the
formulae for transformation of coordinates required to express a
given collineation. It begins by reducing all so-called metrical
notions--distance, angle, etc.--to projective forms, and obtains,
from this reduction, a methodological unity and simplicity before
impossible. This reduction depends, however, except where the
space-constant is negative, upon imaginary figures--in Euclid, the
circular points at infinity; it is moreover purely symbolic and
analytical, and must be regarded as philosophically irrelevant.
As the question concerning the import of this reduction is of
fundamental importance to our theory of Geometry, and as Cayley, in
his Presidential Address to the British Association in 1883, formally
challenged philosophers to discuss the use of imaginaries, on which
it depends, I will treat this question at some length. But first let
us see how, as a matter of mathematics, the reduction is effected.

=31.= We shall find, throughout this period, that almost
every important proposition, though misleading in its obvious
interpretation, has nevertheless, when rightly interpreted, a wide
philosophical bearing. So it is with the work of _Cayley_, the
pioneer of the projective method.

The projective formula for angles, in Euclidean Geometry, was first
obtained by Laguerre, in 1853. This formula had, however, a perfectly
Euclidean character, and it was left for Cayley to generalize
it so as to include both angles and distances in Euclidean and
non-Euclidean systems alike[38].

_Cayley_ was, to the last, a staunch supporter of Euclidean
_space_, though he believed that non-Euclidean _Geometries_ could
be applied, within Euclidean space, by a change in the definition
of distance[39]. He has thus, in spite of his Euclidean orthodoxy,
provided the believers in the possibility of non-Euclidean spaces
with one of their most powerful weapons. In his "Sixth Memoir upon
Quantics" (1859), he set himself the task of "establishing the notion
of distance upon purely descriptive principles." He showed that, with
the ordinary notion of distance, it can be rendered projective by
reference to the circular points and the line at infinity, and that
the same is true of angles[40]. Not content with this, he suggested
a new definition of distance, as the inverse sine or cosine of a
certain function of the coordinates; with this definition, the
properties usually known as metrical become projective properties,
having reference to a certain conic, called by Cayley the Absolute.
(The circular points are, analytically, a degenerate conic, so that
ordinary Geometry forms a particular case of the above.) He proves
that, when the Absolute is an _imaginary_ conic, the Geometry so
obtained for two dimensions is spherical Geometry. The correspondence
with Lobatchewsky, in the case where the Absolute is _real_, is not
worked out: indeed there is, throughout, no evidence of acquaintance
with non-Euclidean systems. The importance of the memoir, to Cayley,
lies entirely in its proof that metrical is only a branch of
descriptive Geometry.

=32.= The connection of Cayley's Theory of Distance with Metageometry
was first pointed out by Klein[41]. Klein showed in detail that, if
the Absolute be real, we get Lobatchewsky's (hyperbolic) system; if
it be imaginary, we get either spherical Geometry or a new system,
analogous to that of Helmholtz, called by Klein elliptic; if the
Absolute be an imaginary point-pair, we get parabolic Geometry, and
if, in particular, the point-pair be the circular points, we get
ordinary Euclid. In elliptic Geometry, two straight lines in the same
plane meet in only one point, not two as in Helmholtz's system. The
distinction between the two kinds of Geometry is difficult, and will
be discussed later.

=33.= Since these systems are all obtained from a Euclidean plane,
by a mere alteration in the definition of distance, Cayley and
Klein tend to regard the whole question as one, not of the nature
of space, but of the definition of distance. Since this definition,
on their view, is perfectly arbitrary, the philosophical problem
vanishes--Euclidean _space_ is left in undisputed possession, and
the only problem remaining is one of convention and mathematical
convenience[42]. This view has been forcibly expressed by Poincaré:
"What ought one to think," he says, "of this question: Is the
Euclidean Geometry true? The question is nonsense." Geometrical
axioms, according to him, are mere conventions: they are "definitions
in disguise[43]." Thus Klein blames Beltrami for regarding his
auxiliary plane as merely auxiliary, and remarks that, if he had
known Cayley's Memoir, he would have seen the relation between
the plane and the pseudosphere to be far more intimate than he
supposed[44]. A view which removes the problem entirely from the
arena of philosophy demands, plainly, a full discussion. To this
discussion we will now proceed.

=34.= The view in question has arisen, it would seem, from a natural
confusion as to the nature of the coordinates employed. Those who
hold the view have not adequately realised, I believe, that their
coordinates are not _spatial_ quantities, as in metrical Geometry,
but mere conventional signs, by which different points can be
distinctly designated. There is no reason, therefore, until we
already have metrical Geometry, for regarding one function of the
coordinates as a better expression of distance than another, so
long as the fundamental addition-equation[45] is preserved. Hence,
if our coordinates are regarded as adequate for all Geometry, an
indeterminateness arises in the expression of distance, which can
only be avoided by a convention. But projective coordinates--so our
argument will contend--though perfectly adequate for all projective
properties, and entirely free from any metrical presupposition, are
inadequate to express metrical properties, just because they have
no metrical presupposition. Thus where metrical properties are in
question, Beltrami remains justified as against Klein; the reduction
of metrical to projective properties is only apparent, though
the independence of these last, as against metrical Geometry, is
perfectly real.

=35.= But what are projective coordinates, and how are they
introduced? This question was not touched upon in Cayley's Memoir,
and it seemed, therefore, as if a logical error were involved in
using coordinates to define distance. For coordinates, in all
previous systems, had been deduced from distance; to use any existing
coordinate system in defining distance was, accordingly, to incur
a vicious circle. Cayley mentions this difficulty in a note, where
he only remarks, however, that he had regarded his coordinates
as numbers arbitrarily assigned, on some system not further
investigated, to different points. The difficulty has been treated at
length by Sir R. Ball (Theory of the Content, Trans. R. I. A. 1889),
who urges that if the values of our coordinates already involve the
usual measure of distance, then to give a new definition, while
retaining the usual coordinates, is to incur a contradiction. He
says (op. cit. p. 1): "In the study of non-Euclidean Geometry I have
often felt a difficulty which has, I know, been shared by others. In
that theory it seems as if we try to replace our ordinary notion of
distance between two points by the logarithm of a certain anharmonic
ratio[46]. But this ratio itself involves the notion of distance
measured in the ordinary way. How, then, can we supersede our old
notion of distance by the non-Euclidean notion, inasmuch as the very
definition of the latter involves the former?"

=36.= This objection is valid, we must admit, so long as anharmonic
ratio is defined in the ordinary metrical manner. It would be
valid, for example, against any attempt to found a new definition
of distance on Cremona's account of anharmonic ratio[47], in
which it appears as a metrical property unaltered by projective
transformation. If a logical error is to be avoided, in fact, all
reference to spatial magnitude of any kind must be avoided; for all
spatial magnitude, as will be shown hereafter[48], is logically
dependent on the fundamental magnitude of distance. Anharmonic
ratio and coordinates must alike be defined by purely descriptive
properties, if the use afterwards made of them is to be free from
metrical presuppositions, and therefore from the objections of Sir R.
Ball.

Such a definition has been satisfactorily given by Klein[49],
who appeals, for the purpose, to v. Staudt's quadrilateral
construction[50]. By this construction, which I have reproduced in
outline in Chapter III. Section A, § 112 ff., we obtain a purely
descriptive definition of harmonic and anharmonic ratio, and, given
a pair of points, we can obtain the harmonic conjugate to any
third point on the same straight line. On this construction, the
introduction of projective coordinates is based. Starting with any
three points on a straight line, we assign to them arbitrarily the
numbers 0, 1, ∞. We then find the harmonic conjugate to the first
with respect to 1, ∞, and assign to it the number 2. The object of
assigning this number rather than any other, is to obtain the value
-1 for the anharmonic ratio of the four numbers corresponding to the
four points[51]. We then find the harmonic conjugate to the point
1, with respect to 2, ∞, and assign to it the number 3; and so on.
Klein has shown that by this construction, we can obtain any number
of points, and can construct a point corresponding to any given
number, fractional or negative. Moreover, when two sets of four
points have the same anharmonic ratio, descriptively defined[52],
the corresponding numbers also have the same anharmonic ratio. By
introducing such a numerical system on two straight lines, or on
three, we obtain the coordinates of any point in a plane, or in
space. By this construction, which is of fundamental importance
to projective Geometry, the logical error, upon which Sir R. Ball
bases his criticism, is satisfactorily avoided. Our coordinates
are introduced by a purely descriptive method, and involve no
presupposition whatever as to the measurement of distance.

=37.= With this coordinate system, then, to define distance as a
certain function of the coordinates is not to be guilty of a vicious
circle. But it by no means follows that the definition of distance is
arbitrary. All reference to distance has been hitherto excluded, to
avoid metrical ideas; but when distance is introduced, metrical ideas
inevitably reappear, and we have to remember that our coordinates
give no information, _primâ facie_, as to any of these metrical
ideas. It is open to us, of course, if we choose, to continue to
exclude distance in the ordinary sense, as the quantity of a finite
straight line, and to define the _word_ distance in any way we
please. But the conception, for which the word has hitherto stood,
will then require a new name, and the only result will be a confusion
between the _apparent_ meaning of our propositions, to those who
retain the associations belonging to the old sense of the word, and
the _real_ meaning, resulting from the new sense in which the word is
used.

This confusion, I believe, has actually occurred, in the case of
those who regard the question between Euclid and Metageometry as
one of the definition of distance. Distance is a quantitative
relation, and as such presupposes identity of quality. But projective
Geometry deals only with quality--for which reason it is called
descriptive--and cannot distinguish between two figures which are
qualitatively alike. Now the meaning of qualitative likeness,
in Geometry, is the possibility of mutual transformation by a
collineation[53]. Any two pairs of points on the same straight line,
therefore, are qualitatively alike; their only qualitative relation
is the straight line, which both pairs have in common; and it is
exactly the qualitative identity of the relations of the two pairs,
which enables the difference of their relations to be exhaustively
dealt with by quantity, as a difference of distance. But where
quantity is excluded, any two pairs of points on the same straight
line appear as alike, and even any two sets of three: for any three
points on a straight line can be projectively transformed into any
other three. It is only with _four_ points in a line that we acquire
a projective property distinguishing them from other sets of four,
and this property is anharmonic ratio, descriptively defined. The
projective Geometer, therefore, sees no reason to give a name to the
relation between two points, in so far as this relation is anything
over and above the unlimited straight line on which they lie; and
when he introduces the notion of distance, he defines it, in the
only way in which projective principles allow him to define it, as a
relation between _four_ points. As he nevertheless wishes the word
to give him the power of distinguishing between different _pairs_
of points, he agrees to take two out of the four points as fixed.
In this way, the only variables in distance are the two remaining
points, and distance appears, therefore, as a function of _two_
variables, namely the coordinates of the two variable points. When we
have further defined our function so that distance may be additive,
we have a function with many of the properties of distance in the
ordinary sense. This function, therefore, the projective Geometer
regards as the only proper definition of distance.

We can see, in fact, from the manner in which our projective
coordinates were introduced, that _some_ function of these
coordinates must express distance in the ordinary sense. For
they were introduced serially, so that, as we proceeded from the
zero-point towards the infinity-point, our coordinates continually
grew. To every point, a definite coordinate corresponded: to the
distance between two variable points, therefore, as a function
dependent on no other variables, must correspond some definite
function of the coordinates, since these are themselves functions of
their points. The function discussed above, therefore, must certainly
include distance in the ordinary sense.

But the arbitrary and conventional nature of distance, as maintained
by Poincaré and Klein, arises from the fact that the two fixed
points, required to determine our distance in the projective sense,
may be arbitrarily chosen, and although, when our choice is once
made, any two points have a definite distance, yet, according as we
make that choice, distance will become a different function of the
two variable points. The ambiguity thus introduced is unavoidable on
projective principles; but are we to conclude, from this, that it
is really unavoidable? Must we not rather conclude that projective
Geometry cannot adequately deal with distance? If _A_, _B_, _C_, be
three different points on a line, there must be _some_ difference
between the relation of _A_ to _B_ and of _A_ to _C_, for otherwise,
owing to the qualitative identity of all points, _B_ and _C_ could
not be distinguished. But such a difference involves a relation,
between _A_ and _B_, which is independent of other points on the
line; for unless we have such a relation, the other points cannot
be distinguished as different. Before we can distinguish the two
fixed points, therefore, from which the projective definition
starts, we must already suppose some relation, between any two
points on our line, in which they are independent of other points;
and this relation is distance in the ordinary sense[54]. When we
have measured this quantitative relation by the ordinary methods
of metrical Geometry, we can proceed to decide what base-points
must be chosen, on our line, in order that the projective function
discussed above may have the same value as ordinary distance. But
the choice of these base-points, when we are discussing distance
in the ordinary sense, is not arbitrary, and their introduction is
only a technical device. Distance, in the ordinary sense, remains
a relation between _two_ points, not between _four_; and it is the
failure to perceive that the projective sense differs from, and
cannot supersede, the ordinary sense, which has given rise to the
views of Klein and Poincaré. The question is not one of convention,
but of the irreducible metrical properties of space. To sum up:
Quantities, as used in projective Geometry, do not stand for spatial
magnitudes, but are conventional symbols for purely qualitative
spatial relations. But distance, _quâ_ quantity, presupposes identity
of quality, as the condition of quantitative comparison. Distance in
the ordinary sense is, in short, that quantitative relation, between
two points on a line, by which their difference from other points
can be defined. The projective definition, however, being unable to
distinguish a collection of less than four points from any other on
the same straight line, makes distance depend on two other points
besides those whose relation it defines. No name remains, therefore,
for distance in the ordinary sense, and many projective Geometers,
having abolished the name, believe the thing to be abolished also,
and are inclined to deny that _two_ points have a unique relation at
all. This confusion, in projective Geometry, shows the importance of
a name, and should make us chary of allowing new meanings to obscure
one of the fundamental properties of space.

=38.= It remains to discuss the manner in which non-Euclidean
Geometries result from the projective definition of distance, as also
the true interpretation to be given to this view of Metageometry. It
is to be observed that the projective methods which follow Cayley
deal throughout with a Euclidean plane, on which they introduce
different measures of distance. Hence arises, in any interpretation
of these methods, an apparent subordination of the non-Euclidean
spaces, as though these were less self-subsistent than Euclid's.
This subordination is not intended in what follows; on the contrary,
the correlation with Euclidean space is regarded as valuable,
first, because Euclidean space has been longer studied and is more
familiar, but secondly, because this correlation proves, when truly
interpreted, that the other spaces are self-subsistent. We may
confine ourselves chiefly, in discussing this interpretation, to
distances measured along a single straight line. But we must be
careful to remember that the metrical definition of distance--which,
according to the view here advocated, is the only adequate
definition--is the same in Euclidean and in non-Euclidean spaces; to
argue in its favour is not, therefore, to argue in favour of Euclid.

The projective scheme of coordinates consists of a series of numbers,
of which each represents a certain anharmonic ratio and denotes one
and only one point, and which increase uniformly with the distance
from a fixed origin, until they become infinite on reaching a certain
point. Now Cayley showed that, in Euclidean Geometry, distance may
be expressed as the limit of the logarithm of the anharmonic ratio
of the two points and the (coincident) points at infinity on their
straight line; while, if we assumed that the points at infinity were
distinct, we obtained the formula for distance in hyperbolic or
spherical Geometry, according as these points were real or imaginary.
Hence it follows that, with the projective definition of distance,
we shall obtain precisely the formulae of hyperbolic, parabolic or
spherical Geometry, according as we choose the point, to which the
value +∞ is assigned, at a finite, infinite or imaginary distance
(in the ordinary sense) from the point to which we assign the value
0. Our straight line remains, all the while, an ordinary Euclidean
straight line. But we have seen that the projective definition of
distance fits with the true definition only when the two fixed
points to which it refers are suitably chosen. Now the ordinary
meaning of distance is required in non-Euclidean as in Euclidean
Geometries--indeed, it is only in metrical properties that these
Geometries differ. Hence our _Euclidean_ straight line, though it
may serve to illustrate other Geometries than Euclid's, can only be
dealt with correctly by Euclid. Where we give a different definition
of distance from Euclid's, we are still in the domain of purely
projective properties, and derive no information as to the metrical
properties of our straight line. But the importance, to Metageometry,
of this new interpretation, lies in the fact that, having
independently established the metrical formulae of non-Euclidean
spaces, we find, as in Beltrami's Saggio, that these spaces can
be related, by a homographic correspondence, with the points of
Euclidean space; and that this can be effected in such a manner as
to give, for the distance between two points of our non-Euclidean
space, the hyperbolic or spherical measure of distance for the
corresponding points of Euclidean space.

=39.= On the whole, then, a modification of Sir R. Ball's view,
which is practically a generalized statement of Beltrami's method,
seems the most tenable. He imagines what, with Grassmann, he calls
a Content, _i.e._ a perfectly general three-dimensional manifold,
and then correlates its elements, one by one, with points in
Euclidean space. Thus every element of the Content acquires, as its
coordinates, the ordinary Euclidean coordinates of the corresponding
point in Euclidean space. By means of this correlation, our
calculations, though they refer to the Content, are carried on, as in
Beltrami's Saggio, in ordinary Euclidean space. Thus the confusion
disappears, but with it, the supposed Euclidean interpretation also
disappears. Sir R. Ball's Content, if it is to be a space at all,
must be a space radically different from Euclid's[55]; to speak, as
Klein does, of ordinary planes with hyperbolic or elliptic measures
of distance, is either to incur a contradiction, or to forego any
metrical meaning of distance. Instead of ordinary planes, we have
surfaces like Beltrami's, of constant measure of curvature; instead
of Euclid's space, we have hyperbolic or spherical space. At the
same time, it remains true that we can, by Klein's method, give a
Euclidean meaning to every symbolic proposition in non-Euclidean
Geometry. For by substituting, for distance, the logarithm above
alluded to, we obtain, from the non-Euclidean result, a result which
follows from the ordinary Euclidean axioms. This correspondence
removes, once for all, the possibility of a lurking contradiction in
Metageometry, since, to a proposition in the one, corresponds one
and only one proposition in the other, and contradictory results in
one system, therefore, would correspond to contradictory results in
the other. Hence Metageometry cannot lead to contradictions, unless
Euclidean Geometry, at the same moment, leads to corresponding
contradictions. Thus the Euclidean plane with hyperbolic or elliptic
measure of distance, though either contradictory or not metrical
as an independent notion, has, as a help in the interpretation of
non-Euclidean results, a very high degree of utility.

=40.= We have still to discuss Klein's third kind of non-Euclidean
Geometry, which he calls elliptic. The difference between this and
spherical Geometry is difficult to grasp, but it may be illustrated
by a simpler example. A plane, as every one knows, can be wrapped,
without stretching, on a cylinder, and straight lines in the plane
become, by this operation, geodesics on the cylinder. The Geometries
of the plane and the cylinder, therefore, have much in common.
But since the generating circle of the cylinder, which is one of
its geodesics, is finite, only a portion of the plane is used up
in wrapping it once round the cylinder. Hence, if we endeavour to
establish a point-to-point correspondence between the plane and the
cylinder, we shall find an infinite series of points on the plane
for a single point on the cylinder. Thus it happens that geodesics,
though on the plane they have only one point in common, may on
the cylinder have an infinite number of intersections. Somewhat
similar to this is the relation between the spherical and elliptic
Geometries. To any one point in elliptic space, two points correspond
in spherical space. Thus geodesics, which in spherical space may have
two points in common, can never, in elliptic space, have more than
one intersection.

But Klein's method can only prove that elliptic Geometry holds of
the ordinary Euclidean plane with elliptic measure of distance.
Klein has made great endeavours to enforce the distinction between
the spherical and elliptic Geometries[56], but it is not immediately
evident that the latter, as distinct from the former, is valid.

In the first place, Klein's elliptic Geometry, which arises as
one of the alternative metrical systems on a Euclidean plane or
in a Euclidean space, does not by itself suffice, if the above
discussion has been correct, to prove the possibility of an elliptic
space, _i.e._ of a space having a point-to-point correspondence
with the Euclidean space, and having as the ordinary distance
between two of its points the elliptic definition of the distance
between corresponding points of the Euclidean space. To prove this
possibility, we must adopt the direct method of Newcomb (Crelle's
Journal, Vol. 83). Now in the first place Newcomb has not proved that
his postulates are self-consistent; he has only failed to prove that
they are contradictory[57]. This would leave elliptic space in the
same position in which Lobatchewsky and Bolyai left hyperbolic space.
But further there seems to be, at first sight, in _two_-dimensional
elliptic space, a positive contradiction. To explain this, however,
some account of the peculiarities of the elliptic plane will be
necessary.

[Illustration]

The elliptic plane, regarded as a figure in three-dimensional
elliptic space, is what is called a double surface[58], _i.e._ as
Newcomb says (_loc. cit._ p. 298): "The two sides of a complete plane
are not distinct, as in a Euclidean surface.... If ... a being should
travel to distance 2_D_, he would, on his return, find himself on
the opposite surface to that on which he started, and would have
to repeat his journey in order to return to his original position
without leaving the surface." Now if we imagine a _two_-dimensional
elliptic space, the distinction between the sides of a plane becomes
unmeaning, since it only acquires significance by reference to the
third dimension. Nevertheless, some such distinction would be forced
upon us. Suppose, for example, that we took a small circle provided
with an arrow, as in the figure, and moved this circle once round the
universe. Then the sense of the arrow would be reversed. We should
thus be forced, either to regard the new position as distinct from
the former, which transforms our plane into a spherical plane, or to
attribute the reversal of the arrow to the action of a motion which
restores our circle to its original place. It is to be observed that
nothing short of moving round the universe would suffice to reverse
the sense of the arrow. This reversal _seems_ like an action of
empty space, which would force us to regard the points which, from a
three-dimensional point of view, are coincident though opposite, as
really distinct, and so reduce the elliptic to the spherical plane.
But motion, not space, really causes the change, and the elliptic
plane is therefore not proved to be impossible. The question is not,
however, of any great philosophic importance.

=41.= In connection with the reduction of metrical to projective
Geometry, we have one more topic for discussion. This is the
geometrical use of imaginaries, by means of which, except in the
case of hyperbolic space, the reduction is effected. I have already
contended, on other grounds, that this reduction, in spite of its
immense technical importance, and in spite of the complete logical
freedom of projective Geometry from metrical ideas, is _purely_
technical, and is not philosophically valid. The same conclusion will
appear, if we take up Cayley's challenge at the British Association,
in his Presidential Address of 1883.

In this address, Professor Cayley devoted most of his time to
non-Euclidean systems. Non-Euclidean _spaces_, he declared, seemed to
him mistaken _à priori_[59]; but non-Euclidean _Geometries_, here as
in his mathematical works, were accepted as flowing from a change in
the definition of distance. This view has been already discussed, and
need not, therefore, be further criticised here. What I wish to speak
about, is the question with which Cayley himself opened his address,
namely, the geometrical use and meaning of imaginary quantities. From
the manner in which he spoke of this question, it becomes imperative
to treat it somewhat at length. For he said (pp. 8-9):

"... The notion which is the really fundamental one (and I cannot
too strongly emphasize the assertion) underlying and pervading the
whole notion of modern analysis and Geometry, [is] that of imaginary
magnitude in analysis, and of imaginary space (or space as the _locus
in quo_ of imaginary points and figures) in Geometry: I use in each
case the word imaginary as including real.... Say even the conclusion
were that the notion belongs to mere technical mathematics, or has
reference to nonentities in regard to which no science is possible,
still it seems to me that (as a subject of philosophical discussion)
the notion ought not to be thus ignored; it should at least be shown
that there is a right to ignore it."

=42.= This right it is now my purpose to demonstrate. But for fear
non-mathematicians should miss the point of Cayley's remark (which
has sometimes been erroneously supposed to refer to non-Euclidean
spaces), I may as well explain, at the outset, that this question
is radically distinct from, and only indirectly connected with, the
validity or import of Metageometry. An imaginary quantity is one
which involves √-1: its most general form is _a_ + √-1_b_ where _a_
and _b_ are real; Cayley uses the word imaginary so as to include
real, in order to cover the special case where _b_ = 0. It will
be convenient, in what follows, to exclude this wider meaning,
and assume that _b_ is not zero. An imaginary point is one whose
coordinates involve √-1, _i.e._ whose coordinates are imaginary
quantities. An imaginary curve is one whose points are imaginary--or,
in some special uses, one whose equation contains imaginary
coefficients. The mathematical subtleties to which this notion leads
need not be here discussed; the reader who is interested in them will
find an excellent elementary account of their geometrical uses in
Klein's Nicht-Euklid, II. pp. 38-46. But for our present purpose, we
may confine ourselves to imaginary points. If these are found to have
a merely technical import, and to be destitute of any philosophical
meaning, then the same will hold of any collection of imaginary
points, _i.e._ of any imaginary curve or surface.

That the notion of imaginary points is of supreme importance in
Geometry, will be seen by any one who reflects that the circular
points are imaginary, and that the reduction of metrical to
projective Geometry, which is one of Cayley's greatest achievements,
depends on these points. But to discuss adequately their
philosophical import is difficult to me, since I am unacquainted with
any satisfactory philosophy of imaginaries in pure Algebra. I will
therefore adopt the most favourable hypothesis, and assume that no
objection can be successfully urged against this use. Even on this
hypothesis, I think, no case can be made out for imaginary points in
Geometry.

In the first place, we must exclude, from the imaginary points
considered, those whose coordinates are only imaginary with certain
special systems of coordinates. For example, if one of a point's
coordinates be the tangent from it to a sphere, this coordinate will
be imaginary for any point inside the sphere, and yet the point is
perfectly real. A point, then, is only to be called imaginary, when,
whatever real system of coordinates we adopt, one or more of the
quantities expressing these coordinates remains imaginary. For this
purpose, it is mathematically sufficient to suppose our coordinates
Cartesian--a point whose Cartesian coordinates are imaginary, is a
true imaginary point in the above sense.

To discuss the meaning of such a point, it is necessary to consider
briefly the fundamental nature of the correspondence between a
point and its coordinates. Assuming that elementary Geometry has
proved--what I think it does satisfactorily prove--that spatial
relations are susceptible of quantitative measurement, then a given
point will have, with a suitable system of coordinates, in a space
of _n_ dimensions, _n_ quantitative relations to the fixed spatial
figure forming the axes of coordinates, and these _n_ quantitative
relations will, under certain reservations, be unique--_i.e._, no
other point will have the same quantities assigned to it. (With many
possible coordinate systems, this latter condition is not realized:
but for that very reason they are inconvenient, and employed only in
special problems.) Thus given a coordinate system, and given any set
of quantities, these quantities, _if they determine a point at all_,
determine it uniquely. But, by a natural extension of the method, the
above reservation is dropped, and it is assumed that to _every_ set
of quantities some point must correspond. For this assumption there
seems to me no vestige of evidence. As well might a postman assume
that, because every house in a street is uniquely determined by its
number, therefore there must be a house for every imaginable number.
We must know, in fact, that a given set of quantities can be the
coordinates of some point in space, before it is legitimate to give
any spatial significance to these quantities: and this knowledge,
obviously, cannot be derived from operations with coordinates alone,
on pain of a vicious circle. We must, to return to the above analogy,
know the number of houses in Piccadilly, before we know whether a
given number has a corresponding house or not; and arithmetic alone,
however subtly employed, will never give us this information.

Thus the distinction which is important is, not the distinction
between real and imaginary quantities, but between quantities to
which points correspond and quantities to which no points correspond.
We can conventionally agree to denote real points by imaginary
coordinates, as in the Gaussian method of denoting by the single
quantity (_a_ + √-1_b_) the point whose ordinary coordinates are
_a_, _b_. But this does not touch Cayley's meaning. Cayley means
that it is of great utility in mathematics to regard, as points
with a real existence in space, the assumed spatial correlates of
quantities which, with the coordinate system employed, have no
correlates in every-day space; and that this utility is supposed,
by many mathematicians, to indicate the validity of so fruitful an
assumption. To fix our ideas, let us consider Cartesian axes in
three-dimensional Euclidean space. Then it appears, by inspection,
that a point may be situated at any distance to right or left of any
of the three coordinate planes; taking this distance as a coordinate,
therefore, it appears that real points correspond to all quantities
from -∞ to +∞. The same appears for the other two coordinates;
and since elementary Geometry proves their variations mutually
independent, we know that one and only one real point corresponds
to any three real quantities. But we also know, from the exhaustive
method pursued, that all space is covered by the range of these three
variable quantities: a fresh set of quantities, therefore, such as is
introduced by the use of imaginaries, possesses no spatial correlate,
and can be supposed to possess one only by a convenient fiction.

=43.= The fact that the fiction _is_ convenient, however, may
be thought to indicate that it is more than a fiction. But this
presumption, I think, can be easily explained away. For all the
fruitful uses of imaginaries, in Geometry, are those which begin
and end with real quantities, and use imaginaries only for the
intermediate steps. Now in all such cases, we have a real spatial
interpretation at the beginning and end of our argument, where alone
the spatial interpretation is important: in the intermediate links,
we are dealing in a purely algebraical manner with purely algebraical
quantities, and may perform any operations which are algebraically
permissible. If the quantities with which we end are capable of
spatial interpretation, then, and only then, our result may be
regarded as geometrical. To use geometrical language, in any other
case, is only a convenient help to the imagination. To speak, for
example, of projective properties which refer to the circular points,
is a mere _memoria technica_ for purely algebraical properties;
the circular points are not to be found in space, but only in the
auxiliary quantities by which geometrical equations are transformed.
That no contradictions arise from the geometrical interpretation of
imaginaries, is not wonderful: for they are interpreted solely by the
rules of Algebra, which we may admit as valid in their application
to imaginaries. The perception of space being wholly absent,
Algebra rules supreme, and no inconsistency can arise. Wherever,
for a moment, we allow our ordinary spatial notions to intrude, the
grossest absurdities do arise--every one can see that a circle, being
a closed curve, cannot get to infinity. The metaphysician, who should
invent anything so preposterous as the circular points, would be
hooted from the field. But the mathematician may steal the horse with
impunity.

Finally, then, only a knowledge of space, not a knowledge of Algebra,
can assure us that any given set of quantities will have a spatial
correlate, and in the absence of such a correlate, operations with
these quantities have no geometrical import. This is the case with
imaginaries in Cayley's sense, and their use in Geometry, great as
are its technical advantages, and rigid as is its technical validity,
is wholly destitute of philosophical importance.

=44.= We have now, I think, discussed most of the questions
concerning the scope and validity of the projective method. We
have seen that it is independent of all metrical presuppositions,
and that its use of coordinates does not involve the assumption
that spatial magnitudes are measured or expressed by them. We have
seen that it is able to deal, by its own methods alone, with the
question of the qualitative likeness of geometrical figures, which
is logically prior to any comparison as to quantity, since quantity
presupposes qualitative likeness. We have seen also that, so far as
its legitimate use extends, it applies equally to all homogeneous
spaces, and that its criterion of an independently possible
space--the determination of a straight line by two points[60]--is
not subject to the qualifications and limitations which belong, as
we have seen in the case of the cylinder, to the metrical criterion
of constant curvature. But we have also seen that, when projective
Geometry endeavours to grapple with spatial magnitude, and bring
distance and the measurement of angles beneath its sway, its success,
though technically valid and important, is philosophically an
apparent success only. Metrical Geometry, therefore, if quantity is
to be applied to space at all, remains a separate, though logically
subsequent branch of Mathematics.

=45.= It only remains to say a few words about _Sophus Lie_. As a
mathematician, as the inventor of a new and immensely powerful method
of analysis, he cannot be too highly praised. Geometry is only one
of the numerous subjects to which his theory of continuous groups
applies, but its application to Geometry has made a revolution in
method, and has rendered possible, in such problems as Helmholtz's, a
treatment infinitely more precise and exhaustive than any which was
possible before.

The general definition of a group is as follows: If we have any
number of independent variables _x{1}x{2}...x{n}_, and
any series of transformations of these into new variables--the
transformations being defined by equations of specified forms,
with parameters varying from one transformation to another--then
the series of transformations form a _group_, if the successive
application of any two is equivalent to a single member of the
original series of transformations. The group is _continuous_, when
we can pass, by infinitesimal gradations within the group, from any
one of the transformations to any other.

Now, in Geometry, the result of two successive motions or
collineations of a figure can always be obtained by a single motion
or collineation, and any motion or collineation can be built up
of a series of infinitesimal motions or collineations. Moreover
the analytical expression of either is a certain transformation
of the coordinates of all the points of the figure[61]. Hence the
transformations determining a motion or a collineation are such
as to form a continuous group. But the question of the projective
equivalence of two figures, to which all projective Geometry is
reducible, must always be dealt with by a collineation; and the
question of the equality of two figures, to which all metrical
Geometry is reducible, must always be decided by a motion such as
to cause superposition; hence the whole subject of Geometry may
be regarded as a theory of the continuous groups which define all
possible collineations and motions.

Now Sophus Lie has developed, at great length, the purely analytical
theory of groups; he has therefore, by this method of formulating
the problem, a very powerful weapon ready for the attack. In two
papers "On the foundations of Geometry[62]," undertaken at Klein's
urgent request, he takes premisses which roughly correspond to those
of Helmholtz, omitting Monodromy, and applies the theory of groups to
the deduction of their consequences[63]. Helmholtz's work, he says,
can hardly be looked upon as _proving_ its conclusions, and indeed
the more searching analysis of the group-theory reveals several
possibilities unknown to Helmholtz. Nevertheless, as a pioneer,
devoid of Lie's machinery, Helmholtz deserves, I think, more praise
than Lie is willing to give him[64].

Lie's method is perfectly exhaustive; omitting the premiss of
Monodromy, the others show that a body has six degrees of freedom,
_i.e._ that the group giving all possible motions of a body will
have six independent members; if we keep one point fixed, the
number of independent members is reduced to three. He then, from
his general theory, enumerates all the groups which satisfy this
condition. In order that such a group should give possible motions,
it is necessary, by Helmholtz's second axiom, that it should leave
invariant some function of the coordinates of any two points. This
eliminates several of the groups previously enumerated, each of which
he discusses in turn. He is thus led to the following results:

I. _In two dimensions_, if free mobility is to hold _universally_,
there are no groups satisfying Helmholtz's first three axioms, except
those which give the ordinary Euclidean and non-Euclidean motions;
but if it is to hold only _within a certain region_, there is also
a possible group in which the curve described by any point in a
rotation is not closed, but an equiangular spiral. To exclude this
possibility, Helmholtz's axiom of Monodromy is required.

II. _In three dimensions_, the results go still more against
Helmholtz. Assuming free mobility only _within a certain region_, we
have to distinguish two cases: _Either_ free mobility holds, within
that region, absolutely without exception, _i.e._ when one point is
held fast, _every_ other point within the region can move freely
over a surface: in this case the axiom of Monodromy is unnecessary,
and the first three axioms suffice to define our group as that of
Euclidean and non-Euclidean motions. _Or_ free mobility, within the
specified region, holds only of every point _of general position_,
while the points of a certain line, when one point is fixed, are only
able to move on that line, not on a surface: when this is the case,
other groups are possible, and can only be excluded by Helmholtz's
fourth axiom.

Having now stated the purely mathematical results of Lie's
investigations, we may return to philosophical considerations, by
which Helmholtz's work was mainly motived. It becomes obvious,
not only that exceptions within a certain region, but also that
limitation to a certain region, of the axiom of Free Mobility,
are philosophically quite impossible and inconceivable. How can a
certain line, or a certain surface, form an impassable barrier in
space, or have any mobility different in kind from that of all other
lines or surfaces? The notion cannot, in philosophy, be permitted
for a moment, since it destroys that most fundamental of all the
axioms, the homogeneity of space. We not only may, therefore, but
must take Helmholtz's axiom of Free Mobility in its very strictest
sense; the axiom of Monodromy thus becomes mathematically, as well
as philosophically, superfluous. This is, from a philosophical
standpoint, the most important of Lie's results.

=46.= I have now come to the end of my history of Metageometry.
It has not been my aim to give an exhaustive account of even the
important works on the subject--in the third period, especially, the
names of Poincaré, Pasch, Cremona, Veronese, and others who might be
mentioned, would have cried shame upon me, had I had any such object.
But I have tried to set forth, as clearly as I could, the principles
at work in the various periods, the motives and results of successive
theories. We have seen how the philosophical motive, at first
predominant, has been gradually extruded by the purely mathematical
and technical spirit of most recent Geometers. At first, to discredit
the Transcendental Aesthetic seemed, to Metageometers, as important
as to advance their science; but from the works of Cayley, Klein
or Lie, no reader could gather that Kant had ever lived. We have
also seen, however, that as the interest _in_ philosophy waned, the
interest _for_ philosophy increased: as the mathematical results
shook themselves free from philosophical controversies, they
assumed gradually a stable form, from which further development,
we may reasonably hope, will take the form of growth, rather than
transformation. The same gradual development out of philosophy might,
I believe, be traced in the infancy of most branches of mathematics;
when philosophical motives cease to operate, this is, in general, a
sign that the stage of uncertainty as to premisses is past, so that
the future belongs entirely to mathematical technique. When this
stable stage has been attained, it is time for Philosophy to borrow
of Science, accepting its final premisses as those imposed by a real
necessity of fact or logic.

=47.= Now in discussing the systems of Metageometry, we have found
two kinds, radically distinct and subject to different axioms. The
historically prior kind, which deals with metrical ideas, discusses,
to begin with, the conditions of Free Mobility, which is essential to
all measurement of space. It finds the analytical expression of these
conditions in the existence of a space-constant, or constant measure
of curvature, which is equivalent to the homogeneity of space. This
is its first axiom.

Its second axiom states that space has a finite integral number of
dimensions, _i.e._ in metrical terms, that the position of a point,
relative to any other figure in space, is uniquely determined by a
finite number of spatial magnitudes, called coordinates.

The third axiom of metrical Geometry may be called, to distinguish it
from the corresponding projective axiom, the axiom of distance. There
exists one relation, it says, between any two points, which can be
preserved unaltered in a combined motion of both points, and which,
in any motion of a system as one rigid body, is always unaltered.
This relation we call distance.

The above statement of the three essential axioms of metrical
Geometry is taken from Helmholtz as amended by Lie. Lie's own
statement of the axioms, as quoted above, has been too much
influenced by projective methods to give a historically correct
rendering of the spirit of the second period; Helmholtz's statement,
on the other hand, requires, as Lie has shewn, very considerable
modifications. The above compromise may, therefore, I hope be taken
as accepting Lie's corrections while retaining Helmholtz's spirit.

=48.= But metrical Geometry, though it is historically prior, is
logically subsequent to projective Geometry. For projective Geometry
deals directly with that qualitative likeness, which the judgment of
quantitative comparison requires as its basis. Now the above three
axioms of metrical Geometry, as we shall see in Chapter III. Section
B, do not presuppose measurement, but are, on the contrary, the
conditions presupposed by measurement. Without these axioms, which
are common to all three spaces, measurement would be impossible;
with them, so I shall contend, measurement is able, though only
empirically, to decide approximately which of the three spaces is
valid of our actual world. But if these three axioms themselves
express, not results, but conditions, of measurement, must they not
be equivalent to the statement of that qualitative likeness on which
quantitative comparison depends? And if so, must we not expect to
find the same axioms, though perhaps under a different form, in
projective Geometry?

=49.= This expectation will not be disappointed. The above three
axioms, as we shall see hereafter, are one and all philosophically
equivalent to the homogeneity of space, and this in turn is
equivalent to the axioms of projective Geometry. The axioms of
projective Geometry, in fact, may be roughly stated thus:

I. Space is continuous and infinitely divisible; the zero of
extension, resulting from infinite division, is called a Point. All
points are qualitatively similar, and distinguished by the mere fact
that they lie outside one another.

II. Any two points determine a unique figure, the straight line;
two straight lines, like two points, are qualitatively similar, and
distinguished by the mere fact that they are mutually external.

III. Three points not in one straight line determine a unique figure,
the plane, and four points not in one plane determine a figure of
three dimensions. This process may, so far as can be seen _à priori_,
be continued, without in any way interfering with the possibility
of projective Geometry, to five or to _n_ points. But projective
Geometry requires, as an axiom, that the process should stop with
some positive integral number of points, after which, any fresh point
is contained in the figure determined by those already given. If the
process stops with (_n_ + 1) points, our space is said to have _n_
dimensions.

These three axioms, it will be seen, are the equivalents of the
three axioms of metrical Geometry[65], expressed without reference
to quantity. We shall find them to be deducible, as before, from
the homogeneity of space, or, more generally still, from the
possibility of experiencing externality. They will therefore appear
as _à priori_, as essential to the existence of any Geometry and to
experience of an external world as such.

=50.= That some logical necessity is involved in these axioms might,
I think, be inferred as probable, from their historical development
alone. For the systems of Metageometry have not, in general, been set
up as more likely to fit facts than the system of Euclid; with the
exception of Zöllner, for example, I know of no one who has regarded
the fourth dimension as required to explain phenomena. As regards the
space-constant again, though a _small_ space-constant is regarded
as empirically possible, it is not usually regarded as probable;
and the finite space-constants, with which Metageometry is equally
conversant, are not usually thought even possible, as explanations
of empirical fact[66]. Thus the motive has been throughout not one
of fact, but one of logic. Does not this give a strong presumption,
that those axioms which are retained, are retained because they are
logically indispensable? If this be so, the axioms common to Euclid
and Metageometry will be _à priori_, while those peculiar to Euclid
will be empirical. After a criticism of some differing theories of
Geometry, I shall proceed, in Chapters III. and IV., to the proof and
consequences of this thesis, which will form the remainder of the
present work.

FOOTNOTES:

[5] V. Mémoires de l'Académie royale des Sciences de l'lnstitut de
France, T. XII. 1833, for a full statement of his results, with
references to former writings.

[6] This bolder method, it appears, had been suggested, nearly a
century earlier, by an Italian, Saccheri. His work, which seems to
have remained completely unknown until Beltrami rediscovered it in
1889, is called "Euclides ab omni naevo vindicatus, etc." Mediolani,
1733. (See Veronese, Grundzüge der Geometrie, German translation,
Leipzig, 1894, p. 636.) His results included spherical as well as
hyperbolic space; but they alarmed him to such an extent that he
devoted the last half of his book to disproving them.

[7] Klein's first account of elliptic Geometry, as a result of
Cayley's projective theory of distance, appeared in two articles
entitled "Ueber die sogenannte Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie, I,
II," Math. Annalen 4, 6 (1871-2). It was afterwards independently
discovered by Newcomb, in an article entitled "Elementary Theorems
relating to the geometry of a space of three dimensions, and of
uniform positive curvature in the fourth dimension," Crelle's
Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik, Vol. 83 (1877). For
an account of the mathematical controversies concerning elliptic
Geometry, see Klein's "Vorlesungen über Nicht-Euklidische Geometrie,"
Göttingen 1893, I. p. 284 ff. A bibliography of the relevant
literature up to the year 1878 was given by Halsted in the American
Journal of Mathematics, Vols. 1, 2.

[8] Veronese (op. cit. p. 638) denies the priority of Gauss in the
invention of a non-Euclidean system, though he admits him to have
been the first to regard the axiom of parallels as indemonstrable.
His grounds for the former assertion seem scarcely adequate: on the
evidence against it, see Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 171-174.

[9] V. Briefwechsel mit Schumacher, Bd. II. p. 268.

[10] f. Helmholtz, Wiss. Abh. II. p. 611.

[11] Crelle's Journal, 1837.

[12] Theorie der Parallellinien, Berlin, 1840. Republished, Berlin,
1887. Translated by Halsted, Austin, Texas, U.S.A. 4th edition, 1892.

[13] Frischauf, Absolute Geometrie, nach Johann Bolyai, Leipzig,
1872. Halsted, The Science Absolute of Space, translated from the
Latin, 4th edition, Austin, Texas, U.S.A. 1896.

[14] Both Lobatchewsky and Bolyai, as Veronese remarks, start rather
from the point-pair than from distance. See Frischauf, Absolute
Geometrie, Anhang.

[15] Compare Stallo, Concepts of Modern Physics, p. 248.

[16] Gesammelte Werke, pp. 255-268.

[17] On the history of this word, see Stallo, Concepts of Modern
Physics, p. 258. It was used by Kant, and adapted by Herbart to
almost the same meaning as it bears in Riemann. Herbart, however,
also uses the word _Reihenform_ to express a similar idea. See
Psychologie als Wissenschaft, I. § 100 and II. § 139, where Riemann's
analogy with colours is also suggested.

[18] Compare Erdmann's "Grössenbegriff vom Raum."

[19] Compare Veronese, op. cit. p. 642: "Riemann ist in seiner
Definition des Begriffs Grösse dunkel." See also Veronese's whole
following criticism.

[20] Vorträge und Reden, Vol. II. p. 18.

[21] Cf. Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 160.

[22] Since we are considering the curvature at a point, we are only
concerned with the first infinitesimal elements of the geodesics that
start from such a point.

[23] Disquisitiones generales circa superficies curvas, Werke, Bd.
IV. SS. 219-258, 1827.

[24] Nevertheless, the Geometries of different surfaces of equal
curvature are liable to important differences. For example, the
cylinder is a surface of zero curvature, but since its lines of
curvature in one direction are finite, its Geometry coincides with
that of the plane only for lengths smaller than the circumference of
its generating circle (see Veronese, op. cit. p. 644). Two geodesics
on a cylinder may meet in many points. For surfaces of zero curvature
on which this is not possible, the identity with the plane may
be allowed to stand. Otherwise, the identity extends only to the
properties of figures not exceeding a certain size.

[25] For we may consider two different parts of the same surface as
corresponding parts of different surfaces; the above proposition then
shows that a figure can be reproduced in one part when it has been
drawn in another, if the measures of curvature correspond in the two
parts.

[26] Crelle, Vols, XIX., XX., 1839-40.

[27] In this formula, _u_, _v_ may be the lengths of lines, or the
angles between lines, drawn on the surface, and having thus no
necessary reference to a third dimension.

[28] In what follows, I have given rather Klein's exposition of
Riemann, than Riemann's own account. The former is much clearer
and fuller, and not substantially different in any way. V. Klein,
Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 206 ff.

[29] See §§ 69-73.

[30] Grundlagen der Geometrie, I. and II., Leipziger Berichte, 1890;
v. end of present chapter, § 45.

[31] Nicht-Euklid, I. pp. 258-9.

[32] Giornale di Matematiche, Vol. VI., 1868. Translated into
French by J. Hoüel in the "Annales Scientifiques de l'École Normale
Supérieure," Vol. VI. 1869.

[33] Crelle's Journal, Vols. XIX. XX., 1839-40.

[34] Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 190.

[35] This article is more trigonometrical and analytical than the
German book, and therefore makes the above interpretation peculiarly
evident.

[36] Such surfaces are by no means particularly remote. One of them,
for example, is formed by the revolution of the common Tractrix

    x = asin φ,    y = a(log tan φ/2 + cos φ).

[37] "Teoria fondamentale degli spazii di curvatura costanta," Annali
di Matematica, II. Vol. 2, 1868-9. Also translated by J. Hoüel, _loc.
cit._

[38] See Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 47 ff., and the references there
given.

[39] See quotation below, from his British Association Address.

[40] Compare the opening sentence, due to Cayley, of Salmon's Higher
Plane Curves.

[41] V. Nicht-Euklid, I. Chaps. I. and II.

[42] See p. 9 of Cayley's address to the Brit. Ass. 1883. Also a
quotation from Klein in Erdmann's Axiome der Geometrie, p. 124 note.

[43] Nature, Vol. XLV. p. 407.

[44] Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 200.

[45] I.e. the equation _AB_ + _BC_ = _AC_, for three points in one
straight line.

[46] The formula substituted by Klein for Cayley's inverse sine or
cosine. The two are equivalent, but Klein's is mathematically much
the more convenient.

[47] Elements of Projective Geometry, Second Edition, Oxford, 1893,
Chap. IX.

[48] Chap. III. Section B.

[49] See Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 338 ff.

[50] See his Geometrie der Lage, § 8, Harmonische Gebilde.

[51] The anharmonic ratio of four numbers, _p_, _q_, _r_, _s_, is
defined as

    (p - q).(r - s) / (p - r).(q - s).

[52] _I.e._ as transformable into each other by a collineation. See
Chap. III. Sec. A, § 110.

[53] See Chap. III. Sec. A.

[54] It follows from this, that the reduction of metrical to
projective properties, even when, as in hyperbolic Geometry, the
Absolute is real, is only apparent, and has a merely technical
validity.

[55] Sir R. Ball does not regard his non-Euclidean content as a
possible space (_v. op. cit._ p. 151). In this important point I
disagree with his interpretation, holding such a content to be a
space as possible, _à priori_, as Euclid's, and perhaps actually true
within the margin due to errors of observation.

[56] See Nicht-Euklid, I. p. 97 ff. and p. 292 ff.

[57] Newcomb says (_loc. cit._ p. 293): "The system here set forth is
founded on the following three postulates.

"1. I assume that space is triply extended, unbounded, without
properties dependent either on position or direction, and possessing
such planeness in its smallest parts that both the postulates of the
Euclidean Geometry, and our common conceptions of the relations of
the parts of space are true for every indefinitely small region in
space.

"2. I assume that this space is affected with such curvature that a
right line shall always return into itself at the end of a finite and
real distance 2_D_ without losing, in any part of its course, that
symmetry with respect to space on all sides of it which constitutes
the fundamental property of our conception of it.

"3. I assume that if two right lines emanate from the same point,
making the indefinitely small angle _a_ with each other, their
distance apart at the distance _r_ from the point of intersection
will be given by the equation

    s = 2aD/π sin rπ/2D.

The right line thus has this property in common with the Euclidean
right line that two such lines intersect only in a single point.
It may be that the number of points in which two such lines can
intersect admit of being determined from the laws of curvature,
but not being able so to determine it, I assume as a postulate the
fundamental property of the Euclidean right line."

It is plain that in the absence of the determination spoken of, the
possibility of elliptic space is not established. It may be possible,
for example, to prove that, in a space where there is a maximum to
distance, there must be an infinite number of straight lines joining
two points of maximum distance. In this event, elliptic space would
become impossible.

[58] For an elucidation of this term, see Klein, Nicht-Euklid, I. p.
99 ff.

[59] Cf. p. 9 of Report: "My own view is that Euclid's twelfth axiom,
in Playfair's form of it, does not need demonstration, but is part
of our notion of space, of the physical space of our experience,
but which is the representation lying at the bottom of all external
experience."

[60] The exception to this axiom, in spherical space, presupposes
metrical Geometry, and does not destroy the validity of the axiom for
projective Geometry. See Chap. III. Sec. B, § 171.

[61] Mathematicians of Lie's school have a habit, at first somewhat
confusing, of speaking of motions of space instead of motions of
bodies, as though space as a whole could move. All that is meant is,
of course, the equivalent motion of the coordinate axes, _i.e._ a
change of axes in the usual elementary sense.

[62] "Ueber die Grundlagen der Geometrie," Leipziger Berichte, 1890.
The problem of these two papers is really metrical, since it is
concerned, not with collineations in general, but with motions. The
problem, however, is dealt with by the projective method, motions
being regarded as collineations which leave the Absolute unchanged.
It seemed impossible, therefore, to discuss Lie's work, until some
account had been given of the projective method.

[63] Lie's premisses, to be accurate, are the following:

Let

    x{1} = f(x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}...)
    x{2} = φ(x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}...)
    x{3} = ψ(x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}...)

give an infinite family of real transformations of space, as to which
we make the following hypotheses:

A. The functions f, φ, ψ, are _analytical_ functions of

    x, y, z, a{1}, a{2}....

B. Two points x{1}y{1}z{1}, x{2}y{2}z{2} possess an
invariant, _i.e._

    Ω(x{1}, y{1}, z{1}, x{2}, y{2}, z{2}) =
        Ω(x{1′}, y{1′}, z{1′}, x{2′}, y{2′}, z{2′})

where x{1′}..., x{2′}..., are the transformed coordinates of
the two points.

C. Free Mobility: _i.e._, any point can be moved into any other
position; when one point is fixed, any other point of general
position can take up ∞^{2} positions; when two points are fixed, any
other of general position can take up ∞^{1} positions; when three, no
motion is possible--these limitations being results of the equations
given by the invariant Ω.

[64] On this point, cf. Klein, Höhere Geometrie, Göttingen, 1893, II.
pp. 225-244, especially pp. 230-1.

[65] Axiom II. of the metrical triad corresponds to Axiom III. of the
projective, and _vice versâ_.

[66] Cf. Helmholtz, Wiss. Abh. Vol. II. p. 640, note: "Die Bearbeiter
der Nicht-Euklidischen Geometrie (haben) deren objective Wahrheit nie
behauptet."




