Chapter II. "Breath is Life"--Teachings of the Orient and Occident
Compared. Chapter III. The Exoteric Theory of Breath. Chapter IV. The
Esoteric Theory of Breath--Prana. Chapter V. The Nervous System--Yogi
Teachings Concerning the Solar Plexus--The Solar Plexus a Store-House of
Prana. Chapter VI. How to Breathe--Oriental Methods. Chapter VII. Four
Methods of Respiration as Classified by the Yogis--The Yogi Complete
Breath. Chapter VIII. How to Acquire the Yogi Complete Breath. Chapter
IX. Physiological Effect of the Complete Breath. Chapter X. Yogi
Lore--The Yogi Cleansing Breath--The Yogi Nerve Vitalizing Breath--The
Yogi Vocal Breath. Chapter XI. Seven Yogi Developing Exercises. Chapter
XII. Chapter XIII. Vibration and Yogi Rhythmic Breathing--How to
Ascertain the Heart Beat Unit Used by the Yogis as the Basis of Rhythmic
Breathing. Chapter XIV. Phenomena of Psychic Breathing--Directions for
Yogi Psychic Breathing--Prana Distributing--Inhibiting
Pain--Self-Healing--Healing Others--Distant Healing. Chapter XV. More
Phenomena of Yogi Psychic Breathing--Thought Projection--Forming an
Aura--Recharging Yourself--Recharging Others--Charging Water--Acquiring
Mental Qualities--Controlling the Emotions--Transmutation of
Reproductive Energy--Brain Stimulating--The Grand Yogi Psychic Breath.
Chapter XVI. Yogi Spiritual Breathing--Soul Consciousness--How
Unfolded--The Universal Consciousness--How the Yogi Attain This
Consciousness--General Directions.

75 Pages.

Price, Paper $0.53 Postpaid; Cloth $0.75 Postpaid.

  I received the copy of "Science Breath" promptly and I am
  very much pleased with it. The simple, clear, logical manner
  in which it is written will certainly be appreciated and
  will enhance its usefulness. Please send me another
  copy.--H. W. A., Pittsburg, Pa.




The Hindu-Yogi System of
Practical Water Cure

By YOGI RAMACHARAKA

Chapter I. The Hindu-Yogi Water Cure--An Important Branch of Hatha
Yoga--The Underlying Principle--Prana in the Water--How slow Water Loses
Prana--How Water May be Pranaized. Chapter II. Nature's Great
Remedy--Water the Basis of Life--The Important Part Played by Water in
the Psychological Mechanism of the System--What Water Does, and Why.
Chapter III. Water Drinking--Why Man Needs Water--How Much Water He
Needs--What He Suffers from Neglecting the Normal Amount of Fluids--An
Important Secret--Surprising Facts. Chapter IV. The Stomach and
Intestines--A Plain, Practical, Scientific Description of the Organs of
Assimilation and Elimination--Something that Everyone Should Know to be
Healthy. Chapter V. The Obstructed Sewer--A Scientific Statement
Regarding the Great Sewer of the System, Which When Clogged, Obstructed
and Choked with Waste-Matter, Causes Disease and Weakness. Chapter VI.
The Internal Bath--The Scientific Method of Keeping Clean the Great
Sewer of the System--A Simple Method of Internal Cleanliness, and
Resulting Health. Chapter VII. The Skin--A Plain Scientific Description
of the Skin, and the Part it Plays in Health and Disease--Something that
Everyone Should Know, but Few Realize. Chapter VIII. Scientific
Bathing--Scientific Methods of Bathing--The Cleansing Bath--The
Non-Drying Bath--The Hot Bath--The Cold Bath--Hardening Baths--Private
Information. Chapter X. Pack Treatments--The Wet Sheet Pack, and How to
Apply It--The Half Pack--The Sweat Pack--Endosmose and
Exosmose--Hydropathy in a Nut Shell. Chapter X. Other Valuable
Methods--Fomentations, or Hot Steam Applications--Water Bandages and
Compresses--Hot Water Compresses, and Cold Water Bandages--Special
Applications--Sexual Vitality Treatments--Special Applications, etc.

This book has just been published, although Yogi Ramacharaka wrote it
some time ago.




THE KYBALION

A STUDY OF

The Hermetic Philosophy of Ancient
Egypt and Greece

BY THREE INITIATES

"The lips of Wisdom are closed, except to the ears of Understanding."

This new book is bound to attract the earnest attention of all students
of the Secret Doctrines of the East. Perhaps the better way to describe
this work is to give you the following words from its authors:

"From old Egypt have come the fundamental esoteric and occult teachings
which have so strongly influenced the philosophies of all races, nations
and peoples, for several thousand years. Egypt, the home of the Pyramids
and the Sphinx, was the birthplace of the Hidden Wisdom and Mystic
Teachings. From her Secret Doctrine all nations have borrowed. India,
Persia, Chaldea, Medea, China, Japan, Assyria, ancient Greece and Rome,
and other ancient countries partook liberally at the feast of knowledge
which the Hierophants and Masters of the Land of Isis so freely provided
for those who came prepared to partake of the great store of Mystic and
Occult Lore which the master-minds of that ancient land had gathered
together. In ancient Egypt dwelt the great adepts and Masters who have
never been surpassed, and who seldom have been equaled during the
centuries that have taken their processional flight since the days of
the Great Hermes. In Egypt was located the Great Lodge of Lodges of the
Mystics. At the doors of her Temples entered the Neophytes who
afterward, as Hierophants, Adepts, and Masters, traveled to the four
corners of the earth, carrying with them the precious knowledge which
they were ready, anxious, and willing to pass on to those who were ready
to receive the same. All students of the Occult recognize the debt that
they owe to these venerable Masters of that ancient land."


THE KYBALION

The Hermetic Teachings are to be found in all lands, among all
religions, but never identified with any particular country, nor with
any particular religious sect. This because of the warning of the
ancient teachers against allowing the Secret Doctrine to become
crystallized into a creed. The wisdom of this caution is apparent to all
students of history. The ancient occultism of India and Persia a
degenerated, and was largely lost, owing to the fact that the teachers
became priests, and so mixed theology with the philosophy, the result
being that much of the occultism of India and Persia has been lost
amidst the mass of religious superstition, cults, creeds and "gods." So
it was with Ancient Greece and Rome. So it was with the Hermetic
Teachings of the Gnostics and Early Christians, which were lost at the
time of Constantine, whose iron hand smothered philosophy with the
blanket of theology.


THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHY

"But there were always a few faithful souls who kept alive the flame,
tending it carefully, and not allowing its light to become extinguished.
And thanks to these staunch hearts, and fearless minds, we have the
truth still with us. But it is not found in books, to any great extent.
It has been passed along from Master to Student; from Initiative to
Heirophant; from lip to ear. When it was written down at all, its
meaning was veiled in terms of alchemy and astrology, so that only those
possessing the key could read it aright. This was made necessary in
order to avoid the persecutions of the theologians of the Middle Ages,
who fought the Secret Doctrine with fire and sword; stake, gibbet and
cross. Even to this day there will be found but few reliable books on
the Hermetic Philosophy. Although there are countless references to it
in many books written on various phases of Occultism. And yet, the
Hermetic Philosophy is the only Master Key which will open all the doors
of the Occult Teachings!


ABOUT THE BOOK

"In this book we invite you to examine into the Hermetic Teachings as
set forth in THE KYBALION. We therein give you many of the maxims and
precepts of THE KYBALION, accompanied by explanations and illustrations
which we deem likely to render the teachings more easily comprehended by
the modern student, particularly as the original text is purposely
veiled in obscure terms. The trust that the many students to whom we now
offer this little work will derive as much benefit from the study of its
pages as have the many who have gone on before, treading the same Path
to Mastery throughout the centuries that have passed since the times of
HERMES TRISMEGISTUS--the Master of Masters--the Great-great. According
to the Teachings, this book will attract the attention of such as are
prepared to receive its Teaching. And, likewise, when the pupil is ready
to receive the truth, then will this book come to him, or her, and not
before. Such is The Law. The Hermetic Principle of Cause and Effect, in
its aspect of The Law of Attraction, will bring lips and ear
together--pupil and book in company. 'The Principles of Truth are Seven;
he who knows these, understandingly, possesses the Magic Key before
whose touch all the Doors of the Temple fly open.'--The Kybalion.

THE THREE INITIATES."

Bound in Blue Silk Cloth, Lettered in Gold, 223 Pages.

Price $1.08 Postpaid.




Yoga Lessons

FOR DEVELOPING SPIRITUAL CONSCIOUSNESS

By SWAMIE A. P. MUKERJI OF INDIA

Associate Editor Kalpaka Magazine Price $1.20 net.

Yoga is a subject which has enthralled the attention of the world from
time out of mind. No one has hitherto done justice to such a grand
system, though there have been, now and then, innumerable attempts.

The present author, my esteemed friend, Swamie Mukerji, a Yogi who comes
out of a successive generation of Yogis, is able and proper instrument
to handle the subject. He, in these lessons, prepares the layman for an
understanding of the Yoga and through a series of wise and masterful
sayings, impresses on the mind of the reader the necessity for rising
above materialism, nay, solves the very problem "What am I?"

Every line is pregnant with mature thoughts and rivets on his attention,
and makes him think, think, think.

This is not a work for which an introduction, briefly setting forth the
contents, could be written. I can but ask you to read, digest and
improve.

DR. T. R. SANJIVI, Ph. D., President
The Latent Light Culture
Tennevelley, India.




BOOKS PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE

BY

THE YOGI PUBLICATION SOCIETY

Chicago, Illinois


                                                        Price,
                                                      Postpaid.

Fourteen Lessons in Yogi Philosophy, and Oriental
  Occultism. By Ramacharaka. Bound in green silk
  cloth                                                 $1.10

Advanced Course in Yogi Philosophy, and Oriental
  Occultism. By Ramacharaka. Bound in brown silk
  cloth                                                  1.10

Raja Yoga. By Ramacharaka. Bound in brown silk
  cloth                                                  1.10

Gnana Yoga. By Ramacharaka. Bound in blue silk cloth     1.10

Psychic Healing. By Ramacharaka. Bound in maroon silk
  cloth                                                  1.10

Hatha Yoga. By Ramacharaka. Bound in yellow silk cloth   1.10

Science of Breath. By Ramacharaka. Bound in paper, 53c;
  cloth                                                   .75

Light on the Path and Illumined Way. By M. C. Cloth       .44

A Treatise on the Light on the Path. By M. C. Paper       .10

A Visit to a Gnani. By Edward Carpenter. Paper            .28

Jesus: The Last Great Initiate. By Edouard Schure.
  Silk cloth                                              .80

Krishna and Orpheus. By Edouard Schure. Silk cloth        .80

Bhavagad Gita. By Ramacharaka                             .80

The Spirit of the Upanishads                              .55

Mystery of Being                                          .50

Karma. Occult Novel. By A. P. Sinnett. Cloth              .60

Practical Mind Reading. By W. W. Atkinson. Cloth          .50

Practical Psychomancy and Crystal Gazing. By W.
  W. Atkinson. Cloth                                      .50

Mental Influence. By W. W. Atkinson. Cloth                .50

Mystic Christianity. By Ramacharaka. Pamphlet Edition,
  $1.12; ready in book form, Sept 1, '08                 1.10

Kybalion. By Three Initiates. Cloth                      1.08

Inner Consciousness. By W. W. Atkinson                    .50

Secret of Success. By W. W. Atkinson                      .50

The Philosophies and Religions of India, by Ramacharaka.
  Cloth                                                  1.12


COMPLETE CATALOG ON APPLICATION.

We will be pleased to send descriptive circulars to anyone that you
think would be interested.




Transcriber's Notes:

"Bhavagad Gita" in the list of books published by The Yogi Publication
Society is a misprint for "Bhagavad Gita."

"Ronach" in the Table of Contents, Chapter IV, is a misprint for
"Roauch."





