CHAPTER XXIII.

THE NEW ACADEMY.

    A. Arcesilaus                                                   528
        1. Denial of knowledge                                      528
        2. Probability                                              534
    B. Carneades                                                    535
        1. Negative views of                                        538
        2. Positive views of                                        553
    C. School of Carneades                                          563


GENERAL INDEX                                                       567








PART I.

STATE OF CULTURE IN GREECE.


CHAPTER I.

THE INTELLECTUAL AND POLITICAL STATE OF GREECE AT THE CLOSE OF THE
FOURTH CENTURY.


[A. Merits and defects of the systems of Plato and Aristotle.]

In Plato and Aristotle Greek Philosophy reached its greatest
perfection. In their hands the Socratic philosophy of conceptions grew
into elaborate systems, which embraced the whole range of contemporary
knowledge, and grouped it from definite points of view so as to afford
a connected view of the universe. The study of nature was by them
supplemented by careful enquiries into the subject of morals. It was,
moreover, transformed, enlarged, and enriched by Aristotle. In
metaphysics, the foundations for a philosophical structure were deeply
laid, everything being referred to first principles, in a way which no
previous philosopher had before attempted. A multitude of phenomena
which earlier thinkers had carelessly passed over, more particularly
the phenomena of mental life, were pressed into the service of
research; new questions were raised; new answers given. New ideas had
penetrated every branch of knowledge. That idealism in which the Greek
mind so beautifully and lucidly found expression had been set forth by
Plato in brilliant purity, and had been by Aristotle combined with
careful observation. Practice and theory had brought the dialectical
method to the position of an art. A valuable instrument of thought had
been gained in the scientific use of terms of which Aristotle was the
real originator. Within a few generations the intellectual treasures of
Greece had been manifoldly increased, both in extent and value. The
heritage received by Socrates from his predecessors could hardly be
recognised as the same in that which Aristotle left to his successors.

Great as was the progress made by Greek philosophy in the fourth
century before Christ, quite as great were the difficulties with which
it had perpetually to contend; quite as difficult the problems on the
solution of which it had to labour. Aristotle had already pointed out
the weak points in the system of Plato, which rendered it impossible
for him to accept that system as satisfactory. From the platform of
later knowledge still further objections might be raised to it. Even in
Aristotle’s own system inconsistencies on some of the most important
points might be found, concealed under a certain indefiniteness of
expression, but fatal if once brought to light to the soundness of the
whole. For with all his ingenuity, Aristotle never succeeded in
harmoniously blending all the elements out of which his system was
composed. Thus the divergencies of his immediate followers from the
original Aristotelian teaching may be accounted for.

Nor were these defects of a kind that could be easily disposed of. The
deeper the enquiry is carried, the clearer it becomes that they were
defects embedded in the foundations of the systems both of Plato and
Aristotle, and underlying the whole previous range of philosophic
thought. Omitting details and minor points, they may all be ultimately
referred to two: either to an imperfect knowledge and experience of the
world, or to the overhaste of idealistic philosophy to draw
conclusions. To the former defect may be attributed the mistakes in
natural science into which Plato and Aristotle fell, and the limited
character of their view of history; to the latter, the Platonic theory
of ideas with all that it involves—the antithesis of ideas and
appearances, of reason and the senses, of knowledge and ignorance, of
the present world and the world to come—and likewise the corresponding
points in the system of Aristotle; such, for instance (to name some of
the principal ones only), as the relation of the particular and the
general, of form and matter, of God and the world, of the theory of
final causes and natural explanations, of the rational and the
irrational parts of the soul, of speculative theory and practice.

Both defects are closely connected. The Greek philosophers were content
with an uncertain and imperfect knowledge of facts, because they
trusted conceptions too implicitly, and were ignorant of their origin
and worth; and they had this unconditional trust in the truth of
conceptions because the study of nature was yet in its infancy. Their
knowledge of history was too limited for them to see the difference
between the results of careful observation and those of ordinary
unmethodical experience, to realise the uncertainty of most of the
traditional principles and the necessity for a stricter method of
induction. The fault common to both Plato and Aristotle lay in
attaching undue prominence to the dialectical method inherited from
Socrates to the neglect of observation, and in assuming that
conceptions expressing the very essence of things can be deduced in a
purely logical way from current beliefs and the use of language. In
Plato this dialectical exclusiveness appears most strongly, and finds
striking expression in his theory of recollection. If all conceptions
are inherent from the moment of birth and need only the agency of
sensible things to produce a consciousness of their existence, it is
only legitimate to infer that, to know the essence of things, we must
look within and not without, and obtain ideas by abstraction from the
mind rather than by induction from experience. It is equally legitimate
to infer that the ideas derived from the mind are the true standard by
which experience must be judged. Whenever ideas and experience
disagree, instead of regarding ideas as at fault, we ought to look upon
the data of experience as imperfect, and as inadequately expressing the
ideas which constitute the thing as it really exists. Thus the whole
theory of ideas, and all that it implies, is seen to be a natural
corollary from the Socratic theory of conceptions. Even those parts of
this theory which seem most incongruous are best explained by being
referred to the principles of the Socratic process.

From this defective assumption Aristotle is only partially free. He
attempted, it is true, to supply the defects in the Socratic and
Platonic theory of conceptions by observation of a kind with which
Plato’s experimental knowledge cannot be compared either for accuracy
or extent. With that attempt he also combined a complete transformation
of the Platonic metaphysics, whereby he secured the same position for
particulars in relation to the universal that his predecessor had
secured for observation in relation to conceptional knowledge. But
Aristotle did not go far enough. In his theory of knowledge he cannot
wholly discard the assumption that the soul has its knowledge by a
process of development from within, and is not only endowed with the
capacity of thinking, but possesses also from its birth the substance
of ideas. In his scientific method a critical investigation of common
notions and of idiom—that in fact which he himself calls proof by
probabilities—is constantly taking the place of strict induction. His
endeavours to harmonise the two antagonistic currents in Plato’s
teaching may have been undertaken in all sincerity, but the antagonism
was too deeply seated to yield to his efforts. It not only reappears in
the fundamental ideas of his system, but it colours all its general
results. Beginning with the antithesis between form and matter, it ends
in the contrast between the world and a soul independent of the world,
in the conception of reason as something above man, never combining
with the lower parts of his nature to form one complete living unity.




[B. Connection between the theories of Aristotle and Greek character.]

Granting that the Socratic philosophy of conceptions is the source from
which these peculiarities are derived, still that philosophy is itself
only the expression of the character of the nation which produced it.
In an earlier work it has been shown [1] that the most distinctive
feature of Greek life lay in confounding the outer and the inner
worlds, in ingenuously assuming that the two originally corresponded,
and are still in perfect harmony with one another. When the whole
mental life of a people bears this impress, it is sure to be reflected
in its philosophy also. Together with the advantages which accrue from
the confusion of the two, philosophy shares also the disadvantages
which unavoidably attend any theory which ignores the real distinction
between them. The mind only gradually and imperfectly becomes aware of
the distinctive peculiarity of mental life, of the notion of
personality, of the fact that moral rights and duties are independent
of external circumstances, of the share of the individual will in
creating ideas. It has also less hesitation in transferring phases of
consciousness directly to things themselves, in regarding the world
from ideal points of view borrowed from the sphere of mind, in
accepting its own notions of things as realities without testing their
actual truth, and even treating them as more real than the reality of
the senses, and in confounding the critical analysis of a notion with
the experimental investigation of a thing. If the philosophy of Greece
in the time of its greatest perfection was not free from these defects;
if, further, these defects were the cause of all the important faults
in the systems of Plato and Aristotle; the creators of these systems
and their immediate successors are not the only ones to blame; but the
whole mental peculiarity of the people is at fault of which within the
province of science these men were the greatest representatives.

As the faults of the Platonic and Aristotelian systems are seen to be
connected with the general character of Greek life, it becomes obvious
how difficult it must have been for Greeks to emancipate themselves
from them. To overcome the difficulty nothing short of a radical
breaking away from old lines of thought would avail. The origin of
ideas, the primary meaning of conceptions, must be enquired into with
searching thoroughness; a sharper distinction must be drawn between
what is supplied from without and what is supplied from within; the
truth of axioms hitherto received in metaphysics must be more carefully
investigated than had ever been done as yet. The intellect must
accustom itself to an accuracy of observation, and to a strictness of
inductive process, never before reached in Greece. Experimental
sciences must attain a degree of completeness which it was vain to hope
to reach by the methods and means then in vogue. The fashion of
regarding nature as though it were a living being which allowed
questions as to facts to be answered by speculations as to final causes
or by the desire of nature to realise beauty, must be abandoned.
Enquiries into a man’s moral nature and duties must be kept apart from
the simple study of his conduct in relation to natural surroundings,
the disastrous effects which flow from the confusion of the two being
only too apparent in the national type of the Greeks, in the
exclusively political character of their morality, and in their
adherence to slavery.

Before this pass could be reached how much was there not to alter in
the condition and mental habit of Greece! Could it indeed be expected
that a more vigorous and more scientific method would gain foothold so
long as the tendency to look upon the life of nature as analogous to
the life of man was kept alive by a religion such as that of Hellas? Or
that moral science would liberate itself from the trammels of Greek
propriety of conduct, whilst in all practical matters those trammels
were in full force? Or that a clearer distinction would be drawn
between what comes from without and what from within in ideas—a
distinction which we vainly look for in Aristotle—until a depth and an
intensity had been given to the inner life, and until the rights and
value of the individual as such had obtained a recognition which it
required the combined influence of Christianity and the peculiar
Germanic character to bring about? The more vividly the national type
and the national conditions surrounding Greek philosophy are realised,
the firmer becomes the conviction, that to heal its defects—which are
apparent even in its greatest and most brilliant achievements—nothing
short of a revolution in the whole mental tone of Greece would
avail—such as history has seen accomplished, but not till after many
shifts and many centuries.

On the platform of the ancient life of Greece such a change could not
possibly have come about. It may be that under more favourable
circumstances Greek philosophy might have further developed along the
same course of purely intellectual enquiry which it had previously so
successfully followed in the hands of its earlier representatives, more
particularly of Aristotle. What results might in this way have been
attained, we cannot exactly determine. Speculation is, however,
useless. In point of fact, the historical circumstances under which
philosophy had to grow cannot be ignored. Philosophy had become what it
was under the influence of those circumstances. The Socratic theory of
conceptions, and Plato’s theory of ideas, presuppose on the one hand
the high culture of the age of Pericles, and the brilliant career of
Athens and Greece following on the Persian war. They also presuppose
the political degradation and the moral exhaustion of Greece during and
after the Peloponnesian war. Aristotle, with his high intellectual
culture, despairing of everything direct and practical, with his wide
view of things, his knowledge of every kind, his system matured and
elaborate, and embracing all the results of previous enquiry—appears as
the child of an age which was bearing to the grave a great historical
epoch, in which intellectual labour had begun to take the place of
vigorous political action.

The bloom of Greek philosophy was short-lived, but not more short-lived
than the bloom of national life. The one was dependent on the other,
and both were due to the action of the same causes. The Greeks, with a
high appreciation of freedom, a ready aptitude for politics, and a
genius for artistic creations, produced within the sphere of politics
one result of its kind unrivalled and unique. They neglected, however,
to lay the foundations wide and deep. Their political endurance was not
equal to their versatility and restlessness. Communities limited in
extent and simple in arrangement sufficed for them. But how could such
communities include all branches of the Greek family, and satisfy at
once all legitimate aspirations? It is the same within the department
of science. Prematurely concluding and rashly advancing from isolated
experiences without mediating links to the most general conceptions,
they constructed theories upon a foundation of limited and imperfect
experience, which it was wholly inadequate to bear. Whether, and in how
far, the intellect of Greece, if left to itself, might have remedied
these defects in a longer protracted calm of development, is a question
which it is impossible to answer. As a fact, that intellect was far too
intimately bound up with the political, the moral, and the religious
life—in short, with the whole mental tone and culture of the people—not
to be seriously affected by a change in any one of them. It lay, too,
in the character and historical progress of that people to have only a
brief period of splendour, and that soon over. At the time that the
philosophy of Greece reached its highest point in Plato and Aristotle,
Greece was in all other respects in a hopeless state of decline.
Notwithstanding individual attempts to revive it, the old morality and
propriety of conduct had disappeared since the beginning of the
Peloponnesian war. The old belief in the gods was likewise gone. To the
bulk of the people the rising philosophy with its ethics afforded no
substitute. Art, although carefully cultivated, failed to come up to
the excellence of the strictly classic period. Political relations
became daily more unsatisfactory. In the fifth century before Christ
the rivalry of Athens and Sparta had ranged the states of Greece into
two groups. In the succeeding century disunion spread further. The
effort made by Thebes under Epaminondas to found a new leadership only
multiplied parties. Destitute of a political centre of gravity, the
Greeks, of their own choice, drifted into a disgraceful dependence on
the conquered and now declining Persian empire. Persian gold wielded an
influence which Persian arms had been unable to exercise. The petty
jealousies of tiny states and tribes frittered away in endless local
feuds resources which with unity and leadership might have accomplished
wonders. Civil order declined, and with it the well-being and martial
prowess of the nation declined also. The growing pursuit of the art of
war as a profession took the decision of battle more and more out of
the hands of free citizens, and placed it in those of the numerous
bands of mercenaries which are one of the most baneful phenomena of
that age, a sure sign of the decline of freedom, and of the approach of
a military despotism. When by the rise of the Macedonian power the
danger of a military despotism loomed nearer, patriots in Greece
continued to deceive themselves with the hope that their self-devotion
would avert the danger, but any unbiassed reader of history sees in the
failure of their attempts to avert it the natural and inevitable result
of causes so deeply rooted in the Greek character and the course of
Greek history, that neither the most heroic exertions of individuals,
nor the united resistance of the divided states, which came too late,
could for one moment have rendered the final issue doubtful.




[C. Greece after the battle of Chæronea.]

By the battle of Chæronea the doom of Greece was sealed. Never since
then has Greece attained to real political freedom. All attempts to
shake off the Macedonian supremacy ended in humiliating disasters. In
the subsequent struggles Hellas, and Athens in particular, were the
play-ball of changing rulers, the continual arena of their warfare. The
second half of the third century was reached before a purely Grecian
power—the Achæan League—was formed, round which the hopes of the nation
rallied, but the attempt was wholly inadequate to meet the real
requirements of the times. Soon it became apparent that no remedies
were forthcoming to heal the ills from which the country was suffering.
Discord, their old hereditary failing, rendered it impossible for
Greeks to be independent in foreign relations, or to be united and
settled at home. Their best resources were wasted in perpetual
struggles between Achæans, Ætolians, and Spartans. The very individual
who led the Achæans against the Macedonians in the cause of
independence, called the Macedonians back to the Peloponnesus to gain
their support against Sparta. When the supremacy of Macedonia was
broken by the arms of Rome, a more avowed dependence on Italian allies
succeeded. And when, in the year 146 B.C., the province of Achaia was
incorporated into the Roman empire, even the shadow of freedom which up
to that time had been assured departed for ever.

Sad as were the external affairs of Greece at this period, and marked
as was the decline of its intellectual power, its mental horizon,
nevertheless, extended and its culture became more generally diffused.
The Macedonian ascendency, which gave the death-blow to the
independence of Greece, also broke down the barriers which had hitherto
separated Greeks from foreigners. A new world was opened out before
them, and a vast territory offered for their energies to explore.
Greece was brought into manifold contact with the Eastern nations
belonging to the Macedonian monarchy, whereby it secured for its
culture the place of honour among them, but at the same time became
subject to a slow, but, in the long run, important back-current of
Oriental thought, traces of which appear in its philosophy a few
centuries later. By the side of the old famed centres of learning in
the mother country of Hellas, new centres arose, suited by position,
inhabitants, and peculiar circumstances to unite the culture of East
and West, and to fuse into one homogeneous mass the intellectual forces
of different races. Whilst Hellas, by the number of emigrants who left
her shores to settle in Asia and Egypt, was losing her population and
the Greeks in their ancestral homes were being ousted by foreigners,
they were gaining the most extensive intellectual conquests at the time
over the very nations by and through whom they had been oppressed.








