CHAPTER XX.

THE EPICUREAN ETHICS CONTINUED: SPECIAL POINTS.


[A. The individual.]

The general principles already laid down determine likewise the
character of particular points in the moral science of the Epicureans.
Epicurus, it is true, never developed his moral views to a systematic
theory of moral actions and states, however much his pupils,
particularly in later times, busied themselves with morality and
special points in a system of morals. [1325] Moreover, his fragmentary
statements and precepts are very imperfectly recorded. Still, all that
is known corresponds with the notion which we must form in accordance
with those general views. All the practical rules given by Epicurus aim
at conducting man to happiness by controlling passions and desires. The
wise man is easily satisfied. He sees that little is necessary for
supplying the wants of nature, and for emancipating from pain; that
imaginary wealth knows no limit, whereas the riches required by nature
may be easily acquired; [1326] that the most simple nourishment affords
as much enjoyment as the most luxurious, and is at the same time far
more conducive to health; [1327] that therefore the restriction of
wants rather than the increase of possessions makes really rich; [1328]
and that he who is not satisfied with little will never be satisfied at
all. [1329] He therefore can like Epicurus live upon bread and water,
[1330] and at the same time think himself as happy as Zeus. [1331] He
eschews passions which disturb peace of mind and the repose of life;
considering it foolish to throw away the present in order to obtain an
uncertain future, or to sacrifice life itself for the means of life,
seeing he can only once enjoy it. [1332] He therefore neither gives way
to passionate love, nor to forbidden acts of profligacy. [1333] Fame he
does not covet; and for the opinions of men he cares only so far as to
wish not to be despised, since being despised would expose him to
danger. [1334] Injuries he can bear with calmness. [1335] He cares not
what may happen to him after death; [1336] nor envies any one the
possessions which he does not himself value. [1337]

It has been already seen how Epicurus thought to rise above pains, and
to emancipate himself from the fear of the Gods and death. [1338] And
it has been further noticed that he thinks to secure by means of his
principles the same independence and happiness which the Stoics aspired
to by means of theirs. But whilst the Stoics hoped to attain this
independence by crushing the senses, Epicurus was content to restrain
and regulate them. Desires he would not have uprooted, but he would
have them brought into proper proportion to the collective end and
condition of life, into the equilibrium necessary for perfect repose of
mind. Hence, notwithstanding his own simplicity, Epicurus is far from
disapproving, under all circumstances, of a fuller enjoyment of life.
The wise man will not live as a Cynic or a beggar. [1339] Care for
business he will not neglect; only he will not trouble himself too much
about it, and will prefer the business of education to any and every
other. [1340] Nor will he despise the attractions of art, although he
is satisfied when obliged to do without them. [1341] In short, his
self-sufficiency will not consist in using little, but in needing
little; and it is this freedom from wants which adds flavour to his
more luxurious enjoyments. [1342] His attitude to death is the same.
Not fearing death, rather seeking it when he has no other mode of
escaping unendurable suffering, he will resort to suicide if necessary,
but the cases will be rare, because he has learnt to be happy under all
bodily pains. The Stoic’s recommendation of suicide finds no favour
with him. [1343]




[B. Civil society and the family.]

[(1) Civil society.]

However self-sufficing the wise man may be, still Epicurus will not
separate him from connection with others. Not, indeed, that he believed
with the Stoics in the natural relationship of all rational beings.
[1344] Yet even he could form no idea of human life except in
connection with human society. He does not, however, assign the same
value to all forms of social life. Civil society and the state have for
him the least attraction. Civil society is only an external association
for the purpose of protection. Justice reposes originally on a contract
entered into for purposes of mutual security. [1345] Laws are made for
the sake of the wise, not to prevent their committing, but to prevent
their suffering injustice. [1346] Law and justice are not, therefore,
binding for their own sake, but for the general good; nor is injustice
to be condemned for its own sake, but only because the offender can
never be free from fear of discovery and punishment. [1347] There is
not, therefore, any such thing as universal, unchangeable justice. The
claims of justice only extend to a limited number of beings and
nations—those, in fact, which are able and willing to enter into the
social compact. And the particular applications of justice which
constitute positive right differ in different cases, and change with
circumstances. What is felt to be conducive to mutual security must
pass for justice, and whenever a law is seen to be inexpedient it is no
longer binding. [1348] The wise man will therefore only enter into
political life in case and in as far as this is necessary for his own
safety. Sovereign power is a good, inasmuch as it protects from harm.
He who pursues it, without thereby attaining this object, acts most
foolishly. [1349] Since private individuals live as a rule much more
quietly and safely than statesmen, it was natural that the Epicureans
should be averse to public affairs; public life, after all, is a
hindrance to what is the real end-in-chief—wisdom and happiness. [1350]
Their watchword is Λάθε βιώσας. [1351] To them the golden mean seemed
by far the most desirable lot in life. [1352] They only advise citizens
to take part in public affairs when special circumstances render it
necessary, [1353] or when an individual has such a restless nature that
he cannot be content with the quiet of private life. [1354] Otherwise
they are too deeply convinced of the impossibility of pleasing the
masses to wish even to make the attempt. [1355] For the same reason
they appear to have been partisans of monarchy. The stern and
unflinching moral teaching of the Stoics had found its political
expression in the unbending republican spirit, so often encountered at
Rome. Naturally the soft and timid spirit of the Epicureans took
shelter under a monarchical constitution. Of their political principles
one thing at least is known, that they did not consider it degrading
for a wise man to pay court to princes, and under all circumstances
they recommended unconditional obedience to the powers that be. [1356]



[(2) Family life.]

Family life is said to have been deprecated by Epicurus equally with
civil life. [1357] Stated thus baldly, this is an exaggeration. It
appears, however, to be established, that Epicurus believed it to be
generally better for the wise man to forego marriage and the rearing
of children, since he would thereby save himself many disturbances.
[1358] It is also quite credible that he declared the love of children
towards parents to be no inborn feeling. [1359] This view is, after
all, only a legitimate consequence of his materialism; but it did not
oblige him to give up parental love altogether. Nay, it is asserted of
him that he was anything but a stranger to family affections. [1360]




[C. Friendship.]

The highest form of social life was considered by Epicurus to be
friendship—a view which is peculiar in a system that regarded the
individual as the atom of society. Such a system naturally attributes
more value to a connection with others freely entered upon and based on
individual character and personal inclination, than to one in which a
man finds himself placed without any choice, as a member of a society
founded on nature or history. The basis, however, on which the
Epicurean friendship rests is very superficial; regard is mainly had to
its advantages, and in some degree to the natural effects of common
enjoyments; [1361] but it is also treated in such a way, that its
scientific imperfection has no influence on its moral importance. Only
one section of the School, and that not the most consistent, maintained
that friendship is pursued in the first instance for the sake of its
own use and pleasure, but that it subsequently becomes an unselfish
love. [1362] The assumption that among the wise there exists a tacit
agreement requiring them to love one another as much as they love
themselves, is clearly only a lame shift. [1363] Still, the Epicureans
were of opinion that a grounding of friendship on motives of utility
was not inconsistent with holding it in the highest esteem. Friendly
connection with others affords so pleasant a feeling of security, that
it entails the most enjoyable consequences; and since this connection
can only exist when friends love one another as themselves, it follows
that self-love and the love of a friend must be equally strong. [1364]

Even this inference sounds forced, nor does it fully state the grounds
on which Epicurus’s view of the value of friendship reposes. That view,
in fact, was anterior to all the necessary props of the system. What
Epicurus requires is primarily enjoyment. The first conditions of such
enjoyment, however, are inward repose of mind, and the removal of fear
of disturbances. But Epicurus was far too effeminate and dependent on
externals to trust his own powers to satisfy these conditions. He
needed the support of others, not only to obtain their help in
necessity and trouble, and to console himself for the uncertainty of
the future, but still more, to make sure of himself and his principles
by having the approval of others, and thus obtaining an inward
satisfaction which he could not otherwise have had. Thus, the approval
of friends is to him the pledge of the truth of his convictions. In
sympathy with friends his mind first attains to a strength by which it
is able to rise above the changing circumstances of life. General ideas
are for him too abstract, too unreal. A philosopher who considers
individual beings as alone real, and perceptions as absolutely true,
cannot feel quite happy and sure of his ground, unless he finds others
to go with him. [1365] The enjoyment which he seeks is the enjoyment of
his own cultivated personality; and wherever this standard prevails,
particular value is attached to the personal relations of society, and
to friendship. [1366]

Hence Epicurus uses language on the value and necessity of friendship
which goes far beyond the grounds on which he bases it. Friendship is
unconditionally the highest of earthly goods. [1367] It is far more
important in whose company we eat and drink, than what we eat and
drink. [1368] In case of emergency, the wise man will not shrink from
suffering the greatest pains, even death, for his friend. [1369]

It is well known that the conduct of Epicurus and his followers was in
harmony with these professions. The Epicurean friendship is hardly less
celebrated than the Pythagorean. [1370] There may be an offensive
mawkishness and a tendency to mutual admiration apparent in the
relations of Epicurus to his friends, [1371] but of the sincerity of
his feelings there can be no doubt. One single expression referring to
the property of friends, [1372] is enough to prove what a high view
Epicurus held of friendship; and there is evidence to show that he
aimed at a higher improvement of his associates. [1373]

In other respects Epicurus bore the reputation of being a kind,
benevolent, and genial companion. [1374] His teaching bears the same
impress. It meets the inexorable sternness of the Stoics by insisting
on compassion and forgiveness, [1375] and supersedes its own egotism by
the maxim that it is more blessed to give than to receive. [1376] The
number of such maxims on record is, no doubt, limited; nevertheless,
the whole tone of the Epicurean School is a pledge of the humane and
generous character of its moral teaching. [1377] To this trait that
School owes its chief importance in history. By its theory of utility
it undoubtedly did much harm, partly exposing, partly helping forward,
the moral decline of the classic nations. Still, by drawing man away
from the outer world within himself, by teaching him to seek happiness
in the beautiful type of a cultivated mind content with itself, it
contributed quite as much as Stoicism, though after a gentler fashion,
to the development and the extension of a more independent and more
universal morality.








