CHAPTER II.

CHARACTER AND CHIEF FEATURES OF THE POST-ARISTOTELIAN PHILOSOPHY.


[A. Causes producing the post-Aristotelian philosophy.]

The circumstances which have been briefly sketched in the preceding
chapter are of the greatest importance in their bearing on the
character of the post-Aristotelian philosophy. Greek philosophy, like
Greek art, is the offspring of Greek political independence. In the
whirl of public life every one is thrown on himself and his own
resources. Thereby, and by the emulation begotten of unlimited
competition for all the good things of life, the Greek had learned to
make full use of his intellect. Consciousness of his dignity—which a
Greek associated far more closely than we do with the privilege of
citizenship—and independence of the necessity of struggling for daily
food, had taught him independence of mind, and enabled him to devote
himself to the pursuit of knowledge without any ulterior aim. [2]



[(1) Political causes.]

With the decline of political independence the mental powers of the
nation were broken past remedy. No longer borne up by a powerful esprit
de corps, weaned from the habit of working for the common weal, the
majority gave themselves up to the petty interests of private life and
personal affairs. Even the better disposed were too much occupied in
contending against the low tone and corruption of their times, to be
able to devote themselves in moments of relaxation to independent
speculation. What could be expected in such an age as that which
preceded the rise of the Stoic and Epicurean systems, but that
philosophy would become practical itself, if indeed it were studied at
all?

An age like that did not require theoretical knowledge, but it did
require moral bracing and strengthening. If these were not to be had
from popular religion in its then state, was it matter for wonder that
philosophy should be looked to to supply the deficiency, seeing that in
all cultivated circles philosophy had already taken the place of
religion? If we ask in what form, and in what form only, philosophy
could supply the deficiency under the then circumstances, the answer is
not far to seek. There was little room for creative effort, plenty for
sustained endurance; little for activity without, plenty for activity
within; little room for public life, plenty of room for private life.
So utterly hopeless had the public state of Greece become, that even
the few who made it their business to provide a remedy could only gain
for themselves the honour of martyrdom. As matters stood, the only
course open for the best-intentioned was to withdraw entirely within
themselves, to entrench themselves within the safe barriers of their
inner life against outward misfortunes, and to make happiness dependent
entirely on their own inward state.

Stoic apathy, Epicurean self-contentment, and Sceptic imperturbability,
were the doctrines which suited the political helplessness of the age,
and they were therefore the doctrines which met with the most general
acceptance. There was yet another which suited it—viz., the sinking of
national distinctions in the feeling of a common humanity, the
severance of morals from politics which characterises the philosophy of
the Alexandrian and Roman period. The barriers which kept nations apart
had been swept away, together with their national independence: East
and West, Greeks and barbarians, were united in large empires, brought
into communication and forced into comparison with one another in
matters the most important. Philosophy declared that all men are of one
blood and are equally privileged citizens of one empire, that morality
rests on the relation of man to man, and is independent of nationality
and position in the state; but in so doing it only explicitly stated a
truth which was partly realised and partly implied in actual life.



[(2) Intellectual causes.]

The very course which philosophy itself had taken during the previous
century and a half had prepared the way for the turn which now set in.
Socrates and the Sophists, in different ways no doubt, had each devoted
themselves to the practical side of life; and thus the Cynic School was
the precursor of Stoicism, the Cyrenaic of Epicureanism. These two
Schools are, however, only of minor importance in the general progress
of philosophy in the fourth century, and sophistry by the close of the
same century was already a thing of the past. Socrates, it is true,
would have nothing to do with physical enquiries; yet he felt the
desire for knowledge far too keenly to bear comparison with the
post-Aristotelian philosophers. Proposing to concern himself only with
subjects which were of practical use in life, he yet put forth a theory
of knowledge which involved a reform quite as much of speculative as of
practical philosophy, and that reform was accomplished on a grand scale
by Plato and Aristotle.

However little Greek philosophy as a whole developed during the fourth
century along the lines of its subsequent expansion, still the
speculations of Plato and Aristotle necessarily helped to prepare for
the coming charge. The antagonism between the ideal and phenomenal
worlds which Plato set up, and Aristotle vainly attempted to bridge
over, leads ultimately to a contrast between the outer and the inner
life, between thought and the object of thought. The generic
conceptions or forms, which Plato and Aristotle regard as most truly
real, are, after all, fabrications of the human mind. The conception of
reason, even in its expanded form as the divine Reason, or reason of
the world, is an idea formed by abstraction from the inner life. And
what is really meant by identifying form in itself with what is, and
matter with what is possible, or even (as Plato does) with what is not,
or by placing God outside of and in contrast to the world, but the
admission that man finds in his own mind a higher and more real
existence than any which he finds outside of it, and that what is truly
divine and unlimited must be in the mind as an idea, apart from and
independent of all impressions from without? Plato and Aristotle in
fact declared that reason constitutes the real essence of man—reason
coming from above and uniting itself with the body, but in itself
superior to the world of sense and life in time—and that man’s highest
activity is thought, turned away from all external things, and
meditating only on the inner world of ideas. It was only one step
further in the same direction for the post-Aristotelian philosophy to
contemplate man in complete severance from the outer world, and to
refer him to himself for that satisfaction which he can find nowhere
else in life.




[B. Common characteristics of the post-Aristotelian philosophy.]

This step was taken by the Schools of the Stoics, Epicureans, and
Sceptics which appeared in the first half of the third century before
Christ, superseded the influence of the older Schools, and asserted
their supremacy without great variation in their teaching until the
beginning of the first century. In whatever else these three Schools
may differ, at least they agree in two fundamental points, (1) in
subordinating theory to practice, and (2) in the peculiar character of
their practical philosophy.



[(1) Theory subordinated to practice.]

The subordination of theory to practice is most apparent in the School
of Epicurus. It is nearly as clear in the case of the Sceptics, who,
denying all possibility of knowledge, left as the only ground of action
conviction based on probabilities. Both Schools also agree in
considering philosophy as only a means for securing happiness. By the
Stoics, on the other hand, the need of philosophic speculation was felt
more strongly; but even in their case it may be seen that speculation
was not pursued simply for its own sake, but for practical purposes, by
which it was also determined. Thus the Stoics, like the Epicureans, in
the speculative part of their system confined themselves to current
views—thereby showing that the source of their philosophical
peculiarities lay elsewhere than in speculation, and that other studies
had greater value in their eyes, in which also they considered
themselves more proficient. They even expressly stated that the study
of nature is only necessary as a help to the study of virtue. It is
beyond question, that their chief peculiarities, and those which give
them an importance in history, are ethical. The other parts of their
system, more particularly those in which their distinctive tenets
appear, are likewise regulated by practical considerations. This
statement will hereafter be shown in detail. It may suffice to observe
now, that the most important point in the logic of the Stoics—the
question as to the standard of truth—was decided by a practical
postulate; that the fundamental principles of the Stoic metaphysics are
only intelligible from the ground of their ethics; that for natural
science the Stoics did very little; that in their theory of final
causes on which they lay so much stress nature is explained by moral
considerations; and that their natural as well as their positive
theology bears ample testimony to the practical tone of their system.
Standing in advance of the Epicureans by their higher intellectual
training and their learned energy, and in opposition to the Sceptics by
their dogmatism, the Stoics nevertheless agree with both these Schools
in the essentially practical character of their teaching.



[(2) Peculiar mode of dealing with the practical problem.]

This relationship is more strikingly seen in the way in which they deal
with the practical problem. The Epicurean imperturbability is akin to
that of the Sceptics; both resemble the Stoic apathy. All three Schools
are agreed that the only way to happiness consists in peace of mind,
and in avoiding all those disturbances which sometimes arise from
external influences, at other times from internal emotions; they are
only divided as to the means by which peace of mind may be secured.
They are also agreed in making moral activity independent of external
circumstances, and in separating morals from politics, although only
the Stoics set up the doctrine of the original unity of the whole human
family, and insist on being citizens of the world. Through all the
Schools runs the common trait of referring everything to the subject,
and constantly falling back on man and his own inner life, one
consequence of which is the prominence given to action in preference to
speculation, and another that action is determined by personal
certainty, and a mental equilibrium which must be attained by the
exercise of will and the cultivation of the intellect.



[(3) Their peculiarities illustrated by subsequent philosophy.]

The same character belongs to philosophy in the centuries succeeding
the rise of these three Schools; during which the circumstances which
produced that character were not materially altered. In addition to the
followers of the old Schools, Eclectics are now met with, who gather
from every system what seems true and probable. In this process of
selection their guiding principle is regard for the practical wants of
man. Hence the ultimate standard of truth is placed in personal
consciousness. Everything is referred to the subject as its centre. In
ethics and natural theology the Eclectics were mainly indebted to the
Stoics. A new School of Sceptics also arose, not differing in its
tendencies from the older one. Neopythagoreans and Platonists appeared,
not satisfied with human knowledge, but aspiring to higher revelations.
Professing to appeal to the metaphysics of Plato and Aristotle, these
philosophers betray their connection with the later post-Aristotelian
Schools, not only by borrowing largely from the Stoics for the material
for their theology and ethics, but also by their general tone;
knowledge is for them less even than for the Stoics an end in itself,
and they are further from natural science. With them philosophy is
subservient to the interests of religion; its aim is to bring men into
proper relation with God; and the religious needs of mankind are the
highest authority for science.

The same observations apply also to Plotinus and his successors. These
philosophers are not lacking in an elaborate science of metaphysics.
The care which they devoted to this science leaves no doubt as to their
lively interest in scientific completeness and systematic arrangement.
For all that their speculative efforts bear the same relation to the
practical aim of philosophy as those of the Stoics, who in point of
learning and logical elaboration of a system are quite their equals. A
real interest in knowledge was no doubt one of the elements which
brought Neoplatonism into being; but it was not strong enough to
counterbalance another, the practical and religious sentiment. The mind
was not sufficiently independent to be able to get on without appealing
to intellectual and theological authorities; the scientific procedure
was too mixed to lead to a simple study of things as they are. As in
the case of the Neopythagoreans, the ultimate ground of the system is a
religious want. The divine world is only a portion of human thought
projected out of the mind, and incapable of being fully grasped by the
understanding. The highest business of philosophy is to reunite man
with the divine world external to himself. To attain this end, all the
means which science supplies are employed. Philosophy endeavours to
explain the steps by which the finite gradually came to be separated
from the original infinite being; it seeks to bring about a return by a
regular and systematic course; and in this attempt the philosophic
spirit of Greece, by no means extinct, proved its powers by a result of
its kind unrivalled. In the first instance, no doubt, the problem was
so raised as to press philosophy into the service of religion; but, in
the long run, it became apparent that, with the premises assumed, a
scientific solution of the religious question was impossible. The idea
of an original being with which the system started was a reflex of the
religious sentiment, and not the result of scientific research, and the
doctrine of a mystical union with a transcendental being was a
religious postulate, the gratuitous assumption of which betrays an
origin in the mind of the thinker. The platform of Neoplatonism is the
same, therefore, as that of the other post-Aristotelian systems; and it
is hardly necessary in proof of this position to point to the agreement
of Neoplatonism in other respects with Stoicism, and especially in
ethics. Far as the two systems lie asunder, the one standing at the
beginning the other at the end of the post-Aristotelian philosophy,
nevertheless both display one and the same attitude of thought; and we
pass from one to the other by a continuous series of intermediate
links.

In passing from School to School the post-Aristotelian philosophy
assumed, as might be expected, various modifications of character in
course of time; nevertheless, it retained a certain mental habit and
certain common elements. Such was the neglect of intellectual
originality, which drove some thinkers to a sceptical denial of all
knowledge, and induced others to take their knowledge at second hand
from older authorities. Such was the prominence given to practical over
speculative questions. Such was the disregard for natural science, and,
in comparison with former times, the greater importance attached to
theology, apparent not only in the controversy between the Epicureans
and Stoics, but also in the apologetic writings of the Stoics and
Platonists. Such, too, was the negative morality which aimed at
independence of the outer world, at mental composure, and philosophic
contentment; the separation of morals from politics; the moral
universalism and citizenship of the world; the going within self into
the depths of the soul, the will, and the thinking powers; the
deepening of the consciousness accompanied at the same time by a
narrowing and isolation of it, and the loss of a lively interest in the
outer world, and in the simple scientific study thereof.




[C. Development of post-Aristotelian philosophy.]

[(1) Dogmatic Schools.]

[(a) Stoics and Epicureans.]

This mental habit, first of all, found simple dogmatic expression in
philosophical systems. Not only moral science, but also logic and
natural science, were treated in a way consonant with it, although they
were partially built upon older views. In dealing with the moral
problem, two Schools come to view, markedly different and decided in
their peculiarities. The Stoics regard almost exclusively the universal
element in man who seeks contentment within, the Epicureans catch at
the individual side of his being. The Stoics regard man exclusively as
a thinking being, the Epicureans as a creature of feeling. The Stoics
make happiness to consist in subordination to the law of the whole, in
the suppression of personal feelings and inclinations, in virtue; the
Epicureans in individual independence of everything external, in the
unruffled serenity of the inner life, in painlessness. The theoretical
bases of their teaching correspond with these fundamental ethical
positions.


[(b) Dogmatic scepticism.]

Although the rivalry between these two Schools was great, both,
nevertheless, stand on the same platform. Absolute composure of mind,
freedom of the inner life from all disturbance from without, is the
goal at which both aim, although they follow different methods. Hence
it becomes necessary to insist on the common element as the essential
aim and matter of philosophy. If the philosophic axioms of the two
systems contradict one another, it may be thence inferred that the aim
of both may be attained independently of any definite dogmatic view; in
short, knowledge may be despaired of in order to pass from a
recognition of ignorance to a general indifference to everything and to
an unconditional repose of mind. Thus Scepticism is connected with
Stoicism and Epicureanism, as the third chief form of the philosophy of
that age. Apart from Pyrrho’s School, it is most effectually
represented in the New Academy.



[(2) Sceptical Schools.]

[(a) Influences producing Scepticism.]

[(α) Political influence of Rome.]

The rise, the growth, and the conflict of these three Schools, by the
side of which the older Schools have only a subordinate value, occupies
the first portion of the period of post-Aristotelian philosophy, and
extends from the end of the fourth to the beginning of the first
century before Christ. The distinctive features of this epoch consist
partly in the predominance of the above tendencies, and partly in their
separate existence, without modification by intermixture. After the
middle of the second century a gradual change may be observed. Greece
had then become a Roman province, and the intellectual intercourse
between Greece and Rome was continually on the increase. Many learned
Greeks resided at Rome, frequently as the companions of families of
high birth; others living in their own country, were visited by Roman
pupils. Was it possible that in the face of the clearly-defined and
sharply-expressed Roman character, the power and independence of the
Greek intellect, already unquestionably on the decline, would assert
its ancient supremacy? Or that Greeks could become the teachers of
Romans without accommodating themselves to their demands, and
experiencing in turn a reflex influence? Even Greek philosophy could
not withdraw itself from this influence. Its creative power was long
since in abeyance, and in Scepticism it had openly avowed that it could
place no trust in itself. To the practical sense of a Roman no
philosophical system commended itself which did not make for practical
results by the shortest possible route. To him practical needs were the
ultimate standard of truth. Little did he care for strict logic and
argumentative accuracy in scientific procedure. Differences of schools,
so long as they had no practical bearing, were for him of no
importance. No wonder that Greek philosophy, touched by the breath of
Rome, lent itself to Eclecticism!

[(β) Intellectual influence of Alexandria.]

Whilst on the one side of the world the Greeks were falling under the
influence of the nation that had subdued them, on the other they were
assimilating the views of the Oriental nations whom they had subdued by
martial as well as by mental superiority. For two centuries, in
philosophy at least, Greece had held her own against Oriental modes of
thought. Now that her intellectual incapacity continually increased,
those modes of thought gained for themselves a foothold in her
philosophy. Alexandria was the place where the connection of Greece
with the East was first and most completely brought about. In that
centre of commerce for all parts of the globe, East and West entered
into a connection more intimate and more lasting than in any other
centre. Nor was this connection a mere accident of circumstances; it
was also a work of political forecast. From its founder, Ptolemy Soter,
the Ptolemæan dynasty inherited as the principle of government the rule
always to combine what is native with what is foreign, and to clothe
new things in the old and venerable forms of Egyptian custom and
religious ceremony. At Alexandria, accordingly, there arose, towards
the beginning of the first century before Christ, a School calling
itself at first Platonic, afterwards Pythagorean, which later still, in
the shape of Neoplatonism, gained the ascendency over the whole domain
of philosophy. The very fact, however, that such a change in
philosophic views did not appear sooner, is sufficient to show that it
was produced by external circumstances. But notwithstanding external
circumstances it would never have come about had not the intellect of
Greece in the course of its own development been ripe for it.


[(b) Scepticism and Eclecticism.]

The same remark holds good of the rise of that practical Eclecticism
which we have before traced to the influence of Rome. Even in the
period of intellectual exhaustion, Greek philosophy was not simply the
resultant of its outward surroundings, but, under the influence of
outward surroundings, took shape in a way indicated by its previous
progress. If the lingering remains of a few small Schools, which soon
expired, are excepted, there existed, after the beginning of the third
century before Christ, only four great philosophic Schools—the
Peripatetic, the Stoic, the Epicurean, and the School of Platonists.
The last-named of these was converted to Scepticism by Arcesilaus.
These four Schools were all permanently established at Athens, where a
lively interchange of thought took place between them, which renders a
thorough comparison of their several teachings comparatively easy. It
was only natural that they would not long exist side by side without
making overtures towards union and agreement. These overtures were
favoured by Scepticism, which, denying the possibility of knowledge,
only allowed a choice between probabilities, and decided that choice by
the standard of practical needs. Hence, towards the close of the second
century before Christ, these philosophic Schools may be observed to
emerge more or less from their exclusiveness. An eclectic tendency
steals over philosophy, aiming not so much at scientific knowledge as
at attaining certain results for practical use. The distinctive
doctrines of each School drop into the background; and in the belief
that infallibility resides solely in the mind itself, such portions are
selected from each system as seem most in harmony with the selecting
mind. The germ of this eclectic mode of thought lay in Scepticism. On
the other hand, Eclecticism involves doubt. Hence, soon after the
Christian era, a new school of doubt developed, which continued until
the third century. There was thus, on the one hand, a lively interest
in knowledge, which was desired in the practical interest of religion
and morals; and, on the other hand, a disbelief in the truths of
existing knowledge, and, indeed, of knowledge generally, openly avowed
by some as Sceptics, secretly betrayed by others in the unsettledness
of their Eclecticism. These two currents coalescing, led to the thought
that truth, which cannot be found in knowledge, exists somewhere
outside of it, and must be looked for partly in the religious
traditions of the early days of Greece and the East, partly in direct
divine revelation. Then came in such a notion of God, and of His
relations to the world, as accords with this belief in revelation. Man
knowing that truth lies outside himself, and doubting his own
capacities to attain it, removes deity, as the absolute source of
truth, into another world; and because the need of a revelation of
truth still exists, the interval between God and the world is peopled
with intermediate beings, who are sometimes conceived of as
metaphysical entities, and at other times appear as the demons of
popular belief. This mental habit, which is connected with Plato and
Pythagoras, among the older systems, forms the transition to
Neoplatonism. The appearance of Neoplatonism introduces the last stage
in the development of Greek philosophy.



[(3) Religious School of Neoplatonists.]

Yet even this turn in Greek philosophy was not uninfluenced by the
circumstances of the times. Since the end of the second century after
Christ, the decline of the Roman Empire progressed apace. Dread of the
dangers which threatened it on all sides, the pressure of the times and
distress made startling progress. All means of defence hitherto
employed had proved unavailing to stem destruction. With ruin
everywhere impending, the desire and longing for higher assistance
increased. No such assistance was forthcoming from the old gods of Rome
or the religious faith of the day; despite which circumstances were
daily becoming more hopeless. Then it was that the desire for foreign
forms of worship which had been gradually spreading over the Roman
world since the last days of the Republic, and which the circumstances
of the Empire had stimulated, gained ground. That desire was favoured
by the highest power in the state, under the Oriental and half Oriental
emperors who for nearly half a century after Septimius Severus occupied
the imperial throne. The state and the gods of the state were
continually losing their hold on the respect of men. Meanwhile, on the
one hand, Oriental worships, mysteries old and new, and foreign heathen
religions of the most varying kinds, were ever gaining fresh adherents.
On the other, Christianity was rapidly acquiring a power which enabled
it openly to enter the lists for supremacy among the recognised
religions of the state. The powerful monarchs who about the middle of
the third century attempted to refound the Empire, had not for their
object to restore a specifically Roman form of government, but to bring
the various elements which composed the Empire under one sovereign will
by fixed forms of administration. In this attempt Diocletian and
Constantine succeeded. The Roman character asserted itself, as a ruling
and regulating power, but it did so under the influence of another
originally foreign character. The Empire was a congeries of nations
artificially held together, and arranged on a carefully-designed plan;
its centre of gravity lay not within the nation, but in the simple will
of the prince, himself exalted above all rules and laws of state, and
deciding everything without appeal and without responsibility.

In like manner Neoplatonism united all the elements of previous
philosophical Schools into one comprehensive and well-arranged system,
in which each class of existences had its definite place assigned to
it. The initial point in this system, the all-embracing unity, was a
being lying beyond the world, high above every notion that experience
and conception can supply, unmixed with the process of life going on in
the world, and from his unattainable height causing all things, but
himself subject to no conditions of causality. Neoplatonism is the
intellectual reproduction of Byzantine Imperialism. As Byzantine
Imperialism combines Oriental despotism with the Roman idea of the
state, so Neoplatonism supplements the scientific forms of Greek
philosophy with Oriental mysticism.

In Neoplatonism the post-Aristotelian philosophy had manifestly veered
round into its opposite. Self-dependence and the self-sufficingness of
thought made way for implicit resignation to higher powers, for a
craving for revelation, for an ecstatic departure from the sphere of
conscious mental activity. Man has abandoned the idea of truth within
for truth to be found only in God. God stands there as abstract
spirituality removed into another world in contrast to man and the
world of appearances. Speculation has but one aim—to explain the
procession of the finite from the infinite, and the conditions of its
return into the absolute; but neither of these problems can meet with a
satisfactory intellectual solution. Even this form of thought betrays
undeniably the personal character of the post-Aristotelian philosophy,
and is the natural outcome of previous teaching, as will be more fully
seen in the sequel. With it the creative powers of the Greek mind were
exhausted. After being driven step by step during centuries from the
platform of their own national philosophy, the Greeks were eventually
entirely dislodged therefrom by the victory of Christianity.
Neoplatonism made one more futile attempt to rescue the forms of Greek
culture from its mighty rival, but when that attempt failed Greek
religion and Greek philosophy went down together.








