CHAPTER XIX.

THE MORAL SCIENCE OF THE EPICUREANS. GENERAL PRINCIPLES.


[A. Pleasure.]

[(1) Pleasure the highest good.]

Natural science is intended to overcome the prejudices which stand in
the way of happiness; moral science to give positive instruction as to
the nature and means of attaining to happiness. The speculative parts
of the Epicurean system had already worked out the idea that reality
belongs only to individual things, and that all general order must be
referred to the accidental harmony of individual forces. The same idea
is now met with in the sphere of morals, individual feeling being made
the standard, and individual well-being the object of all human
activity. Natural science, beginning with external phenomena, went back
to the secret principles of these phenomena, accessible only to
thought. It led from an apparently accidental movement of atoms to a
universe of regular motions. Not otherwise was the course followed by
Epicurus in moral science. Not content with human feelings alone, nor
with selfishly referring everything to the individual taken by himself
alone, that science, in more accurately defining the conception of
well-being, ascertained that the same can only be found by rising
superior to feelings and purely individual aims, in short by that very
process of referring consciousness to itself and its universal being,
which the Stoics declared to be the only path to happiness. It is for
us now to portray this development of the Epicurean philosophy in its
most prominent features.

The only unconditional good, according to Epicurus, is pleasure; the
only unconditional evil is pain. [1278] No proof of this proposition
seemed to him to be necessary; it rests on a conviction supplied by
nature herself, and is the ground and basis of all our doing and not
doing. [1279] If proof, however, were required, he appealed to the fact
that all living beings from the first moment of their existence pursue
pleasure and avoid pain, [1280] and that consequently pleasure is a
natural good, and the normal condition of every being. [1281] Hence
follows the proposition to which Epicurus in common with all the
philosophers of pleasure appealed, that pleasure must be the object of
life.



[(2) Freedom from pain.]

At the same time, this proposition was restricted in the Epicurean
system by several considerations. In the first place, neither pleasure
nor pain is a simple thing. There are many varieties and degrees of
pleasure and pain, and the case may occur in which pleasure has to be
secured by the loss of other pleasures, or even by pain, or in which
pain can only be avoided by submitting to another pain, or at the cost
of some pleasure. In this case Epicurus would have the various feelings
of pleasure and pain carefully weighed, and in consideration of the
advantages and disadvantages which they confer, would under
circumstances advise the good to be treated as an evil, and the evil as
a good. He would have pleasure forsworn if it would entail a greater
corresponding pain, and pain submitted to if it holds out the prospect
of greater pleasure. [1282] He also agrees with Plato in holding that
every positive pleasure presupposes a want, i.e. a pain which it
proposes to remove; and hence he concludes that the real aim and object
of all pleasure consists in obtaining freedom from pain, [1283] and
that the good is nothing else but emancipation from evil. [1284] By a
Cyrenaic neither repose of soul nor freedom from pain, but a gentle
motion of the soul or positive pleasure was proposed as the object of
life; and hence happiness was not made to depend on man’s general state
of mind, but on the sum-total of his actual enjoyments. But Epicurus,
advancing beyond this position, recognised both the positive and the
negative side of pleasures, both pleasure as repose, and pleasure as
motion. [1285] Both aspects of pleasure, however, do not stand on the
same footing in his system. On the contrary, the essential and
immediate cause of happiness is repose of mind—ἀταραξία. Positive
pleasure is only an indirect cause of ἀταραξία in that it removes the
pain of unsatisfied craving. [1286] This mental repose, however,
depends essentially on the character of a man’s mind, just as
conversely positive pleasure in systems so materialistic must depend on
sensuous attractions. It was consistent, therefore, on the part of
Aristippus to consider bodily gratification the highest pleasure; and
conversely Epicurus was no less consistent in subordinating it to
gratification of mind.




[B. Intellectual happiness.]

In calling pleasure the highest object in life, says Epicurus, we do
not mean the pleasures of profligacy, nor indeed sensual enjoyments at
all, but the freedom of the body from pain, and the freedom of the soul
from disturbance. Neither feasts nor banquets, neither the lawful nor
unlawful indulgence of the passions, nor the joys of the table, make
life happy, but a sober judgment, investigating the motives for action
and for inaction, and dispelling those greatest enemies of our peace,
prejudices. The root from which it springs,



[(1) Intelligence.]

and, therefore, the highest good, is intelligence. [1287] It is
intelligence that leaves us free to acquire possession thereof, without
being ever too early or too late. [1288] Our indispensable wants are
simple, little being necessary to ensure freedom from pain; other
things only afford change in enjoyment, by which the quantity is not
increased, or else they rest on a mere sentiment. [1289] The little we
need may be easily attained. Nature makes ample provision for our
happiness, would we only receive her gifts thankfully, not forgetting
what she gives in thinking what we desire. [1290] He who lives
according to nature is never poor; the wise man living on bread and
water has no reason to envy Zeus; [1291] chance has little hold on him;
with him judgment is everything, [1292] and if that be right, he need
trouble himself but little about external mishaps. [1293] Not even
bodily pain appeared to Epicurus so irresistible as to be able to cloud
the wise man’s happiness. Although he regards as unnatural the Stoic’s
insensibility to pain, [1294] still he is of opinion that the wise man
may be happy on the rack, and can smile at pains the most violent,
exclaiming in the midst of torture, How sweet! [1295] A touch of forced
sentiment may be discerned in the last expression, and a trace of
self-satisfied exaggeration is manifest even in the beautiful language
of the dying philosopher on the pains of disease. [1296] Nevertheless,
the principle involved is based in the spirit of the Epicurean
philosophy, and borne out by the testimony of the founder. The main
thing, according to Epicurus, is not the state of the body, but the
state of the mind; bodily pleasure being of short duration, and having
much about it to unsettle; mental enjoyments only being pure and
incorruptible. For the same reason mental sufferings are more severe
than those of the body, since the body only suffers from present ills,
whilst the soul feels those past and those to come. [1297] In a life of
limited duration the pleasures of the flesh never attain their
consummation. Mind only, by consoling us for the limited nature of our
bodily existence, can produce a life complete in itself, and not
standing in need of unlimited duration. [1298]



[(2) Reasons for rising superior to the senses.]

At the same time, the Epicureans, if consistent with their principles,
could not deny that bodily pleasure is the earlier form, and likewise
the ultimate source, of all pleasure, and neither Epicurus nor his
favourite pupil Metrodorus shrank from making this admission; Epicurus
declaring that he could form no conception of the good apart from
enjoyments [1299] of the senses; Metrodorus asserting that everything
good has reference to the belly. [1300] For all that the Epicureans did
not feel themselves driven to give up the pre-eminence which they
claimed for goods of the soul over those of the body. Did even the
Stoics, notwithstanding the grossness of their theory of knowledge,
ever abate their demand for a knowledge of conceptions; or cease to
subordinate the senses to reason, although they built their theory of
morals on nature? But all definite character has vanished from these
intellectual joys and pains. The only distinctive feature which they
possess is the addition either of memory, or of hope, or of fear [1301]
to the present feeling of pleasure or pain; and their greater
importance is simply ascribed to the greater force or duration
belonging to ideal feelings as compared with the attractions which
momentarily impress the senses. [1302] Incidentally the remembrance of
philosophic discourses is mentioned [1303] as a counterpoise to bodily
pain; properly speaking, mental pleasures and pains are not different
from other pleasures in kind, but only in degree, by reason of their
being stronger and more enduring. Accordingly Epicurus cannot escape
the admission that we have no cause for rejecting gross and carnal
enjoyments if these can liberate us from the fear of higher powers, of
death, and of sufferings; [1304] and thus the only consolation he can
offer in pain is the uncertain one that the most violent pains either
do not last long, or else put an end to life; and the less violent ones
ought to be endured since they do not exclude a counterbalancing
pleasure. [1305] Hence victory over the impression of the moment must
be won, not so much by mental force stemming the tide of feeling, as by
a proper estimate of the conditions and actions of the senses.



[(3) Virtue.]

In no other way can the necessity of virtue be established in the
Epicurean system. Agreeing with the strictest moralists, so far as to
hold that virtue can be as little separated from happiness as happiness
from virtue, [1306] having even the testimony of opponents as to the
purity and integrity of his moral teaching, which in its results
differed in no wise from that of the Stoics; [1307] Epicurus,
nevertheless, holds a position of strong contrast to the Stoics in
respect of the grounds on which his moral theory is based. To demand
virtue for its own sake seemed to him a mere phantom of the
imagination. Those only who make pleasure their aim have a real object
in life. [1308] Virtue has only a conditional value [1309] as a means
to happiness; or, as it is otherwise expressed, [1310] Virtue taken by
itself does not render a man happy, but the pleasure arising from the
exercise of virtue. This pleasure the Epicurean system does not seek in
the consciousness of duty fulfilled, or of virtuous action, but in the
freedom from disquiet, fear, and dangers, which follows as a
consequence from virtue. Wisdom and intelligence contribute to
happiness by liberating us from the fear of the Gods and of death, by
making us independent of immoderate passions and vain desires, by
teaching us to bear pain as something subordinate and passing, and by
pointing the way to a more cheerful and natural life. [1311]
Self-control aids, in that it points out the attitude to be assumed
towards pleasure and pain, so as to receive the maximum of enjoyment
and the minimum of suffering; [1312] valour, in that it enables us to
overcome fear and pain; [1313] justice, in that it makes life possible
without that fear of Gods and men, which ever haunts the transgressor.
[1314] To the Epicurean virtue is never an end in itself, but only a
means to an end lying beyond—a happy life—but withal a means so certain
and necessary, that virtue can neither be conceived without happiness,
nor happiness without virtue. However unnecessary it may seem, still
Epicurus would ever insist that an action to be right must be done not
according to the letter, but according to the spirit of the law, not
simply from regard to others, or by compulsion, but from delight in
what is good. [1315]




[C. The wise man.]

The same claims were advanced by Epicurus on behalf of his wise man as
the Stoics had urged on behalf of theirs. Not only does he attribute to
him a control over pain, in nothing inferior to the Stoic insensibility
of feeling, but he endeavours himself to describe the wise man’s life
as most perfect and satisfactory in itself. Albeit not free from
emotions, and in particular susceptible to the higher feelings of the
soul such as compassion, the wise man finds his philosophic activity in
no wise thereby impaired. [1316] Without despising enjoyment, he is
altogether master of his desires, and knows how to restrain them by
intelligence, so that they never exercise a harmful influence on life.
He alone has an unwavering certainty of conviction; [1317] he alone
knows how to do the right thing in the right way; he alone, as
Metrodorus observes, [1318] knows how to be thankful. Nay, more, he is
so far exalted above ordinary men, that Epicurus promises his pupils
that, by carefully observing his teaching, they will dwell as Gods
among men; [1319] so little can destiny influence him, that he calls
him happy under all circumstances. [1320] Happiness may, indeed, depend
on certain external conditions; it may even be allowed that the
disposition to happiness is not found in every nature, nor in every
person; [1321] but still, when it is found, its stability is sure, nor
can time affect its duration. For wisdom—so Epicurus and the Stoics
alike believed—is indestructible, [1322] and the wise man’s happiness
can never be increased by time. A life, therefore, bounded by time can
be quite as complete as one not so bounded. [1323]

Different as are the principles and the tone of the systems of the
Stoics and of Epicurus, one and the same tendency may yet be traced in
both—the tendency which characterises all the post-Aristotelian
philosophy—the desire to place man in a position of absolute
independence by emancipating him from connection with the external
world, and by awakening in him the consciousness of the infinite
freedom of thought. [1324]








