CHAPTER XVI.

CHARACTER AND DIVISIONS OF THE EPICUREAN TEACHING: THE TEST-SCIENCE OF
TRUTH.


[A. Character of Epicurean system.]

[(1) Its power of self-preservation.]

The scientific value and capacity for development of Epicureanism are
out of all proportion to its extensive diffusion and the length of time
during which it continued to flourish. No other system troubled itself
so little about the foundation on which it rested; none confined itself
so exclusively to the utterances of its founder. Such was the dogmatism
with which Epicurus propounded his precepts, such the conviction he
entertained of their excellence, that his pupils were required to
commit summaries of them to memory; [1100] and the superstitious
devotion for the founder was with his approval [1101] carried to such a
length, that on no single point was the slightest deviation from his
tenets permitted. Although, even in Cicero’s time, the writings of
Epicurus and Metrodorus found hardly a reader outside the School,
[1102] yet it is asserted that as late as the first and second
centuries after Christ the Epicureans clung tenaciously to their
master’s teaching. [1103] Probably it was easier for an Epicurean than
for any other thinker to act thus. Like his master, [1104] he was
indifferent to the labours of other philosophers, or unable to
appreciate their merits. [1105] For us this conduct of theirs has one
advantage: we can be far more certain that the Epicurean teaching
reflects that of the founder than we can that this is so in the case of
the Stoics. But this philosophical sterility, this mechanical handing
down of unchangeable principles, places the intellectual value of
Epicureanism on the lowest level. The servile dependence of the
Epicurean School on its founder can neither excuse its mental idleness
nor recommend a system so powerless to give an independent training to
its supporters.



[(2) Aim of philosophy according to the Epicureans.]

The want of intellectual taste here displayed appears also in the view
taken by Epicurus of the aim and business of philosophy. If among the
Stoics the subordination of theory to practice was frequently felt,
among the Epicureans this subordination was carried to such an extent
as to lead to a depreciation of all science. The aim of philosophy was,
with them, to promote human happiness. Indeed, philosophy is nothing
else than an activity helping us to happiness by means of speech and
thought. [1106] Nor is happiness, according to Epicurus, directly
promoted by knowledge, but only indirectly in as far as knowledge
ministers to practical needs, or clears away hindrances to their
attainment. All science which does not serve this end is superfluous
and worthless. [1107] Epicurus, therefore, despised learning and
culture, the researches of grammarians, and the lore of historians, and
declared it a piece of good fortune for simplicity of feeling to be
uncontaminated by learned rubbish. [1108] Nor was his opinion different
respecting mathematical science, of which he was wholly ignorant.
[1109] The calculations of mathematicians, he maintained, are based on
false principles; [1110] at any rate, they contribute nothing to human
happiness, and it is therefore useless and foolish to trouble oneself
about them. [1111] The theory of music and poetry he likewise found
exceedingly irksome, although he took pleasure in music itself and the
theatre; [1112] and rhetoric, as an artificial guide to eloquence,
seemed to him as worthless as the show-speeches which are the only
result of the study of it. The power of public speaking is a matter of
practice and of momentary feeling, and hence the skilful speaker is far
from being a good statesman. [1113] The greater part of logical
enquiries fared no better in his judgment. Himself no logician, he set
little store by logic. Definitions are of no use; the theory of
division and proof may be dispensed with; the philosopher does best to
confine himself to words, and to leave all the logical ballast alone.
[1114] Of all the questions which engrossed the attention of Stoic
logicians, one only, the theory of knowledge, was studied by Epicurus,
and that in a very superficial way. [1115]

Far greater, comparatively, was the importance he attached to the study
of nature, [1116] but even natural science was deemed valuable not so
much for its own sake as because of its practical use. The knowledge of
natural causes is the only means of liberating the soul from the
shackles of superstition; this is the only use of natural science. If
it were not for the thought of God and the fear of death, there would
be no need of studying nature. [1117] The investigation of our
instincts is also of use, because it helps us to control them, and to
keep them within their natural bounds. [1118] Thus the onesided
practical view of philosophy which we have already encountered in
Stoicism was carried by the Epicureans to an extreme length.



[(3) Divisions of philosophy.]

Nor is it otherwise than in harmony herewith that logic did not receive
a fuller or more perfect treatment in the further development of their
system. Even the study of nature, going far more fully into particulars
than logic, was guided entirely by practical considerations, all
scientific interest in nature being ignored. Following the usual
method, however, the Epicureans divided philosophy into three parts
[1119]—logic, natural science, and moral science. Limiting the first of
these parts to one branch of logic, the part which deals with the
characteristics of truth, and which they therefore called neither
logic, nor dialectic, but Canonic, they really reduced this part to a
mere introductory appendage to the two other parts, [1120] and studied
Canonic as a part of natural science. [1121] Natural science moreover
was so entirely subordinated to moral science, that we might almost
feel tempted to follow some modern writers [1122] in their view of the
Epicurean system, by giving to moral science precedence of the two
other parts, or at least of natural science. [1123] The School,
however, followed the usual order, and not without reason; [1124] for
although the whole tendency of the Epicurean Canonic and natural
science can only, like the Stoic, be explained by a reference to moral
science, yet moral science with them presupposes the test-science of
truth and natural science. We shall, therefore, do well to treat of
Canonic in the first place, and subsequently to prove how this branch
of study depends on Ethics.




[B. Canonic or the test-science of truth.]

[(1) Sensation and perception.]

Canonic or the test-science of truth, as has been observed, is occupied
with investigating the standard of truth, and with enquiring into the
mode of acquiring knowledge. The whole of formal logic, the doctrine of
the formation of conceptions and conclusions, is omitted by Epicurus.
[1125] Even the theory of the acquisition of knowledge assumes with him
a very simple form. If the Stoics were fain, notwithstanding their
ideal ethics and their pantheistic speculations, ultimately to take
their stand on materialism, could Epicurus avoid doing the same? In
seeking a speculative basis for a view of life which refers everything
to the feeling of pleasure or pain, he appealed far more unreservedly
than they had done to sensation. Now, since the senses can alone inform
us what is pleasant or unpleasant, and what is desirable or the
contrary, our judgment as to truth or falsehood must ultimately depend
on the senses. Viewed speculatively, sensation is the standard of
truth; viewed practically, the feeling of pleasure or pain. [1126] If
the senses may not be trusted, still less may knowledge derived from
reason be trusted, since reason itself is primarily and entirely
derived from the senses. There remains, therefore, no distinctive mark
of truth, and no possibility of certain conviction. We are at the mercy
of unlimited doubt. If, however, this doubt is contradictory of
itself—for how can men declare they know, that they can know
nothing?—it is also contradictory of human nature, since it would do
away not only with all knowledge but with every possibility of
action—in short, with all the conditions on which human life depends.
[1127] To avoid doubt we must allow that sensation as such is always,
and under all circumstances, to be trusted; nor ought the delusions of
the senses to shake our belief; the causes of these deceptions do not
lie in sensation as such, but in our judgment about sensation. What the
senses supply is only that an object produces this or that effect upon
us, and that this or that picture has impressed our soul. The facts
thus supplied are always true, only it does not follow that the object
exactly corresponds with the impression we receive of it, or that it
produces on others the same impression that it produces on us. Many
different pictures may emanate from one and the same object, and these
pictures may be changed on their way to the ear or eye. Pictures, too,
may strike our senses with which no real objects correspond. To
confound the picture with the thing, the impression made with the
object making the impression, is certainly an error, but this error
must not be laid to the charge of the senses, but to that of opinion.
[1128] Indeed, how is it possible, asks Epicurus, [1129] to refute the
testimony of the senses? Can reason refute it? But reason is itself
dependent on the senses, and cannot bear testimony against that on
which its own claims to belief depend. Or can one sense convict another
of error? But different sensations do not refer to the same object, and
similar sensations have equal value. Nothing remains, therefore, but to
attach implicit belief to every impression of the senses. Every such
impression is directly certain, and is accordingly termed by Epicurus
clear evidence (ἐνάργεια). [1130] Nay, more, its truth is so paramount
that the impressions of madmen, and appearances in dreams, are true
because they are caused by something real, [1131] and error only
becomes possible when we go beyond sensation.



[(2) Notions.]

This going beyond sensation becomes, however, a necessity. By a
repetition of the same perception a notion (πρόληψις) arises. A notion,
therefore, is nothing else than the general picture retained in the
mind of what has been perceived. [1132] On these notions retained by
memory depend all speaking and thinking. They are what commonly go
under the name of things; and speech is only a means of recalling
definite perceptions [1133] to the memory. Notions are presupposed in
all scientific knowledge. [1134] Together with sensations they form the
measure of the truth of our convictions; [1135] and it holds true of
them as it did of sensations—that they are true in themselves and need
no proof. [1136] Taken by themselves, notions, like perceptions, are
reflections in the soul of things on which the transforming action of
the mind, changing external impressions into conceptions, has not as
yet been brought to bear.



[(3) Opinion.]

For this very reason notion are not sufficient. From appearances we
must advance to their secret causes; from the known to the unknown.
[1137] Far too little value was attached by Epicurus to the logical
forms of thought, or he would have investigated more accurately the
nature of this process of advancing. [1138] Thoughts, in his view,
result from sensations spontaneously, and although a certain amount of
reflection is necessary for the process, yet it requires no scientific
guidance. [1139] The thoughts arrived at in this way do not stand as a
higher genus above perceptions, but they are only opinions (ὑπόληψις,
δόξα) without a note of truth in themselves, and depending for their
truth upon sensation. That opinion may be considered a true one which
is based on the testimony of the senses, or is at least not contrary to
the senses, and that a false opinion in which the opposite is the case.
[1140] Sometimes we suppose that upon certain present impressions other
impressions will follow: for instance, that a tower which appears round
at a distance will appear round close at hand. In that case, if the
real perception corresponds with the assumption, the opinion is true,
otherwise it is false. [1141] At other times we suppose that certain
appearances are due to secret causes: for instance, that empty space is
the cause of motion. If all appearances tally with their explanations,
we may consider our assumptions correct; if not, our assumptions are
incorrect. [1142] In the first case the test of the truth of an opinion
is that it is supported by experience; in the latter that it is not
refuted by experience. [1143] Have we not here all the leading features
of a theory of knowledge based purely on sensation? The Epicurean’s
interest in these questions was, however, far too slight to construct
with them a developed theory of materialism.



[(4) Standard of truth subjective.]

Little pains seem to have been taken by Epicurus to overcome the
difficulties by which this view was beset. If all sensations as such
are true, the saying of Protagoras necessarily follows that for each
individual that is true which seems to him to be true, that contrary
impressions about one and the same object are true, and that deceptions
of the senses, so many instances of which are supplied by experience,
are really impossible. To avoid these conclusions, Epicurus maintained
that for each different impression there is a different object-picture.
What immediately affects our senses is not the object itself, but a
picture of the object, and these pictures may be innumerable, a
different one being the cause of each separate sensation. Moreover,
although the pictures emanating from the same object are in general
nearly alike, it is possible that they may differ from one another
owing to a variety of causes. If, therefore, the same object appears
different to different individuals, the cause of these different
sensations is not one and the same, but a different one, and different
pictures must have affected their senses. If our own sensations deceive
us, the blame does not belong to our senses, as though they had
depicted to us unreal objects, but to our judgment for drawing
unwarranted inferences from pictures [1144] as to their causes.

This line of argument, however, only removes the difficulty one step
further. Sensation is said always to reproduce faithfully the picture
which affects the organs of sense, but the pictures do not always
reproduce the object with equal faithfulness. How then can a faithful
picture be known from one which is not faithful? To this question the
Epicurean system can furnish no real answer. To say that the wise man
knows how to distinguish a faithful from an unfaithful picture [1145]
is to despair of an absolute standard at all, and to make the decision
of truth or error depend upon the individual’s judgment. Such a
statement reduces all our impressions of the properties of things to a
relative level. If sensation does not show us things themselves, but
only those impressions of them which happen to affect us, it does not
supply us with a knowledge of things as they are, but as they happen to
be related to us. It was, therefore, a legitimate inference from this
theory of knowledge for Epicurus to deny that colour belongs to bodies
in themselves, since some only see colour in the dark, whilst others do
not. [1146] Like his predecessor, Democritus, he must have been brought
to this view by his theory of atoms. Few of the properties belong to
atoms which we perceive in things, and hence all other properties must
be explained as not belonging to the essence, but only to the
appearance of things. [1147] The taste for speculation was, however,
too weak, and the need of a direct truth of the senses too strong in
Epicurus for him to be able to turn his thoughts in this direction for
long. Whilst allowing to certain properties of things only a relative
value, he had no wish to doubt the reality of objects, nor to disparage
the object-pictures which furnish us with sensations. [1148]








