CHAPTER XVIII.

VIEWS OF EPICURUS ON RELIGION.


[A. Criticism of the gods and the popular faith.]

Satisfied with the results of his own enquiries into nature, Epicurus
hoped by his view of the causes of things not only to displace the
superstitions of a polytheistic worship, but also to uproot the
prejudice in favour of Providence. Indeed, these two objects were
placed by him on exactly the same footing. So absurd did he consider
the popular notions respecting the Gods, that instead of blaming those
who attacked them, [1243] he believed it impious to acquiesce in them.
Religion being, according to Lucretius, the cause of the greatest
evils, [1244] he who displaces it to make way for rational views of
nature deserves praise as having overcome the most dangerous enemy of
mankind. All the language of Epicurus in disparagement of the art of
poetry applies in a still higher degree to the religious errors
fostered by poetry. [1245] Nor is it better with belief in Providence
than with the popular faith. This belief is also included in the
category of romance; [1246] and the doctrine of fatalism, which was the
Stoic form for the same belief, was denounced as even worse than the
popular faith. [1247] For how, asks the Epicurean, could divine
Providence have created a world in which evil abounds, in which virtue
often fares ill, whilst vice is triumphant? How could a world have been
made for the sake of man, when man can only inhabit a very small
portion of it? How could nature be intended to promote man’s well-being
when it so often imperils his life and labour, and sends him into the
world more helpless than any animal? How can we form a conception of
beings ruling over an infinite universe, and everywhere present to
administer everything in every place? [1248] What could have induced
these beings to create a world, and how and whence could they have
known how to create it, had not nature supplied them with an example?
[1249] In fine, how could God be the happy Being He must be if the
whole burden of caring for all things and all events lay upon Him, or
He were swayed to and fro together with the body of the world? [1250]
Or how could we feel any other feeling than that of fear in the
presence of such a God who troubles himself about everything? [1251]




[B. The gods according to Epicurus.]

[(1) Reasons for his belief.]

With the denial of the popular Gods, the denial of demons, [1252] of
course, goes hand in hand; and, together with Providence, the need of
prayer [1253] and of prophecy is at the same time negatived. [1254] All
these notions, according to Epicurus, are the result of ignorance and
fear. Pictures seen in dreams have been confounded with real
existences; regularity of motion in the heavenly bodies has been
mistaken by the ignorant for the work of God; events which accidentally
happened in combination with others have been regarded as portents;
terrific natural phenomena, storms and earthquakes, have engendered in
men’s minds the fear of higher powers. [1255] Fear is therefore the
basis of religion; [1256] and, on the other hand, freedom from fear is
the primary object aimed at by philosophy.

For all that, Epicurus was unwilling to renounce belief in the Gods,
[1257] nor is it credible that this unwillingness was simply a yielding
to popular opinion. [1258] The language used by the Epicureans
certainly gives the impression of sincerity; and the time was past when
avowed atheism was attended with danger. Atheism would have been as
readily condoned in the time of Epicurus as the deism which denied most
unreservedly the popular faith. It is, however, possible to trace the
causes which led Epicurus to believe that there are Gods. There was
first the general diffusion of a belief in Gods which appeared to him
to establish the truth of this belief, and hence he declared the
existence of Gods to be something directly certain, and grounded on a
primary notion (πρόληψις). [1259] Moreover, with his materialistic
theory of knowledge he no doubt supposed that the primary notion which
convinces us of the existence of Gods arises from the actual
contemplation of divine beings, and from the perception of those
atom-pictures from which Democritus had already deduced the belief in
Gods. [1260] And in addition to these theoretical reasons, Epicurus had
also another, half æsthetical, half religious—the wish to see his ideal
of happiness realised in the person of the Gods, [1261] and it is this
ideal which determines the character of all his notions respecting
them. His Gods are therefore, throughout, human beings. Religious
belief only knows beings such as these, or, as Epicurus expresses it,
only such beings come before us in those pictures of the Gods which
present themselves to our minds, sometimes in sleep, sometimes when we
are awake. Reflection, too, convinces us that the human form is the
most beautiful, that to it alone reason belongs, and that it is the
most appropriate form for perfectly happy beings. [1262] Epicurus even
went so far as to attribute to the Gods difference of sex. [1263] At
the same time everything must be eliminated which is not appropriate to
a divine being.



[(2) Nature of the Epicurean gods.]

The two essential characteristics of the Gods, according to Epicurus,
are immortality and perfect happiness. [1264] Both of these
characteristics would be impaired were we to attribute to the bodies of
the Gods the same dense corporeity which belongs to our own. We must,
therefore, only assign to them a body analogous to our body, ethereal,
and consisting of the finest atoms. [1265] Such bodies would be of
little use in a world like ours. In fact, they could not live in any
world without being exposed to the temporal ruin which will in time
overwhelm it, and, meantime, to a state of fear, which would mar their
bliss. Epicurus, therefore, assigns the space between the worlds for
their habitation, where, as Lucretius remarks, troubled by no storms,
they live under a sky ever serene. [1266]

Nor can these Gods be supposed to care for the world and the affairs of
men, else their happiness would be marred by the most distressing
occupation; but perfectly free from care and trouble, and absolutely
regardless of the world, in eternal contemplation of their unchanging
perfection, they enjoy the most unalloyed happiness. [1267] The view
which the School formed to itself of this happiness we learn from
Philodemus. [1268] The Gods are exempt from sleep, sleep being a
partial death, and not needed by beings who live without any exertion.
And yet he believes that they require nourishment, though this must, of
course, be of a kind suited to their nature. They also need dwellings,
[1269] since every being requires some place wherein to dwell. Were
powers of speech to be refused to them, they would be deprived of the
highest means of enjoyment—the power of conversing with their equals.
Philodemus thinks it probable they use the Greek or some other closely
allied language. [1270] In short, he imagines the Gods to be a society
of Epicurean philosophers, who have everything that they can
desire—everlasting life, no care, and perpetual opportunities of sweet
converse. Only such Gods,—the Epicureans thought, [1271]—need not be
feared. Only such Gods are free and pure, and worshipped because of
this very perfection. [1272] Moreover, these Gods are innumerable. If
the number of mortal beings is infinite, the law of counterpoise
requires that the number of immortal beings must not be less. [1273] If
we have only the idea of a limited number of Gods, it is because, owing
to their being so much alike, [1274] we confound in our minds the
innumerable pictures of the Gods which are conveyed to our souls.

Priding themselves, in contrast to the Stoics, on their agreement by
means of this theology with the anthropomorphic views of the popular
belief, and even outdoing polytheism in the assumption of innumerable
Gods, [1275] the Epicureans were willing to join in the customary
services of religion, [1276] without being nearly so anxious as the
Stoics to prove themselves in harmony with the popular creed. Whilst
the Stoics in their anxiety to do this had plunged head over heels into
allegory, no such tendency is observed on the part of the Epicureans.
Only the poet of the School gives a few allegorical interpretations of
mythical ideas, and he does it with more taste and skill than is usual
with the Stoics. [1277] On other points the Epicureans, not excluding
Lucretius, observe towards the popular faith a negative attitude, that
of opposing it by explanations; and by this attitude, without doubt,
they rendered one of the most important services to humanity.








