CHAPTER XXI.

THE EPICUREAN SYSTEM AS A WHOLE; ITS POSITION IN HISTORY.


[A. Inner connection of the Epicurean teaching.]

It has often been urged against the Epicurean philosophy, that it is
deficient both in coherence and consistency. Nor is this objection
without foundation. If we come to the study of it, looking for a
complete scientific groundwork, or a strictly logical development, we
shall certainly be disappointed. It is not difficult to show in what
contradictions Epicurus was involved; in professing to trust the senses
wholly and entirely, and yet going beyond the senses to the hidden
causes of things; in despising logical forms and laws, and at the same
time building up his whole system on deductions; in holding that all
sensations are true, but yet maintaining that a portion of the
realities which they represent as belonging to things is only relative.
Nor were these the only inconsistencies. At one time only natural
causes and laws are acknowledged, and any such thing as free will and
imagination is ignored; at another, by the doctrine of the swerving
aside of atoms and of the human will, unexplained caprice is elevated
to the rank of law. Pleasures and pains are all referred to bodily
sensations, and yet mental states are called higher and more important;
nay, more, even from a basis of selfishness rules and precepts of
humanity, justice, love, faithfulness, and devotion are deduced. It
ought not, however, to be forgotten that the Stoics, to whom the claim
of clear and consistent thought cannot be denied, were involved in
similar difficulties. They, like the Epicureans, built up a rational
system on a basis of the senses. They, too, constructed an ideal theory
of morals on a material groundwork of metaphysics. They, too, declared
that universal law is the only active power, whilst they maintained
that reality belongs only to the world of matter. They, too, deduced a
strict theory of virtue from the principle of self-preservation; not to
mention the inconsistent attitude which they assumed towards the
popular religion. To deny to the Stoics a unity and connectedness of
system, because of these scientific defects and inconsistencies, would
be felt to be doing them an injustice. And can Epicureanism be fairly
condemned, when its faults are essentially of the same kind (though a
little more obvious) as those of the Stoics, without a single
extenuating circumstance which can be urged on its behalf?

The strongest argument in favour of Epicureanism is that the
development of the system does not pretend to rest upon an intellectual
platform. Epicurus sought in philosophy a path to happiness, a school
of practical wisdom. For him knowledge has only a secondary value,
because it contributes to this end; indeed, both the tone and the
results of his intellectual activity were determined by a reference to
this end. In the case of the Stoics, however, it has been already seen
that the comparative subordination of Logic and Natural Science to
Moral Science, the going back to the older view of nature, the
vindication of the truth of the senses and of the reality of matter,
grew out of their peculiarly one-sided view of the scope of philosophy.
In the case of Epicurus the same results appear, and all the more
markedly, since Epicurus did not, like the Stoics, look for happiness
in subordination to a universal law, but in individual gratification or
pleasure. For him the recognition of a universal law had not the same
importance as for the Stoics; and consequently Epicurus did not feel
the same need of a scientific method as they had done. He could
therefore more exclusively content himself with the impressions of the
senses, and regard them as the only unfailing source of knowledge. No
necessity compelled him to advance from pure materialism to a view of
matter in which it is described as possessing a soul, and made to be
the bearer of reason. In fact, the more exclusively everything was
referred by him to mechanical causes, the more easily could he regard
the individual as independent of all superhuman forces in his pursuit
of happiness, and left entirely to himself and his natural powers. No
system in ancient times has so consistently carried out the mechanical
view of nature as that of the Atomists. None, therefore, afforded such
a strong metaphysical support to the Epicurean views of the absolute
worth of the individual. It was as natural for Epicurus to build on the
teaching of Democritus as for the Stoics to build on that of
Heraclitus. But Epicurus, influenced probably more by practical than by
scientific considerations, allowed himself, by his theory of the
swerving aside of atoms, to destroy the consistency of the theory of
Democritus. [1378]

It is hardly necessary to notice here how the distinctive features of
the Epicurean morals were developed out of their theory of happiness,
in contrast to the Stoic teaching. The happiness of Epicurus, however,
does not depend upon sensual gratification as such, but upon repose of
mind and cheerfulness of disposition. His theory of morals, therefore,
notwithstanding its foundation in pleasure, bears a nobler character,
which is seen in its language as to the wise man’s relations to the
pains and passions of the body, to poverty and riches, to life and
death, quite as much as in the mild humanity and the warm and hearty
appreciation of friendship by the Epicurean School. The rationalising
spirit of that School was undoubtedly opposed to any religious belief
which supposed an intervention of God in the course of the world, or
the world’s influence on man for weal or woe; but its appeal to the
senses without criticism placed no objection in the way of admitting
divine beings, from whom no such intervention need be feared. Nay,
more, this belief seemed the most natural ground for explaining the
popular belief in Gods. It satisfied an inborn and apparently keenly
felt want by supplying an appropriate object of devotion, and a
standard by which to test the accuracy of moral ideas. Hence,
notwithstanding scientific defects and contradictions, the whole system
of Epicurus bears a definite stamp. All the essential parts of that
system are subservient to one and the same end. The consistent working
out of a scientific view of nature is looked for in vain; but there is
no lack of consistency arising from an undeniable reference of the
individual to a definite and practical standard.




[B. Historical position of Epicureanism.]

[(1) Relation to Stoicism.]

Looking to the wider historical relations of the Epicurean system, the
first point which calls for remark is the relation of that system to
Stoicism. The contrast between the two Schools is obvious; attention
having been already drawn to it on all the more important points. It is
likewise well known that a constant rivalry existed between the two
Schools during their whole careers, that the Stoics looked down on the
Epicureans, and circulated many calumnies with respect to their morals.
For these statements proofs may be found in the preceding pages.
Nevertheless, the two Schools are related in so many respects, that
they can only be regarded as parallel links connected in one chain,
their differences being varieties where the same main tendency


[(a) Points of agreement.]

exists. Both agree in the general character of their philosophy. In
both practical considerations prevail over speculation. Both treat
natural science and logic as sciences subsidiary to ethics—natural
science especially in view of its bearing on religion. Both attach more
importance to natural science than to logic. If the Epicurean neglect
of scientific rules forms a contrast to the care which the Stoics
devoted thereto, both Schools are at least agreed in one thing—in
displaying greater independence in investigating the question as to a
test of truth. By both this standard was placed in the senses; and to
all appearances both were led to take this view by the same cause;
appeals to the senses being a consequence of their purely practical way
of looking at things. Both, moreover, employed against scepticism the
same practical postulate—the argument that knowledge must be possible,
or no certainty of action would be possible. They even agree in not
being content with the phenomena supplied by the senses as such,
although Epicurus as little approved of the Stoic theory of
irresistible impressions as he did of their logical analysis of the
forms of thought. With such appeals to the senses how could there be
any other result than materialism both in the Stoic and Epicurean
systems? But it is strange that the materialism in both Schools should
be based on the same definition of reality, corresponding with their
practical way of looking at things. [1379]


[(b) Points of difference.]

In the unfolding and detailed exposition of their materialistic views
the systems diverge, more widely, perhaps, than the philosophers
themselves, whose leading they professed to follow. These divergencies
appear particularly on the subject of nature, the Stoics regarding
nature as a system of design, the Epicureans explaining it as a
mechanical product. Whilst the Stoics adhered to fatalism, and saw God
everywhere, the Epicureans held the theory of atoms, and the theory of
necessity. Whilst the Stoics were speculatively orthodox, the
Epicureans were irreligious freethinkers. Both meet again in that
branch of natural science which is most important in respect of
morals—the part dealing with man. Both hold that the soul is a fiery
atmospheric substance. Even the proof for this view, derived from the
mutual influence of body and soul, is common to both. Both distinguish
between the higher and the lower parts of the soul, and thus even the
Epicureans in their psychology allow a belief in the superiority of
reason to the senses, and in the divine origin of the soul.

The arena of the warmest dispute between the two Schools is, however,
ethics. Yet, even on this ground, they are more nearly related than
appears at first sight. No greater contrast appears to be possible than
that between the Epicurean theory of pleasure and the Stoic theory of
virtue; and true it is that the two theories are diametrically
opposite. Nevertheless, not only are both aiming at one and the same
end—the happiness of mankind—but the conditions of happiness are also
laid down by both in the same spirit. According to Zeno virtue,
according to Epicurus pleasure, is the highest and only good; but the
former in making virtue consist essentially in withdrawal from the
senses or insensibility; the latter in seeking pleasure in repose of
mind or imperturbability, are expressing the same belief. Man can only
find unconditional and enduring satisfaction, when by means of
knowledge he attains to a condition of mind at rest with itself, and
also to an independence of external attractions and misfortunes. The
same unlimited appeal to personal truth is the common groundwork of
both systems. Both have expanded this idea under the same form—that of
the ideal wise man—for the most part with the same features. The wise
man of Epicurus is, as we have seen, superior to pain and want; he
enjoys an excellence which cannot be lost; and he lives among men a
very God in intelligence and happiness. Thus, when worked out into
details, the difference in the estimate of pleasure and virtue by the
Stoics and Epicureans seems to vanish. Neither the Stoic can separate
happiness from virtue, nor the Epicurean separate virtue from
happiness.

But, whilst recommending a living for society, both systems take no
real interest in social life. The recognition of a natural society
amongst mankind, of certain positive relations to state and family,
above all, a clear enunciation of a citizenship of the world,
characterise the Stoics. The pursuit of friendship, and the gentle
humanity of their ethics, characterise the Epicureans. Together with
these peculiarities one common feature cannot be ignored. Both have
renounced the political character of the old propriety of conduct, and
diverting their attention from public life, seek to find a basis for
universal morality in the simple relation of man to man.


[(c) The relationship greater than the difference.]

The united weight of all these points of resemblance is sufficient to
warrant the assertion that, notwithstanding their differences, the
Stoics and Epicureans stand on the same footing, and that the sharpness
of the contrast between them is owing to their laying hold of opposite
sides of one and the same principle. Abstract personality, and
self-consciousness developed into a generic idea, is for both the
highest aim. Compared with it not only the state of the senses, but the
scientific knowledge of things, and the realisation of moral ideas in a
commonwealth, are of minor importance. In this self-consciousness
happiness consists. To implant it in man is the object of philosophy,
and knowledge is only of value when and in as far as it ministers to
this end. The point of difference between the two Schools is their view
of the conditions under which that certainty of consciousness is
attained. The Stoics hope to attain it by the entire subordination of
the individual to universal law. The Epicureans, on the other hand, are
of opinion that man can only then be content in himself when he is
restrained by nothing external to himself. The first condition of
happiness consists in liberating individual life from all dependence on
others, and all disturbing causes. The former, therefore, make virtue,
the latter make personal well-being or pleasure, the highest good. By
the Epicureans, however, pleasure is usually conceived as of a purely
negative character, as being freedom from pain, and is referred to the
whole of human life. Hence it is always made to depend on the
moderation of desires, on indifference to outward ills, and the state
of the senses, on intelligence and actions conformable with
intelligence, in short, on virtue and wisdom. Hence, too, the
Epicureans arrive by a roundabout course at the same result as the
Stoics—the conviction that happiness can only be the lot of those who
are altogether independent of external things, and enjoy perfect inward
harmony.



[(2) Relation to Aristippus.]

Towards the older philosophy Epicureanism bears nearly the same
relation as Stoicism. True it is that Epicurus and his School would not
recognise their obligation to either one or other of their
predecessors. [1380] But far from disproving the influence of previous
systems on his own, this conduct only shows the personal vanity of
Epicurus. Epicureanism, like Stoicism, starts with the object of
bringing down science from metaphysical speculation to the simpler form
of a practical science of life. Both systems of philosophy, therefore,
turn away from Plato and Aristotle, whose labours they notably neglect,
to Socrates and those Socratic Schools which, without more extensive
meddling with science, are content with ethics. Circumstances, however,
led Epicurus to follow Aristippus as Zeno had followed Antisthenes. Not
only in morals did Epicurus derive his principle of pleasure from the
Cyrenaics; he likewise derived from them his theory of knowledge, that
the sense-impressions are the only source of ideas, and that every
feeling is true in itself. Nor can he altogether deny that feelings
only furnish direct information respecting our personal states, and
respecting the relative properties of things. With the Cyrenaics, too,
he taught that true pleasure can only be secured by philosophic
intelligence, and that this intelligence aims, before all things, at
liberating the mind from passion, fear, and superstition. At the same
time, he is by no means prepared to follow the Cyrenaics unreservedly.
His theory of morals differs, as has already been seen, from the
Cyrenaic theory in this important particular, that not sensual and
individual pleasure, but mental repose and the whole state of the mind
is regarded as the ultimate end, and the highest good in life. It was
thus impossible for him to be content, as the Cyrenaics were, with
feelings only, with individual and personal impressions. He could not
help requiring conviction which reposed on a real knowledge of things,
since only on such conviction can an equable and certain tone of mind
depend.



[(3) Relation to Democritus.]

Epicurus, therefore, not only differed from Aristippus with regard to
feelings, by referring all feelings to impressions from without, of
which he considered them true representations, but he felt himself
called upon to oppose the Cyrenaic contempt for theories of nature,
just as the Stoics had opposed the Cynic contempt for science. To the
physics of Democritus he looked for a scientific basis for his ethics,
just as they had looked to the system of Heraclitus. But the closer he
clung to Democritus, owing to the weakness of his own interest in
nature, the more it becomes apparent that his whole study of nature was
subservient to a moral purpose, and hence of a purely relative value.
Accordingly, he had not the least hesitation in setting consistency at
defiance, by assuming the swerving aside of atoms and the freedom of
the will. It is not only altogether improbable that Epicurus was but a
second edition of Democritus—for history knows of no such
repetitions—but as a matter of fact it is false. Closer observation
proves that even when the two philosophers agree in individual
statements, the meaning which they attach to these assertions and the
whole spirit of their systems are widely divergent. Democritus aims at
explaining natural phenomena by natural causes. He wishes, in short,
for a science of nature purely for its own sake. Epicurus wishes for a
view of nature which shall be able to avert disturbing influences from
man’s inner life. Natural science stands with him entirely in the
service of ethics. If in point of substance his system is borrowed from
another system, yet its whole position and treatment supposes an
entirely new view of things. The Socratic introspection, and the
Sophistic resolution of natural philosophy into personal rationalising,
are its historical antecedents; and it owes its existence to that
general dislike for pure theory, which constitutes the common
peculiarity of all the post-Aristotelian systems.



[(4) Relation to Aristotle and Plato.]

Excepting the systems named, Epicureanism, so far as is known, is
connected with no other previous system. Even its attack upon those
systems appears to have consisted of general dogmatic and superficial
statements. Still it must not be forgotten that Epicureanism
presupposes the line of thought originated by Socrates, not only as
found in the collateral Cyrenaic branch, but as found in the main line
of regular development by Plato and Aristotle. The view of Plato and
Aristotle, which distinguishes the immaterial essence from the sensible
appearance of things, and attributes reality only to the former, is
undoubtedly attacked by Epicurus as by Zeno, on metaphysical grounds.
Practically, however, he approaches very much nearer to this view in
all those points in which his teaching deviates from the Cyrenaic and
resembles that of the Stoics.

It has been observed on a former occasion that the indifference to the
immediate conditions of the senses, the withdrawal of the mind within
itself, the contentment with itself of the thinking subject, which
Epicurus no less than the Stoics and cotemporary Sceptics required, is
itself a consequence of the idealism of Plato and Aristotle. Even the
materialism of the post-Aristotelian systems, it is said, was by no
means a going back to the old pre-Socratic philosophy of nature, but a
one-sided practical apprehension of that idealism. These systems deny a
soul in nature or a soul in man, because they look exclusively to
consciousness and to personal activity for independence of the senses.
The correctness of this observation may be easily proved from the
Epicurean teaching, notwithstanding the severity and harshness of its
materialism. Why was it that Epicurus relentlessly banished from nature
all immaterial causes and all idea of purpose? And why did he confine
himself exclusively to a mechanical explanation of nature? Was it not
because he felt afraid that the admission of any other than material
causes would imperil the certainty of consciousness; because he feared
to lose the firm groundwork of reality by admitting invisible forces,
and to expose human life to influences beyond calculation if he allowed
anything immaterial? Yet in his view of life, how little does he adhere
to present facts, since his wise man is made to enjoy perfect happiness
by himself alone, independent of everything external. The same ideal is
reproduced in the Epicurean Gods. In their isolated contemplation of
themselves, what else do they resemble but the God of Aristotle, who,
aloof from all intermeddling with the world, meditates on himself
alone? No doubt the independent existence of the thinking mind is held
by Aristotle in a clear and dignified manner. By Epicurus it is
pourtrayed in a sensuous, and, therefore, a contradictory form. But the
connection of the views of both cannot be ignored. There is a similar
general relation between the Epicurean philosophy and that of Plato and
Aristotle. [1381] Little as the former can be compared with the latter
in breadth and depth, it must not, therefore, be regarded as an
intellectual monstrosity. Epicureanism is a tenable though one-sided
expression of a certain stage in the development of the intellect of
Greece.








