CHAPTER XVII.

THE EPICUREAN VIEWS ON NATURE.


[A. General views on nature.]

[(1) Object, value, and method of the study of nature.]

If Epicurus and his followers underrated logic, to natural science they
attached a considerable value. This value was, however, exclusively
derived from a sense of the practical advantages which a knowledge of
nature confers in opposing superstition. Without such an object the
study of nature would have seemed wholly superfluous. [1149] Such being
their attitude of mind, the Epicureans were, as might have been
expected, indifferent about giving a complete and accurate explanation
of phenomena. Their one aim was to put forward such a view of nature as
would do away with the necessity for supernatural intervention, without
at the same time pretending to offer a sufficient solution of the
problems raised by science. [1150] Whilst, therefore, he devoted
considerable attention to natural science, [1151] Epicurus does not
seem to have considered certainty to be of importance, or even to be
possible, in dealing with details of scientific study. Of the general
causes of things we can and ought to entertain a firm conviction, since
the possibility of overcoming religious prejudices and the fears
occasioned by them depends on these convictions. No such result,
however, follows from the investigation of details, which, on the
contrary, only tends to confirm prejudices in those who are not already
emancipated from them. In dealing with details, therefore, it is enough
for Epicurus to show that various natural causes for phenomena may be
imagined, and to offer various suggestions which dispense with the
intervention of the Gods and the myths of a belief in Providence.
[1152] To say that any one of these suggestions is the only possible
one, is in most cases to exceed the bounds of experience and human
knowledge, and to go back to the capricious explanations of mythology.
[1153] Possibly the world may move, and possibly it may be at rest.
Possibly it may be round, or else it may be triangular, or have any
other shape. Possibly the sun and the stars may be extinguished at
setting, and be lighted afresh at rising. It is, however, equally
possible that they may only disappear under the earth and reappear
again, or that their rising and setting may be due to yet other causes.
Possibly the waxing and waning of the moon may be caused by the moon’s
revolving; or it may be due to an atmospheric change, or to an actual
increase and decrease in the moon’s size, or to some other cause.
Possibly the moon may shine with borrowed light, or it may shine with
its own, experience supplying us with instances of bodies which give
their own light, and of those which have their light borrowed. [1154]
From these and such-like statements it appears that questions of
natural science in themselves have no value for Epicurus. Whilst
granting that only one natural explanation of phenomena is generally
possible, yet in any particular case he is perfectly indifferent which
explanation is adopted.



[(2) Mechanical explanation of nature.]

Great stress is, however, laid by him on the general explanation. In
contrast with the religious view which regards the world as a system of
means leading to ends, the leading business of the natural science of
the Epicureans is to refer all phenomena to natural causes. To an
Epicurean nothing appeals more absurd than to suppose that the
arrangements of nature have for their object the well-being of mankind,
or that they have any object at all. The tongue is not given us for the
purpose of speaking, nor the ears for the purpose of hearing. As a
matter of fact, it would, indeed, be more correct to say, that we speak
because we have a tongue, and hear because we have ears. Natural powers
have acted purely according to the law of necessity, and among their
various products there could not fail to be some presenting the
appearance of purpose in their arrangement. In the case of man there
have resulted many such products and powers. But this result is by no
means intentional; it is an accidental consequence of natural causes.
In explaining nature all thought of Gods must be put out of sight. For
their happiness would be inconceivable, on the supposition that they
cared for man and his welfare. [1155]

Confining his interest in nature, as Epicurus did, entirely to this
general view of things, he was all the more inclined, in carrying it
into details, to rely upon some older system. No system, however,
appeared to correspond better with his tone of mind than that of
Democritus, which, moreover, commended itself to him not only by
absolutely banishing the idea of final cause, but by referring
everything to matter, and by its theory of atoms. As Epicurus places in
each individual thing taken by itself the ultimate end of action, so
Democritus had theoretically made all that is real to consist in what
is absolutely individual or in atoms. His natural science, therefore,
seemed to present the most natural basis for the Epicurean Ethics. If
the Stoics, in their views of nature, closely followed Heraclitus,
Epicurus in his followed Democritus still more closely, and hence, with
the exception of one single point, the additions made by Epicurus to
the theory of this philosopher are of no philosophical importance.



[(3) Atoms and empty space.]

With Democritus Epicurus agreed in holding that there is no other form
of reality except that of bodily reality. Every substance, he says in
the words of the Stoics, must affect others, and be affected by them;
and whatever affects others or is itself affected, is corporeal.
Corporeal substance is, therefore, the only kind of substance. [1156]
The various qualities of things, essential as well as accidental
qualities, are accordingly not incorporeal existences, but simply
chance modes of body, the former being called by Epicurus συμβεβηκότα,
the latter συμπτώματα. [1157] But a second something is necessary
besides corporeal substance in order to explain phenomena, viz. empty
space. That empty space exists is proved by the differences of weight
in bodies. For what else could be the cause of this difference? [1158]
It is proved still more conclusively by motion, motion being impossible
without empty space. [1159] Mind as a moving cause, however, seems to
Epicurus altogether superfluous. Everything that exists consists of
bodies and empty space, and there is no third thing. [1160]

Democritus had resolved the two conceptions of body and empty space
into the conceptions of being and not being. True to his position,
Epicurus dispensed with this speculative basis, and clinging to the
ordinary notions of empty space, and of a material filling space,
[1161] he simply proves these notions by the qualities of phenomena.
For this very reason Democritus’s division of body into innumerable
primary particles or atoms appeared to him most necessary. All bodies
known to us by sensation are composed of parts. [1162] If the process
of division were infinitely continued, all things would ultimately be
resolved into the non-existent—in this Epicurus and Democritus
agree;—and conversely all things must have been formed out of the
non-existent, in defiance of the first principle of natural science
that nothing can come from nothing, and that nothing can be resolved
into nothing. [1163] Hence, we must conclude that the primary component
parts of things can neither have come into existence nor cease to
exist, nor yet be changed in their nature. [1164] These primary bodies
contain no empty space in themselves, and hence can neither be divided
nor destroyed, nor be changed in any way. [1165] They are so small that
they do not impress the senses, and as a matter of fact we do not see
them. Nevertheless they must not be regarded as mathematical atoms, the
name atoms being assigned to them only because their bodily structure
will not admit of division. [1166] They have neither colour, warmth,
smell, nor any other property; properties belong only to distinct
materials; [1167] and for this reason they must not be sought in the
four elements, all of which, as experience shows, come into being and
pass away. [1168] They possess only the universal qualities of all
corporeal things, viz. shape, size, and weight. [1169]

Not only must atoms, like all other bodies, have shape, but there must
exist among them indefinitely many varieties of shape, or it would be
impossible to account for the innumerable differences of things. There
cannot, however, be really an infinite number of shapes, as Democritus
maintained, in any limited body—this is intelligible of itself—nor yet
in the whole universe, [1170] since an unlimited number would make the
arrangement of the world impossible, everything in the world being
circumscribed by certain containing limits. [1171] Again, atoms must be
different in point of size; for all materials cannot be divided into
particles of equal size. Yet even to this difference there must be some
limitation. An atom must neither be so large as to become an object of
sense, nor can it, after what has been said, be infinitely small.
[1172] From difference in point of size the difference of atoms in
point of weight follows. [1173] In point of number atoms must be
innumerable, and in the same way empty space must be unbounded also.
For since everything bounded must be bounded by something, it is
impossible to imagine any bounds of the universe beyond which nothing
exists, and hence there can be no bounds at all. The absence of bounds
must, apply to the mass of atoms quite as much as to empty space. If an
infinite number of atoms would not find room in a limited space,
conversely a limited number of atoms would be lost in empty space, and
never able to form a world. [1174] In all these views Epicurus closely
follows Democritus, no doubt agreeing with him also in explaining the
qualities of things by the composition of their atoms. [1175]




[B. The world.]

[(1) The swerving aside of atoms.]

In deducing the origin of things from their primary causes, Epicurus,
however, deviates widely from his predecessor. Atoms—so it was taught
by both—have by virtue of their weight been eternally engaged in a
downward motion. [1176] That all bodies should move downwards in empty
space seemed to Epicurus a matter of course; for whatever is heavy must
fall unless it is supported. [1177] He was therefore opposed to the
Aristotelian view that heaviness shows itself in the form of attraction
towards a centre, and consequently to his further supposition that
downward mode of motion belongs only to certain bodies, circular motion
being for others more natural. [1178] The objection that in endless
space there is no above or below he could meet only by appealing to
experience; [1179] some things always appear above our heads, others
beneath our feet. [1180] But whilst Democritus held that atoms in their
downward motion meet together, thus giving rise to a rotatory motion,
no such view commended itself to Epicurus. Nay rather in his view all
atoms will fall equally fast, since empty space offers no resistance,
and falling perpendicularly it is impossible to see how they can meet.
[1181] To render a meeting possible he supposes the smallest possible
swerving aside from the perpendicular line in falling. This assumption
seemed to him indispensable, since it would be otherwise impossible to
assert the freedom of the human will. For how can the will be free if
everything falls according to the strict law of gravity? For the same
reason this swerving aside was not supposed to proceed from any natural
necessity, but simply from the power of self-motion in the atoms.
[1182] In consequence of their meeting one part of the atoms
rebounds—so Democritus also taught; the lighter ones are forced
upwards, and from the upward and downward motions combined a rotatory
motion arises. [1183] When this motion takes place a clustering of
atoms is the consequence, which by their own motion separate themselves
from the remaining mass, and form a world of themselves. [1184] Atoms
being eternal and unchangeable, the process of forming worlds must go
on without beginning or end; [1185] and inasmuch as they are also
infinite in number, and empty space is infinite also, there must be an
innumerable number of worlds. [1186] In the character of these worlds
the greatest possible variety may be supposed, since it is most
unlikely that the innumerable combinations of atoms all brought about
at random will fall out alike. Equally impossible is it to assert that
all these worlds are absolutely dissimilar. In general, Epicurus
assumed that they are extremely different both in point of size and
arrangement, and that here and there one may be similar to our own.
[1187] Moreover, since eternity affords time for all imaginable
combinations of atoms, nothing can ever be brought about now which has
not already existed. [1188] In one respect all worlds are alike; they
come into existence, are liable to decay, and, like all other
individual elements, are exposed to a gradual increase and decrease.
[1189] So we might have assumed from other positions in his system.
Between the individual worlds both Democritus and Epicurus insert
intermediate world-spaces, in which by the clustering of atoms from
time to time new worlds come into being. [1190]



[(2) Origin of the world.]

The origin of our world is thus described. At a certain period of
time—Lucretius [1191] believes at no very distant period—a cluster of
atoms of varying shape and size was formed in this definite portion of
space. These atoms meeting, there first arose from the pressure and
rebound of the quickly falling particles motions of every variety in
every direction. Soon the greater atoms pressing downwards, by dint of
weight forced upwards the smaller and lighter atoms, the fiery ones
topmost and with the greatest impetus to form the ether, and afterwards
those which form the air. [1192] The upper pressure ceasing, these
masses, under the pressure of particles still joining it from below,
spread forth sidewards, and thus the belts of fire and air were formed.
Next uprose those atoms out of which the sun and stars are formed into
the heights, and at the same time the earth settled down, its inner
part being partially exhausted in those places where the sea now is. By
the influence of the warmth of the ether, and the sun-heat, the
earth-mass was bound together more closely, the sea was pressed out of
it, and the surface assumed an uneven character. [1193] The world is
shut off from other worlds and from empty space by those bodies which
form its external boundary. [1194]



[(3) Arrangement of the universe.]

Asking, in the next place, what idea must be formed of the arrangement
of the world, we are met by the two principles which Epicurus is never
weary of inculcating; one, that we must explain nothing as an
intentional arrangement by deity, but refer everything simply and
solely to mechanical causes; the other, that in explaining phenomena
the widest possible room must be given for hypotheses of every kind,
and that nothing is more absurd than to abridge the wide range of
possible explanations by exclusively deciding in favour of any one.
[1195] Thereby the investigation of nature loses for him its value as
such, nor is it of any great interest to us to follow his speculations
on nature into detail. On one point he dogmatises, protesting that the
framework of heaven must not be considered the work of God, [1196] nor
must life and reason be attributed to the stars. [1197] Otherwise, on
nearly all the questions which engaged the attention of astronomers at
that time, he observes the greatest indifference, treating the views of
his predecessors, good and bad alike, with an easy superficiality which
can only be explained by supposing him altogether indifferent [1198] as
to their truth. The state of his own astronomical knowledge can,
moreover, be easily seen by recalling the notorious assertion [1199]
that the sun, the moon, and the stars are either not at all, or only a
little larger, and may possibly be even less than they appear to be.
The Epicureans also thought to support their theory that the earth,
borne by the air, reposes in the middle of the world—a theory which on
their hypothesis of the weight of bodies is impossible [1200]—by the
gradual diminution in weight of the surrounding bodies. [1201] It would
be impossible here to go through the treatment which they gave to
atmospheric and terrestrial phenomena, particularly as the principle
already indicated was most freely used, and many explanations were
given as being all equally possible. [1202]



[(4) Plants and animals.]

Out of the newly made earth plants at first grew, [1203] and afterwards
animals came forth, since the latter, according to Lucretius, can by no
possibility have fallen from heaven. [1204] In other worlds, likewise,
living beings came into existence, though not necessarily in all.
[1205] Among these beings were originally, as Empedocles had previously
supposed, [1206] all sorts of composite or deformed creatures. Those,
however, alone continued to exist which were fitted by nature to find
support, to propagate, and to protect themselves from danger. Romantic
creatures, such as centaurs of chimæras, can never have existed here,
because the beings of which they are compounded would require
conditions of life [1207] altogether different.




[C. Mankind.]

[(1) Origin of the human race.]

Aiming, as the Epicureans did, at explaining the origin of men and
animals in a purely natural manner, they likewise tried to form an
idea, equally according to nature, of the original state and historical
development of the human race. In this attempt they ignored all
legendary notions, and, notwithstanding their leaning towards
materialism, they on the whole advocated perfectly sound views. The men
of early times, so thought Lucretius, were stronger and more powerful
than the men of to-day. Rude and ignorant as beasts, they lived in the
woods in a perpetual state of warfare with the wild animals, without
justice or society. [1208] The first and most important step in a
social direction was the discovery of fire, the learning to build huts,
and to clothe themselves in skins; then began marriage and domestic
life, [1209] and speech, originally not a matter of convention, but,
like the noises of animals, the natural expression of thoughts and
feelings, was developed. [1210] The older the human race grew, the more
they learned of the arts and skill which minister to the preservation
and enjoyment of life. These arts were first learnt by experience,
under the pressure of nature, or the compulsion of want. What had thus
been discovered was completed by reflection, the more gifted preceding
the rest as teachers. [1211] In exactly the same way civil society was
developed. Individuals built strongholds, and made themselves rulers.
In time the power of kings aroused envy, and they were massacred. To
crush the anarchy which then arose, magistrates were chosen, and order
established by penal laws. [1212] It will subsequently be seen that
Epicurus explained religion in the same way by natural growth.



[(2) The soul.]

The apotheosis of nature, which has been apparent in Epicurus’s whole
view of history, becomes specially prominent in his treatment of
psychology. This treatment could, after all that has been said, be only
purely materialistic. The soul, like every other real being, is a body.
In support of this view the Epicureans appealed to the mutual relations
of the body and the soul, agreeing on this point with the Stoics.
[1213] The body of the soul, however, consists of the finest, lightest,
and most easily moved atoms, as is manifest from the speed of thought,
from the instantaneous dissolution of the soul after death, and,
moreover, from the fact that the soulless body is as heavy as the body
in which there is a soul. [1214] Hence Epicurus, again agreeing with
the Stoics, describes the soul as a material resembling fire and air,
[1215] or, more accurately, as composed of four elements, fire, air,
vapour, and a fourth nameless element. It consists of the finest atoms,
and is the cause of feeling, [1216] and according as one or other of
these elements preponderates, the character of man is of one or the
other kind. [1217] Like the Stoics, Epicurus believed that the
soul-element is received by generation from the parents’ souls, [1218]
and that it is spread over the whole body, [1219] growing as the body
grows. [1220] At the same time he makes a distinction somewhat similar
to that made by the Stoics in their doctrine of the sovereign part of
the soul (ἡγεμονικόν). [1221] Only the irrational part of the soul is
diffused as a principle of life over the whole body; the rational part
has its seat in the breast. [1222] To the rational part belong mental
activity, sensation, and perception, the motion of the will and the
mind, and in this latter sense life itself; both parts together make up
one being, yet they may exist in different conditions. The mind may be
cheerful whilst the body and the irrational soul feel pain, or the
reverse may be the case. It is even possible that portions of the
irrational soul may be lost by the mutilation of the body, without
detriment to the rational soul, or consequently to life. [1223] When,
however, the connection between soul and body is fully severed, then
the soul can no longer exist. Deprived of the surrounding shelter of
the body, its atoms are dispersed in a moment, owing to their
lightness; and the body in consequence, being unable to exist without
the soul, goes over into corruption. [1224] If this view appears to
hold out the most gloomy prospect for the future, Epicurus considers
that it cannot really be so. With life every feeling of evil ceases,
[1225] and the time when we shall no longer exist affects us just as
little as the time before we existed. [1226] Nay, more, he entertains
the opinion that his teaching alone can reconcile us to death by
removing all fear of the nether world and its terrors. [1227]

Allowing that many of these statements are natural consequences of the
principles of Epicurus, the distinction between a rational and an
irrational soul must, nevertheless, at first sight seem strange in a
system so thoroughly materialistic as was that of the Epicureans. And
yet this distinction is not stranger than the corresponding parts of
the Stoic teaching. If the Stoic views may be referred to the
distinction which they drew in morals between the senses and the
reason, not less are the Epicurean ethics marked by the same contrast
between the general and the sensuous side of the mind. Hence Epicurus
shares the Stoic belief in an ethereal origin of the human race; [1228]
and although this belief as at first expressed only implies that man,
like other living beings, is composed of ethereal elements, yet there
is connected with it the distinction already discussed in the case of
the Stoics between the higher and the lower parts of man, which
ultimately comes to be simply another mode of expressing the difference
between mind and matter.



[(3) Sensation.]

Among the phenomena of the soul’s life sensation is made to harmonise
with the general principles of the Epicurean view of nature by the aid
of Democritus’s doctrine of atom-pictures (εἴδωλα). From the surface of
bodies—this is the pith of that doctrine—the finest possible particles
are constantly being thrown off, which by virtue of their fineness
traverse the furthest spaces in an infinitely short time, hurrying
through the void. [1229] Many of these exhalations are arrested by some
obstacle soon after coming forth, or are otherwise thrown into
confusion. In the case of others the atoms for a long time retain the
same position and connection which they had in bodies themselves, thus
presenting a picture of things, and only lacking corporeal solidity. As
these pictures are conveyed to the soul by the various organs of sense,
our impressions of things arise. [1230] Even those impressions, which
have no corresponding real object, must be referred to such pictures
present in the soul. [1231] For often pictures last longer than things
themselves; [1232] and often by a casual combination of atoms pictures
are formed in the air resembling no one single thing. Sometimes, too,
pictures of various kinds are combined on their way to the senses;
thus, for instance, the notion of a Centaur is caused by the union of
the picture of a man with that of a horse, not only in our imagination,
but already previously in the atom-picture. [1233] If, therefore,
sensation distorts or imperfectly represents real objects, it must be
explained as being due to some change or mutilation in the
atom-pictures before they reach our senses. [1234]

In thus explaining mental impressions, the Epicureans do not allow
themselves to be disturbed by the fact that we can recall at pleasure
the ideas of all possible things. The cause of this power was rather
supposed to be the circumstance that we are always surrounded by an
innumerable number of atom-pictures, none of which we perceive unless
our attention is directed to them. Likewise the seeming motion of forms
which we behold in dreams is explained by the hasty succession of
similar atom-pictures, appearing to us as changes of one and the same
picture. [1235] But besides receiving pictures supplied from without,
spontaneous motion with regard to these pictures takes place on our
part, a motion connected in the first instance with the soul’s motion
when it receives the outward impression, but not to be regarded as a
simple continuation thereof. This independent motion gives rise to
opinion, and hence opinion is not so necessary or so universally true
as feeling. It may agree with feeling, or it may not agree with it. It
may be true or it may be false. [1236] The conditions of its being true
or false have been previously investigated. [1237]



[(4) Will.]

Impressions also give rise to will and action, the soul being set in
motion by impressions, and this motion extending from the soul to the
body. [1238] Into the nature of will, however, Epicurus does not appear
to have instituted a more careful psychological investigation. It was
enough for him to assert the freedom of the will. This freedom he
considers absolutely indispensable, if anything we do is to be
considered our own, unless we are prepared to despair of moral
responsibility altogether, and to resign ourselves to a comfortless and
inexorable necessity. [1239] To make freedom possible, Epicurus had
introduced accident into the motion of atoms, and for the same reason
he denies the truth of disjunctive propositions which apply to the
future. [1240] In the latter respect, he, no doubt, only attacked the
material truth of two clauses, without impugning the formal accuracy of
the disjunction, [1241] i.e. he did not deny that of two contradictory
cases either one or the other must happen, nor did he deny the truth of
saying: To-morrow Epicurus will either be alive or not alive. But he
disputed the truth of each clause taken by itself. He denied the truth
of the sentence, Epicurus will be alive; and equally that of its
contradictory, Epicurus will not be alive; on the ground that the one
or the other statement only becomes true by the actual realisation of
an event at present uncertain. [1242] For this he deserves little
blame. Our real charge against him is that he did not more thoroughly
investigate the nature of the will and the conception of freedom, and
that he treats the subject of the soul as scantily and superficially as
he had treated the subject of nature.








