PART IV.

THE SCEPTICS—PYRRHO AND THE OLDER ACADEMY.


CHAPTER XXII.

PYRRHO.


[A. Historical position of Scepticism.]

Stoicism and Epicureanism are alike in one respect: they commence the
pursuit of happiness with definite dogmatic statements. The Sceptic
Schools, however, attempt to reach the same end by denying every
dogmatic position. Varied as the paths may be, the result is in all
cases the same; happiness is made to consist in the exaltation of the
mind above all external objects, in the withdrawal of man within his
own thinking self. Moving in the same sphere



[(1) Its relation to cotemporary dogmatic systems.]

as the cotemporary dogmatic systems, the post-Aristotelian Scepticism
takes a practical view of the business of philosophy, and estimates the
value of theoretical enquiries by their influence on the state and
happiness of man. It moreover agrees with cotemporary systems in its
ethical view of life; the object at which it aims is the same as that
at which those systems aim, viz. repose of mind, and imperturbability.
It differs from them, none the less; for the Epicureans and Stoics made
mental repose to depend on a knowledge of the world and its laws,
whereas the Sceptics are of opinion that it can only be obtained by
despairing of all knowledge. Hence, with the former morality depends on
a positive conviction as to the highest Good; with the latter, morality
consists in indifference to all that appears as Good to men. Important
as this difference may be, it must not therefore be forgotten that
Scepticism generally revolves in the same sphere as Stoicism and
Epicureanism, and that in renouncing all claim to knowledge, and all
interest in the external world, it is only pushing to extremes that
withdrawal of man into himself which we have seen to be the common
feature of these Schools. Not only, therefore, do these three lines of
thought belong to one and the same epoch, but such is their internal
connection that they may be regarded as three branches of a common
stock.



[(2) Causes producing it.]

More than one point of departure was offered to Scepticism by the
earlier philosophy. The Megarian criticism and the Cynic teaching had
taken up a position subversive of all connection of ideas, and of all
knowledge. Pyrrho, too, had received from the School of Democritus an
impulse to doubt. [1382] In particular, the development of the Platonic
and Aristotelian speculations by those who were not able to follow
them, had made men mistrustful of all speculation, until they at last
doubted the possibility of all knowledge. Not seldom do Sceptical
theories follow times of great philosophical originality. A stronger
impulse was given in the sequel by the Stoic and Epicurean systems.
Related to Scepticism by their practical tone, it was natural that
these systems should afford fuel to Scepticism. At the same time the
unsatisfactory groundwork upon which they were built, and the contrast
between their moral and physical teaching, promoted destructive
criticism. If, according to the Stoics and Epicureans, the particular
and the universal elements in the personal soul, the isolation of the
individual as an independent atom, and his being merged in a
pantheistic universe, are contrasted without being reconciled; among
the Sceptics this contrast has given place to neutrality. Neither the
Stoic nor the Epicurean theory can claim our adherence; neither the
unconditional value of pleasure, nor yet the unconditional value of
virtue; neither the truth of the senses nor the truth of rational
knowledge; neither the Atomist’s view of nature, nor the Pantheistic
view as it found expression in Heraclitus. The only thing which remains
certain amid universal uncertainty is abstract personality content with
itself, personality forming at once the starting-point and the goal of
the two contending systems.

The important back-influence of Stoicism and Epicureanism upon
Scepticism may be best gathered from the fact that Scepticism only
attained a wide extension and a more comprehensive basis in the New
Academy after the appearance of those systems. Before that time its
leading features had been indeed laid down by Pyrrho, but they had
never been developed into a permanent School of Scepticism, nor given
rise to an expanded theory of doubt.



[(3) Pyrrho and his followers.]

Pyrrho was a native of Elis, [1383] and may therefore have early made
the acquaintance of the Elean and Megarian criticism—that criticism, in
fact, which was the precursor of subsequent Scepticism. It can,
however, hardly be true that Bryso was his instructor. [1384] To
Anaxarchus, a follower of Democritus, he attached himself, and
accompanied that philosopher with Alexander’s army as far as India.
[1385] Perhaps, however, he is less indebted to Anaxarchus for the
sceptical than for the ethical parts of his teaching. [1386] At a later
period he resided in his native city, [1387] honoured by his
fellow-citizens, [1388] but in poor circumstances, [1389] which he bore
with his characteristic repose of mind. [1390] He died, it would
appear, at an advanced age, [1391] between 275 and 270 B.C., leaving no
writings behind. [1392] Even the ancients, therefore, only knew his
teaching by that of his pupils, among whom Timon of Phlius was the most
distinguished. [1393] Besides Timon several other of his pupils are
known by name. [1394] His School, however, was short-lived. [1395] Soon
after Timon it seems to have become extinct. [1396] Those who were
disposed to be sceptical now joined the New Academy, towards whose
founder even Timon made no secret of his grudge. [1397]




[B. Teaching of Pyrrho.]

[(1) Impossibility of knowledge.]

The little which is known of Pyrrho’s teaching may be summed up in the
three following statements: We can know nothing as to the nature of
things: Hence the right attitude towards them is to withhold judgment:
The necessary result of suspending judgment is imperturbability. He who
will live happily—for happiness is the starting-point with the
Sceptics—must, according to Timon, take these things into
consideration: What is the nature of things? What ought our attitude to
things to be? What is the gain resulting from these relations? [1398]
To the first of these three questions Pyrrho can only reply by saying
that things are altogether inaccessible to knowledge, and that whatever
property may be attributed to a thing, with equal justice the opposite
may be predicated. [1399] In support of this statement Pyrrho appears
to have argued that neither the senses nor reason furnish certain
knowledge. [1400] The senses do not show things as they are, but only
as they appear to be. [1401] Rational knowledge, even where it seems to
be most certain, in the sphere of morals, does not depend upon real
knowledge, but only upon tradition and habit. [1402] Against every
statement the opposite may be advanced with equal justice. [1403] If,
however, neither the senses nor reason alone can furnish trustworthy
testimony, no more can the two combined, and thus the third way is
barred, by which we might possibly have advanced to knowledge. [1404]
How many more of the arguments quoted by the later Sceptics belong to
Pyrrho it is impossible to say. The short duration and diffusion of
Pyrrho’s School renders it probable that with him Scepticism was not
far advanced. The same result appears to follow from its further
development in the Academy. The ten τρόποι, or aspects under which
sceptical objections were grouped, cannot with certainty be attributed
to any one before Ænesidemus. [1405] Portions of the arguments used at
a later day may be borrowed from Pyrrho and his pupils, [1406] but it
is impossible to discriminate these portions with certainty.



[(2) Withholding of judgment.]

Thus, if knowledge of things proves to be a failure, there only remains
as possible an attitude of pure Scepticism; and therein is contained
the answer to the second question. We know nothing whatever of the real
nature of things, and hence can neither believe nor assert anything as
to their nature. We cannot say of anything that it is or is not; but we
must abstain from every opinion, allowing that of all which appears to
us to be true, the opposite may with equal justice be true. [1407]
Accordingly, all our statements (as the Cyrenaics taught) only express
individual opinions, and not absolute realities. We cannot deny that
things appear to be of this or the other kind; but we can never say
that they are so. [1408] Even the assertion that things are of this or
the other kind is not an assertion, but a confession by the individual
of his state of mind. [1409] Hence, too, the universal rule of
indecision cannot be taken as an established principle, but only as a
confession, and, therefore, as only problematical. [1410] It must,
however, remain a matter of doubt how far the captious turns of
expression by which the Sceptics thought to parry the attacks of their
opponents come from Pyrrho’s School. The greater part, it is clear,
came into use in the struggle with the Dogmatists, and are not older
than the development of the Stoic theory of knowledge by Chrysippus,
and the criticism of Carneades to which it gave rise. In this
despairing of anything like certain conviction consists ἀφασία,
ἀκαταληψία, or ἐποχὴ, the withholding of judgment or state of
indecision which Pyrrho and Timon regard as the only true attitude in
speculation, [1411] and from which the whole School derived its
distinctive name. [1412]



[(3) Mental imperturbability.]

From this state of indecision, Timon, in reply to the third question,
argues that mental imperturbability or ἀταραξία proceeds, which can
alone conduct to true happiness. [1413] Men are disturbed by views and
prejudices which mislead them into the efforts of passion. Only the
Sceptic who has suspended all judgment is in a condition to regard
things with absolute calmness, unruffled by passion or desire. [1414]
He knows that it is a fond delusion to suppose that one external
condition is preferable to another. [1415] In reality only the tone of
mind or virtue possesses value. [1416] Thus, by withdrawing within
himself, man reaches happiness, which is the goal of all philosophy.
[1417] Absolute inactivity being, however, impossible, the Sceptic will
act on probabilities, and hence follow custom; [1418] but at the same
time he will be conscious that such conduct does not rest on a basis of
firm conviction. [1419] The province of uncertain opinion includes all
positive judgments respecting good and evil. Only in this conditional
form will Timon allow of goodness and divine goodness as standards of
conduct. [1420] The real object of Scepticism is, therefore, a purely
negative one—indifference. It cannot even be proved [1421] that
Pyrrho’s School so far accommodated itself to life, as to make
moderation rather than indifference the regulating principle for
unavoidable actions and desires. In this direction the School seems to
have done but little.








