CHAPTER XIV.

THE STOIC PHILOSOPHY AS A WHOLE AND ITS HISTORICAL POSITION.


[A. Inner connection of the Stoic system.]

Having now investigated the Stoic system in detail, we are in a
position to pass a definite judgment on the scope of the Stoic
philosophy, the import and the relation of its various parts, and its
historical position. Its peculiar character manifests itself before all
things in the three points to which attention was drawn at the outset:
[1031]—its pre-eminently practical tone, the determination of this
practical tendency by the notions of the good and of virtue, and the
use of logic and natural science as a scientific basis. Speculative
knowledge is not, as we have seen, to the Stoics an end in itself, but
only a means for producing a right moral attitude; all philosophical
research stands directly or indirectly in the service of virtue. Both
in the earlier and in the later days of its existence the Stoic School
advocated this principle in the most determined and exclusive manner,
nor was it even denied by Chrysippus, the chief representative of its
science and learning.



[(1) Ethical side of Stoicism.]

If it be then asked what is the right moral attitude, the Stoics reply:
action conformable to nature and reason—in other words, virtue. Virtue,
however, implies two things. On the one hand it implies the resignation
of the individual to the universe, obedience to the universal law; on
the other hand it implies the harmony of man with himself, the dominion
of the higher over the lower nature, of reason over emotion, and the
rising superior to everything which does not belong to his true nature.
Both statements may be reconciled, because the law of morality is
addressed only to reasonable beings, and is the law of their nature,
and can only be carried into execution by their own exertions. Still,
in the Stoic ethics, two currents of thought may be clearly
distinguished, which from time to time come into actual collision; the
one requiring the individual to live for the common good and for
society, the other impelling him to live for himself only, to
emancipate himself from all that is not himself, and to console himself
with the feeling of virtue. The first of these tendencies impels man to
seek the society of others; the second enables him to dispense with it.
From the former spring the virtues of justice, sociability, love of
man; from the latter, the inner freedom and happiness of the virtuous
man. The former culminates in citizenship of the world; the latter in
the self-sufficingness of the wise man. In as far as virtue includes
everything that can be required of man, happiness depends on it alone;
nothing is good but virtue, nothing is evil but vice; all that is not
connected with the moral nature is indifferent. On the other hand, in
as far as virtue is based on human nature, it stands on the same
footing with all else that is conformable with nature. If its own
peculiar value cannot be surrendered, no more can it be required that
we should be indifferent to its conformity to nature, that it should
not have for us some positive or negative value, or in some way affect
our feelings. Therewith the doctrine of things indifferent and the wise
man’s freedom from emotions begins to totter. Lastly, if we look at the
way in which virtue exists in man, we arrive at different results,
according as we look at its essence or its manifestation. Virtue
consists in acting conformably with reason, and reason is one and
undivided; hence it appears that virtue forms an undivided unity, and
must be possessed whole and entire or not at all. From this proposition
the contrast of the wise and foolish man, with all its bluntness and
extravagances, is only a legitimate consequence. Or, again, if we look
at the conditions upon which, owing to human nature, the acquisition
and possession of virtue depends, the conviction is inevitable that the
wise man as drawn by the Stoics never occurs in reality. Hence the
conclusion is undeniable that the contrast between wise men and fools
is more uncertain than it at first appeared to be. Thus all the main
features of the Stoic ethics may be simply deduced from their one
fundamental notion, that rational action or virtue is the only good.



[(2) Scientific side of the Stoic system.]

Not only does this view of ethics require a peculiar theory of the
world to serve as its scientific basis, but it has a reflex action
also, influencing alike the tone and the results of theoretic enquiry.
If the duty of man is declared to consist in bringing his actions into
harmony with the laws of the universe, it becomes also necessary that
he should endeavour himself to know the world and its laws. The more
his knowledge of the world increases, the greater will be the value
which he attaches to the forms of scientific procedure. If, moreover,
man is required to be nothing more than an instrument of the universal
law, it is only consistent to suppose an absolute regularity of
procedure in the universe, an unbroken connection of cause and effect,
and ultimately to refer everything to one highest all-moving cause, and
to include everything under one primary substance. If in human life the
individual has no rights as against the laws of the universe, then all
that is of individual occurrence in the world is powerless against
universal necessity. On the other hand, if in the case of man
everything turns upon strength of will, then likewise in the universe
the acting power must be regarded as the highest and most exalted.
There arises thus that view of the world as a series of forces which
constitutes one of the most peculiar and thorough-going characteristics
of the Stoic view of nature. [1032] Lastly, if such excessive
importance is attached to practical conduct as is done by the Stoics,
that sensuous view of the world which finds its crudest expression in
the Stoic Materialism and reliance on the senses, [1033] will most
nearly accord with speculation. At the same time the Materialism of the
Stoics is limited and corrected by the conception of the universe and
of a divine all-penetrating power and reason, just as their appeal to
the senses is by the demand for the formation of conceptions, and the
general application of the process of demonstration; the truth of
knowledge itself is based on a practical postulate, the greater or less
certainty of which is measured by the strength of personal conviction.
If these elements proved too contradictory to be harmonised; if the
Materialism of the Stoics was at variance with their view of the world
as a series of forces; if appeals to the senses were obviously in
conflict with logical method, it was at least thereby clearly
established that a practical and not a purely intellectual interest lay
at the root of their system.



[(3) Connection of the moral and scientific elements.]

This statement must of course not be taken to mean that the Stoics
first developed their ethical principles independently of their theory
of the universe, and afterwards brought the two into connection with
each other. On the contrary, it was by the peculiar connection of
theory and practice that Stoicism itself first came into existence. The
leading thought of Zeno consists in the attempt to vindicate the
supremacy of virtue by a scientific knowledge of the laws of the world;
and he becomes the founder of a new School only by bringing to Cynicism
those scientific ideas and aims which he had learned himself in the
School of Polemo, Stilpo, and Diodorus, or otherwise gathered from a
study of ancient philosophy. These elements are not therefore
accidentally brought together in Stoicism, but they are co-extensive,
and dependent one upon the other. As in the natural science and theory
of knowledge of the Stoics, the experimental basis on which their
system was built may be easily seen, so the peculiar development of
their ethics supposes all those positions respecting the universe and
the powers therein at work, which form the most important part of their
natural science. Only by a scientific treatment of this kind was
Stoicism at all able to improve upon the imperfection of the Cynic
ethics, so far at least as it really did so, and to accommodate itself
to the wants of human nature, so far as to be able to exercise an
influence at large. Upon this union of ethics and metaphysics that
religious attitude of the Stoic system reposes, to which it owes in a
great measure its historical importance. Thereby it occupies so
influential a position in an age in which intellectual power was indeed
declining, but in which the interest for science was keen. But that
Stoic physics and metaphysics should have adopted this line, and no
other; that Zeno and his followers, who draw on former systems for
their own on the most extensive scale, should have borrowed from these
systems these and no other positions, and expanded them in this and no
other direction; these results are, doubtless, ultimately due to their
moral attitude. All that bore on the subject of ethics, and supported
it, they appropriated; all that was opposed thereto they rejected. The
Stoic system as such owes its rise to a union of ethical and
speculative elements, in which both were more definitely determined by
one another; still the ethical platform is the one on which its
formation commences, and which primarily determined its course and
results.




[B. Relation of Stoicism to previous systems.]

[(1) Its relation to Socrates and the Cynics.]

In order to obtain a more accurate notion of the rise of Stoicism, the
premises on which it proceeds, and the grounds on which it is based, we
must take a glance at its relation to preceding systems. The Stoics
themselves deduced their philosophical pedigree directly from
Antisthenes, and indirectly from Socrates. [1034] Clear as is their
connection with both these philosophers, it would nevertheless be a
mistake to regard their teaching as a revival of Cynicism, still more
to regard it as a simple following of Socrates. From both it
undoubtedly borrowed much. The self-sufficiency of virtue, the
distinction of things good, evil, and indifferent, the ideal picture of
the wise man, the whole withdrawal from the outer world within the
precincts of the mind, and the strength of moral will, are ideas taken
from the Cynics. In the spirit of Cynicism, too, it explained general
ideas as simply names. Not to mention many peculiarities of ethics, the
contrasting of one God with the many popular Gods, and the allegorical
explanation of myths, were likewise points borrowed from Cynicism. The
identification of virtue with intelligence, the belief that virtue was
one, and could be imparted by teaching, were at once in the spirit of
Socrates and also in that of the Cynics. The argument for the existence
of God based on the subordination of means to ends, the whole view of
the world as a system of means and ends, and the Stoic theory of
Providence, are views peculiarly Socratic; [1035] and the Stoics
followed Socrates in ethics by identifying the good and the useful.

And yet the greatness of the interval which separates the Stoics even
from the Cynics becomes at once apparent on considering the relation of
Aristo to the rest of the Stoic School. In refusing to meddle with
natural or mental science, or even with ethical considerations at all,
Aristo faithfully reflects the principles of Antisthenes. In asserting
the unity of virtue to such an extent that all virtues are merged in
one, he was only repeating similar expressions of Antisthenes. In
denying any difference in value to things morally indifferent, and in
placing the highest morality in this indifference, he was, according to
the older writers, reasserting a Cynic tenet. [1036] Conversely in
denying these statements, as the great majority of Stoics did, the
points are indicated in which Stoicism differed from Cynicism. [1037]
In the feeling of moral independence, and in invincible strength of
will, the Cynic is opposed to the whole world; he needs for virtue no
scientific knowledge of the world and its laws; he regards nothing
external to himself; he allows nothing to influence his conduct, and
attaches value to nothing; but, in consequence, he remains with his
virtue confined to himself; virtue makes him independent of men and
circumstances, but it has neither the will nor the power to interpose
effectively in the affairs of life, and to infuse therein new moral
notions. Stoicism insists upon the self-sufficiency of virtue quite as
strongly as Cynicism, and will allow quite as little that anything
except virtue can be a good in the strictest sense of the term. But in
Stoicism the individual is not nearly so sharply opposed to the outer
world as in Cynicism. The Stoic is too cultivated; he knows too well
that he is a part of the universe to ignore the value of an
intellectual view of the world, or to neglect the natural conditions of
moral action, as things of no moment. What he aims at is not only a
negation—independence from externals—but a positive position—life
according to nature; and that life only he considers according to
nature which is in harmony with the laws of the universe as well as
with those of human nature. Hence Stoicism is not only far in advance
of Cynicism by its intellectual attitude, but its moral philosophy also
breathes a freer and milder spirit. Let only the principles of the
Stoics on the necessity and value of scientific knowledge be compared
with the sophistical assertions of Antisthenes, destructive of all
knowledge; or the cultivated logical form of the intellectual edifice
of the Stoics, with the chaotic condition of Cynic thought; or the
careful metaphysical and psychological researches and the copious
learning of the School of Chrysippus, with the Cynics’ contempt for all
theory and all learned research, and it becomes apparent at once how
deep-seated is the difference between the two systems, and how little
Stoicism as a philosophic system can be deduced from Cynicism.

In ethics, too, the difference of the two Schools is also fully
apparent. Stoic morality recognises, at least conditionally, a positive
and negative value in external things and circumstances; the Cynic
allows to these absolutely no value. The former forbids affection
contrary to reason, the latter any and every kind of affection. [1038]
The former throws the individual back upon human society, the latter
isolates him. The former teaches citizenship of the world in a positive
sense, requiring all to feel themselves one with their fellow-men; the
latter in a negative sense, that of feeling indifferent to home and
family. The former has a pantheistic tone about it, due to the lively
feeling of the connection between man and the universe, and a definite
theological stamp owing to its taking a stand by positive religion; the
latter has a rationalistic character, owing to the enfranchisement of
the wise man from the prejudices of popular belief, with which it has
exclusively to do. In all these respects Stoicism preserves the
original character of the Socratic philosophy far better than Cynicism,
which only caricatured them. Still it departs from that character in
two respects. In point of theory the Stoic doctrine received a
systematic form and development such as Socrates never contemplated;
and in natural science, it cultivated a field avoided by Socrates on
principle, however much its doctrine of Providence, and its view of
nature as a system of means subordinated to ends, may remind of
Socrates. On the other hand, interest in science, although limited to
the subject of ethics, is with Socrates far deeper and stronger than
with the Stoics, the latter pursuing scientific research only as a
means for solving moral problems. Hence the Socratic theory of a
knowledge of conceptions, simple though it may sound, contained a
fruitful germ of unexpanded speculation, in comparison with which all
that the Stoics did is fragmentary. The Stoic ethics are not only more
expanded and more carefully worked out in detail than those of
Socrates, but they are also more logical in clinging to the principle
that virtue alone is an unconditional good. There are no concessions to
current modes of thought, such as Socrates allowed, who practically
based his doctrine of morals upon utility. On the other hand, the moral
science of the Stoics also falls far short of the frankness and
cheerfulness of the Socratic view of life. If in many respects it toned
down the asperities of Cynicism, still it appropriated its leading
principles far too unreservedly to avoid accepting a great number of
its conclusions.

Asking in the next place in how far the Stoics were induced by other
influences to change and extend the platform of the Socratic
philosophy, we have for determining the practical side of their system,
besides the general tendency of the post-Aristotelian [(2) Relation to
Megarians and Heraclitus.] philosophy, the example of Cynicism. Its
speculative development, on the other hand, is partly connected with
the Megarians, partly with Heraclitus; to the Megarians the personal
connection of Zeno with Stilpo points, to Heraclitus the fact that from
him the Stoics themselves deduced their views on natural science, which
they expanded in commentaries on his writings. [1039]


[(a) The Megarians.]

Probably the Megarian influence must not be rated too high. Zeno may
have thence received an impulse to that reasoning habit which appears
with him in a preference for compressed sharp-pointed syllogisms;
[1040] but in post-Aristotelian times, contact with Megarians was no
longer wanted for this, and the greatest reasoner among the Stoics,
Chrysippus, appears not only to have had no personal relations to them,
but his logic is throughout a simple continuation of that of Aristotle.


[(b) Heraclitus.]

Far greater, and more generally recognised, is the importance of the
influence which the views on nature of the philosopher of Ephesus
exercised on the Stoics. A system which laid such emphasis on the
subordination of everything individual to the law of the universe,
which singled out universal reason from the flux of things as the one
thing everlastingly and permanently the same—a system in many other
ways so nearly related to their own, must have strongly commended
itself to their notice, and offered them many points with which to
connect their own. If to us the view that life is dependent for its
existence on matter is repulsive, it was otherwise to the Stoics; for
them this very theory possessed special attractions. Hence, with the
exception of the threefold division of the elements, there is hardly a
single point in the Heraclitean theory of nature which the Stoics did
not appropriate:—fire or ether as the primary element, the oneness of
this element with universal reason, the law of the universe, destiny,
God, the flux of things, the gradual change of the primary element into
the four elements, and of these back to the primary element, the
regular alternation of creation and conflagration in the world, the
oneness and eternity of the universe, the description of the soul as
fiery breath, the identification of the mind with the demon, the
unconditional sovereignty of the universal law over individuals—these
and many other points in the Stoic system, originally derived from
Heraclitus, [1041] prove how greatly this system is indebted to him.

Nor must it be forgotten that there is nothing in Heraclitus analogous
to the reasoning forms of the Stoics, nor can their ethical views be
referred to his few and undeveloped hints. With all the importance the
Stoics attached to natural science, it is with them only subordinate to
moral science; and the very fact that it is referred to Heraclitus as
its author, proves its inferior position, and the want of any
independent interest in the subject. It is also unmistakeable that even
in natural science the Stoics only partially follow Heraclitus, and
that principles taken from Heraclitus often bear an altered meaning
when wrought into the Stoic system. Omitting minor points, not only is
the Stoic doctrine of nature in a formal point of view far more
developed, and with regard to its extension far more comprehensive,
than the corresponding doctrine of Heraclitus, but the whole Stoic view
of the world is by no means so completely identical with his as might
be supposed. The flux of things, which the Stoics teach equally with
Heraclitus, [1042] has not for them that overwhelming importance that
it had for him. The matter of which the universe consists may be always
going over into new forms, but, at the same time, it is for them the
permanent material and essence of things. [1043] Individual substances,
too, are treated by the Stoics as corporeally permanent. [1044]
Moreover, from the material they distinguish the active principle,
Reason or deity, far more definitely than Heraclitus had done, and the
same distinction is carried into individual things in the contrast
between matter and quality. Thereby it becomes possible for them to
contrast much more sharply than their predecessor had done the reason
of the world, and the blindly working power of nature. Heraclitus, it
would appear, confined his attention to observing nature and describing
its elementary meteorological processes. But the natural science of the
Stoics includes the idea of means working for ends. It sees the object
in referring the whole arrangement of the world to man, and it pursues
this line of thought exclusively, neglecting in consequence science
proper. Hence the idea of sovereign reason or the universal law had not
the same meaning in the minds of both. Heraclitus sees this reason,
primarily and chiefly, in the ordinary sequence of natural phenomena,
in the regularity of the course by which to each individual phenomenon
its place in the world, its extent and duration are prescribed—in
short, in the unchanging coherence of nature. Without excluding this
aspect in their proofs of the existence of God and the rule of
Providence, the Stoics attach the chief importance to the
serviceableness of the order of nature. The reason which rules the
world appears in Heraclitus primarily as a natural power; in the
Stoics, as intelligence working with a purpose. For Heraclitus Nature
is the highest object, the object of independent and absolute interest;
and hence the infinite Being is no more than the power which forms the
world. The Stoics regard nature from the platform of humanity, as a
means for the wellbeing and activity of man. Their deity accordingly
does not work as a simple power of nature, but essentially as the
wisdom which cares for the wellbeing of man. The highest conception in
the system of Heraclitus is that of nature or destiny. Stoicism
accepted this conception also, but at the same time developed it to the
higher idea of Providence.



[(3) Connection with Aristotle.]

Shall we be wrong if we attribute this modification of the Heraclitean
theory of nature by the Stoics partly to the influence of Socrates’ and
Plato’s theory of final causes, but in a still greater degree to the
influence of the Aristotelian philosophy? To Aristotle belongs properly
the idea of matter without qualities, no less than the distinction
between a material and a formal cause. Aristotle applied the idea of
purpose to natural science far more extensively than any other system
had done before; and although the mode in which the Stoics expressed
this idea has more resemblance to the popular theological statements of
Socrates and Plato than to Aristotle, still the Stoic conception of a
natural power working with a purpose, such as is contained in the idea
of artificial fire and λόγοι σπερματικοὶ, is essentially Aristotelian.
Even many positions which appear to be advanced in opposition to
Aristotle were yet connected with him. Thus the existence of ether as a
body distinct from the four elements is denied, and yet in point of
fact it is asserted under a new name—that of artificial fire. The
Peripatetic doctrine of the origin of the rational soul is contradicted
by the Stoic theory of development, and yet the latter is based on a
statement in Aristotle to the effect that the germ of the animal soul
lies in the warm air [1045] which surrounds the seed, warm air which
Aristotle distinguishes from fire quite as carefully as Zeno and
Cleanthes distinguished the two kinds of fire. Even the point of
greatest divergence from Aristotelian teaching—the transformation of
the human soul and the divine spirit into something corporeal—might yet
be connected with Aristotle, and, indeed, the Peripatetic School here
comes to their assistance. For had not Aristotle described the ether as
the most divine body, the stars formed out of it as divine and happy
beings? Had he not brought down the acting and moving forces from a
heavenly sphere to the region of earth? Had he not, as we have just
seen, sought the germ of the soul in an ethereal matter? And might not
others go a little further and arrive at materialistic views? and all
the more so, seeing how hard it is to conceive the extra-mundane
intelligence of Aristotle, at once as incorporeal, and yet touching and
encircling the world of matter, and to make personal unity in the human
soul accord with an origin in a reason coming from above?

The way for Stoicism was more directly paved by the Aristotelian
speculations as to the origin of notions and conceptions. Here the
Stoics did little more than omit (in conformity with their principles)
what their predecessor had said as to an original possession and
immediate knowledge of truth. It has been remarked on an earlier
occasion how closely their formal logic followed that of Aristotle;
they contented themselves with building on Aristotelian foundations,
and even their additions have more reference to grammar than to logic.
The actual influence of Peripatetic views on those of the Stoics
appears to have been least in the province of ethics. Here the crudity
of the Stoic conception of virtue, the entire suppression of emotions,
the absolute exclusion of everything external from the circle of moral
goods, the distinction between the wise and the foolish man, the
attacks on a purely speculative life, present a sharp contrast to the
caution and many-sidedness of Aristotle’s moral theory, to his careful
weighing of current opinions and their practicability, to his
recognition of propriety in every shape and form, and to the praise
which he lavishes on a purely speculative life. What the Stoics chiefly
owe to Aristotle is the formal treatment of the materials and the
psychological analysis of individual moral faculties. On the other
hand, the province of ethics must be looked to for traces of the
teaching which Zeno received from Polemo, perhaps even from Xenocrates.



[(4) Connection with Plato.]

The speculative portions of Plato’s teaching could offer no great
attractions to practical men and materialists like the Stoics, either
in their original form or in the form which they assumed in the older
Academy under Pythagorean influence. On the other hand, such points in
Platonism as the Socratic habit of making knowledge the foundation of
virtue, the comparative depreciation of external goods, the
disparagement of all that is sensual, the elevation and the purity of
moral idealism, and, in the older Academy, the demand for life
according to nature, the doctrine of the self-sufficingness of virtue,
and the growing tendency to confine philosophy to practical issues—all
these were questions for a Stoic full of interest. Unfounded as the
notion of the later Eclectics is, [1046] that the Stoic and Academician
systems of morality were altogether the same, the Stoics, nevertheless,
appear to have received suggestions from the Academy which they carried
out in a more determined spirit. Thus the theory of living according to
nature belongs originally to the Academy, although the Stoics adopted
it with a peculiar and somewhat different meaning. Besides influencing
the moral doctrines of the Stoics, the attitude assumed by the older
Academy towards positive religion may also have had some influence on
their orthodoxy; their most prominent representative, Cleanthes, is in
his whole philosophic character the counterpart of Xenocrates. Although
later in its origin than Stoicism, the new Academy was not without
important influence on that system, through the person of Chrysippus,
but this influence was at first only of an indirect kind, inasmuch as
it obliged the Stoics by its logical contradiction to look about for a
more logical basis for their system, and therewith to attempt a more
systematic expansion of their teaching. [1047] Somewhat similar is the
effect of Epicureanism, which by its strong opposition in the field of
ethics imparted decision and accuracy to the Stoic doctrine, and thus
indirectly helped to form it.




[C. The Stoic philosophy as a whole.]

[(1) Its historical position.]

By the aid of these remarks it now becomes possible to give a
satisfactory account of the history of Stoicism. Belonging to an age of
moral debasement and political oppression, its founder, Zeno, conceived
the idea of liberating himself and all who were able to follow him from
its degeneracy and slavery by means of a philosophy which, by purity
and strength of moral will, would procure independence from all
external things, and unruffled inward peace. That his endeavours should
have taken this practical turn, that he should have proposed to himself
not knowledge as such, but the moral exercise of knowledge as the
object to be realised, was in part due to his own personal character,
and may be in part referred to the general circumstances of the times.
On nobler and more serious minds, these circumstances weighed too
heavily not to call forth opposition and resistance in place of
listless contemplation. The sway of the Macedonian, and afterwards of
the Roman Empire, was far too despotic to allow the least prospect of
open resistance. Nor must it be overlooked that philosophy itself had
reached a pass at which satisfactory answers to speculative problems
were no longer forthcoming; hence attention was naturally directed to
questions of morals.

Haunted by this longing for virtue, Zeno must have felt attracted by a
system of philosophy which had at an earlier period followed a similar
course with marked success, viz. the system of the Cynics, and what he
doubtless identified therewith, the old Socratic teaching. [1048]
Anxious to find a positive meaning and scientific basis for virtue, he
strove to appropriate from every system whatever agreed with the bent
of his own mind. By using all the labours of his predecessors, and
keeping his eye steadily fixed upon the practical end of philosophy, he
succeeded in forming a new and more comprehensive system, which was
afterwards completed by Chrysippus. In point of form this system was
most indebted to the Peripatetic philosophy; in point of matter, next
to its debt to the Cynics, which has been already mentioned, its chief
obligation was to Heraclitus. But the moral theory of the Stoics was as
little identical with that of the Cynics, as the natural science of the
Stoics was with that of Heraclitus. If the divergence was, in the first
instance, due to the influence of the Stoic principles, still the
influence of the Peripatetic teaching is unmistakeable in the natural
and speculative science of the Stoics, and the influence of the Academy
in their moral science. Stoicism does not, therefore, appear simply as
a continuation of Cynicism, nor yet as an isolated innovation, but,
like every other form of thought which marks an epoch, it worked up
into itself all previous materials, and produced from their combination
a new result. In this process of assimilation much that was beautiful
and full of meaning was omitted; everything was absorbed that could be
of use in the new career on which the Greek mind was about to enter.



[(2) Its onesidedness.]

It was the fault of the age that it could no longer come up to the
many-sidedness of an Aristotle or a Plato. Stoicism, it is true,
approximates thereto more nearly than any other of the
post-Aristotelian systems. But in its practical view of philosophy, in
its materialistic appeal to the senses, in its theoretical
self-sufficiency, setting up the wise man as superior to the weaknesses
and wants of human nature; in its citizenship of the world, throwing
political interests into the background; and in so many other traits it
is the fit exponent of an epoch in which the taste for purely
scientific research and the delight in ethical speculation were at an
end, whilst out of the overthrow of states, and the growth of freedom,
the idea of humanity was coming to the fore. Stoicism represented most
powerfully the moral and religious convictions of such an age, yet not
without onesidedness and exaggeration. By exercise of the will and by
rational understanding, man is to become free and happy. This aim is,
however, pursued so persistently that the natural conditions of human
existence and the claims of individuality are ignored. To man, regarded
as the exponent of universal law, as little freedom of will is allowed
by the Stoic natural science in face of the inexorable course of nature
as freedom of action is allowed by the Stoic ethics in face of the
demands of duty. The universal claims of morality are alone
acknowledged; the right of the individual to act according to his
peculiar character, and to develop that character, is almost ignored.
The individual, as such, dwindles into obscurity, whilst a high place
in the world is assigned to mankind collectively. The individual is
subordinated to the law of the whole; but by regarding nature as a
system of means and ends, and introducing the belief in Providence and
Prophecy, the universe is again subordinated to the interests of man—a
view against which a more careful research has many objections to urge.
In both respects Epicureanism is in decided contrast to Stoicism,
though agreeing with it in the general tone of its practical philosophy
and in its aim to make man independent of the outer world and happy in
himself.








