Notes On Some Oral Teachings.



The Three Vital Airs.


It is the pure Âkâsha that passes up Sushumnâ: its two aspects flow in Idâ
and Pingalâ. These are the three vital airs, and are symbolized by the
Brâhmanical thread. They are ruled by the Will. Will and Desire are the
higher and lower aspects of one and the same thing. Hence the importance
of the purity of the canals; for if they soil the vital airs energized by
the Will, Black Magic results. This is why all sexual intercourse is
forbidden in practical Occultism.

From Sushumnâ, Idâ and Pingalâ a circulation is set up, and from the
central canal passes into the whole body. (Man is a tree; he has in him
the macrocosm and the microcosm. Hence the trees used as symbols; the
Dhyân‐Chohanic body is thus figured.)



The Auric Egg.


The Auric Egg is formed in curves, which may be conceived from the curves
formed by sand on a vibrating metal disk. Each atom, as each body, has its
Auric Egg, each centre forming its own. This Auric Egg, with the
appropriate materials thrown into it, is a defence; no wild animal,
however ferocious, will approach the Yogî thus guarded: it flings back
from its surface all malign influences. No Will power is manifested
through the Auric Egg.

_Q. What is the connection between the circulation of the vital airs and
the power of the Yogî to make his Auric Egg a defence against aggression?_

_A._ It is impossible to answer this question. The knowledge is the last
word of Magic. It is connected with Kundalinî, that can as easily destroy
as preserve. The ignorant tyro might kill himself.

_Q. Is the Auric Egg of a child a differentiation of Akâsha, into which
may be thrown by the Adept the materials he needs for special
purposes_—_e.g._, _the Mâyâvi Rûpa?_

[The question was somewhat obscurely worded. Evidently what the questioner
wanted to know was if the Auric Egg was a differentiation of Akâsha, into
which, as the child became a man, he might, if an Adept, weave the
materials needed for special purposes, etc.]

_A._ Taking the question in the sense of an Adept putting something into
or acting on the Auric Egg of a child, then this could not be done, as the
Auric Egg is Karmic, and not even an Adept must interfere with such Karmic
record. If the Adept were to put anything into the Auric Egg of another,
for which the person is not responsible, or which does not come from the
Higher Self of that personality, how could Karmic justice be maintained?

The Adept can draw into his own Auric Egg from his planet, or even from
that of the globe or of the universe, according to his degree. This
envelope is the receptacle of all Karmic causes, and photographs all
things like a sensitive plate.

The child has a very small Auric Egg which is in colour almost pure white.
At birth the Auric Egg consists of almost pure Akâsha plus the Tanhâs,
which, until the seventh year, remain potential or in latency.

The Auric Egg of an idiot cannot be said to be human, that is, it is not
tinged with Manas. It is Akâshic vibrations rather than an Auric Egg—the
material envelope, such as that of the plant, the mineral or other object.

The Auric Egg is the transmitter from the periodical lives to the Life
eternal, _i.e._, from Prâna to Jîva. It disappears, but remains.

The reason why the confession of the Roman Catholic and Greek Churches is
so great a sin is because the confessor interferes with the Auric Egg of
the penitent by means of his will power, engrafting artificially
emanations from his own Auric Egg and casting seeds for germination into
the Auric Egg of his subject. It is on the same lines as hypnotic
suggestion.

The above remarks apply equally to Hypnotism, although the latter is a
psycho‐physical force, and it is this which constitutes one of its many
serious dangers. At the same time “a good thing may pass through dirty
channels,” as in the case of the breaking by suggestion of the alcohol or
opium habit. Mesmerism may be used by the Occultist to remove evil habits,
if the intention be perfectly pure; as on the higher plane intention is
everything, and good intention must work for good.

_Q. Is the Auric Egg the expansion of the __“__Pillar of Light,__”__ the
Mânasic Principle, and so not surrounding the child till its seventh
year?_

_A._ It is the Auric Egg. The Auric Egg is quite pure at birth, but it is
a question whether the higher or lower Manas will colour it at the seventh
year. The Mânasic expansion is pure Âkâsha. The ray of Manas is let down
into the vortex of the lower Principles, and being discoloured, and so
limited by the Kâmic Tanhâs and by the defects of the bodily organism,
forms the personality. Hereditary Karma can reach the child before the
seventh year, but no individual Karma can come into play till the descent
of the Manas.


    The Auric Egg is to the Man
    As the Astral Light is to the Earth
    As the Ether is to the Astral Light
    As the Akâsha is to the Ether


The critical states are left out in the enumeration. They are the Lava
Centres, or missing links in our consciousness, and separate these four
planes from one another.



The Dweller.


The “Dweller on the Threshold” is found in two cases: (_a_) In the case of
the separation of the Triangle from the Quaternary; (_b_) When Kâmic
desires and passions are so intense that the Kâma Rûpa persists in Kâma
Loka beyond the Devachanic period of the Ego, and thus survives the
reincarnation of the Devachanic Entity (_e.g._, when reincarnation occurs
within two hundred or three hundred years). The “Dweller” being drawn by
affinity towards the Reincarnating Ego to whom it had belonged, and being
unable to reach it, fastens on the Kâma of the new personality, and
becomes the Dweller on the Threshold, strengthening the Kâmic element and
thus lending it a dangerous potency. Some become mad from this cause.



Intellect.


The white Adept is not always at first of powerful intellect. In fact, H.
P. B. had known Adepts whose intellectual powers were originally below the
average. It is the Adept’s purity, his equal love to all, his working with
Nature, with Karma, with his “Inner God,” that give him his power.
Intellect by itself alone will make the Black Magician. For intellect
alone is accompanied with pride and selfishness: it is the intellectual
_plus_ the spiritual that raises man. For spirituality prevents pride and
vanity.

Metaphysics are the domain of the Higher Manas; whereas Physics are that
of Kâma‐Manas, which does the thinking in Physical Science and on material
things. Kâma‐Manas, like every other Principle, is of seven degrees. The
Mathematician without spirituality, however great he may be, will not
reach Metaphysics; but the Metaphysician will master the highest
conceptions of Mathematics, and will apply them, without learning the
latter. To a born Metaphysician the Psychic Plane will not be of much
account: he will see its errors immediately he enters it, inasmuch as it
is not the thing he seeks. With respect to Music and other Arts, they are
the children of either the Mânasic or Kâma‐Mânasic Principle,
proportionately as Soul or technicality predominates.



Karma.


After each incarnation, when the Mânasic Ray returns to its Father, the
Ego, some of its atoms remain behind and scatter. These Mânasic atoms,
Tânhic and other “causes,” being of the same nature as the Manas, are
attracted to it by strong bonds of affinity, and on the reincarnation of
the Ego are unerringly attracted to it and constitute its Karma. Until
these are all gathered up, the individuality is not free from rebirth. The
Higher Manas is responsible for the Ray it sends forth. If the Ray be not
soiled, no bad Karma is generated.



The Turîya State.


You should bear in mind that, in becoming Karma‐less, good Karma, as well
as bad, has to be gotten rid of, and that Nidânas, started towards the
acquisition of good Karma, are as binding as those induced in the other
direction. For both are Karma.

Yogîs cannot attain the Turîya state unless the Triangle is separated from
the Quaternary.



Mahat.


Mahat is the manifested universal Parabrâhmic Mind (for one Manvantara) on
the Third Plane [of Kosmos]. It is the Law whereby the Light falls from
plane to plane and differentiates. The Mânasaputras are its emanations.

Man alone is capable of conceiving the Universe on this plane of
existence.

Existence _is_; but when the entity does not feel it, for that entity it
is not. The pain of an operation exists, though the patient does not feel
it, and for the patient it is not.



How To Advance.


_Q. What is the correct pronunciation of AUM?_

_A._ It should first be practised physically, always at the same pitch,
which must be discovered in the same way as the particular colour of the
student is found, for each has his own tone.

AUM consists of two vowels and one semi‐vowel, which latter must be
prolonged. Just as Nature has its Fa, so each man has his: man being
differentiated from Nature. The body may be compared to an instrument and
the Ego to the player. You begin by producing effects on yourself; then
little by little you learn to play on the Tattvas and Principles; learn
first the notes, then the chords, then the melodies. Once the student is
master of every chord, he may begin to be a co‐worker with Nature and for
others. He may then, by the experience he has gained of his own nature,
and by the knowledge of the chords, strike such as will be beneficial in
another, and so will serve as a keynote for beneficial results.

Try to have a clear representation of the geometrical triangle on every
plane, the conception gradually growing more metaphysical, and ending with
the subjective Triangle, Âtmâ‐Buddhi‐Manas. It is only by the knowledge of
this Triangle under all forms that you can succeed, _e.g._ in enclosing
the past and the future in the present. Remember that you have to merge
the Quaternary in the Triangle. The Lower Manas is drawn upwards, with the
Kâma, Prâna and Linga, leaving only the physical body behind, the lower
reinforcing the higher.

Advance may be made in Occultism even in Devachan, if the Mind and Soul be
set thereon during life; but it is only as in a dream, and the knowledge
will fade away as memory of a dream fades, unless it be kept alive by
conscious study.



Fear And Hatred.


Fear and hatred are essentially one and the same. He who fears nothing
will never hate, and he who hates nothing will never fear.



The Triangle.


_Q. What is the meaning of the phrase: __“__Form a clear image of the
Triangle on every plane;__”_ _e.g._, _on the Astral Plane, what should one
think of as the Triangle?_

_A._ [H. P. B. asked whether the question signified the meaning of the
Triangle or the way to represent the Triangle on the “screen of light.”
The questioner explaining that the latter was the meaning, H. P. B. said
that] it was only in the Turîya state, the fourth of the seven steps of
Râja Yoga that the Yogî can represent to himself that which is abstract.
Below this state, the perceptive power, being conditioned, must have some
form to contemplate; it cannot represent to itself the Arûpa. In the
Turîya state the Triangle is in yourself and is felt. Below the Turîya
state there must be a symbol to represent Âtmâ‐Buddhi‐Manas. It is not a
mere geometrical Triangle, but the Triad imaged, to make thought possible.
Of this Triad, we can make some kind of representation of Manas, however
indistinct; while of Âtmâ no image can be formed. We must try to represent
the Triangle to ourselves on higher and higher planes. We must figure
Manas as overshadowed by Buddhi, and immersed in Âtmâ. Only Manas, the
Higher Ego, can be represented; we may think it as the Augoeides, the
radiant figure in _Zanoni_. A very good Psychic might see this.



Psychic Vision.


Psychic vision, however, is not to be desired, since Psyche is earthly and
evil. More and more as Science advances, the psychic will be reached and
understood; Psychism has in it nothing that is spiritual. Science is right
on its own plane, from its own standpoint. The law of the Conservation of
Energy implies that psychic motion is generated by motion. Psychic motion
being only motion on the Psychic Plane, a material plane, the Psychologist
is right who sees in it nothing beyond matter. Animals have no Spirit, but
they have psychic vision, and are sensitive to psychic conditions; observe
how these react on their health, their bodily state.

Motion is the abstract Deity; on the highest plane it is Arûpa, absolute;
but on the lowest it is merely mechanical. Psychic action is within the
sphere of physical motion. Ere psychic action can be developed in the
brain and nerves, there must be adequate action which generates it on the
Physical Plane. The paralyzed animal that cannot generate action in the
physical body, cannot think. Psychics merely see on a plane of different
material density; the spiritual glimpses sometimes obtained by them come
from a plane beyond. A Psychic’s vision is that of one coming, as it were,
into a lighted room, and seeing everything there by an artificial light:
when the light is extinguished, vision is lost. Spiritual vision sees by
the light within, the light hidden beneath the bushel of the body, by
which we can see clearly and independently of all outside. The Psychic
seeing by an external light, the vision is coloured by the nature of that
light.

X. saying that she felt as though she saw on three planes, H. P. B.
answered that each plane was sevenfold, the Astral as every other. She
gave as an example on the Physical Plane the vision of a table with the
sense of sight; seeing it still, with the eyes closed, by retinal
impression; the image of it conserved in the brain; it can be recalled by
memory; it can be seen in dream; or as an aggregate of atoms; or as
disintegrated. All these are on the Physical Plane. Then we can begin
again on the Astral Plane, and obtain another septenary. This hint should
be followed and worked out.



Triangle And Quaternary.


_Q.  Why is the violet, the color of the Linga Sharîra, placed at the apex
of the triangle, when the Macrocosm is figured as a triangle over a
square, thus throwing the yellow, Buddhi, into the lower Quaternary?_

_A._ It is wrong to speak of the “lower Quaternary” in the Macrocosm. It
is the Tetraktys, the highest, the most sacred of all symbols. There comes
a moment when, in the highest meditation, the Lower Manas is withdrawn
into the Triad, which thus becomes the Quaternary, the Tetraktys of
Pythagoras, leaving what was the Quaternary as the lower Triad, which is
then reversed. The Triad is reflected in the Lower Manas. The Higher Manas
cannot reflect itself, but when the Green passes upward it becomes a
mirror for the Higher; it is then no more Green, having passed from its
associations. The Psyche then becomes spiritual, the Ternary is reflected
in the Fourth, and the Tetraktys is formed. So long as you are not dead,
there must be something to reflect the Higher Triad; for there must be
something to bring back to the waking consciousness the experiences passed
through on the higher plane. The Lower Manas is as a tablet which retains
the impressions made on it during trance.

The Turîya state is entered on the Fourth Path; it is figured in the
diagram on p. 478, in the Second Paper.

_Q. What is the meaning of a triangle formed of lines of light appearing
in the midst of intense vibrating blue?_

_A._ Seeing the Triangle outside is nothing; it is merely a reflection of
the Triad on the Auric Envelope, and proves that the seer is outside the
Triangle. It should be seen in quite another way. You must endeavour to
merge yourself in it, to assimilate yourself with it. You are merely
seeing things in the Astral. “When the Third Eye is opened in any one of
you, you will have something very different to tell me.”

_Q. With reference to the __“__Pillar of Light__”__ in a previous
question, is the Auric Envelope the Higher Ego, and does it correspond to
the Ring Pass‐Not?_

[This question was not answered, as going too far. The Ring Pass‐Not is at
the circumference of the manifested Universe.]



Nidânas.


_Q. The root of the Nidânas is Avidyâ. How does this differ from Mâyâ? How
many Nidânas are there Esoterically?_

_A._ Again too much is asked. The Nidânas, the concatenations of causes
and effects (not in the sense of the Orientalists), are not caused by
ignorance. They are produced by Dhyân Chohans and Devas, who certainly
cannot be said to act in ignorance. We produce Nidânas in ignorance. Each
cause started on the Physical Plane sets up action on every plane to all
eternity. They are eternal effects reflected from plane to plane on to the
“screen of eternity.”



Manas.


_Q. What is the septenary classification of Manas? There are seven degrees
of the Lower Manas, and presumably there are seven degrees of the Higher.
Are there then fourteen degrees of Manas, or is Manas, taken as a whole,
divided into forty‐nine Mânasic fires?_

_A._ Certainly there are fourteen, but you want to run before you can
walk. First learn the three, and then go on to the forty‐nine. There are
three Sons of Agni; they become seven, and then evolve to the forty‐nine.
But you are still ignorant how to produce the three. Learn first how to
produce the “Sacred Fire,” spoken of in the _Purânas_. The forty‐nine
fires are all states of Kundalinî, to be produced in ourselves by the
friction of the Triad. First learn the septenary of the body, and then
that of each Principle. But first of all learn the first Triad (the three
vital airs).



The Spinal Cord.


_Q. What is the sympathetic nerve and its function in Occultism? It is
found only after a certain stage of animal evolution, and would seem to be
evolving in complexity towards a second spinal cord._

_A._ At the end of the next Round, Humanity will again become male‐female,
and then there will be two spinal cords. In the Seventh Race the two will
merge into the one. The evolution corresponds to the Races, and with the
evolution of the Races the sympathetic developes into a true spinal cord.
We are returning up the arc only with self‐consciousness added. The Sixth
Race will correspond to the “pudding bags,” but will have the perfection
of form with the highest intelligence and spirituality.

Anatomists are beginning to find new ramifications and new modifications
in the human body. They are in error on many points, _e.g._, as to the
spleen, which they call the manufactory of white blood corpuscles, but
which is really the vehicle of the Linga Sharîra. Occultists know each
minute portion of the heart, and have a name for each. They call them by
the names of the Gods, as Brahmâ’s Hall, Vishnu’s Hall, etc. They
correspond with parts of the brain. The very atoms of the body are the
thirty‐three crores of Gods.

The sympathetic nerve is played on by the Tântrikas, who call it Shiva’s
Vînâ.



Prâna.


_Q. What is the relation of man to Prâna—the periodical life?_

_A._ Jîva becomes Prâna only when the child is born and begins to breathe.
It is the breath of life, Nephesh. There is no Prâna on the Astral Plane.



Antahkarana.


_Q. The Antahkarana is the link between the Higher and the Lower Egos;
does it correspond to the umbilical cord in projection?_

_A._ No; the umbilical cord joining the astral to the physical body is a
real thing. Antahkarana is imaginary, a figure of speech, and is only the
bridging over from the Higher to the Lower Manas. Antahkarana only exists
when you commence to “throw your thought upwards and downwards.” The
Mâyâvi Rûpa, or Mânasic body, has no material connection with the physical
body, no umbilical cord. It is spiritual and ethereal, and passes
everywhere without let or hindrance. It entirely differs from the astral
body, which, if injured, acts by repercussion on the physical body. The
Devachanic entity, even previous to birth, can be affected by the
Skandhas, but these have nothing to do with the Antahkarana. It is
affected, _e.g._, by the desire for reincarnation.

_Q. We are told in_ The Voice of the Silence _that we have to become __
__“__the path itself,__”__ and in another passage that Antahkarana is that
path. Does this mean anything more than that we have to bridge over the
gap between the consciousness of the Lower and the Higher Egos?_

_A._ That is all.

_Q. We are told that there are seven portals on the Path: is there then a
sevenfold division of Antahkarana? Also, is Antahkarana the battlefield?_

_A._ It is the battlefield. There are seven divisions in the Antahkarana.
As you pass from each to the next you approach the Higher Manas. When you
have bridged the fourth you may consider yourself fortunate.



Miscellaneous.


_Q. We are told that_ AUM _“__should be practised physically.__”__ Does
this mean that, colour being more differentiated than sound, it is only
through the colours that we shall get at the real sound of each of us? and
that_ AUM _can only have its Spiritual and Occult signification when
turned to the Âtmâ‐Buddhi‐Manas of each person?_

_A._ AUM means good action, not merely lip‐sound. You must say it in
deeds.

_Q. With reference to the triangle, is not the Âtmâ‐Buddhi‐Manas different
for each entity, according to the plane on which he is?_

_A._ Each Principle is on a different plane. The Chelâ must rise to one
after the other, assimilating each, until the three are one. This is the
real root of the Trinity.

_Q. In_ The Secret Doctrine _we are told that Âkâsha is the same as
Pradhâna. Âkâsha is the Auric Egg of the earth, and yet Âkâsha is Mahat.
What that is the relation of Manas to the Auric Egg?_

_A._ Mûlaprakriti is the same as Âkâsha (seven degrees). Mahat is the
positive aspect of Âkâsha, and is the Manas of the Kosmic Body. Mahat is
to Âkâsha as Manas is to Buddhi, and Pradhâna is but another name for
Mûlaprakriti.

The Auric Egg is Âkâsha and has seven degrees. Being pure abstract
substance, it reflects abstract ideas, but also reflects lower concrete
things.

The Third Logos and Mahat are one, and are the same as the Universal Mind,
Alaya.

The Tetraktys is the Chatur Vidyâ, or the fourfold knowledge in one, the
four‐faced Brahmâ.



Nâdis.


_Q. Have the Nâdîs any fixed relationship to the vertebræ; can they be
located opposite to or between any vertebræ? can they be regarded as
occupying each a given and fixed extent in the cord? Do they correspond to
the divisions of the cord known to Anatomists?_

_A._  H. P. B. believed that the Nâdîs corresponded to regions of the
spinal cord known to Anatomists. There are thus six or seven Nâdîs or
plexuses along the spinal cord. The term, however, is not technical but
general, and applies to any knot, centre, ganglion, etc. The sacred Nâdîs
are those which run along or above Sushumnâ. Six are known to Science, and
one (near the atlas) unknown. Even the Târaka Râja Yogîs speak only of
six, and will not mention the sacred seventh.

Idâ and Pingalâ play along the curved wall of the cord in which is
Sushumnâ. They are semi‐material, positive and negative, sun and moon, and
start into action the free and spiritual current of Sushumnâ. They have
distinct paths of their own, otherwise they would radiate all over the
body. By concentration on Idâ and Pingalâ is generated the “sacred fire.”

Another name for Shiva’s Vînâ (sympathetic system) is Kâlî’s Vînâ.

The sympathetic cords and Idâ and Pingalâ start from a sacred spot above
the medulla oblongata, called Triveni. This is one of the sacred centres,
another of which is Brahmarandra, which is, if you like, the grey matter
of the brain. It is also the anterior fontanelle in the new‐born child.

The spinal column is called Brahmadanda, the stick of Brahmâ. This is
again symbolized by the bamboo rod carried by Ascetics. The Yogîs on the
other sides of the Himâlayas, who assemble regularly at Lake Mânsarovara,
carry a triple knotted bamboo stick, and are called Tridandins. This has
the same signification as the Brâhmanical cord, which has many other
meanings besides the three vital airs: _e.g._, it symbolizes the three
initiations of a Brâhman, taking place: (_a_) at birth, when he receives
his mystery name from the family Astrologer, who is supposed to have
received it from the Devas (he is also thus said to be initiated by the
Devas); a Hindu will sooner die than reveal this name; (_b_) at seven,
when he receives the cord; and (_c_) at eleven or twelve, when he is
initiated into his caste.

_Q. If it is right to study the body and its organs, with their
correspondences, will you give the main outline of these in connection
with the Nâdîs and with the diagram of the orifices._


    _A._ The Spleen corresponds to the Linga Sharîra
    The  Liver to Kâma
    The Heart to Prâna
    The Corpora‐quadrigemina to Kâma‐Manas
    The Pituitary body to Manas‐Antahkarana
    The Pineal gland to Manas


until it is touched by the vibrating light of Kundalinî, which proceeds
from Buddhi, when it becomes Buddhi‐Manas.

The pineal gland corresponds with Divine Thought. The pituitary body is
the organ of the Psychic Plane. Psychic vision is caused by the molecular
motion of this body, which is directly connected with the optic nerve, and
thus affects the sight and gives rise to hallucinations. Its motion may
readily cause flashes of light, such as may be obtained by pressing the
eyeballs. Drunkenness and fever produce illusions of sight and hearing by
the action of the pituitary body. This body is sometimes so affected by
drunkenness that it is paralyzed. If an influence on the optic nerve is
thus produced and the current thus reversed, the colour will probably be
complementary.



Sevens.


_Q. If the physical body is no part of the real human septenary, is the
physical material world one of the seven planes of the Kosmic septenary?_

_A._ It is. The body is not a Principle in Esoteric parlance, because the
body and the Linga are both on the same plane; then the Auric Egg makes
the seventh. The body is an Upâdhi rather than a Principle. The earth and
its astral light are as closely related to each other as the body and its
Linga, the earth being the Upâdhi. Our plane in its lowest division is the
earth, in its highest the astral. The terrestrial astral light should of
course not be confounded with the universal Astral Light.

_Q. A physical object was spoken of as a septenary on the physical plane,
inasmuch as we could (1) directly contact it; (2) retinally reproduce it;
(3) remember it; (4) dream of it; (5) view it atomically; (6) view it
disintegrated; (7)—What is the seventh?_

_These are seven ways in which we view it: the septenary is our way of
seeing one thing. Is it objectively septenary?_

_A._ The seventh bridges across from one plane to another. The last is the
idea, the privation of matter, and carries you to the next plane. The
highest of one plane touches the lowest of the next. Seven is a factor in
nature, as in colours and sounds. There are seven degrees in the same
piece of wood, each perceived by one of the seven senses. In wood the
smell is the most material degree, while in other substances it may be the
sixth. Substances are septenary apart from the consciousness of the
viewer.

The psychometer, seeing a morsel, say of a table a thousand years hence,
would see the whole; for every atom reflects the whole body to which it
belongs, just as with the Monads of Leibnitz.

After the seven material subdivisions are the seven divisions of the
Astral, which is its second Principle. The disintegrated matter—the
highest of the material subdivisions—is the privation of the idea of
it—the fourth.

The number fourteen is the first step between seven and forty‐nine. Each
septenary is really a fourteen, because each of the seven has its two
aspects. Thus fourteen signifies the inter‐relation of two planes in its
turn. The septenary is to be clearly traced in the lunar months, fevers,
gestations, etc. On it is based the week of the Jews and the septenary
Hierarchies of the Lord of Hosts.



Sounds.


_Q. Sound is an attribute of Âkâsha; but we cannot cognize anything on the
Âkâshic plane; on what plane then do we recognize sound? On what plane is
sound produced by the physical contact of bodies? Is there sound on seven
planes, and is the physical plane one of them?_

_A._ The physical plane is one of them. You cannot see Âkâsha, but you can
sense it from the Fourth Path. You may not be fully conscious of it, and
yet you may sense it. Âkâsha is at the root of the manifestation of all
sounds. Sound is the expression and manifestation of that which is behind
it, and which is the parent of many correlations. All Nature is a
sounding‐board; or rather Âkâsha is the sounding‐board of Nature. It is
the Deity, the one Life, the one Existence. (Hearing is the vibration of
molecular particles; the order is seen in the sentence, “The disciple
feels, hears, sees.”)

Sound can have no end. H. P. B. remarked with regard to a tap made by a
pencil on the table: “By this time it has affected the whole universe. The
particle which has had its wear and tear destroys something which passes
into something else. It is eternal in the Nidânas it produces.” A sound,
if not previously produced on the Astral Plane, and before that on the
Âkâshic, could not be produced at all. Âkâsha is the bridge between nerve
cells and mental powers.

_Q. __“__Colours are psychic, and sounds are spiritual.__”__ What,
assuming that these are vibrations, is the successive order (these
corresponding to sight and hearing) of the other senses?_

_A._ This phrase was not to be taken out of its context, otherwise
confusion would arise. All are on all planes. The First Race had touch all
over like a sounding board; this touch differentiated into the other
senses, which developed with the Races. The “sense” of the First Race was
that of touch, meaning the power of their atoms to vibrate in unison with
external atoms. The “touch” would be almost the same as sympathy.

The senses were on a different plane with each Race; _e.g._, the Fourth
Race had very much more developed senses than ourselves, but on another
plane. It was also a very material Race. The sixth and seventh senses will
merge into the Âkâshic Sound. “It depends to what degree of matter the
sense of touch relates itself as to what we call it.”



Prâna.


_Q. Is Prâna the production of the countless __“__lives__”__ of the human
body, and therefore, to some extent, of the congeries of the cells or
atoms of the body?_

_A._ No; Prâna is the parent of the “lives.” As an example, a sponge may
be immersed in an ocean. The water in the sponge’s interior may be
compared to Prâna; outside is Jîva. Prâna is the motor‐principle in life.
The “lives” leave Prâna; Prâna does not leave them. Take out the sponge
from the water, and it becomes dry, thus symbolizing death. Every
principle is a differentiation of Jîva, but the life‐motion in each is
Prâna, the “breath of life.” Kâma depends on Prâna, without which there
would be no Kâma. Prâna wakes the Kâmic germs to life; it makes all
desires vital and living.



The Second Spinal Cord.


_Q. With reference to the answer to the question on the second cord, what
is it that will become a second spinal cord in the Sixth Race? Will Idâ
and Pingalâ have separate physical ducts?_

_A._ It is the sympathetic cords which will grow together and form another
spinal cord. Idâ and Pingalâ will be joined with Sushumnâ, and they will
become one. Idâ is on the left side of the cord, and Pingalâ on the right.



Initiates.


Pythagoras was an Initiate, one of the grandest of Scientists. His
disciple, Archytas, was marvellously apt in applied Science. Plato and
Euclid were Initiates, but not Socrates. No real Initiates were married.
Euclid learned his Geometry in the Mysteries. Modern men of Science only
rediscover the old truths.



Kosmic Consciousness.


H. P. B. proceeded to explain Kosmic Consciousness, which is, like all
else, on seven planes, of which three are inconceivable, and four are
cognizable by the highest Adept.

Taking the lowest only, the Terrestrial (it was afterwards decided to call
this plane Prâkritic), it is divisible, into seven planes, and these again
into seven, making the forty‐nine.

She then took the lowest plane of Prâkriti, or the true Terrestrial.

Its objective or sensuous plane is that which is sensed by the five
physical senses.

On its second plane things are reversed.

Its third plane is psychic: here is the instinct which prevents a kitten
going into the water and getting drowned.

Then objective consciousness was given.

The three lower Prâkritic are related to the three lower of the Astral
Plane immediately succeeding.

With regard to the first division of the second plane, H. P. B. reminded
her pupils that all seen on it must be reversed in translating it, _e.g._,
with numbers which appeared backwards. The Astral Objective corresponds in
everything to the Terrestrial Objective.

The second division corresponds to the second of the lower plane, but the
objects are of extreme tenuity, an astralized Astral. This plane is the
limit of the ordinary medium, beyond which he cannot go. A non‐mediumistic
person to reach it must be asleep or in a trance, or under the influence
of laughing‐gas; or in ordinary delirium people pass on to this plane.

The third, the Prânic, is of an intensely vivid nature. Extreme delirium
carries the patient to this plane. In delirium tremens the sufferer passes
to this and to the one above it. Lunatics are often conscious on this
plane, where they see terrible visions. It runs into the—

Fourth division, the worst of the astral planes, Kâmic and terrible. Hence
come the images that tempt; images of drunkards in Kâma Loka impelling
others to drink; images of all vices inoculating men with the desire to
commit crimes. The weak imitate these images in a kind of monkeyish
fashion, so falling beneath their influence. This is also the cause of
epidemics of vices, and cycles of disaster, of accidents of all kinds
coming in groups. Extreme delirium tremens is on this plane.

The fifth division is that of premonitions in dreams, of reflections from
the lower mentality, glimpses into the past and future, the plane of
things mental and not spiritual. The mesmerized clairvoyant can reach this
plane, and even, if good, may go higher.

The sixth is the plane from which come all beautiful inspirations of art,
poetry, and music; high types of dreams, flashes of genius. Here we have
glimpses of past incarnations, without being able to locate or analyze
them.

We are on the seventh plane at the moment of death or in exceptional
visions. The drowning man is here when he remembers his past life. The
memory of events of this plane must be centred in the heart, “the seat of
Buddha.” There it will remain, but impressions from this plane are not
made on the physical brain.



General Notes.


The two planes above dealt with are the only two used in the Hatha Yoga.

Prâna and the Auric Envelope are essentially the same, and again, as Jîva,
it is the same as the Universal Deity. This, in its Fifth Principle, is
Mahat, in its Sixth, Alaya. (The Universal Life is also seven‐principled.)
Mahat is the highest _Entity_ in Kosmos; beyond this is no diviner Entity;
it is of subtlest matter, Sûkshma. In us this is Manas, and the very Logoi
are less high, not having gained experience. The Mânasic Entity will not
be destroyed, even at the end of the Mahâmanvantara, when all the Gods are
absorbed, but will re‐emerge from Parabrâhmic latency.

Consciousness is the Kosmic seed of superkosmic omniscience. It has the
potentiality of budding into the Divine Consciousness.

Rude physical health is a drawback to seership. This was the case with
Swedenborg.

Fohat is everywhere: it runs like a thread through all, and has its own
seven divisions.

Auric Envelope or Âtmic Elements of Manifested Kosmos.
Alaya. Buddhi.
Mahat. Manas.
Fohat. Kâma‐Manas.
Jîva. Kâma‐Prana.
Astral. Linga.
Prâkriti. Body.

In the Kosmic Auric Envelope is all the Karma of the manifesting Universe.
This is the Hiranyagarbha. Jîva is everywhere, and so with the other
Principles.

                              [Illustration]

The above diagram represents the type of all the Solar Systems.

Mahat, single before informing the Universe, differentiates when informing
it, as does Manas in man.

                              [Illustration]

Taking this figure to represent the human Principles and planes of
consciousness, then 7, 6, 5 represent respectively, Shiva, Vishnu, Brahmâ,
Brahmâ being the lowest.

Shiva is the four‐faced Brahmâ; the Creator, Preserver, Destroyer, and
Regenerator.

Between 5 and 4 comes the Antahkarana.  The triangle represents the
Christos, the Sacrificial Victim crucified between the thieves: this is
the double‐faced entity. The Vedântins make this a quaternary for a blind:
Antahkarana, Chit, Buddhi, and Manas.

MANVANTARIC ASPECT OF PARABRAHMAN AND MÛLAPRAKRITI.

                              [Illustration]

[N.B.—The number of Rays is arbitrary and without significance.]

Perceptive life begins with the Astral: it is not our physical atoms which
see, etc.

Consciousness proper begins between Kâma and Manas. Âtmâ‐Buddhi acts more
in the atoms of the body, in the bacilli, microbes, etc., than in Man
himself.



Objective Consciousness.


Sensuous objective consciousness includes all that pertains to the five
physical senses in man, and rules in animals, birds, fishes and some
insects. Here are the “Lives”; their consciousness is in Âtmâ‐Buddhi;
these are entirely without Manas.



Astral Consciousness.


That of some plants (_e.g._, sensitive), of ants, spiders, and some night‐
flies (Indian), but not of bees.

The vertebrate animals in general are without this consciousness, but the
placental Mammals have all the potentialities of human consciousness,
though at present, of course, dormant.

Idiots are on this plane. The common expression “he has lost his mind” is
an Occult truth. For when through fright or other cause the lower mind
becomes paralyzed, then the consciousness is on the Astral Plane. The
study of lunacy will throw much light on these points. This may be called
the “nerve plane.” It is cognized by our “nervous centres” of which
Physiology knows nothing, _e.g._, the clairvoyant reading with the eyes
bandaged, reading with the tips of the fingers, the pit of the stomach,
etc. This sense is greatly developed in the deaf and dumb.



Kâma‐Prânic Consciousness.


The general life‐consciousness which belongs to all the objective world,
even to the stones; for if stones were not living they could not decay,
emit a spark, etc. Affinity between chemical elements is a manifestation
of this Kâmic consciousness.



Kâma‐Mânasic Consciousness.


The instinctual consciousness of animals and idiots in its lowest degrees,
the planes of sensation: in man these are rationalized, _e.g._, a dog shut
in a room has the instinct to get out, but cannot because its instinct is
not sufficiently rationalized to take the necessary means; whereas a man
at once takes in the situation and extricates himself. The highest degree
of this Kâma‐Mânasic consciousness is the psychic. Thus there are seven
degrees from the instinctual animal to the rationalized instinctual and
psychic.



Mânasic Consciousness.


From this plane Manas stretches upwards to Mahat.



Buddhic Consciousness.


The plane of Buddhi and the Auric Envelope. From here it goes to the
Father in heaven, Âtmâ, and reflects all that is in the Auric Envelope.
Five and six therefore cover the planes from the psychic to the divine.



Miscellaneous.


Reason is a thing that oscillates between right and wrong. But
Intelligence—Intuition—is higher, it is the clear vision.

To get rid of Kâma we must crush out all our material instincts—“crush out
matter.” The flesh is a thing of habit; it will repeat mechanically a good
impulse as well as a bad one. It is not the flesh which is always the
tempter; in nine cases out of ten it is the Lower Manas, which, by its
images, leads the flesh into temptation.

The highest Adept begins his Samâdhi on the Fourth Solar Plane, but cannot
go outside the Solar System. When he begins Samâdhi he is on a par with
some of the Dhyân Chohans, but he transcends them as he rises to the
seventh plane (Nirvâna).

The Silent Watcher is on the Fourth Kosmic Plane.

The higher Mind directs the Will: the lower turns it into selfish Desire.

The head should not be covered in meditation. It is covered in Samâdhi.

The Dhyân Chohans are passionless, pure and mindless. They have no
struggle, no passions to crush.

The Dhyân Chohans are made to pass through the School of Life. “God goes
to School.”

The best of us in the future will be Mânasaputras; the lowest will be
Pitris. We are seven intellectual Hierarchies here. This earth becomes the
moon of the next earth.

The “Pitris” are the Astral overshadowed by Âtmâ‐Buddhi, falling into
matter. The “Pudding‐bags” had Life and Âtmâ‐Buddhi, but no Manas. They
were therefore senseless. The reason for all evolution is the gaining of
experience.

In the Fifth Round all of us will play the part of Pitris. We shall have
to go and shoot out our Chhâyâs into another humanity, and remain until
that humanity is perfected. The Pitris have finished their office in this
Round and have gone into Nirvâna; but they will return to do the same
office up to the middle point of the Fifth Round. The Fourth or Kâmic
Hierarchy of the Pitris becomes the “man of flesh.”

The astral body is first in the womb; then comes the germ that fructifies
it. It is then clothed with matter, as were the Pitris.

The Chhâyâ is really the lower Manas, the shadow of the higher Mind. This
Chhâyâ makes the Mâyâvi Rûpa. The Ray clothes itself in the highest degree
of the Astral Plane. The Mâyâvi Rûpa is composed of the astral body as
Upâdhi, the guiding intelligence from the heart, the attributes and
qualities from the Auric Envelope.

The Auric Envelope takes up the light of Âtmâ, and overshadows the
coronal, circling round the head.

The Auric Fluid is a combination of the Life and Will principles, the life
and the will being one and the same in Kosmos. It emanates from the eyes
and hands, when directed by the will of the operator.

The Auric Light surrounds all bodies: it is the “aura” emanating from
them, whether they be animal, vegetable, or mineral. It is the light,
_e.g._, seen round magnets.

Âtmâ‐Buddhi‐Manas in man corresponds to the three Logoi in Kosmos. They
not only correspond, but each is the radiation from Kosmos to Microcosmos.
The third Logos, Mahat, becomes Manas in man, Manas being only Mahat
individualized, as the sun‐rays are individualized in bodies that absorb
them. The sun‐rays give life, they fertilize what is already there, and
the individual is formed. Mahat, so to say, fertilizes, and Manas is the
result.

Buddhi‐Manas is the Kshetrajña.

There are seven planes of Mahat, as of all else.



The Human Principles.


Here H. P. B. drew two diagrams, illustrating different ways of
representing the human principles. In the first

                              [Illustration]

the two lower are disregarded; they go out, disintegrate, are of no
account. Remain five, under the radiation of Âtmâ.

In the second:

                              [Illustration]

the lower Quaternary is regarded as mere matter, objective illusion, and
there remain Manas and the Auric Egg, the higher Principles being
reflected in the Auric Egg. In all these systems remember the main
principle, the descent and re‐ascent of the Spirit, in man as in Kosmos.
The Spirit is drawn downwards as by spiritual gravitation.

Seeking further for the cause of this, the students were checked, H. P. B.
giving only a suggestion on the three Logoi:

1. Potentiality of Mind (Absolute Thought).

2. Thought in Germ.

3. Ideation in Activity.



Notes.


Protective variation, _e.g._, identity of colouring of insects and of that
on which they feed, was explained to be the work of Nature Elementals.

Form is on different planes, and the forms of one plane may be formless to
dwellers on another. The Kosmocratores build on planes in the Divine Mind,
visible to them though not to us. The principle of limitation—_principium
individuationis_—is Form: this principle is Divine Law manifested in
Kosmic Matter, which, in its essence, is limitless. The Auric Egg is the
limit of man as Hiranyagarbha of the Kosmos.

The first step towards the accomplishment of Kriyâshakti is the use of the
Imagination. To imagine a thing is to firmly create a model of what you
desire, perfect in all its details. The Will is then brought into action,
and the form is thereby transferred to the objective world. This is
creation by Kriyâshakti.



Suns And Planets.


A comet partially cools and settles down as a sun. It then gradually
attracts round it planets that are as yet unattached to any centre, and
thus, in millions of years, a Solar System is formed. The worn‐out planet
becomes a moon to the planet of another system.

The sun we see is a reflection of the true Sun: this reflection, as an
outward concrete thing, is a Kâma‐Rûpa, all the suns forming the Kâma‐Rûpa
of Kosmos. To its own system the sun is Buddhi, as being the reflection
and vehicle of the true Sun, which is Âtmâ, invisible on this plane. All
the Fohatic forces—electricity, etc.—are in this reflection.



The Moon.


At the beginning of the evolution of our globe, the moon was much nearer
to the earth, and larger than it is now. It has retreated from us, and
shrunk much in size. (The moon gave all her Principles to the earth, while
the Pitris gave only their Chhâyâs to man.)

The influences of the moon are wholly psycho‐physiological. It is dead,
sending out injurious emanations like a corpse. It vampirizes the earth
and its inhabitants, so that anyone sleeping in its rays suffers, losing
some of his life‐force. A white cloth is a protection, the rays not
passing through it, and the head especially should be thus guarded. It has
most power when it is full. It throws off particles which we absorb, and
is gradually disintegrating. Where there is snow the moon looks like a
corpse, being unable, through the white snow, to vampirize effectually.
Hence snow‐covered mountains are free from its bad influences. The moon is
phosphorescent.

The Râkshakas of Lanka and the Atlanteans are said to have subjected the
moon. The Thessalians learned from them their Magic.

Esoterically, the moon is the symbol of the Lower Manas; it is also the
symbol of the Astral.

Plants which under the sun’s rays are beneficent are maleficent under
those of the moon. Herbs containing poisons are most active when gathered
under the moon’s rays.

A new moon will appear during the Seventh Round, and our moon will finally
disintegrate and disappear. There is now a planet, the “Mystery Planet,”
behind the moon, and it is gradually dying. Finally the time will come for
it to send its Principles to a new Laya Centre, and there a new planet
will form, to belong to another Solar System, the present Mystery Planet
then functioning as moon to that new globe. This moon will have nothing to
do with our earth, though it will come within our range of vision.



The Solar System.


All the visible planets placed in our Solar System by Astronomers belong
to it, except Neptune. There are also some others not known to Science,
belonging to it, and “all moons which are not yet visible for next
things.”

The planets only move in our consciousness. The Rulers of the seven Secret
Planets have no influence on this earth, as this earth has on other
planets. It is the sun and moon which really have not only a mental, but
also a physical effect. The effect of the sun on humanity is connected
with Kâma‐Prâna, with the most physical Kâmic elements in us; it is the
vital principle which helps growth. The effect of the moon is chiefly
Kâma‐Mânasic or psycho‐physiological; it acts on the psychological brain,
on the brain‐mind.



Precious Stones.


In answer to a question, H. P. B. said that the diamond and the ruby were
under the sun, the sapphire under the moon—“but what does it matter to
you?”



Time.


When once out of the body, and not subject to the habit of consciousness
formed by others, time does not exist.

Cycles and epochs depend on consciousness: we are not here for the first
time; the cycles return because we come back into conscious existence.
Cycles are measured by the consciousness of humanity and not by Nature. It
is because we are the same people as in past epochs that these events
occur to us.



Death.


The Hindus look upon death as impure, owing to the disintegration of the
body and the passing from one plane to another. “I believe in
transformation, not in death.”



Atoms.


The Atom is the Soul of the molecule. It is the six Principles, and the
molecule is the body thereof. The Atom is the Âtman of the objective
Kosmos, _i.e._, it is on the seventh plane of the lowest Prakriti.



Terms.


H. P. B. began by saying that students ought to know the correct meaning
of the Sanskrit terms used in Occultism, and should learn the Occult
Symbology. To begin with one had better learn the correct Esoteric
classification and names of the fourteen (7 × 2) and seven (Sapta) Lokas
found in the exoteric texts. These are given there in a very confused
manner, and are full of “blinds.” To illustrate this three classifications
are given below.



Lokas.


1. The general exoteric, orthodox and tântric category:
      Bhûr‐loka.
      Bhuvar‐loka.
      Swar‐loka.
      Mahar‐loka.       The second seven are reflected.
      Janar‐loka.
      Tapar‐loka.
      Satya‐loka.

2. The Sânkhya category, and that of some Vedântins
      Brahmâ‐loka.
      Pitri‐loka.
      Soma‐loka.
      Indra‐loka.
      Gandharva‐loka.
      Râkshasa‐loka
      Yaksha‐loka.

And an eighth.

3. The Vedântic, the nearest approach to the Esoteric:
      Atala.
      Vitala.
      Sutala.
      Talâtala (or Karatala).
      Rasâtala.
      Mahâtala.
      Pâtâla.

Each and all correspond Esoterically to the Kosmic or Dhyân Chohanic
Hierarchies, and to the human States of Consciousness and their
subdivisions (forty‐nine). To appreciate this the meanings of the terms
used in the Vedântic classification must be first understood.

_Tala_     means _place_.

Atala      means no place.

Vitala     means some change for the better: _i.e._, better for matter in
that more matter enters into it, or, in other words, it becomes more
differentiated. This is an ancient Occult term.

Sutala     means good, excellent, place.

Karatala   means something that can be grasped or touched (from kara, a
hand): _i.e._, the state in which matter becomes tangible.

Rasâtala   means place of taste; a place you can sense with one of the
organs of sense.

Mahâtala   means exoterically “great place”; but, Esoterically, a place
including all others subjectively, and potentially including all that
precedes it.

Pâtâla     means something under the feet (from pada, foot), the upâdhi,
or basis, of anything, the antipodes, America, etc.

Each of the Lokas, places, worlds, states, etc., corresponds with and is
transformed into five (exoterically) and seven (Esoterically) states or
Tattvas, for which there are no definite names. These in the main
divisions cited below make up the forty‐nine Fires:


    5 and 7 Tanmâtras, outer and inner senses.
    5 and 7 Bhûtas, or elements.
    5 and 7 Gnyânendryas, or organs of sensation.
    5 and 7 Karmendryas, or organs of action.


These correspond in general to States of Consciousness, to the Hierarchies
of Dhyân Chohans, to the Tattvas, etc. These Tattvas transform themselves
into the whole Universe. The fourteen Lokas are made of seven with seven
reflections: above, below; within, without; subjective, objective; pure,
impure; positive, negative; etc.



Explanation of the States of Consciousness Corresponding to the Vedântic
Classification of Lokas.


7. _Atala._ The Âtmic or Auric state or locality: it emanates directly
from ABSOLUTENESS, and is the first something in the Universe. Its
correspondence is the Hierarchy of non‐substantial primordial Beings, in a
place which is no place (for us), a state which is no state. This
Hierarchy contains the primordial plane, all that was, is, and will be,
from the beginning to the end of the Mahâmanvantara; all is there. This
statement should not, however, be taken to imply Kismet: the latter is
contrary to all the teachings of Occultism.

Here are the Hierarchies of the Dhyâni Buddhas. Their state is that of
Parasamâdhi, of the Dharmakâya; a state where no progress is possible. The
entities there may be said to be crystallized in purity, in homogeneity.

6. _Vitala._ Here are the Hierarchies of the celestial Buddhas, or
Bodhisattvas, who are said to emanate from the seven Dhyâni Buddhas. It is
related on earth to Samâdhi, to the Buddhic consciousness in man. No
Adept, save one, can be higher than this and live; if he passes into the
Âtmic or Dharmakâya state (Alaya) he can return to earth no more. These
two states are purely hyper‐metaphysical.

5. _Sutala._ A differential state corresponding on earth with the Higher
Manas, and therefore with Shabda (Sound), the Logos, our Higher Ego; and
also to the Manushi Buddha state, like that of Gautama, on earth. This is
the third stage of Samâdhi (which is septenary). Here belong the
Hierarchies of the Kumâras—the Agnishvattas, etc.

4. _Karatala_ corresponds with Sparsha (touch) and to the Hierarchies of
ethereal, semi‐objective Dhyân Chohans of the astral matter of the Mânasa‐
Manas, or the pure ray of Manas, that is the Lower Manas before it is
mixed with Kâma (as in the young child). They are called Sparsha Devas,
the Devas endowed with touch. These Hierarchies of Devas are progressive:
the first have one sense; the second two; and so on to seven: each
containing all the senses potentially, but not yet developed. Sparsha
would be rendered better by affinity, contact.

3. _Rasâtala_, or Rûpatala: corresponds to the Hierarchies of Rûpa or
Sight Devas, possessed of three senses, sight, hearing, and touch. These
are the Kâma‐Mânasic entities, and the higher Elementals. With the
Rosicrucians they were the Sylphs and Undines. It corresponds on earth
with an artificial state of consciousness, such as that produced by
hypnotism and drugs (morphia, etc.).

2. _Mahâtala._ Corresponds to the Hierarchies of Rasa or Taste Devas, and
includes a state of consciousness embracing the lower five senses and
emanations of life and being. It corresponds to Kâma and Prâna in man, and
to Salamanders and Gnomes in nature.

1. _Pâtâla._ Corresponds to the Hierarchies of Gandha or Smell Devas, the
underworld or antipodes: Myalba. The sphere of irrational animals, having
no feeling save that of self‐preservation and gratification of the senses:
also of intensely selfish human beings, waking or sleeping. This is why
Nârada is said to have visited Pâtâla when he was cursed to be reborn. He
reported that life there was very pleasant for those “who had never left
their birth‐place”; they were very happy. It is the earthly state, and
corresponds with the sense of smell. Here are also animal Dugpas,
Elementals of animals, and Nature Spirits.



Further Explanations of the Same Classifications.


7. Auric, Âtmic, Alayic, sense or state. One of full potentiality, but not
of activity.

6. Buddhic; the sense of being one with the universe; the impossibility of
imagining oneself apart from it.

(It was asked why the term Alayic was here given to the Âtmic and not to
the Buddhic state. _Ans._ These classifications are not hard and fast
divisions. A term may change places according as the classification is
exoteric, Esoteric or practical. For students the effort should be to
bring all things down to states of consciousness. Buddhi is really one and
indivisible. It is a feeling within, absolutely inexpressible in words.
All cataloguing is useless to explain it.)

5. Shâbdic, sense of hearing.

4. Spârshic, sense of touch.

3. Rûpic, the state of feeling oneself a body and perceiving it (rûpa =
form).

2. Râsic, sense of taste.

1. Gândhic, sense of smell.

All the Kosmic and anthropic states and senses correspond with our organs
of sensation, Gnyânendryas, rudimentary organs for receiving knowledge
through direct contact, sight, etc. These are the faculties of Sharîra,
through Netra (eyes), nose, speech, etc., and also with the organs of
action, Karmendryas, hands, feet, etc.

Exoterically, there are five sets of five, giving twenty‐five. Of these
twenty are facultative and five Buddhic. Exoterically Buddhi is said to
perceive; Esoterically it reaches perception only through the Higher
Manas. Each of these twenty is both positive and negative, thus making
forty in all. There are two subjective states answering to each of the
four sets of five, hence eight in all. These being subjective cannot be
doubled. Thus we have 40 + 8 = 48 “cognitions of Buddhi.” These with Mâyâ,
which includes them all, make 49. (Once that you have reached the
cognition of Mâyâ, you are an Adept.)



The Lokas.


In their exoteric blinds the Brâhmans count fourteen Lokas (earth
included), of which seven are objective, though not apparent, and seven
subjective, yet fully demonstrable to the Inner Man. There are seven
Divine Lokas and seven infernal (terrestrial) Lokas.

SEVEN DIVINE LOKAS.              SEVEN INFERNAL (TERRESTRIAL)
                                 LOKAS.
1. Bhûrloka (the earth).         1. Pâtâla (our earth).
2. Bhuvarloka (between the       2. Mahâtala.
earth and the sun [Munis]).
3. Svarloka (between the sun     3. Rasâtala.
and and Pole Star [Yogîs]).
4. Maharloka (between the        4. Talâtala (or Karatala).
earth and the utmost limit of
the Solar System).(858)
5. Janarloka (beyond the Solar   5. Sutala.
System, the abode of the
Kumâras, who do not belong to
this plane).
6. Taparloka (still beyond the   6. Vitala.
Mahâtmic region, the dwelling
of the Vairâja deities).
7. Satyaloka (the abode of the   7. Atala.
Nirvanîs).

These the Brâhmans read from the bottom.

Now all these fourteen are planes from without within, and (the seven
Divine) States of Consciousness through which man can pass‐‐and must pass,
once he is determined to go through the seven paths and portals of Dhyâni;
one need not be disembodied for this, and all this is reached on earth,
and in one or many of the incarnations.

See the order: the four lower ones (1, 2, 3, 4), are _rûpa_; _i.e._, they
are performed by the Inner Man with the full concurrence of the diviner
portions, or, elements, of the Lower Manas, and consciously by the
personal man. The three higher states cannot be reached and remembered by
the latter, unless he is a fully initiated Adept. A Hatha Yogî will never
pass beyond the Maharloka, psychically, and the Talâtala (double or dual
place), physico‐mentally. To become a Râja Yogî, one has to ascend up to
the seventh portal, the Satyaloka. For such, the Master Yogîs tell us, is
the fruition of Yajna, or sacrifice. When the Bhûr, Bhuvar and Svarga
(states) are once passed, and the Yogî’s consciousness centred in
Maharloka, it is in the last plane and state between entire identification
of the Personal and the Higher Manas.

One thing to remember: while the infernal (or terrestrial) states are also
the seven divisions of the earth, for planes and states, as much as they
are Kosmic divisions, the divine Saptaloka are purely subjective, and
begin with the psychic Astral Light plane, ending with the Satya or
Jîvanmukta state. These fourteen Lokas, or spheres, form the extent of the
whole Brahmânda (world). The four lower are transitory, with all their
dwellers, and the three higher eternal; _i.e._, the former states, planes
and subjects, to these, last only a Day of Brahmâ, changing with every
Kalpa: the latter endure for an Age of Brahmâ.

Students must learn the correspondences: then concentrate on the organs
and so reach their corresponding states of consciousness. Take them in
order beginning with the lowest, and working steadily upwards. A medium
might irregularly catch glimpses of higher, but would not thus gain
orderly development.

The greatest phenomena are produced by touching and centering the
attention upon the little finger.

The Lokas and Talas are reflections the one of the other. So also are the
Hierarchies in each, in pairs of opposites, at the two poles of the
sphere. Everywhere are such opposites: good and evil, light and darkness,
male and female.

H. P. B. could not say why blue was the colour of the earth. Blue is a
colour by itself, a primary. Indigo is a colour, not a shade of blue, so
is violet.

The Vairâjas belong to, are the fiery Egos of, other Manvantaras. They
have already been purified in the fire of passions. It is they who refused
to create. They have reached the Seventh Portal, and have refused Nirvâna,
remaining for succeeding Manvantaras.

The seven steps of Antahkarana correspond with the Lokas.

Samâdhi is the highest state on earth that can be reached in the body.
Beyond that the Initiate must have become a Nirmânakâya.

Purity of mind is of greater importance than purity of body. If the Upâdhi
be not perfectly pure, it cannot preserve recollections coming from a
higher state. An act may be performed to which little or no attention is
paid, and it is of comparatively small importance. But if thought of,
dwelt on in the mind, the effect is a thousand times greater. The thoughts
must be kept pure.

Remember that Kâma, while having bad passions and emotions, helps you to
evolve by giving also the desire and impulse necessary for rising.

The flesh, the body, the human being in his material part, is, on this
plane, the most difficult thing to subject. The highest Adept, put into a
new body, has to struggle against it and subdue it, and finds its
subjugation difficult.

The Liver is the General, the Spleen is the Aide‐de‐Camp. All that the
Liver does not accomplish is taken up and completed by the Spleen.

H. P. B. was asked whether each person must pass through the fourteen
states, and answered that the Lokas and Talas represented planes on this
earth, through some of which all must pass, and through all of which the
disciple must pass, on his way to Adeptship. Everyone passes through the
lower Lokas, but not necessarily through the corresponding Talas. There
are two poles in everything: seven states in every state.

Vitala represents a sublime as well as an infernal state. That state which
for the mortal is a complete separation of the Ego from the personality is
for a Buddha a mere temporary separation. For the Buddha it is a Kosmic
state.

The Brâhmans and Buddhists regard the Talas as hells, but in reality the
term is figurative. We are in hell whenever we are in misery, suffer
misfortune and so on.



Forms In The Astral Light.


The Elementals in the Astral light are reflections. Everything on earth is
reflected there. It is from these that photographs are sometimes obtained
through mediums. The mediums unconsciously produce them as forms. The
Adepts produce them consciously through Kriyâshakti, bringing them down by
a process that may be compared to the focussing of rays of light by a
burning glass.



States Of Consciousness.


Bhûrloka is the waking state in which we normally live; it is the state in
which animals also are, when they sense food, a danger, etc. To be in
Svarloka is to be completely abstracted on this plane, leaving only
instinct to work, so that on the material plane you would behave as an
animal. Yogîs are known who have become crystallized in this state, and
then they must be nourished by others. A Yogî near Allahabad had been for
fifty‐three years sitting on a stone; his Chelâs plunge him into the river
every night and then replace him. During the day his consciousness returns
to Bhûrloka, and he talks and teaches. A Yogî was found on an island near
Calcutta round whose limbs the roots of trees had grown. He was cut out,
and in the endeavour to awaken him so many outrages were inflicted on him
that he died.

_Q. Is it possible to be in more than one state of consciousness at once?_

_A._ The consciousness cannot be entirely on two planes at once. The
higher and lower states are not wholly incompatible, but if you are on the
higher you will wool‐gather on the lower. In order to remember the higher
state on returning to the lower, the memory must be carried upwards to the
higher. An Adept may apparently enjoy a dual consciousness; when he
desires not to see he can abstract himself: he may be in a higher state
and yet return answers to questions addressed to him. But in this case he
will momentarily return to the material plane, shooting up again to the
higher plane. This is his only salvation in adverse conditions.

The lower you go in the Talas the more intellectual you become and the
less spiritual. You may be a morally good man but not spiritual. Intellect
may remain very closely related to Kâma. A man may be in a Loka and visit
one and all the Talas, his condition depending on the Loka to which he
belongs. Thus a man in Bhûrloka only may pass into the Talas and go to the
devil. If he dwells in Bhuvarloka he cannot become as bad. If he has
reached the Satya state he can go into any Tala without danger; buoyed up
by his own purity he can never be engulfed. The Talas are brain intellect
states, while the Lokas—or more accurately the three higher—are spiritual.

Manas absorbs the light of Buddhi. Buddhi is Arûpa, and can absorb
nothing. When the Ego takes all the light of Buddhi, it takes that of
Âtmâ, Buddhi being the vehicle, and thus the three become one. This done,
the _full_ Adept is one spiritually, but has a body. The fourfold Path is
finished and he is one. The Masters’ bodies are, as far as they are
concerned, illusionary, and hence do not grow old, become wrinkled, etc.

The student, who is not naturally psychic, should fix the fourfold
consciousness in a higher plane and nail it there. Let him make a bundle
of the four lower and pin them to a higher state. He should centre on this
higher, trying not to permit the body and intellect to draw him down and
carry him away. Play ducks and drakes with the body, eating, drinking and
sleeping, but living always on the ideal.



Mother‐Love.


Mother‐love is an instinct, the same in the human being and in the animal,
and often stronger in the latter. The continuance of this love in human
beings is due to association, to blood magnetism and to psychic affinity.
Families are sometimes formed of those who have lived together before, but
often not. The causes at work are very complex and have to be balanced.
Sometimes when a child with very bad Karma is to be born, parents of a
callous type are chosen, or they may die before the Karmic results appear.
Or the suffering through the child may be their own Karma. Mother‐love as
an instinct is between Rasâtala and Talâtala.

The Lipikas keep man’s Karmic record, and impress it on the Astral Light.

Vacillating people pass from one state of consciousness to another.

Thought arises before desire. The thought acts on the brain, the brain on
the organ, and then desire awakes. It is not the outer stimulus that
arouses the organ. Thought therefore must be slain ere desire can be
extinguished. The student must guard his thoughts. Five minutes’ thought
may undo the work of five years; and though the five years’ work will be
run through more rapidly the second time, yet time is lost.



Consciousness.


H. P. B. began by challenging the views of consciousness in the West,
commenting on the lack of definition in the leading Philosophies. No
distinction was made between consciousness and self‐consciousness, and yet
in this lay the difference between man and the animal. The animal was
conscious only, not self‐conscious; the animal does not know the Ego as
Subject, as does man. There is therefore an enormous difference between
the consciousness of the bird, the insect, the beast, and that of man.

But the full consciousness of man is self‐consciousness—that which makes
us say, “_I_ do that.” If there is pleasure it must be traced to some one
experiencing it. Now the difference between the consciousness of man and
of animals is that while there is a Self in the animal, the animal is not
conscious of the Self. Spencer reasons on consciousness, but when he comes
to a gap he merely jumps over it. So again Hume, when he says that on
introspection he sees merely feelings and can never find any “I,” forgets
that without an “I” no seeing of feelings would be possible. What is it
that studies the feelings? The animal is not conscious of the feeling “I
am I.” It has instinct, but instinct is not self‐consciousness. Self‐
consciousness is an attribute of the mind, not of the soul, the _anima_,
whence the very name _animal_ is taken. Humanity had no self‐consciousness
until the coming of the Mânasaputras in the Third Race. Consciousness,
brain‐consciousness, is the field of the light of the Ego, of the Auric
Egg, of the Higher Manas. The cells of the leg are conscious, but they are
the slaves of the idea; they are not self‐conscious, they cannot originate
an idea, although when they are tired they can convey to the brain an
uneasy sensation, and so give rise to the idea of fatigue. Instinct is the
lower state of consciousness. Man has consciousness running through the
four lower keys of his septenary consciousness; there are seven scales of
consciousness in his consciousness, which is none the less essentially and
pre‐eminently one, a unit. There are millions and millions of states of
consciousness, as there are millions and millions of leaves; but as you
cannot find two leaves alike, so you cannot find two states of
consciousness alike; a state is never exactly repeated.

Is memory a thing born in us that it can give birth to the Ego? Knowledge,
feeling, volition, are colleagues of the mind, not faculties of it. Memory
is an artificial thing, an adjunct of relativeness; it can be sharpened or
left dull, and it depends on the condition of the brain‐cells which store
all impressions; knowledge, feeling, volition, cannot be correlated, do
what you will. They are not produced from each other, nor produced from
mind, but are principles, colleagues. You cannot have knowledge without
memory, for memory stores all things, garnishing and furnishing. If you
teach a child nothing, it will know nothing. Brain‐consciousness depends
on the intensity of the light shed by the Higher Manas on the Lower, and
the extent of affinity between the brain and this light. Brain‐mind is
conditioned by the responsiveness of the brain to this light; it is the
field of consciousness of the Manas. The animal has the Monad and the
Manas latent, but its brain cannot respond. All potentialities are there,
but are dormant. There are certain accepted errors in the West which
vitiate all their theories.

How many impressions can a man receive simultaneously into his
consciousness and record? The Westerns say one: Occultists say normally
seven, and abnormally fourteen, seventeen, nineteen, twenty‐one, up to
forty‐nine, impressions can be simultaneously received. Occultism teaches
that the consciousness always receives a sevenfold impression and stores
it in the memory. You can prove it by striking at once the seven notes of
the musical scale: the seven sounds reach the consciousness
simultaneously, but the untrained ear can only recognize them one after
another, and if you choose you can measure the intervals. The trained ear
will hear the seven notes at once, simultaneously. And experiment has
shown that in two or three weeks a man may be trained to receive seventeen
or eighteen impressions of colour, the intervals decreasing with practice.

Memory is acquired for this life, and can be expanded. Genius is the
greatest responsiveness of the brain and brain‐memory to the Higher Manas.
Impressions on any sense are stored in the memory.

Before a physical sense is developed there is a mental feeling which
proceeds to become a physical sense. Fishes who are blind, living in the
deep sea, or subterranean waters, if they are put into a pond will in a
few generations develop eyes. But in their previous state there is a sense
of seeing, though no physical sight; how else should they in the darkness
find their way, avoid dangers, etc.? The mind will take in and store all
kinds of things mechanically and unconsciously, and will throw them into
the memory as unconscious perceptions. If the attention is greatly
engrossed in any way, the sense perception of any injury is not felt at
the time, but later the suffering enters into consciousness. So, returning
to our example of the seven notes struck simultaneously, we have one
impression, but the ear is affected in succession by the notes one after
another, so that they are stored in the brain‐mind in order, for the
untrained consciousness cannot register them simultaneously. All depends
on training and on attention. Thus the transference of a sensation passing
from any organ to the consciousness is almost simultaneous if your
attention is fixed on it, but if any noise distracts your attention, then
it will take a fraction more of a second before it reaches your
consciousness. The Occultist should train himself to receive and transmit
along the line of the seven scales of his consciousness every impression,
or impressions, simultaneously. He who reduces the intervals of physical
time the most has made the most progress.



Consciousness, Its Seven Scales.


There are seven scales or shades of consciousness, of the Unit; _e.g._, in
a moment of pleasure or pain; four lower and three higher.

1. Physical sense‐perception: Perception of the cell (if paralyzed, the
sense is there, though _you_ do not feel it).

2. Self‐perception or apperception: _I.e._, self‐perception of cell.

3. Psychic apperception: Of astral double, döppelganger, carrying it
higher to the:

4. Vital perception: Physical feeling, sensations of pleasure and pain, of
quality.

These are the four lower scales, and belong to the psycho‐physiological
man.

5. Mânasic discernment of the Mânasic self‐perception. Lower Manas:

6. Will perception: Volitional perception, the voluntary taking in of an
idea; you can regard or disregard physical pain.

7. Spiritual, entirely conscious apperception:   Because it reaches the
Higher, self‐conscious Manas.

[Apperception means self‐perception, conscious action, not as with
Leibnitz, but when attention is fixed on the perception.]

You can take these on any planes: _e.g._, bad news passes through the four
lower stages before coming to the heart.

Or take Sound:


    1. It strikes the ear.

    2. Self‐perception of the ear.

    3. On the psychic or mental, which carries it to

    4. Vital (harsh, soft; strong, weak; etc.).



The Ego.


One of the best proofs that there is an Ego, a true Field of
Consciousness, is the fact already mentioned, that a state of
consciousness is never exactly reproduced, though you should live a
hundred years, and pass through milliards and milliards. In an active day,
how many states and substates there are; it would be impossible to have
cells enough for all. This will help you to understand why some mental
states and abstract things follow the Ego into Devachan, and why others
merely scatter in space. That which touches the Entity has an affinity for
it, as a noble action, is immortal and goes with it into Devachan, forming
part and parcel of the biography of the personality which is
disintegrating. A lofty emotion runs through the seven stages, and touches
the Ego, the mind that plays its tunes in the mind‐cells. We can analyze
the work of consciousness and describe it; but we cannot define
consciousness unless we postulate a Subject.



Bhûrloka.


The Bhûrloka begins with the Lower Manas. Animals do not feel as do men.
The dog thinks more of his master being angry than of the actual pain of
the lash. The animal does not suffer in memory and in imagination, feeling
past and future as well as actual present pain.



Pineal Gland.


The special physical organ of perception is the brain, and perception is
located in the aura of the pineal gland. This aura answers in vibrations
to any impressions, but it can only be sensed, not perceived, in the
living man. During the process of thought manifesting in consciousness, a
constant vibration occurs in the light of this aura, and a clairvoyant
looking at the brain of a living man may almost count, see with the
spiritual eye, the seven scales, the seven shades of light, passing from
the dullest to the brightest. You touch your hand; before you touch it the
vibration is already in the aura of the pineal gland, and has its own
shade of colour. It is this aura which causes the wear and tear of the
organ, by the vibrations it sets up. The brain, set vibrating, conveys the
vibrations to the spinal cord, and so to the rest of the body. Happiness
as well as sorrow sets up these strong vibrations, and so wears out the
body. Powerful vibrations of joy or sorrow may thus kill.



The Heart.


The septenary disturbance and play of light around the pineal gland are
reflected in the heart, or rather the aura of the heart, which vibrates
and illumines the seven brains of the heart, just as does the aura round
the pineal gland. This is the exoterically four‐ but Esoterically seven‐
leaved lotus, the Saptaparna, the cave of Buddha, with its seven
compartments.



Astral And Ego.


There is a difference between the nature and the essence of the Astral
Body and the Ego. The Astral Body is molecular, however etherealized it
may be: the Ego is atomic, spiritual. The Atoms are spiritual, and are for
ever invisible on this plane; molecules form around them, they remaining
as the higher invisible principles of the molecules. The eyes are the most
Occult of our senses: close them and you pass to the mental plane. Stop
all the senses and you are entirely on another plane.



Individuality.


If twelve people are smoking together, the smoke of their cigarettes may
mingle, but the molecules of the smoke from each have an affinity with
each other, and they remain distinct for ever and ever, no matter how the
whole mass may interblend. So a drop of water, though it fall into the
ocean retains its individuality. It has become a drop with a life of its
own, like a man, and cannot be annihilated. Any group of people would
appear as a group in the Astral Light, but would not be permanent; but a
group meeting to study Occultism would cohere, and the impression would be
more permanent. The higher and the more spiritual the affinity, the more
permanent the cohesion.



Lower Manas.


The Lower Manas is an emanation from the Higher Manas, and is of the same
nature as the Higher. This nature can make no impression on this plane,
nor receive any: an Archangel, having no experience, would be senseless on
this plane, and could neither give nor receive impressions. So the Lower
Manas clothes itself with the essence of the Astral Light; this astral
envelope shuts it out from its Parent, except through the Antahkarana
which is its only salvation. Break this and you become an animal.



Kâma.


Kâma is life, it is the essence of the blood. When this leaves the blood
the latter congeals. Prâna is universal on this plane; it is in us the
vital principle, Prânic, rather than Prâna.



Self‐Hood.


Qualities determine the properties of “Self‐hood.” As, for instance, two
wolves placed in the same environment would probably not act differently.

The field of the consciousness of the Higher Ego is never reflected in the
Astral Light. The Auric Envelope receives the impressions of both the
Higher and the Lower Manas, and it is the latter impressions that are also
reflected in the Astral Light. Whereas the essence of all things
spiritual, all that which reaches, or is not rejected by, the Higher Ego
is not reflected in the Astral Light, because it is on too low a plane.
But during the life of a man, this essence, with a view to Karmic ends, is
impressed on the Auric Envelope, and after death and the separation of the
Principles is united with the Universal Mind (that is to say, those
“impressions” which are superior to even the Devachanic Plane), to await
there Karmically until the day when the Ego is to be reincarnated. [There
are thus three sets of impressions, which we may call the Kâmic,
Devachanic and Mânasic.] For the entities, no matter how high, must have
their Karmic rewards and punishments on earth. These spiritual impressions
are made more or less on the brain, otherwise the Lower Ego would not be
responsible. There are some impressions, however, received through the
brain, which are not of our previous experience. In the case of the Adept
the brain is trained to retain these impressions.

The Reincarnating Ray may, for convenience, be separated into two aspects:
the lower Kâmic Ego is scattered in Kâma Loka; the Mânasic part
accomplishes its cycle and returns to the Higher Ego. It is, in reality,
this Higher Ego which is, so to speak, punished, which suffers. This is
the true crucifixion of the Christos—the most abstruse but yet the most
important mystery of Occultism; all the cycle of our lives hangs on it. It
is indeed the Higher Ego that is the sufferer; for remember that the
abstract consciousness of the higher personal consciousness will remain
impressed on the Ego, since it must be part and parcel of its eternity.
All our grandest impressions are impressed on the Higher Ego, because they
are of the same nature as itself.

Patriotism and great actions in national service are not altogether good,
from the point of view of the highest. To benefit a portion of humanity is
good; but to do so at the expense of the rest is bad. Therefore, in
patriotism, etc., the venom is present with the good. For though the inner
essence of the Higher Ego is unsoilable, the outer garment may be soiled.
Thus both the bad and the good of such thoughts and actions are impressed
on the Auric Envelope and the Karma of the bad is taken up by the Higher
Ego, though it is perfectly guiltless of it. Thus both sets of
impressions, after death, scatter in the Universal Mind, and at
reincarnation the Ego sends out a Ray which is itself, into a new
personality, and there suffers. It suffers in the Self‐consciousness that
it has created by its own accumulated experiences.

Every one of our Egos has the Karma of past Manvantaras behind. There are
seven Hierarchies of Egos, some of which, _e.g._, in inferior tribes, may
be said to be only just beginning the present cycle. The Ego starts with
Divine Consciousness; no past, no future, no separation. It is long before
realizing that it is itself. Only after many births does it begin to
discern, by this collectivity of experience, that it is individual. At the
end of its cycle of reincarnation it is still the same Divine
Consciousness, but it has now become individualized Self‐consciousness.

The feeling of responsibility is inspired by the presence of the Light of
the Higher Ego. As the Ego in its cycle of re‐birth becomes more and more
individualized, it learns more and more by suffering to recognize its own
responsibility, by which it finally gains Self‐consciousness, the
consciousness of all the Egos of the whole Universe. Absolute Being, to
have the idea or sensation of all this, must pass through all experience
individually, not universally, so that when it returns it should be of the
same omniscience as the Universal Mind _plus_ the memory of all that it
has passed through.

At the Day “Be with us” every Ego has to remember all the cycles of its
past reincarnations for Manvantaras. The Ego comes in contact with this
earth, all seven Principles become one, it sees all that it has done
therein. It sees the stream of its past reincarnations by a certain divine
light. It sees all humanity at once, but still there is ever, as it were,
a stream which is always the “I.”

We should therefore always endeavour to accentuate our responsibility.

The Higher Ego is, as it were, a globe of pure divine light, a Unit from a
higher plane, on which is no differentiation. Descending to a plane of
differentiation it emanates a Ray, which it can only manifest through the
personality which is already differentiated. A portion of this Ray, the
Lower Manas, during life, may so crystallize itself and become one with
Kâma that it will remain assimilated with Matter. That portion which
retains its purity forms Antahkarana. The whole fate of an incarnation
depends on whether Antahkarana will be able to restrain the Kâma‐Manas or
not. After death the higher light (Antahkarana) which bears the
impressions and memory of all good and noble aspirations, assimilates
itself with the Higher Ego, the bad is dissociated in space, and comes
back as bad Karma awaiting the personality.

The feeling of responsibility is the beginning of Wisdom, a proof that
Ahankâra is beginning to fade out, the beginning of losing the sense of
separateness.



Kâma Rûpa.


The Kâma Rûpa eventually breaks up and goes into animals. All red‐blooded
animals come from man. The cold‐blooded are from the matter of the past.
The blood is the Kâma Rûpa.

The white corpuscles are the scavengers, “devourers”; they are oozed out
of the Astral through the spleen, and are of the same essence as the
Astral. They are the sweat‐born of the Chhâyâ. Kâma is everywhere in the
body. The red cells are drops of electrical fluid, the perspiration of all
the organs oozed out from every cell. They are the progeny of the Fohatic
Principle.



Heart.


There are seven brains in the heart, the Upâdhis and symbols of the seven
Hierarchies.



The Fires.


The fires are always playing round the pineal gland, but when Kundalinî
illuminates them for a brief instant the whole universe is seen. Even in
deep sleep the Third Eye opens. This is good for Manas, who profits by it,
though we ourselves do not remember.



Perception.


In answer to a question on the seven stages of perception, H. P. B. said
that thought should be centred on the highest, the seventh, and then an
attempt to transcend this will prove that it is impossible to go beyond it
on this plane. There is nothing in the brain to carry the thinker on, and
if thought is to rise yet further it must be thought without a brain. Let
the eyes be closed, the will set not to let the brain work, and then the
point may be transcended and the student will pass to the next plane. All
the seven stages of perception come before Antahkarana; if you can pass
beyond them you are on the Mânasic Plane.

Try to imagine something which transcends your power of thought, say, the
nature of the Dhyân Chohans. Then make the brain passive, and pass beyond;
you will see a white radiant light, like silver, but opalescent as mother
of pearl; then waves of colour will pass over it, beginning in the
tenderest violet, and through bronze shades of green to indigo with
metallic lustre, and that colour will remain. If you see this you are on
another plane. You should pass through seven stages.

When a colour comes, glance at it, and if it is not good reject it. Let
your attention be arrested only on the green, indigo and yellow. These are
good colours. The eyes being connected with the brain, the colour you see
most easily will be the colour of the personality. If you see red, it is
merely physiological, and is to be disregarded. Green‐bronze is the Lower
Manas, yellow‐bronze the Antahkarana, indigo‐bronze is Manas. These are to
be observed, and when the yellow‐bronze merges into the indigo you are on
the Mânasic Plane.

On the Mânasic Plane you see the Noumena, the essence of phenomena. You do
not see people or other consciousnesses, but have enough to do to keep
your own. The trained Seer can see Noumena always. The Adept sees the
Noumena on this plane, the reality of things, so cannot be deceived.

In meditation the beginner may waver backwards and forwards between two
planes. You hear the ticking of a clock on this plane, then on the
astral—the soul of the ticking. When clocks are stopped here the ticking
goes on on higher planes, in the astral, and then in the ether, until the
last bit of the clock is gone. It is the same as with a dead body, which
sends out emanations until the last molecule is disintegrated.

There is no time in meditation, because there is no succession of states
of consciousness on this plane.

Violet is the colour of the Astral. You begin with it, but should not stay
in it; try to pass on. When you see a sheet of violet, you are beginning
unconsciously to form a Mâyâvi Rûpa. Fix your attention, and if you go
away keep your consciousness firmly to the Mâyâvic Body; do not lose sight
of it, hold on like grim death.



Consciousness.


The consciousness which is merely the animal consciousness is made up of
the consciousness of all the cells in the body except those of the heart.
The heart is the king, the most important organ in the body of man. Even
if the head be severed from the body, the heart will continue to beat for
thirty minutes. It will beat for some hours if wrapped in cotton wool and
put in a warm place. The spot in the heart which is the last of all to die
is the seat of life, the centre of all, Brahmâ, the first spot that lives
in the fœtus and the last that dies. When a Yogî is buried in a trance it
is this spot that lives, though the rest of the body be dead, and as long
as this is alive the Yogî can be resurrected. This spot contains
potentially mind, life, energy, and will. During life it radiates
prismatic colours, fiery and opalescent. The heart is the centre of
spiritual consciousness, as the brain is the centre of intellectual. But
this consciousness cannot be guided by a person, nor its energy directed
by him until he is at one with Buddhi‐Manas; until then it guides him—if
it can. Hence the pangs of remorse, the prickings of conscience; they come
from the heart, not the head. In the heart is the only manifested God, the
other two are invisible, and it is this which represents the Triad,
Âtmâ‐Buddhi‐Manas.

In reply to a question whether the consciousness might not be concentrated
in the heart, and so the promptings of the Spirit caught, H. P. B. said
that any one who could thus concentrate would be at one with Manas, would
have united Kâma‐Manas to the Higher Manas. The Higher Manas could not
directly guide man, it could only act through the Lower Manas.

There are three principal centres in man, Heart, Head, and Navel: any two
of which may be + or ‐ to each other, according to the relative
predominance of the centres.

The heart represents the Higher Triad; the liver and spleen represent the
Quaternary. The solar plexus is the brain of the stomach.

H. P. B. was asked if the three centres above‐named would represent the
Christos, crucified between two thieves; she said it might serve as an
analogy, but these figures must not be over‐driven. It must never be
forgotten that the Lower Manas is the same in its essence as the Higher,
and may become one with it by rejecting Kâmic impulses. The crucifixion of
the Christos represents the self‐sacrifice of the Higher Manas, the Father
that sends his only begotten Son into the world to take upon him our sins:
the Christ‐myth came from the Mysteries. So also did the life of
Apollonius of Tyana; this was suppressed by the Fathers of the Church
because of its striking similarity to the life of Christ.

The psycho‐intellectual man is all in the head with its seven gateways;
the spiritual man is in the heart. The convolutions are formed by thought.

The third ventricle in life is filled with light, and not with a liquid as
after death.

There are seven cavities in the brain which are quite empty during life,
and it is in these that visions must be reflected if they are to remain in
the memory. These centres are, in Occultism, called the seven harmonies,
the scale of the divine harmonies. They are filled with Âkâsha, each with
its own colour, according to the state of consciousness in which you are.
The sixth is the pineal gland, which is hollow and empty during life; the
seventh is the whole; the fifth is the third ventricle; the fourth the
pituitary body. When Manas is united to Âtmâ‐Buddhi, or when Âtmâ‐Buddhi
is centred in Manas, it acts in the three higher cavities, radiating,
sending forth a halo of light, and this is visible in the case of a very
holy person.

The cerebellum is the centre, the storehouse, of all the forces; it is the
Kâma of the head. The pineal gland corresponds to the uterus; its
peduncles to the Fallopian tubes. The pituitary body is only its servant,
its torch‐bearer, like the servants bearing lights that used to run before
the carriage of a princess. Man is thus androgyne so far as his head is
concerned.

Man contains in himself every element that is found in the Universe. There
is nothing in the Macrocosm that is not in the Microcosm. The pineal
gland, as was said, is quite empty during life; the pituitary contains
various essences. The granules in the pineal gland are precipitated after
death within the cavity.

The cerebellum furnishes the materials for ideation; the frontal lobes of
the cerebrum are the finishers and polishers of the materials, but they
cannot create of themselves.

Clairvoyant perception is the consciousness of touch: thus reading
letters, psychometrizing substances, etc., may be done at the pit of the
stomach. Every sense has its consciousness, and you can have consciousness
through every sense. There may be consciousness on the plane of sight,
though the brain be paralyzed; the eyes of a paralyzed person will show
terror. So with the sense of hearing. Those who are physically blind, deaf
or dumb, are still possessed of the psychic counterparts of these senses.



Will And Desire.


Eros in man is the will of the genius to create great pictures, great
music, things that will live and serve the race. It has nothing in common
with the animal desire to create. Will is of the Higher Manas. It is the
universal harmonious tendency acting by the Higher Manas. Desire is the
outcome of separateness, aiming at the satisfaction of Self in Matter. The
path opened between the Higher Ego and the Lower enables the Ego to act on
the personal self.



Conversion.


It is not true that a man powerful in evil can suddenly be converted and
become as powerful for good. His vehicle is too defiled, and he can at
best but neutralize the evil, balancing up the bad Karmic causes he has
set in motion, at any rate for this incarnation. You cannot take a herring
barrel and use it for attar of roses: the wood is too soaked through with
the drippings. When evil impulses and tendencies have become impressed on
the physical nature, they cannot at once be reversed. The molecules of the
body have been set in a Kâmic direction, and though they have sufficient
intelligence to discern between things on their own plane, _i.e._, to
avoid things harmful to themselves, they cannot understand a change of
direction, the impulse to which is from another plane. If they are forced
too violently, disease, madness or death will result.



Origines.


Absolute eternal motion, Parabrahman, which is nothing and everything,
motion inconceivably rapid, in this motion throws off a film, which is
Energy, Eros. It thus transforms itself to Mûlaprakriti, primordial
Substance which is still Energy. This Energy, still transforming itself in
its ceaseless and inconceivable motion, becomes the Atom, or rather the
germ of the Atom, and then it is on the Third Plane.

Our Manas is a Ray from the World‐Soul and is withdrawn at Pralaya; “it is
perhaps the Lower Manas of Parabrahman,” that is, of the Parabrahman of
the manifested Universe. The first film is Energy, or motion on the
manifested plane; Alaya is the Third Logos, Mahâ‐Buddhi, Mahat. We always
begin on the Third Plane; beyond that all is inconceivable. Âtmâ is
focussed in Buddhi, but is embodied only in Manas, these being the Spirit,
Soul and Body of the Universe.



Dreams.


We may have evil experiences in dreams as well as good. We should,
therefore, train ourselves so as to awaken directly we tend to do wrong.

The Lower Manas is asleep in sense‐dreams, the animal consciousness being
then guided towards the Astral Light by Kâma; the tendency of such sense‐
dreams is always towards the animal.

If we could remember our dreams in deep sleep, then we should be able to
remember all our past incarnations.



Nidânas.


There are twelve Nidânas, exoteric and Esoteric, the fundamental doctrine
of Buddhism.

So also there are twelve exoteric Buddhist Sûttas called Nidânas, each
giving one Nidâna.

The Nidânas have a dual meaning. They are:

(1) The twelve causes of sentient existence, through the twelve links of
subjective with objective Nature, or between the subjective and objective
Natures.

(2) A concatenation of causes and effects.

Every cause produces an effect, and this effect becomes in its turn a
cause. Each of these has as Upâdhi (basis), one of the sub‐divisions of
one of the Nidânas, and also an effect or consequence.

Both bases and effects belong to one or another Nidâna, each having from
three to seventeen, eighteen and twenty‐one sub‐divisions.

The names of the twelve Nidânas are:

(1) Jarâmarana.
(2) Jâti.
(3) Bhava.
(4) Upâdâna.
(5) Trishnâ.
(6) Vedanâ.
(7) Sparsha.
(8) Chadayâtana.
(9) Nâmarûpa.
(10) Vignâna.
(11) Samskâra.
(12) Avidyâ.(859)

(1) JARÂMARANA, lit. death in consequence of decrepitude. Notice that
death and not life comes as the first of the Nidânas. This is the first
fundamental in Buddhist Philosophy; every Atom, at every moment, as soon
as it is born begins dying.

The five Skandhas are founded on it; they are its effects or product.
Moreover, in its turn, it is based on the five Skandhas. They are mutual
things, one gives to the other.

(2) JÂTI, lit. Birth.

That is to say, Birth according to one of the four modes of Chaturyoni
(the four wombs), _viz._:

(i) Through the womb, like Mammalia.

(ii) Through Eggs.

(iii) Ethereal or liquid Germs—fish spawn, pollen, insects, etc.

(iv) Anupâdaka—Nirmânakâyas, Gods, etc.

That is to say that birth takes place by one of these modes. You must be
born in one of the six objective modes of existence, or in the seventh
which is subjective. These four are within six modes of existence, _viz._:

_Exoterically_:—

(i) Devas; (ii) Men; (iii) Asuras; (iv) Men in Hell; (v) Pretas, devouring
demons on earth; (vi) animals.

_Esoterically_:—

(i) Higher Gods; (ii) Devas or Pitris (all classes); (iii) Nirmânakâyas;
(iv) Bodhisattvas; (v) Men in Myalba; (vi) Kâma Rûpic existences, whether
of men or animals, in Kâma Loka or the Astral Light; (vii) Elementals
(Subjective Existences).

(3) BHAVA = Karmic existence, not life existence, but as a moral agent
which determines _where_ you will be born, _i.e._, in which of the
Triloka, Bhûr, Bhuvar or Svar (seven Lokas in reality).

The cause or Nidâna of Bhava is Upâdâna, that is, the clinging to
existence, that which makes us desire life in whatever form.

Its effect is Jâti in one or another of the Triloka and under whatever
conditions.

Nidânas are the detailed expression of the law of Karma under twelve
aspects; or we might say the law of Karma under twelve Nidânic aspects.



Skandhas.


Skandhas are the germs of life on all the seven planes of Being, and make
up the totality of the subjective and objective man. Every vibration we
have made is a Skandha. The Skandhas are closely united to the pictures in
the Astral Light, which is the medium of impressions, and the Skandhas, or
vibrations, connected with subjective or objective man, are the links
which attract the Reincarnating Ego, the germs left behind when it went
into Devachan which have to be picked up again and exhausted by a new
personality. The exoteric Skandhas have to do with the physical atoms and
vibrations, or objective man; the Esoteric with the internal and
subjective man.

A mental change, or a glimpse of spiritual truth, may make a man suddenly
change to the truth even at his death, thus creating good Skandhas for the
next life. The last acts or thoughts of a man have an enormous effect upon
his future life, but he would still have to suffer for his misdeeds, and
this is the basis of the idea of a death‐bed repentance. But the Karmic
effects of the past life must follow, for the man in his next birth must
pick up the Skandhas or vibratory impressions that he left in the Astral
Light, since nothing comes from nothing in Occultism, and there must be a
link between the lives. New Skandhas are born from their old parents.

It is wrong to speak of Tanhâs in the plural; there is only one Tanhâ,
_the desire to live_. This develops into a multitude or one might say a
congeries of ideas. The Skandhas are Karmic and non‐Karmic. Skandhas may
produce Elementals by unconscious Kriyâshakti. Every Elemental that is
thrown out by man must return to him sooner or later, since it is his own
vibration. They thus become his Frankenstein. Elementals are simply
effects producing effects. They are disembodied thoughts, good and bad.
They remain crystallized in the Astral Light and are attracted by affinity
and galvanized back into life again, when their originator returns to
earth‐life. You can paralyze them by reverse effects. Elementals are
caught like a disease and hence are dangerous to ourselves and to others.
This is why it is dangerous to influence others. The Elementals which live
after your death are those which you implant in others: the rest remain
latent till you are reincarnated, when they come to life in you. “Thus,”
H. P. B. said, “if you are badly taught by me or incited thereby to do
something wrong, you would go on after my death and sin through me, but I
should have to bear the Karma. Calvin, for instance, will have to suffer
for all the wrong teaching he has given, though he gave it with good
intentions. The worst * * * * does is to arrest the progress of truth.
Even Buddha made mistakes. He applied his teaching to people who were not
ready; and this has produced Nidânas.”



Subtle Bodies.


When a man visits another in his Astral Body, it is the Linga Sharîra
which goes, but this cannot happen at any great distance. When a man
_thinks_ of another at a distance very intently, he sometimes appears to
that person.

In this case it is the Mâyâvi Rûpa, which is created by unconscious
Kriyâshakti, and the man himself is not conscious of appearing. If he
were, and projected his Mâyâvi Rûpa consciously, he would be an
Adept.(860) No two persons can be simultaneously conscious of one
another’s presence, unless one be an Adept. Dugpas use the Mâyâvi Rûpa and
sorcerers also. Dugpas work on the Linga Sharîra of other people.

The Linga Sharîra in the spleen is the perfect picture of the man, and is
good or bad, according to his own nature. The Astral Body is the
subjective image of the man which is to be, the first germ in the matrix,
the model of the physical body in which the child is formed and developed.
The Linga Sharîra may be hurt by a sharp instrument, and would not face a
sword or bayonet, although it would easily pass through a table or other
piece of furniture.

Nothing however can hurt the Mâyâvi Rûpa or thought‐body, since it is
purely subjective. When swords are struck at shades, it is the sword
itself, not its Linga Sharîra or Astral that cuts. Sharp instruments alone
can penetrate Astrals, _e.g._, under water, a blow will not affect you,
but a cut will.

The projection of the Astral Body should not be attempted, but the power
of Kriyâshakti should be exercised in the projection of the Mâyâvi Rûpa.



Fire.


Fire is not an Element but a divine thing. The physical flame is the
objective vehicle of the highest Spirit. The Fire Elementals are the
highest. Everything in this world has its Aura and its Spirit. The flame
you apply to the candle has nothing to do with the candle itself. The Aura
of the object comes into conjunction with the lowest part of the other.
Granite cannot burn because its Aura is Fire. Fire Elementals have no
consciousness on this plane, they are too high, reflecting the divinity of
their own source. Other Elementals have consciousness on this plane as
they reflect man and his nature. There is a very great difference between
the mineral and vegetable kingdoms. The wick of the lamp, for instance, is
negative. It is made positive by fire, the oil being the medium. Æther is
Fire. The lowest part of Æther is the flame which you see. Fire is
Divinity in its subjective presence throughout the universe. Under other
conditions, this Universal Fire manifests as water, air and earth. It is
the one Element in our visible Universe which is the Kriyâshakti of all
forms of life. It is that which gives light, heat, death, life, etc. It is
even the blood. In all its various manifestations it is essentially _one_.

It is the “seven Cosmocratores.”

Evidence of the esteem in which Fire was held are to be found in the _Old
Testament_. The Pillar of Fire, the Burning Bush, the Shining Face of
Moses—all Fire. Fire is like a looking‐glass in its nature, and reflects
the beams of the first order of subjective manifestations which are
supposed to be thrown on to the screen of the first outlines of the
created universe; in their lower aspect these are the creations of Fire.

Fire in the grossest aspect of its essence is the first form and reflects
the lower forms of the first subjective beings which are in the universe.
The first divine chaotic thoughts are the Fire Elementals. When on earth
they take form and come flitting in the flame in the form of the
Salamanders or lower Fire Elementals. In the air you have millions of
living and conscious beings, besides our thoughts which they catch up. The
Fire Elementals are related to the sense of sight and absorb the
Elementals of all the other senses. Thus through sight you can have the
consciousness of feeling, hearing, tasting, etc., since all are included
in the sense of sight.



Hints On The Future.


As time passes on there will be more and more ether in the air. When ether
fills the air, then will be born children without fathers. In Virginia
there is an apple tree of a special kind. It does not blossom but bears
fruit from a kind of berry without any seeds. This will gradually extend
to animals and then to men. Women will bear children without impregnation,
and in the Seventh Round there will appear men who can reproduce
themselves. In the Seventh Race of the Fourth Round, men will change their
skins every year and will have new toe and finger nails. People will
become more psychic, then spiritual. Last of all in the Seventh Round,
Buddhas will be born without sin. The Fourth Round is the longest in the
Kali Yuga, then the Fifth, then the Sixth, and the Seventh Round will be
very short.



The Egos.


On the separation of the Principles at death the Higher Ego may be said to
go to Devachan by reason of the experiences of the Lower. The Higher Ego
in its own plane is the Kumâra.

The Lower Quaternary dissolves; the body rots, the Linga Sharîra fades
out.

At reincarnation the Higher Ego shoots out a Ray, the Lower Ego. Its
energies are upward and downward. The upward tendencies become its
Devachanic experiences; the lower are Kâmic. The Higher Manas stands to
Buddhi as the Lower Manas to the Higher.

As to the question of responsibility, it may be understood by an example.
If you take the form of Jack the Ripper, you must suffer for its misdeeds,
for the law will punish the murderer and hold him responsible. You are the
sacrificial victim. In the same way the Higher Ego is the Christos, the
sacrificial victim for the Lower Manas. The Ego takes the responsibility
of every body it informs.

You borrow some money to lend it to another; the other runs away, but it
is you who are responsible. The mission of the Higher Ego is to shoot out
a Ray to be a Soul in a child.

Thus the Ego incarnates in a thousand bodies, taking upon itself the sins
and responsibilities of each body. At every incarnation a new Ray is
emitted, and yet it is the same Ray in essence, the same in you and me and
every one. The dross of the incarnation disintegrates, the good goes to
Devachan.

The Flame is eternal. From the Flame of the Higher Ego, the Lower is
lighted, and from this a lower vehicle, and so on.

And yet the Lower Manas is such as it makes itself. It is possible for it
to act differently in like conditions, for it has reason and self‐
conscious knowledge of right and wrong, and good and evil, given to it. It
is in fact endowed with all the attributes of the Divine Soul. In this the
Ray is the Higher Manas, the speck of responsibility on earth.

The part of the essence is the essence, but while it is out of itself, so
to say, it can get soiled and polluted. The Ray can be manifested on this
earth because it can send forth its Mâyâvi Rûpa. But the Higher cannot, so
it has to send forth a Ray. We may look upon the Higher Ego as the Sun,
and the personal Manases as its Rays. If we take away the surrounding air
and light the Ray may be said to return to the Sun, so with the Lower
Manas and Lower Quaternary.

The Higher Ego can only manifest through its attributes.

In cases of sudden death, the Lower Manas no more disappears than does the
Kâma Rûpa after death. After the severance the Ray may be said to snap or
be dropped. After death such a man cannot go to Devachan, nor yet remain
in Kâma Loka; his fate is to reincarnate immediately. Such an entity is
then an animal Soul _plus_ the intelligence of the severed Ray. The
manifestation of this intelligence in the next birth will depend entirely
on the physical formation of the brain and on education.

Such a Soul may be re‐united with its Higher Ego in the next birth, if the
environment is such as to give it a chance of aspiration (this is the
“grace” of the Christians); or it may go on for two or three incarnations,
the Ray becoming weaker and weaker, and gradually dissipating, until it is
born a congenital idiot and then finally dissipated in lower forms.

There are enormous mysteries connected with the Lower Manas.

With regard to some intellectual giants, they are in somewhat the same
condition as smaller men, for their Higher Ego is paralyzed, that is to
say, their spiritual nature is atrophied.

The Manas can pass its essence to several vehicles, _e.g._, the Mâyâvi
Rûpa, etc., and even to Elementals which it can ensoul, as the
Rosicrucians taught.

The Mâyâvi Rûpa may be sometimes so vitalized that it goes on to another
plane and unites with the beings of that plane and so ensouls them.

People who bestow great affection upon animal pets are ensouling them to a
certain extent, and such animal Souls progress very rapidly; in return
such persons get back the animal vitality and magnetism. It is, however,
against Nature to thus accentuate animal evolution, and on the whole is
bad.



Monadic Evolution.


The Kumâras do not direct the evolution of the Lunar Pitris. To understand
the latter, we might take the analogy of the blood.

The blood may be compared to the universal Life Principle, the corpuscles
to the Monads. The different kinds of corpuscles are the same as the
various classes of Monads and various kingdoms, not, however, because of
their essence being different, but because of the environment in which
they are. The Chhâyâ is the permanent seed, and Weissmann in his
hereditary germ theory is very near truth.

H. P. B. was asked whether there was one Ego to one permanent Chhâyâ seed,
oversouling it in a series of incarnations; her answer was: “No, it is
Heaven and Earth kissing each other.”

The animal Souls are in temporary forms and shells in which they gain
experience, and in which they prepare materials for higher evolution.

Until the age of seven the astral atavic germ forms and moulds the body;
after that the body forms the Astral.

The Astral and the Mind mutually react on each other.

The meaning of the passage in the _Upanishads_, where it says that the
Gods feed on men, is that the Higher Ego obtains its earth experience
through the Lower.



Astral Body.


The Astral can get out unconsciously to the person and wander about.

The Chhâyâ is the same as the Astral Body.

The germ or life essence of it is in the spleen.

“The Chhâyâ is coiled up in the spleen.” It is from this that the Astral
is formed; it evolves in a shadowy curling or gyrating essence like smoke,
gradually taking form as it grows. But it is not projected from the
physical, atom for atom. This latter intermolecular form is the Kâma Rûpa.
At death every cell and molecule gives out its essence, and from it is
formed the Astral of the Kâma Rûpa; but this can never come out during
life.

The Chhâyâ in order to become visible draws upon the surrounding
atmosphere, attracting the atoms to itself; the Linga Sharîra could not
form _in vacuo_. The fact of the Astral Body accounts for the Arabian and
Eastern tales of Djins and bottle imps, etc.

In spiritualistic phenomena, the resemblance to deceased persons is mostly
caused by the imagination. The clothing of such phantoms is formed from
the living atoms of the medium, and is no real clothing, and has nothing
to do with the clothing of the medium. “All the clothing of a
materialization has been paid for.”

The Astral supports life; it is the reservoir or sponge of life, gathering
it up from all the natural kingdoms around, and is the intermediary
between the kingdoms of Prânic and physical life.

Life cannot come immediately from the subjective to the objective, for
Nature goes gradually through each sphere. Therefore the Linga Sharîra is
the intermediary between Prâna and our physical body, and pumps in the
life.

The spleen is consequently a very delicate organ, but the physical spleen
is only a cover for the real spleen.

Now Life is in reality Divinity, Parabrahman. But in order to manifest on
the Physical Plane it must be assimilated; and as the purely physical is
too gross, it must have a medium, _viz._, the Astral. Astral matter is not
homogeneous, and the Astral Light is nothing but the shadow of the real
Divine Light; it is however not molecular.

Those (Kâmarûpic) entities which are below the Devachanic Plane are in
Kâma Loka and only possess intelligence like monkeys. There are no
entities in the four lower kingdoms possessing intelligence which can
communicate with men, but the Elementals have instincts like animals. It
is, however, possible for the Sylphs (the Air Elementals, the wickedest
things in the world) to communicate, but they require to be propitiated.

Spooks (Kâmarûpic entities) can only give the information they see
immediately before them. They see things in the Aura of people, although
the people may not be aware of them themselves.

Earth‐bound spirits are Kâmalokic entities that have been so materialistic
that they cannot be dissolved for a long time. They have only a glimmering
of consciousness and do not know why they are held, some sleep, some
preserve a glimmering of consciousness and suffer torture.

In the case of people who have very little Devachan, the greater part of
the consciousness remains in Kâma Loka, and may last far beyond the normal
period of one hundred and fifty years and remain over until the next
reincarnation of the Spirit. This then becomes the Dweller on the
Threshold and fights with the new Astral.

The acme of Kâma is the sexual instinct, _e.g._, idiots have such desires
and also food appetites, etc., and nothing else.

Devachan is a state on a plane of spiritual consciousness; Kâma Loka is a
place of physical consciousness. It is the shadow of the animal world and
that of instinctual feelings. When the consciousness thinks of spiritual
things, it is on a spiritual plane.

If one’s thoughts are of nature, flowers, etc., then the consciousness is
on the material plane.

But if thoughts are about eating, drinking, etc., and the passions, then
the consciousness is in the Kâmalokic plane, which is the plane of animal
instincts pure and simple.





[Transcriber’s Note: Obvious printer’s errors have been corrected.]






FOOTNOTES


    1 The majority of the Pandits know nothing of the Esoteric Philosophy
      now, because they have lost the key to it; yet not one of these, if
      honest, would deny that the _Upanishads_, and especially the
      _Purânas_, are allegorical and symbolical; nor that there still
      remain in India a few great scholars who could, if they would, give
      them the key to such interpretations. Nor do they reject the actual
      existence of Mahâtmâs—initiated Yogis and Adepts—even in this age of
      Kali Yuga.

    2 This assertion is clearly corroborated by Plato himself, who writes:
      “You say that in my former discourse I have not sufficiently
      explained to you the nature of the First. I purposely spoke
      enigmatically, that in case the tablet should have happened with any
      accident, either by sea or land, a person without some previous
      knowledge of the subject might not be able to understand its
      contents.” (Plato, _Ep._, ii. 312; Cory, _Ancient Fragments_, p.
      304.)

    3 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 287, 288.

    4 _The Dialogues of Plato_, translated by B. Jowett, Regius Professor
      of Greek at the University of Oxford, iii. 523.

    5 _Op. cit._, p. 561.

    6 _Op. cit._, p. 591.

    7 This definition places (unwittingly, of course), the ancient
      “physical philosopher” many cubits higher than his modern “physical”
      _confrère_, since the _ultima thule_ of the latter is to lead
      mankind to believe that neither universe nor man have any cause at
      all—not an intelligent one at all events—and that they have sprung
      into existence owing to blind chance and a senseless whirling of
      atoms. Which of the two hypotheses is the more rational and logical
      is left to the impartial reader to decide.

    8 Italics are mine. Every tyro in Eastern Philosophy, every Kabalist,
      will see the reason for such an association of persons with ideas,
      numbers, and geometrical figures. For number, says Philolaus, “is
      the dominant and self‐produced bond of the eternal continuance of
      things.” Alone the modern Scholar remains blind to the grand truth.

    9 Here again the ancient Philosopher seems to be ahead of the modern.
      For he only “confuses ... first and final causes” (which confusion
      is denied by those who know the spirit of ancient scholarship),
      whereas his modern successor is confessedly and absolutely ignorant
      of both. Mr. Tyndall shows Science “powerless” to solve a single one
      of the final problems of Nature and “disciplined [read, modern
      materialistic], imagination retiring in bewilderment from the
      contemplation of the problems” of the world of matter. He even
      doubts whether the men of present Science possess “the intellectual
      elements which would enable them to grapple with the ultimate
      structural energies of Nature.” But for Plato and his disciples, the
      lower types were but the concrete images of the higher abstract
      ones; the immortal Soul has an arithmetical, as the body has a
      geometrical, beginning. This beginning, as the reflection of the
      great universal Archæus (_Anima Mundi_), is self‐moving, and from
      the centre diffuses itself over the whole body of the Macrocosm.

   10 _Op. cit._, p. 523.

   11 Nowhere are the Neoplatonists guilty of such an absurdity. The
      learned Professor of Greek must have been thinking of two spurious
      works attributed by Eusebius and St. Jerome to Ammonius Saccas, who
      wrote nothing; or must have confused the Neoplatonists with Philo
      Judæus. But then Philo lived over 130 years before the birth of the
      founder of Neoplatonism. He belonged to the School of Aristobulus
      the Jew, who lived under Ptolemy Philometer (150 years B.C.), and is
      credited with having inaugurated the movement which tended to prove
      that Plato and even the Peripatetic Philosophy were derived from the
      “revealed” Mosaic Books. Valckenaer tries to show that the author of
      the _Commentaries on the Books of Moses_, was not Aristobulus, the
      sycophant of Ptolemy. But whatever he was, he was not a
      Neoplatonist, but lived before, or during the days of Philo Judæus,
      since the latter seems to know his works and follow his methods.

   12 Only Clemens Alexandrinus, a Christian Neoplatonist and a very
      fantastic writer.

   13 The labour of reconciling the different systems of religion.

   14 _New Platonism and Alchemy_, by Alex. Wilder, M.D. pp. 7, 4.

   15 It is well‐known that, though born of Christian parents, Ammonius
      had renounced the tenets of the Church—Eusebius and Jerome
      notwithstanding. Porphyry, the disciple of Plotinus, who had lived
      with Ammonius for eleven years together, and who had no interest for
      stating an untruth, positively declares that he had renounced
      Christianity entirely. On the other hand, we know that Ammonius
      believed in the bright Gods, Protectors, and that the Neoplatonic
      Philosophy was as “pagan” as it was mystical. But Eusebius, the most
      unscrupulous forger and falsifier of old texts, and St. Jerome, an
      out‐and‐out fanatic, who had both an interest in denying the fact,
      contradict Porphyry. We prefer to believe the latter, who has left
      to posterity an unblemished name and a great reputation for honesty.

   16 Two works are falsely attributed to Ammonius. One, now lost, called
      _De Consensu Moysis et Jesu_, is mentioned by the same “trustworthy”
      Eusebius, the Bishop of Cæsaræa, and the friend of the Christian
      Emperor Constantine, who died, however, a heathen. All that is known
      of this pseudo‐work is that Jerome bestows great praise upon it
      (_Vir. Illust._, § 55; and Euseb., _H. E._, vi. 19). The other
      spurious production is called the _Diatesseron_ (or the “Harmony of
      the Gospels”). This is partially extant. But then, again, it exists
      only in the Latin version of Victor, Bishop of Capua (sixth
      century), who attributed it himself to Tatian, and as wrongly,
      probably, as later scholars attributed the _Diatesseron_ to
      Ammonius. Therefore no great reliance can be placed upon it, nor on
      its “esoteric” interpretation of the Gospels. Is it this work, we
      wonder, which led Prof. Jowett to regard the Neo‐platonic
      interpretations as “absurdities”?

   17 _Op. cit._, p. 7.

   18 _Op. cit._, iii, 524.

   19 “Imperfect knowledge” of what? That Plato was ignorant of many of
      the modern “working hypotheses”—as ignorant as our immediate
      posterity is sure to be of the said hypotheses when they in their
      turn after exploding join the “great majority”—is perhaps a blessing
      in disguise.

   20 _Op. cit._, p. 524.

   21 _Histoire Critique du Gnosticisme_, by M. J. Matter, Professor of
      the Royal Academy of Strasburg, “It is in Pythagoras and Plato that
      we find, in Greece, the first elements of [Oriental] Gnosticism,” he
      says. (Vol. i, pp. 48 and 50.)

   22 _Asiat. Trans._, i, 579.

   23 _New Platonism and Alchemy_, p. 4.

   24 This fact and others may be found in Chinese Missionary Reports, and
      in a work by Monseigneur Delaplace, a Bishop in China. _Annales de
      la Propagation de la Foi._

   25 The regions somewhere about Udyana and Kashmir, as the translator
      and editor of Marco Polo (Colonel Yule) believes (i. 175).

   26 _Voyage des Pélerins Bouddhistes_, Vol. I.; _Histoire de la Vie de
      Hiouen‐Thsang_, etc., traduit du chinois en français, par Stanislas
      Julien.

   27 Lao‐tse, the Chinese philosopher.

   28 _The Book of Ser Marco Polo_, i. 318.

   29 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 599‐601, 603, 598.

   30 Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 6.

   31 The Rishis—the first group of seven in number—lived in days
      preceding the Vedic period. They are now known as Sages and held in
      reverence like demigods. But they may now be shown as something more
      than merely mortal Philosophers. There are other groups of ten,
      twelve and even twenty‐one in number. Haug shows that they occupy in
      the Brâhmanical religion a position answering to that of the twelve
      sons of Jacob in the Jewish _Bible_. The Brâhmans claim to descend
      directly from the Rishis.

   32 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 90.

   33 See Münter “On the most Ancient Religions of the North before Odin.”
      _Mémoires de la Société des Antiquaires de France_, ii. 230.

   34 Ammianus Marcellinus, xxvi. 6.

   35 “The date of the hundreds of pyramids in the Valley of the Nile is
      impossible to fix by any of the rules of modern science; Herodotus
      informs us that each successive king erected one to commemorate his
      reign, and serve as his sepulchre. But, Herodotus did not tell all,
      although he knew that the real purpose of the pyramid was very
      different from that which he assigns to it. Were it not for his
      religious scruples, he might have added that, externally, it
      symbolized the creative principle of Nature, and illustrated also
      the principles of geometry, mathematics, astrology and astronomy.
      Internally, it was a majestic fane, in whose sombre recesses were
      performed the Mysteries, and whose walls had often witnessed the
      initiation scenes of members of the royal family. The porphyry
      sarcophagus, which Professor Piazzi Smyth, Astronomer Royal of
      Scotland, degrades into a corn‐bin, was the baptismal font, upon
      emerging from which, the neophyte was ‘born again,’ and became an
      adept.” (_Isis Unveiled_, i. 518, 519.)

   36 Diog. Laërt., in “Democrit. Vit.”

   37 _Satyric_, ix. 3.

   38 Pliny, _Hist. Nat._

   39 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 512.

   40 _Op. cit._, ii. 403.

   41 This is precisely what some of them are preparing to do, and many a
      “mysterious page” in sacred and profane history are touched on in
      these pages. Whether or not their explanations will be accepted—is
      another question.

   42 _Ibid._

   43 This is incorrectly expressed. The true Adept of the “Right Hand”
      never punishes anyone, not even his bitterest and most dangerous
      enemy; he simply leaves the latter to his Karma, and Karma never
      fails to do so, sooner or later.

   44 _Op. cit._, ii. 239, 241, 240.

   45 See, in this connection, _Pneumatologie des Esprits_, by the Marquis
      de Mirville, who devotes six enormous volumes to show the absurdity
      of those who deny the reality of Satan and Magic, or the Occult
      Sciences—the two being with him synonymous.

   46 We think we see the sidereal phantom of the old Philosopher and
      Mystic—once of Cambridge University—Henry More, moving about in the
      astral mist over the old moss‐covered roofs of the ancient town in
      which he wrote his famous letter to Glanvil about “witches.” The
      “soul” seems restless and indignant, as on that day of May, 1678,
      when the doctor complained so bitterly to the author of _Sadducismus
      Triumphatus_ of Scot, Adie and Webster. “Our new inspired saints,”
      the soul is heard to mutter, “sworn advocates of the witches ... who
      against all sense and reason ... will have no Samuel but a
      confederate knave ... these in‐blown buffoons, puffed up with ...
      ignorance, vanity and stupid infidelity!” (See “Letter to Glanvil,”
      and _Isis Unveiled_, i. 205, 206.)

   47 _Études Religieuses._

   48 _Études Historiques._

   49 _Mémoire_ read at the Académie des Inscriptions des Belles Lettres,
      in 1859.

   50 See Alfred Maury’s _Histoire des Religions de la Grèce_, i. 248; and
      the speculations of Holzmann in _Zeitschrift für Vergleichende
      Sprach forschung_, ann. 1852, p. 487, _sq._

   51 Creuzer’s _Introduction des Mystères_, iii. 456.

   52 The later Nabathæans adhered to the same belief as the Nazarenes and
      the Sabæans, honoured John the Baptist, and used Baptism. (See _Isis
      Unveiled_, ii. 127; Munck, _Palestine_, p. 525; Dunlap, _Sod, the
      Son of Man_, etc.)

   53 i. 535.

   54 By Hargrave Jennings.

   55 See De Mirville’s _Pneumatologie_, iii. 267 _et seq._

   56 Psellus, 4: in Cory’s _Ancient Fragments_, 269.

   57 _Isis Unveiled_, i, 535, 536.

   58 The forty‐two Sacred Books of the Egyptians, mentioned by Clement of
      Alexandria as having existed in his time, were but a portion of the
      Books of Hermes. Iamblichus, on the authority of the Egyptian priest
      Abammon, attributes 1,200 of such books to Hermes, and Manetho
      36,000. But the testimony of Iamblichus as a Neoplatonist and
      Theurgist is of course rejected by modern critics. Manetho, who is
      held by Bunsen in the highest consideration as a “purely historical
      personage,” with whom “none of the later native historians can be
      compared” (see _Égypte_, i. 97), suddenly becomes a Pseudo‐Manetho,
      as soon as the ideas propounded by him clash with the scientific
      prejudices against Magic and the Occult knowledge claimed by the
      ancient priests. However, none of the Archæologists doubt for a
      moment the almost incredible antiquity of the Hermetic books.
      Champollion shows the greatest regard for their authenticity and
      truthfulness, corroborated as it is by many of the oldest monuments.
      And Bunsen brings irrefutable proofs of their age. From his
      researches, for instance, we learn that there was a line of sixty‐
      one kings before the days of Moses, who preceded the Mosaic period
      by a clearly‐traceable civilization of several thousand years. Thus
      we are warranted in believing that the works of Hermes Trismegistus
      were extant many ages before the birth of the Jewish law‐giver.
      “Styli and inkstands were found on monuments of the fourth Dynasty,
      the oldest in the world,” says Bunsen. If the eminent Egyptologist
      rejects the period of 48,863 years before Alexander, to which
      Diogenes Laërtius carries back the records of the priests, he is
      evidently more embarrassed with the ten thousand of astronomical
      observations, and remarks that “if they were actual observations,
      they _must have_ extended over 10,000 years” (p. 14). “We learn,
      however,” he adds, “from one of their own old chronological works
      ... that the genuine Egyptian traditions concerning the mythological
      period treated of _myriads_ of years.” (_Égypte_, i. 15; _Isis
      Unveiled_, i. 33.)

   59 These details are taken from _Pneumatologie_, iii. pp. 204, 205.

   60 _Égypte_, p. 143; _Isis Unveiled_, i. 625.

   61 _Strom._, VI. vii. The following paragraph is paraphrased from the
      same chapter.

   62 See _Pneumatologie_, iii. 207. Therefore Empedocles is called
      κωλυθάνεμος, the “dominator of the wind.” _Strom._, VI. iii.

   63 _Ibid._, iv.

   64 Summarised from _Pneumatologie_, iii. 209.

   65 _Loc. cit._

   66 _Op. cit._, iii. 208.

   67 The English speaking people who spell the name of Noah’s
      disrespectful son “Ham” have to be reminded that the right spelling
      is “Kham” or “Cham.”

   68 Black Magic, or Sorcery, is the _evil_ result obtained in any shape
      or way through the practice of Occult Arts; hence it has to be
      judged only by its effects. The name of neither Ham nor Cain, when
      pronounced, has ever killed any one; whereas, if we have to believe
      that same Clemens Alexandrinus who traces the teacher of every
      Occultist, outside of Christianity, to the Devil, the name of
      Jehovah (pronounced Jevo and in a peculiar way) had the effect of
      killing a man at a distance. The mysterious Schemham‐phorasch was
      not always used for holy purposes by the Kabalists, especially since
      the Sabbath or Saturday, sacred to Saturn or the evil Shani,
      became—with the Jews—sacred to “Jehovah.”

   69 Khoemnis, the pre‐historic city, may or may not have been built by
      Noah’s son, but it was not his name that was given to the town, but
      that of the Mystery Goddess Khoemnu or Khoemnis (Greek form); the
      deity that was created by the ardent fancy of the neophyte, who was
      thus tantalised during his “twelve labours” of probation before his
      final initiation. Her male counterpart is Khem. The city of Choemnis
      or Khemmis (to‐day Akhmem) was the chief seat of the God Khem. The
      Greeks identifying Khem with Pan, called this city “Panopolis.”

   70 _Pneumatologie_, iii. 210. This looks more like pious vengeance than
      philology. The picture, however, seems incomplete, as the author
      ought to have added to the “chimney” a witch flying out of it on a
      broomstick.

   71 How could they escape from the Deluge unless God so willed it? This
      is scarcely logical.

   72 _Loc. cit._, p. 210.

   73 _Matthew_, xvi. 20.

   74 _Mark_, v. 43.

   75 _Mark_, iv. 11, 12.

   76 Is it not evident that the words: “lest at any time they should be
      converted (or: ‘lest haply they should turn again’—as in the revised
      version) and their sins be forgiven them”—do not at all mean to
      imply that Jesus feared that through repentance any outsider, or
      “them that are without,” should escape damnation, as the literal
      dead‐letter sense plainly shows—but quite a different thing? Namely,
      “lest any of the profane should by understanding his preaching,
      undisguised by parable, get hold of some of the secret teachings and
      mysteries of Initiation—and even of Occult powers? ‘Be converted’
      is, in other words, to obtain a knowledge belonging exclusively to
      the Initiated: ‘and their sins be forgiven them,’ that is, their
      sins would fall upon the illegal revealer, on those who had helped
      the unworthy to reap there where they have never laboured to sow,
      and had given them, thereby, the means of escaping on this earth
      their deserved Karma, which must thus re‐act on the revealer, who,
      instead of good, did harm and failed.”

   77 _New Platonism and Alchemy_, 1869, pp. 7, 9.

   78 vii. 6.

   79 History is full of proofs of the same. Had not Anaxagoras enunciated
      the great truth taught in the Mysteries, _viz._, that the sun was
      surely larger than the Peloponnesus, he would not have been
      persecuted and nearly put to death by the fanatical mob. Had that
      other rabble which was raised against Pythagoras understood what the
      mysterious Sage of Crotona meant by giving out his remembrance of
      having been the “Son of Mercury”—God of the Secret Wisdom—he would
      not have been forced to fly for his life; nor would Socrates have
      been put to death, had he kept secret the revelations of his divine
      Daimon. He knew how little his century—save those initiated—would
      understand his meaning, had he given out all he knew of the moon.
      Thus he limited his statement to an allegory, which is now proven to
      have been more scientific than was hitherto believed. He maintained
      that the moon was inhabited and that the lunar beings lived in
      profound, vast and dark valleys, our satellite being airless and
      without any atmosphere outside such profound valleys; this,
      disregarding the revelation full of meaning for the few only, must
      be so of necessity, if there is any atmosphere on our bright Selene
      at all. The facts recorded in the secret annals of the Mysteries had
      to remain veiled under penalty of death.

   80 _Stromateis_, xii.

   81 See _Homilies_ 7, in _Levit._, quoted in the _Source of Measures_,
      p. 307.

   82 Origen: Huet., _Origeniana_, 167; Franck, 121; quoted from Dunlap’s
      _Sôd_, p. 176.

   83 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 350.

   84 The materialistic “law‐givers,” the critics and Sadducees who have
      tried to tear to shreds the doctrines and teachings of the great
      Asiatic Masters past and present—no scholars in the modern sense of
      the word—would do well to ponder over these words. No doubt that
      doctrines and secret teachings had they been invented and written in
      Oxford and Cambridge would be more brilliant outwardly. Would they
      equally answer to universal truths and facts, is the next question
      however.

   85 iii. fol. 1526, quoted in Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 102.

   86 _New‐Platonism and Alchemy_, p. 6.

   87 i. 2.

   88 lxiv. 10.

   89 The _key_ is shown to be “in the source of measures originating the
      British inch and the ancient cubit” as the author tries to prove.

   90 The word as a plural might have better solved the mystery. God is
      _ever‐present_; if he were _ever‐active_ he could no longer be an
      infinite God—nor ever‐present in his limitation.

   91 The author is evidently a Mason of the way of thinking of General
      Pike. So long as the American and English Masons will reject the
      “Creative Principle” of the “Grand Orient” of France they will
      remain in the dark.

   92 _Source of Measures_, pp. 308, 309.

   93 In his _Pneumatologie_, in Vol. iv., pp. 105‐112, the Marquis de
      Mirville claims the knowledge of the heliocentric system—earlier
      than Galileo—for Pope Urban VIII. The author goes further. He tries
      to show that famous Pope, not as the persecutor but as one
      persecuted by Galileo, and calumniated by the Florentine Astronomer
      into the bargain. If so, so much the worse for the Latin Church,
      since her Popes, knowing of it, still preserved silence upon this
      most important fact, either to screen Joshua or their own
      infallibility. One can understand well that the _Bible_ having been
      so exalted over all the other systems, and its alleged monotheism
      depending upon the silence preserved, nothing remained of course but
      to keep quiet over its symbolism, thus allowing all its blunders to
      be fathered on its God.

   94 _Op. cit._, App. vii. p. 296. The writer feels happy to find this
      fact now mathematically demonstrated. When it was stated in _Isis
      Unveiled_ that Jehovah and Saturn were one and the same with Adam
      Kadmon, Cain, Adam and Eve, Abel, Seth, etc., and that all were
      convertible symbols in the Secret Doctrine (see Vol. ii. pp. 446,
      448, 464 _et seq._); that they answered, in short, to secret
      numerals and stood for more than one meaning in the _Bible_ as in
      other doctrines—the author’s statements remained unnoticed. _Isis_
      had failed to appear under a scientific form, and by giving too
      much, in fact, gave very little to satisfy the enquirer. But now, if
      mathematics and geometry, besides the evidence of the _Bible_ and
      _Kabalah_ are good for anything, the public must find itself
      satisfied. No fuller, more scientifically given proof can be found
      to show that Cain is the transformation of an Elohim (the Sephira
      Binah) into Jah‐Veh (or God‐Eve) androgyne, and that Seth is the
      Jehovah male, than in the combined discoveries of Seyffarth, Knight,
      etc., and finally in Mr. Ralston Skinner’s most erudite work. The
      further relations of these personifications of the first human
      races, in their gradual development, will be given later on in the
      text.

   95 The writings extant in olden times often personified Wisdom as an
      emanation and associate of the Creator. Thus we have the Hindu
      Buddha, the Babylonian Nebo, the Thoth of Memphis, the Hermes of
      Greece; also the female divinities, Neïtha, Metis, Athena, and the
      Gnostic potency Achamoth or Sophia. The Samaritan _Pentateuch_
      denominated the _Book of Genesis_, Akamouth, or Wisdom, and two
      remnants of old treatises, the _Wisdom of Solomon_ and the _Wisdom
      of Jesus_, relate to the same matters. The _Book of Mashalim_—the
      _Discourses_ or _Proverbs_ of Solomon—thus personifies Wisdom as the
      auxiliary of the Creator. In the Secret Wisdom of the East that
      auxiliary is found collectively in the first emanations of Primeval
      Light, the Seven Dhyáni‐Chohans, who have been shown to be identical
      with the “Seven Spirits of the Presence” of the Roman Catholics.

   96 _New Platonism and Alchemy_, p. 6.

   97 ii. 317. 318. Many verbal alterations from the original text of
      _Isis Unveiled_ were made by H. P. B. in her quotations therefrom,
      and these are followed throughout.

   98 Proclus claims to have experienced this sublime ecstasy six times
      during his mystic life; Porphyry asserts that Apollonius of Tyana
      was thus united four times to his deity—a statement which we believe
      to be a mistake, since Apollonius was a Nirmânakâya (divine
      incarnation—not Avatâra)—and he (Porphyry) only once, when over
      sixty years of age. Theophany (or the actual appearance of a God to
      man), Theopathy (or “assimilation of divine nature”), and
      Theopneusty (inspiration, or rather the mysterious power to hear
      orally the teachings of a God) have never been rightly understood.

   99 Kârana Sharîra is the “causal” body and is sometimes said to be the
      “personal God.” And so it is, in one sense.

  100 This would be in one sense Self‐worship.

  101 “The Gods exist,” said Epicurus, “but they are not what the _hoi
      polloi_ [the multitude] suppose them to be. He is not an infidel or
      atheist who denies the existence of Gods whom the multitude worship,
      but he is such who fastens on the Gods the opinions of the
      multitude.”

  102 Esoteric, as exoteric, Buddhism rejects the theory that Gautama was
      an incarnation or Avatâra of Vishnu, but teaches the doctrine as
      herein explained. Every man has in him the materials, if not the
      conditions, for theophanic intercourse and Theopneusty, the
      inspiring “God” being, however, in every case, his own Higher Self,
      or divine prototype.

  103 One entirely and absolutely purified, and having nothing in common
      with earth except his body.

  104 _Mândûkyopanishad_, 4.

  105 Acts, viii. 10 (Revised Version).

  106 See the explanations given on the subject in “The Elixir of Life,”
      by G. M. (From a Chelâ’s Diary), _Five Years of Theosophy_.

  107 _I. Cor._, xv. 47, 50.

  108 _I. Cor._, iii. 16. Has the reader ever meditated upon the
      suggestive words, often pronounced by Jesus and his Apostles? “Be ye
      therefore perfect as your Father ... is perfect” (_Matt._, v. 48),
      says the Great Master. The words are, “as perfect as your Father
      which is in heaven,” being interpreted as meaning God. Now the utter
      absurdity of any man becoming as perfect as the infinite, all‐
      perfect omniscient and omnipresent Deity, is too apparent. If you
      accept it in such a sense, Jesus is made to utter the greatest
      fallacy. What was Esoterically meant is, “Your Father who is above
      the material and astral man, the highest Principle (save the Monad)
      within man, his own personal God, or the God of his own personality,
      of whom he is the ‘prison’ and the ‘temple.’ ” “If thou wilt be
      perfect (_i.e._, an Adept and Initiate) go and sell that thou hast”
      (_Matt._, xix. 21). Every man who desired to become a neophyte, a
      chelâ, then, as now, had to take the vow of poverty. The “Perfect,”
      was the name given to the Initiates of every denomination. Plato
      calls them by that term. The Essenes had their “Perfect,” and Paul
      plainly states that they, the Initiates, can only speak before other
      Adepts. “We speak wisdom among them [only] that are perfect” (_I.
      Cor._ ii. 6.)

  109 _John_, i. 21.

  110 _John_, iii. “Born” from above, _viz._, from his Monad or divine
      EGO, the seventh Principle, which remains till the end of the Kalpa,
      the nucleus of, and at the same time the overshadowing Principle, as
      the Kâranâtmâ (Causal Soul) of the personality in every rebirth. In
      this sense, the sentence “born anew” means “descends from above,”
      the last two words having no reference to heaven or space, neither
      of which can be limited or located, since one is a state and the
      other infinite, hence having no cardinal points. (See _New
      Testament, Revised Version_, _loc. cit._)

  111 This can have no reference to Christian Baptism, since there was
      none in the days of Nicodemus and he could not therefore know
      anything of it, even though a “Master.”

  112 This word, translated in the _New Testament_ “world” to suit the
      official interpretation, means rather an “age” (as shown in the
      _Revised Version_) or one of the periods during the Manvantara, a
      Kalpa, or Æon. Esoterically the sentence would read: “He who shall
      reach, through a series of births and Karmic law, that state in
      which Humanity shall find itself after the Seventh Round and the
      Seventh Race, when comes Nirvâna, Moksha, and when man becomes
      ‘equal unto the Angels’ or Dhyân Chohans, is a ‘son of the
      resurrection’ and ‘can die no more’; then there will be no marriage,
      as there will be no difference of sexes”—a result of our present
      materiality and animalism.

  113 _Luke_, xx. 27‐38.

  114 _John_, ix. 2, 3.

  115 The conscious Ego, or Fifth Principle Manas, the vehicle of the
      divine Monad or “God.”

  116 Some Symbologists, relying on the correspondence of numbers and the
      symbols of certain things and personages, refer these “secrets” to
      the mystery of generation. But it is more than this. The glyph of
      the “Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil” has no doubt a phallic and
      sexual element in it, as has the “Woman and the Serpent”; but it has
      also a psychical and spiritual significance. Symbols are meant to
      yield more than one meaning.

  117 _Wisdom_, xi. 21. Douay version.

  118 _Ecclesiasticus_, i. 9. Douay version.

  119 _Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie_, i. 361.

  120 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 6, 7.

  121 “Synesius mentions books of stone which he found in the temple of
      Memphis, on one of which was engraved the following sentence: ‘One
      _nature_ delights in another, one nature overcomes another, one
      nature overrules another, and the whole of them are _one_’.”

      “The inherent restlessness of matter is embodied in the saying of
      Hermes: ‘Action is the life of Phta’; and Orpheus calls nature
      πολυμήχανος μάτηρ, ‘the mother that makes many things,’ or the
      ingenious, the contriving, the inventive mother.”—_Isis Unveiled_,
      i. 257.

  122 _Source of Measures_, p. x.

  123 _Masonic Review_, July, 1886.

  124 See _Source of Measures_, pp. 47‐50, _et pass._

  125 See Cary’s translation, pp. 322, 323.

  126 _Exodus_, xxxiv. 29, 33.

  127 _Op. cit._, V. vii.

  128 _The Royal Masonic Cyclopædia_, under “Gnosticism.”

  129 In the Ferouers and Devs of Jacobi (Letters F. and D.) the word
      “ferouer” is explained in the following manner: The Ferouer is a
      part of the creature (whether man or animal) of which it is the type
      and which it survives. It is the Nous of the Greeks, therefore
      divine and immortal, and thus can hardly be the Devil or the satanic
      copy De Mirville would represent it (see _Mémoires de l’Académie des
      Inscriptions_, Vol. XXXVII. p. 623, and chap. xxxix. p. 749).
      Foucher contradicts him entirely. The Ferouer was never the
      “principle of sensations,” but always referred to the most divine
      and pure portion of Man’s Ego—the spiritual principle. Anquetil says
      that the Ferouer is the purest portion of man’s soul. The Persian
      Dev is the antithesis of the Ferouer, for the Dev has been
      transformed by Zoroaster into the Genius of Evil (whence the
      Christian Devil), but even the Dev is only finite; for having become
      possessed of the soul of man by _usurpation_, it will have to leave
      it at the great day of Retribution. The Dev obsesses the soul of the
      defunct for three days, during which the soul wanders about the spot
      at which it was forcibly separated from its body; the Ferouer
      ascends to the region of eternal Light. It was an unfortunate idea
      that made the noble Marquis de Mirville imagine the Ferouer to be a
      “satanic copy” of a _divine_ original. By calling all the Gods of
      the Pagans—Apollo, Osiris, Brahmâ, Ormazd, Bel, etc., the “Ferouers
      of Christ and of the chief Angels,” he merely exhibits the God and
      the Angels he would honour as inferior to the Pagan Gods, as man is
      inferior to his Soul and Spirit; since the Ferouer is the immortal
      part of the mortal being of which it is the type and which it
      survives. Perchance the poor author is unconsciously prophetic; and
      Apollo, Brahmâ, Ormazd, Osiris, etc., are destined to survive and
      replace—as eternal cosmic verities—the evanescent fictions about the
      God, Christ and Angels of the Latin Church!

  130 See George Smith’s _Babylon_ and other works.

  131 This is as fanciful as it is arbitrary. Where is the Hindu or
      Buddhist who would speak of his “Crucified”?

  132 _Op. cit._, iv. 237.

  133 _Loc. cit._, 250.

  134 “_Q._: Who knocks at the door?

      _A._: The good cowherd.

      _Q._: Who preceded thee?

      _A._: The three robbers.

      _Q._: Who follows thee?

      _A._: The three murderers,” etc., etc.

      Now this is the conversation that took place between the priest‐
      initiators and the candidates for initiation during the mysteries
      enacted in the oldest sanctuaries of the Himâlayan fastnesses. The
      ceremony is still performed to this day in one of the most ancient
      temples in a secluded spot of Nepaul. It originated with the
      Mysteries of the first Krishna, passed to the First Tirthankara and
      ended with Buddha, and is called the Kurukshetra rite, being enacted
      as a memorial of the great battle and death of the divine Adept. It
      is not Masonry, but an initiation into the Occult teachings of that
      Hero—Occultism, pure and simple.

  135 _Book of Enoch_, Archbishop Laurence’s translation. Introduction, p.
      v.

  136 _The Book of Enoch_ was unknown to Europe for a thousand years, when
      Bruce found in Abyssinia some copies of it in Ethiopic; it was
      translated by Archbishop Laurence in 1821, from the text in the
      Bodleian Library, Oxford.

  137 _Op. cit._, p. xx.

  138 _Loc. cit._

  139 _Op. cit._, p. xiv., note.

  140 _Op. cit._, p. xxxv.

  141 _Op. cit._, p. xiii.

  142 The Seventh Principle, the First Emanation.

  143 _Op. cit._, pp. xxxvii. and xl.

  144 _Op. cit._, pp. xl. and li.

  145 Who stands for the “Solar” or Manvantaric Year.

  146 _Op. cit._, pp. xli., xlii.

  147 _Op. cit._, p. xlviii.

  148 _Op. cit._, p. xxiii.

  149 _Loc. cit._

  150 xcii. 9.

  151 _Op. cit._, xcii. 4.

  152 _Op. cit._, xcii. 4‐7.

  153 At the close of every Root‐Race there comes a cataclysm, in turn by
      fire or water. Immediately after the “Fall into generation” the
      dross of the third Root‐Race—those who fell into sensuality by
      falling off from the teaching of the Divine Instructors—were
      destroyed, after which the Fourth Root‐Race originated, at the end
      of which took place the last Deluge. (See the “Sons of God”
      mentioned in _Isis Unveiled_, 593 _et seq._)

  154 _Op. cit._, xcii. 11.

  155 _Op. cit._, xcii. 7, 11, 13, 15.

  156 _Op. cit._, note, p. 152.

  157 Those interpolations and alterations are found almost in every case
      where figures are given—especially whenever the numbers eleven and
      twelve come in—as these are all made (by the Christians) to relate
      to the numbers of Apostles, and Tribes, and Patriarchs. The
      translator of the Ethiopic text—Archbishop Laurence—attributes them
      generally to “mistakes of the transcriber” whenever the two texts,
      the Paris and the Bodleian MSS., differ. We fear it is no mistake,
      in most cases.

  158 _Op. cit._, lxxxviii. 99, 100.

  159 _Loc. cit._, 94. This passage, as will be presently shown, has led
      to a very curious discovery.

  160 In the profane history of Gautama Buddha he dies at the good old age
      of eighty, and passes off from life to death peacefully with all the
      serenity of a great saint, as Barthélemy St. Hilaire has it. Not so
      in the Esoteric and true interpretation which reveals the real sense
      of the profane and allegorical statement that makes Gautama, the
      Buddha, die very unpoetically from the effects of too much pork,
      prepared for him by Tsonda. How one who preached that the killing of
      animals was the greatest sin, and who was a perfect vegetarian,
      could die from eating pork, is a question that is never asked by our
      Orientalists, some of whom made (as now do many charitable
      missionaries in Ceylon) great fun at the alleged occurrence. The
      simple truth is that the said rice and pork are purely allegorical.
      Rice stands for “forbidden fruit,” like Eve’s “apple,” and means
      Occult knowledge with the Chinese and Tibetans; and “pork” for
      Brâhmanical teachings—Vishnu having assumed in his first Avatâra the
      form of a boar, in order to raise the earth on the surface of the
      waters of space. It is not, therefore, from “pork” that Buddha died,
      but for having divulged some of the Brâhmanical mysteries, after
      which, seeing the bad effects brought on some unworthy people by the
      revelation, he preferred, instead of availing himself of Nirvâna, to
      leave his earthly form, remaining still in the sphere of the living,
      in order to help humanity to progress. Hence his constant
      reincarnations in the hierarchy of the Dalai and Teshu Lamas, among
      other bounties. Such is the Esoteric explanation. The life of
      Gautama will be more fully discussed later on.

  161 _Op. cit._, cv. 21.

  162 In the _Bible_ (_Genesis_, iv and v) there are three distinct Enochs
      (Kanoch or Chanoch)—the son of Cain, the son of Seth, and the son of
      Jared; but they are all identical, and two of them are mentioned for
      purposes of misleading. The years of only the last two are given,
      the first one being left without further notice.

  163 The eternal and incessant “in‐breathing and out‐breathing of
      Parabrahman” or Nature, the Universe in Space, whether during
      Manvantara or Pralaya.

  164 _Op. cit._, iii. 1.

  165 _Op. cit._, 30.

  166 _Op. cit._, 32.

  167 Those who are aware that the term Christos was applied by the
      Gnostics to the Higher Ego (the ancient Pagan Greek Initiates doing
      the same), will readily understand the allusion. Christos was said
      to be cut off from the lower Ego, Chrestos, after the final and
      supreme Initiation, when the two became blended in one; Chrestos
      being conquered and resurrected in the glorified Christos.—Franck,
      _Die Kabbala_, 75; Dunlap, _Sôd_, Vol. II.

  168 _Stromateis_, I. xiii.

  169 _Op. cit._, II. viii.

  170 Many are the marvels recorded as having taken place at his death, or
      we should rather say his translation; for he did not die as others
      do, but having suddenly disappeared, while a dazzling light filled
      the cavern with glory, his body was again seen upon its subsidence.
      When this heavenly light gave place to the habitual semi‐darkness of
      the gloomy cave—then only, says Ginsburg, “the disciples of Israel
      perceived that the lamp of Israel was extinguished.” His biographers
      tell us that there were voices heard from Heaven during the
      preparation for his funeral, and at his interment, when the coffin
      was lowered into the deep cave prepared for it, a flame broke forth
      and a voice mighty and majestic pronounced these words: “This is he
      who caused the earth to quake, and the kingdoms to shake!”

  171 Pockocke, maybe, was not altogether wrong in deriving the German
      Heaven, Himmel, from Himâlaya; nor can it be denied that it is the
      Hindu Kailâsa (Heaven) that is the father of the Greek Heaven
      (Koilon), and of the Latin Cœlum.

  172 See Pockocke’s _India in Greece_, and his derivation of Mount
      Parnassus from Parnasa, the leaf and branch huts of the Hindu
      ascetics, half shrine and half habitation. “Part of the Par‐o‐
      Pamisus (the hill of Bamian), is called Parnassus. ‘These mountains
      are called Devanica, because they are so full of Devas or Gods,
      called “Gods of the Earth,” Bhu Devas. They lived, according to the
      Purânas, in bowers or huts, called Parnasas, because they were made
      of leaves’ (Parnas),” p. 302.

  173 Rawlinson is justly very confident of an Âryan and Vedic influence
      on the early mythology and history of Babylon and Chaldæa.

  174 This is a Secret Doctrine affirmation, and may or may not be
      accepted. Only Abrahm, Isaac and Judah resemble terribly the Hindu
      Brahmâ Ikshvâku and Yadu.

  175 It is said in _The Gnostics and their Remains_, by C. W. King (p.
      13), with regard to the names of Brahmâ and Abram; “This figure of
      the _man_, Seir Aupin, consists of 243 numbers, being the numerical
      value of the letters in the name ‘Abram’ signifying the different
      orders in the celestial Hierarchies. In fact the names Abram and
      Brahmâ are equivalent in numerical value.” Thus to one acquainted
      with Esoteric Symbolism, it does not seem at all strange to find in
      the Loka‐pâlas (the four cardinal and intermediate points of the
      compass personified by eight Hindu Gods) Indra’s elephant, named
      Abhra—(mâtanga) and his wife Abhramu. Abhra is in a way a Wisdom
      Deity, since it is this elephant’s head that replaced that of
      Ganesha (Ganapati) the God of Wisdom, cut off by Shiva. Now Abhra
      means “cloud,” and it is also the name of the city where Abram is
      supposed to have resided—when read backwards—“Arba (Kirjath) the
      city of four ... Abram is Abra with an appended _m_ final, and Abra
      read backward is Arba” (_Key to the Hebrew Egyptian Mystery_). The
      author might have added that Abra meaning in Sanskrit “in, or of,
      the clouds,” the cosmo‐astronomical symbol of Abram becomes still
      plainer. All of these ought to be read in their originals, in
      Sanskrit.

  176 Before these theories and speculations—we are willing to admit they
      are such—are rejected, the following few points ought to be
      explained, (1) Why, after leaving Egypt, was the patriarch’s name
      changed by Jehovah from Abram to Abraham. (2) Why Sarai becomes on
      the same principle Sarah (_Gen._, xvii.). (3) Whence the strange
      coincidence of names? (4) Why should Alexander Polyhistor say that
      Abraham was born at Kamarina or Uria, a city of soothsayers, and
      invented Astronomy? (5) “The Abrahamic recollections go back at
      least three millenniums beyond the grandfather of Jacob,” says
      Bunsen (_Egypt’s Place in History_, v. 35.)

  177 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 35.

  178 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 218‐300. Gematria is formed by a metathesis
      from the Greek word γραμματεία; Notaricon may be compared to
      stenography; Temura is permutation—a way of dividing the alphabet
      and shifting letters.

  179 _De Vita Pythag._

  180 We are not aware that a copy of this ancient work is embraced in the
      catalogue of any European library; but it is one of the “Books of
      Hermes,” and it is referred to and quotations are made from it in
      the works of a number of ancient and mediæval philosophical authors.
      Among these authorities are Arnoldo di Villanova’s _Rosarium
      Philosoph._, Francesco Arnuphi’s _Opus de Lapide_, Hermes
      Trismegistus’ _Tractatus de Transmutatione Metallorum_ and _Tabula
      Smaragdina_, and above all the treatise of Raymond Lully, _Ab
      Angelis Opus Divinum de Quinta Essentia_.

  181 _Exodus_, xxv. 40.

  182 _Sub voce_ “Numbers.”

  183 See Johannes Meursius, _Denarius Pythagoricus_.

  184 Ragon, _Maçonnerie Occulte_, p. 426, note.

  185 _Ibid._, p. 432, note.

  186 Extracted from Ragon, _Maçonnerie Occulte_, p. 427, note.

  187 Summarised from Ragon, _ibid._, p. 428, note.

  188 Ragon mentions the curious fact that the first four numbers in
      German are named after the elements.

      “Ein, or one, means the air, the element which, ever in motion,
      penetrates matter throughout, and whose continual ebb and tide is
      the universal vehicle of life.

      “Zwei, two, is derived from the old German Zweig, signifying germ,
      fecundity; it stands for earth the fecund mother of all.

      “Drei, three, is the _trienos_ of the Greeks, standing for water,
      whence the Sea‐gods, Tritons; and trident, the emblem of Neptune—the
      water, or sea, in general being called Amphitrite (surrounding
      water).

      “Vier, four, a number meaning in Belgian fire.... It is in the
      quaternary that the first solid figure is found, the universal
      symbol of immortality, the Pyramid, ‘whose first syllable means
      fire.’ Lysis and Timæus of Locris claimed that there was not a thing
      one could name that had not the quaternary for its root.... The
      ingenious and mystical idea which led to the veneration of the
      ternary and the triangle was applied to number four and its figure:
      it was said to express a living being, 1, the vehicle of the
      triangle 4, vehicle of God, or man carrying in him the divine
      principle.”

      Finally, “the Ancients represented the world by the number five.
      Diodorus explains it by saying that this number represents earth,
      fire, water, air and ether or spiritus. Hence, the origin of Pente
      (five) and of Pan (the God) meaning in Greek all.” (Compare Ragon,
      _op. cit._, pp. 428‐430.) It is left with the Hindu Occultists to
      explain the relation this Sanskrit word Pancha (five) has to the
      elements, the Greek Pente having for its root the Sanskrit term.

  189 The system of the so‐called Senzar characters is still more
      wonderful and difficult, since each letter is made to yield several
      meanings, a sign placed at the commencement showing the true
      meaning.

  190 Ragon, _op. cit._, p. 431, note.

  191 The Y exoterically signifies only the two paths of virtue or vice,
      and stands also for the numeral 150 and with a dash over the letter
      Y for 150,000.

  192 _Tradition_, chap. on “Numbers.”

  193 This is a kind of magical bow and arrow calculated to destroy in one
      moment whole armies; it is mentioned in the _Râmâyana_, the
      _Purânas_ and elsewhere.

  194 _Matthew_, viii. 30‐34.

  195 _Dogmatic Theology_, iii. 345.

  196 viii. 9, 10.

  197 _Adv. Celsum._

  198 _Eccles. Hist._, i. 140.

  199 _Contra Hæreses_, I. xxiii. 1‐4.

  200 _Contra Hæreses_, ii. 1‐6.

  201 _Op. cit._, ii. 337.

  202 Ten is the perfect number of the Supreme God among the “manifested”
      deities, for number 1 is the symbol of the Universal Unit, or male
      principle in Nature, and number O the feminine symbol Chaos, the
      Deep, the two forming thus the symbol of Androgyne nature as well as
      the full value of the solar year, which was also the value of
      Jehovah and Enoch. Ten, with Pythagoras, was the symbol of the
      Universe; also of Enos, the Son of Seth, or the “Son of Man” who
      stands as the symbol of the solar year of 365 days, and whose years
      are therefore given as 365 also. In the Egyptian Symbology Abraxas
      was the Sun, the “Lord of the Heavens.”

      The circle is the symbol of the one Unmanifesting Principle, the
      plane of whose figure is infinitude eternally, and this is crossed
      by a diameter only during Manvantaras.

  203 _I. Cor._, ii. 6‐8.

  204 Compare Taylor’s _Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries_.

  205 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 89.

  206 _Op. cit._, ii. 395.

  207 Quoted by De Mirville, _Op. cit._, vi. 41 and 42.

  208 Mr. St. George Lane‐Fox has admirably expressed the idea in his
      eloquent appeal to the many rival schools and societies in India. “I
      feel sure,” he said, “that the prime motive, however dimly
      perceived, by which you, as the promoters of these movements, were
      actuated, was a revolt against the tyrannical and almost universal
      establishment throughout all existing social and so‐called religious
      institutions of a usurped authority in some external form
      supplanting and obscuring the only real and ultimate authority, the
      indwelling spirit of truth revealed to each individual soul, true
      conscience in fact, that supreme source of all human wisdom and
      power which elevates man above the level of the brute.” (_To the
      Members of the Ârya Samâj, the Theosophical Society, Brahmo and
      Hindu Samâj and other Religious and Progressive Societies in
      India._)

  209 _Revelation_, ii. 6.

  210 This “art” is not common jugglery, as some define it now: it is a
      kind of psychological jugglery, if jugglery at all, where
      fascination and glamour are used as means of producing illusions. It
      is hypnotism on a large scale.

  211 The author asserts in this his Christian persuasion.

  212 Magnetic passes, evidently, followed by a trance and sleep.

  213 “Elementals” used by the highest Adept to do mechanical, not
      intellectual work, as a physicist uses gases and other compounds.

  214 Quoted from De Mirville, _op. cit._, vi. 43.

  215 _Ibid._, vi. 45.

  216 _Ibid._, p. 46.

  217 Amédée Fleury, _Rapports de St. Paul avec Sénèque_, ii. 100. The
      whole of this is summarised from De Mirville.

  218 But we can never agree with the author “that rites and ritual and
      formal worship and prayers are of the absolute necessity of things,”
      for the external can develop and grow and receive worship only at
      the expense of, and to the detriment of, the internal, the only real
      and true.

  219 H. Jennings, _op. cit._, pp. 37, 38.

  220 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 574.

  221 xi. 26.

  222 Art., by Dr. A. Wilder, in _Evolution_.

  223 _Op. cit._, p. 262.

  224 In its most extensive meaning, the Sanskrit word has the same
      literal sense as the Greek term; both imply “revelation,” by no
      human agent, but through the “receiving of the sacred drink.” In
      India the initiated received the “Soma,” sacred drink, which helped
      to liberate his soul from the body; and in the Eleusinian Mysteries
      it was the sacred drink offered at the Epopteia. The Grecian
      Mysteries are wholly derived from the Brâhmanical Vaidic rites, and
      the latter from the Ante‐Vaidic religious Mysteries—primitive Wisdom
      Philosophy.

  225 It is needless to state that the _Gospel according to John_ was not
      written by John, but by a Platonist or a Gnostic belonging to the
      Neoplatonic school.

  226 _Ibid._, _loc. cit._ The fact that Peter persecuted the “Apostle to
      the Gentiles” under that name, does not necessarily imply that there
      was no Simon Magus individually distinct from Paul. It may have
      become a generic name of abuse. Theodoret and Chrysostom, the
      earliest and most prolific commentators on the Gnosticism of those
      days, seem actually to make of Simon a rival of Paul and to state
      that between them passed frequent messages. The former, as a
      diligent propagandist of what Paul terms the “antithesis of the
      Gnosis” (_1. Epistle to Timothy_), must have been a sore thorn in
      the side of the apostle. There are sufficient proofs of the actual
      existence of Simon Magus.

  227 Taylor’s _Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries_, Wilder’s ed., p. x.

  228 ii. 91‐94.

  229 Bunsen, _Egypt’s Place in History_, v. 90.

  230 _Ibid._

  231 _Stele_, p. 44.

  232 See Dowson’s _Hindu Classical Dict._, _sub voc._, “Pîtha‐sthânaru.”

  233 See _Preface to St. Matthew’s Gospel_, Baronius, i. 752, quoted in
      De Mirville, vi. 63. Jerome is the Father who having found the
      authentic and original _Evangel_ (the Hebrew text), by Matthew the
      Apostle‐publican, in the library of Cæsarea, “_written by the hand_
      of Matthew” (Hieronymus: _De Viris_, Illust. Chap. iii.)—as he
      himself admits—set it down as heretical, and substituted for it his
      own Greek text. And it is also he who perverted the text in the
      _Book of Job_ to enforce belief in the resurrection in flesh (see
      _Isis Unveiled_, Vol. ii. pp. 181 and 182, _et seq._), quoting in
      support the most learned authorities.

  234 De Mirville gives the following thrilling account of the “contest.”

      “John, pressed, as St. Jerome tells us, by all the churches of Asia
      to proclaim more solemnly [in the face of the miracles of
      Apollonius] the divinity of Jesus Christ, after a long prayer with
      his disciples on the Mount of Patmos and being in ecstasy by the
      divine Spirit, made heard amid thunder and lightning his famous _In
      Principio erat Verbum_. When that sublime extasis, that caused him
      to be named the ‘Son of Thunder,’ had passed, Apollonius was
      compelled to retire and to disappear. Such was his defeat, less
      bloody but as hard as that of Simon, the Magician.” (“The Magician
      Theurgist,” vi. 63) For our part we have never heard of extasis
      producing thunder and lightning and we are at a loss to understand
      the meaning.

  235 This is the old, old story. Who of us, Theosophists, but knows by
      bitter personal experience what clerical hatred, malice and
      persecution can do in this direction; to what an extent of
      falsehood, calumny and cruelty these feelings can go, even in our
      modern day, and what exemplars of _Christ‐like_ charity His alleged
      and self‐constituted servants have shown themselves to be!

  236 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 342.

  237 _Loc. cit._, ii. 343, 344.

  238 _Pneumatologie_, vi. 62.

  239 _Les Apologistes Chrétiens au Second Siècle_, p. 106.

  240 _Pneumatologie_, vi, 62.

  241 Many are they who _do not know_: hence, they do not believe in them.

  242 Just so. Apollonius, during a lecture he was delivering at Ephesus
      before an audience of many thousands, perceived the murder of the
      Emperor Domitian in Rome and notified it at the very moment it was
      taking place, to the whole town; and Swedenborg, in the same manner,
      saw from Gothenburg the great fire at Stockholm and told it to his
      friends, no telegraph being in use in those days.

  243 No criterion at all. The Hindu Sâddhus and Adepts acquire the gift
      by the holiness of their lives. The Yoga‐Vidyâ teaches it, and no
      “spirits” are required.

  244 As to the Pontiffs, the matter is rather doubtful.

  245 But this alone is no reason why people should believe in this class
      of spirits. There are better authorities for such belief.

  246 De Mirville’s aim is to show that all such apparitions of the Manes
      or disembodied Spirits are the work of the Devil, “Satan’s
      simulacra.”

  247 He might have added: like the great Shankarâchârya, Tsong‐Kha‐Pa,
      and so many other real Adepts—even his own Master, Jesus; for this
      is indeed a criterion of true Adeptship, though “to disappear” one
      need not fly up in the clouds.

  248 See _Dion Cassius_, XXVII. xviii. 2.

  249 Lampridius, _Adrian_, xxix. 2.

  250 The passage runs as follows: “Aurelian had determined to destroy
      Tyana, and the town owed its salvation only to a miracle of
      Apollonius; this man so famous and so wise, this great friend of the
      Gods, appeared suddenly before the Emperor, as he was returning to
      his tent, in his own figure and form, and said to him in the
      Pannonian language: ‘Aurelian, if thou wouldst conquer, abandon
      these evil designs against my fellow‐citizens: if thou wouldst
      command, abstain from shedding innocent blood; and if thou wouldst
      live, abstain from injustice.’ Aurelian, familiar with the face of
      Apollonius, whose portraits he had seen in many temples, struck with
      wonder, immediately vowed to him (Apollonius) statue, portrait and
      temple, and returned completely to ideas of mercy.” And then
      Vopiscus adds: “If I have believed more and more in the virtues of
      the _majestic_ Apollonius, it is because, after gathering my
      information from the most serious men, I have found all these facts
      corroborated in the Books of the Ulpian Library.” (See Flavius
      Vopiscus, _Aurelianus_). Vopiscus wrote in 250 and consequently
      preceded Philostratus by a century.

  251 _Ep. ad Paulinum._

  252 The above is mostly summarised from De Mirville, _loc. cit._, pp.
      66‐69.

  253 A “true prophet” because an Initiate, one perfectly versed in Occult
      astronomy.

  254 _Key to Hebrew‐Egyptian Mystery_, p. 259 _et seq._ Astronomy and
      physiology are the bodies, astrology and psychology their informing
      souls; the former being studied by the eye of sensual perception,
      the latter by the inner or “soul‐eye”; and both are _exact_
      sciences.

  255 _New Platonism and Alchemy_, p. 12

  256 _Heracles_, 807.

  257 _Æneid_, viii., 274 ff.

  258 App., vii., p. 301.

  259 _Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie_, ii. 88.

  260 (Hieronymus, _De Viris Illust._, iii.) “It is remarkable that, while
      all Church Fathers say that _Matthew_ wrote in _Hebrew_, the whole
      of them use the _Greek_ text as the genuine apostolic writing,
      without mentioning what relation the _Hebrew_ Matthew has to our
      _Greek_ one! It had many _peculiar additions_ which are wanting in
      our (Greek) Evangel” (Olshausen, _Nachweis der Echtheit der
      Sämmtlichen Schriften des Neuen Test._, p. 32; Dunlap, _Sôd, the Son
      of the Man_, p. 44.)

  261 _Commen. to Matthew_ (xii. 13) Book II. Jerome adds that it was
      written in the Chaldaic language, but with Hebrew letters.

  262 “St. Jerome,” v. 445; Dunlap, _Sôd, the Son of Man_, p. 46.

  263 This accounts also for the rejection of the works of Justin Martyr,
      who used only this “Gospel according to the Hebrews,” as also did
      most probably Tatian, his disciple. At what a late period the
      divinity of Christ was fully established we can judge by the mere
      fact that even in the fourth century Eusebius did not denounce this
      book as spurious, but only classed it with such as the _Apocalypse_
      of John; and Credner (_Zur Gesch. des Kan_, p. 120) shows Nicephorus
      inserting it, together with the _Revelation_, in his _Stichometry_,
      among the Antilegomena. The Ebionites, the _genuine_ primitive
      Christians, rejecting the rest of the Apostolic writings, make use
      only of this Gospel (_Adv. Hær._, i. 26) and the Ebionites, as
      Epiphanius declares, firmly believed, with the Nazarenes, that Jesus
      was but a man, “of the seed of a man.”

  264 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 182‐3.

  265 _Op. cit._, ii. 5.

  266 See also _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 180, to end of chapter.

  267 _Source of Measures_, p. 299. This “stream of life” being
      emblematised in the Philloc _basso‐relievo_ just mentioned, by the
      water poured in the shape of a Cross on the initiated candidate by
      Osiris—_Life_ and the Sun—and Mercury—_Death_. It was the _finale_
      of the rite of Initiation after the _seven_ and the _twelve_
      tortures in the Crypts of Egypt were passed through successfully.

  268 Another untrustworthy, untruthful and ignorant writer, an
      ecclesiastical historian of the fifth century. His alleged history
      of the strife between the Pagans, Neoplatonists, and the Christians
      of Alexandria and Constantinople, which extends from the year 324 to
      439, dedicated by him to Theodosius, the younger, is full of
      deliberate falsifications.

  269 _Gems of the Orthodox Christians_, vol. I., p. 135.

  270 _Revelation_, xiv. 1.

  271 A Dagoba is a small temple of globular form, in which are preserved
      the relics of Gautama.

  272 Prachidas are buildings of all sizes and forms, like our mausoleums,
      and are sacred to votive offerings to the dead.

  273 The Talmudistic records claim that, after having been hanged, he was
      lapidated and buried under the water at the junction of two streams.
      _Mishna Sanhedrin_, Vol. VI., p. 4; _Talmud_, of Babylon, same
      article, 43 a, 67 a.

  274 _Coptic Legends of the Crucifixion_, MSS. XI.

  275 We are at a loss to understand why King, in his _Gnostic Gems_,
      represents Solomon’s Seal as a five‐pointed star, whereas it is six‐
      pointed, and is the signet of Vishnu in India.

  276 King (_Gnostics_) gives the figure of a Christian symbol, very
      common during the middle ages, of three fishes interlaced into a
      triangle, and having the FIVE letters (a most sacred Pythagorean
      number) ΙΧΘΥΣ engraved on it. The number five relates to the same
      kabalistic computation.

  277 _Op. cit._, ii., 253‐256.

  278 _Op. cit._, 301. All this connects Jesus with great Initiates and
      solar heroes; all this is purely Pagan, under a newly‐evolved
      variation, the Christian scheme.

  279 _Op. cit._, 296.

  280 Pp. 294, 295.

  281 P. 295

  282 Pp. 295, 296.

  283 Had we known the learned author before his book was printed, he
      might have been perchance prevailed upon to add a seventh link from
      which all others, far preceding those enumerated in point of time,
      and surpassing them in universally philosophical meaning, have been
      derived, aye, even to the great pyramid, whose foundation square
      was, in its turn, the great Âryan Mysteries.

  284 We would say cosmic Matter, Spirit, Chaos, and Divine Light, for the
      Egyptian idea was identical in this with the Âryan. However, the
      author is right with regard to the Occult Symbology of the Jews.
      They were a remarkably matter of fact, unspiritual people at all
      times; yet even with them “Ruach” was Divine Spirit, not “air.”

  285 Mr. Ralston Skinner shows that the symbol ☧, the crossed bones and
      skull, has the letter ק _Koph_, the half of the head behind the
      ears.

  286 Pp. 296‐302. By these numbers, explains the author, “Eli is 113 (by
      placing the word in a circle); _amah_ being 345, is by change of
      letters to suit the same value משת (in a circle) or Moses, while
      Sabachth is John or the dove, or Holy Spirit, because (in a circle)
      it is 710 (or 355 × 2). The termination _ni_, as _meni_ or 5651,
      becomes Jehovah.”

  287 The Western personification of that power, which the Hindus call the
      _Vija_, the “one seed,” or _Mahâ Vishnu_—a power, not the God—or
      that mysterious Principle that contains in Itself the Seed of
      Avatârism.

  288 “Arise into Nervi from this decrepit body into which thou hast been
      sent. Ascend into thy former abode, O blessed Avatâr!”

  289 _The Gnostics and their Remains_, King, pp. 100, 101.

  290 _Loc cit._

  291 _Op. cit._ 258.

  292 _Homilies_ XIX., xx. 1.

  293 The Pleroma constituted the synthesis or entirety of all the
      spiritual entities. St. Paul still used the name in his Epistles.

  294 The “Comforter,” second Messiah, intercessor. “A term applied to the
      Holy Ghost.” Manes was the disciple of Terebinthus, an Egyptian
      Philosopher, who, according to the Christian Socrates (I. i., cited
      by Tillemont, iv. 584), “while invoking one day the demons of the
      air, fell from the roof of his house and was killed.”

  295 _Cf._ _op. cit._, vi. 169‐183.

  296 “The _great serpent_ placed to _watch the temple_,” comments De
      Mirville. “How often have we repeated that it was no _symbol_, no
      personification but really a serpent occupied by a god!”—he
      exclaims; and we answer that at Cairo in a Mussulman, not a
      _heathen_ temple, we have seen, as thousands of other visitors have
      also seen, a huge serpent that lived there for centuries, we were
      told, and was held in great respect. Was it also “occupied by a
      God,” or possessed, in other words?

  297 The Mysteries of Demeter, or the “afflicted mother.”

  298 By the satyrs.

  299 This looks rather suspicious and seems interpolated. De Mirville
      tries to have what he says of Satan and his Court sending their imps
      on earth to tempt humanity and masquerade at _séances_, corroborated
      by the ex‐sorcerer.

  300 This does not look like sinful food. It is the diet of Chelâs to
      this day.

  301 “Grafted” is the correct expression. “The seven Builders graft the
      divine and the beneficent forces on to the gross material nature of
      the vegetable and mineral kingdoms every Second Round”—says the
      _Catechism of Lanoos_.

  302 Only the Prince of the World is not Satan, as the translator would
      make us believe, but the collective Host of the Planetary. This is a
      little theological back‐biting.

  303 Here the Elemental and Elementary Spirits are evidently meant.

  304 The reader has already learned the truth about them in the course of
      the present work.

  305 Pity the penitent _Saint_ had not imparted his knowledge of the
      rotation of the earth and helio‐centric system earlier to his
      Church. That might have saved more than one human life—that of Bruno
      for one.

  306 Chelâs in their trials of initiation, also see _in trances
      artificially generated for them_, the vision of the Earth supported
      by an elephant on the top of a tortoise standing on nothing—and
      this, to teach them to discern the true from the false.

  307 Relating to the days of the year, also to 7 × 7 divisions of the
      earth’s sublunary sphere, divided into seven upper and seven lower
      spheres with their respective Planetary Hosts or “armies.”

  308 Daimon is not “demon,” as translated by De Mirville, but Spirit.

  309 All this is to corroborate his dogmatic assertions that Pater Æther
      or Jupiter is Satan! and that pestilential diseases, cataclysms, and
      even thunderstorms that prove disastrous, come from the Satanic Host
      dwelling in Ether—a good warning to the men of Science!

  310 The translator replaces the word Mediators by mediums, excusing
      himself in a foot‐note by saying that Cyprian _must_ have meant
      modern mediums!

  311 Cyprianus simply meant to hint at the rites and mysteries of
      Initiation, and the pledge of secresy and oaths that bound the
      Initiates together. His translator, however, has made a Witches’
      Sabbath of it instead.

  312 “Twelve centuries later, in full renaissance and reform, the world
      saw Luther do the same [embrace the Devil he means?]—according to
      his own confession and in the same conditions,” explains De Mirville
      in a foot‐note, showing thereby the brotherly love that binds
      Christians. Now Cyprianus meant by the Devil (if the word is really
      in the original text) his Initiator and Hierophant. No Saint—even a
      penitent Sorcerer—would be so silly as to speak of his (the Devil’s)
      rising from his seat to see him to the door, were it otherwise.

  313 Every Adept has “a principality after his death.”

  314 Which shows that it was the Hierophant and his disciples. Cyprianus
      shows himself as grateful as most of the other converts (the modern
      included) to his Teachers and Instructors.

  315 This is proved if we take but a single recorded instance. J. Picus
      de Mirandola, finding that there was more Christianity than Judaism
      in the _Kabalah_, and discovering in it the doctrines of the
      Trinity, the Incarnation, the Divinity of Jesus, etc., wound up his
      proofs of this with a challenge to the world at large from Rome. As
      Ginsburg shows: “In 1486, when only twenty‐four years old, he
      [Picus] published nine hundred [Kabalistic] _theses_, which were
      placarded in Rome, and undertook to defend them in the presence of
      all European scholars whom he invited to the Eternal City, promising
      to defray their travelling expenses.”

  316 This account is summarised from Isaac Myer’s _Qabbalah_, p. 10, _et
      seq._

  317 There is not in the decalogue one idea that is not the counterpart,
      or the paraphrase, of the dogmas and ethics current among the
      Egyptians long before the time of Moses and Aaron. (The Mosaic Law a
      transcript from Egyptian Sources; vide _Geometry in Religion_,
      1890.)

  318 _Book of God._ Kenealy, p. 383. The reference to Klaproth is also
      from this page.

  319 See _Asiat. Jour._, N.S. vii., p. 275, quoted by Kenealy.

  320 _Book of God_, _loc. cit._

  321 _Op. cit._, v. 15.

  322 _Prolegomena_, iii. 13, quoted by Kenealy, p. 385.

  323 See _Book of God_, p. 385. “Care should be taken,” says Butler
      (quoted by Kenealy, p. 489), “to distinguish between the Pentateuch
      in the Hebrew language but in the letters of the Samaritan alphabet,
      and the version of the Pentateuch in the Samaritan language. One of
      the most important differences between the Samaritan and the Hebrew
      text respects the duration of the period between the deluge and the
      birth of Abraham. The Samaritan text makes it longer by some
      centuries than the Hebrew text; and the Septuagint makes it longer
      by some centuries than the Samaritan.” It is observable that in the
      authentic translation of the Latin Vulgate, the Roman Church follows
      the computation expressed in the Hebrew text; and in her Martyrology
      follows that of the Seventy, both texts being inspired, as she
      claims.

  324 See Rev. Joseph Wolff’s _Journal_, p. 200.

  325 A tree is symbolically a book—as “pillar” is another synonym of the
      same.

  326 The wife of Moses, one of the seven daughters of a Midian priest, is
      called Zipora. It was Jethro, the priest of Midian, who initiated
      Moses, Zipora, one of the seven daughters, being simply one of the
      seven Occult powers that the Hierophant was and is supposed to pass
      to the initiated novice.

  327 See for these details the _Book of God_, pp. 244, 250.

  328 _Op. cit._ v. 85.

  329 As is fully shown in the _Source of Measures_ and other works.

  330 Surely even Masons would never claim the _actual_ existence of
      Solomon? As Kenealy shows, he is not noticed by Herodotus, nor by
      Plato, nor by any writer of standing. It is most extraordinary, he
      says, “that the Jewish nation, over whom but a few years before the
      mighty Solomon had reigned in all his glory, with a magnificence
      scarcely equalled by the greatest monarchs, spending nearly _eight
      thousand millions_ of gold on a temple, was overlooked by the
      historian Herodotus, writing of Egypt on the one hand, and of
      Babylon on the other—visiting both places, and of course passing
      almost necessarily within a few miles of the splendid capital of the
      national Jerusalem? How can this be accounted for?” he asks (p.
      457). Nay, not only are there no proofs of the twelve tribes of
      Israel having ever existed, but Herodotus, the most accurate of
      historians, who was in Assyria when Ezra flourished, never mentions
      the Israelites at all; and Herodotus was born in 484 B.C. How is
      this?

  331 Clement, _Stromateis_, xxii.

  332 _Book of God_, p. 408.

  333 _Book of God_, p. 453.

  334 _Asiatic Journal_, vii., p. 275, quoted by Kenealy.

  335 _Book of God_, p. 385.

  336 Speaking of the hidden meaning of the Sanskrit words, Mr. T. Subba
      Row, in his able article on “The Twelve Signs of the Zodiac,” gives
      some advice as to the way in which one should proceed to find out
      “the deep significance of ancient Sanskrit nomenclature in the old
      Âryan myths. 1. Find out the synonyms of the word used which have
      other meanings. 2. Find out the numerical value of the letters
      composing the word according to the methods of the ancient Tântrik
      works [_Tântrika Shâstra_—works on Incantation and Magic]. 3.
      Examine the ancient myths or allegories, if there are any, which
      have any special connection with the word in question. 4. Permute
      the different syllables composing the word and examine the new
      combinations that will thus be formed and their meanings,” etc. But
      he does not give the principal rule. And no doubt he is quite right.
      The Tântrika _Shâstras_ are as old as Magic itself. Have they also
      borrowed their Esotericism from the Hebrews?

  337 Their founder, Sadoc, was the pupil, through Antigonus Saccho, of
      Simon the Just. They had their own secret _Book of the Law_ ever
      since the foundation of their sect (about 400 B.C.) and this volume
      was unknown to the masses. At the time of the Separation the
      Samaritans recognised only the _Book of the Law of Moses_ and the
      _Book of Joshua_, and their _Pentateuch_ is far older, and is
      different from the Septuagint. In 168 B.C. Jerusalem had its temple
      plundered, and its Sacred Books—namely, the _Bible_ made up by Ezra
      and finished by Judas Maccabeus—were lost (see Burder’s _Josephus_,
      vol. ii. pp. 331‐335); after which the _Massorah_ completed the work
      of destruction (even of Ezra’s once‐more adjusted _Bible_) begun by
      the change into square from horned letters. Therefore the later
      _Pentateuch_ accepted by the Pharisees was rejected and laughed at
      by the Sadducees. They are generally called atheists; yet, since
      those learned men, who made no secret of their freethought,
      furnished from among their number the most eminent of the Jewish
      high‐priests, this seems impossible. How could the Pharisees and the
      other two believing and pious sects allow notorious atheists to be
      selected for such posts? The answer is difficult to find for bigotry
      and for believers in a personal, anthropomorphic God, but very easy
      for those who accept facts. The Sadducees were called atheists
      because they believed as the initiated Moses believed, thus
      differing very widely from the latter made‐up Jewish legislator and
      hero of Mount Sinai.

  338 The measurements of the Great Pyramid being those of the temple of
      Solomon, of the Ark of the Covenant, etc., according to Piazzi
      Smythe and the author of the _Source of Measures_, and the Pyramid
      of Gizeh being shown on astronomical calculations to have been built
      4950 B.C., and Moses having _written_ his books—for the sake of
      argument—not even half that time before our era, how can this be?
      Surely if any one borrowed from the other, it is not the Pharaohs
      from Moses. Even philology shows not only the Egyptian, but even the
      Mongolian, older than the Hebrew.

  339 This alone shows how the Books of Moses were tampered with. In
      _Samuel_ (ix. 9), it is said: “He that is now a prophet [Nabhi] was
      beforetime called a Seer [Roch].” Now since before _Samuel_, the
      word “Roch” is met nowhere in the _Pentateuch_, but its place is
      always taken by that of “Nabhi,” this proves clearly that the Mosaic
      text has been replaced by that of the later Levites. (See for fuller
      details _Jewish Antiquities_, by the Rev. D. Jennings, D.D.)

  340 _Zohar_, i, 2a.

  341 _Zohar_, 42b.

  342 _Zohar_, i, 2a. See Dr. Ch. Ginsburg’s essay on _The Cabbalah, its
      Doctrines, Developments and Literature_.

  343 Cudworth, I. iii, quoted by Wilson, _Vishnu Purâna_, i. 14, note.

  344 _Vishnu Purâna_, i. 14.

  345 Stanza i, 4.

  346 _Mishna_, i. 9.

  347 In its manifested state it becomes Ten, the Universe. In the
      Chaldæan _Kabalah_ it is sexless. In the Jewish, Shekinah is female,
      and the early Christians and Gnostics regarded the Holy Ghost as a
      female potency. In the _Book of Numbers_ “Shekina” is made to drop
      the final “h” that makes it a feminine name. Nârâyana, the Mover on
      the Waters, is also sexless; but it is our firm belief that Shekinah
      and Daiviprakriti, the “Light of the Logos,” are one and the same
      thing philosophically.

  348 The Elohim create the Adam of dust, and in him Jehovah‐Binah
      separates himself into Eve, after which the male portion of God
      becomes the Serpent, tempts himself in Eve, then creates himself in
      her as Cain, passes into Seth, and scatters from Enoch, the Son of
      Man, or Humanity, as Jodheva.

  349 _The Source of Measures_, p. 8.

  350 This identifies Sephira, the third potency, with Jehovah the Lord,
      who says to Moses out of the burning bush: “(Here) I am.” (_Exodus_,
      iii, 4.) At this time the “Lord” had not yet become Jehovah. It was
      not the one Male God who spoke, but the Elohim manifested, or the
      Sephiroth in their manifested collectivity of seven, contained in
      the triple Sephira.

  351 The Brâhmans were wise in their generation when they gradually, for
      no other reason than this, abandoned Brahmâ, and paid less attention
      to him individually than to any other deity. As an abstract
      synthesis they worshipped him collectively and in every God, each of
      which represents him. As Brahmâ, the male, he is far lower than
      Shiva, the Lingam, who personates universal generation, or Vishnu,
      the preserver—both Shiva and Vishnu being the regenerators of life
      after destruction. The Christians might do worse than follow their
      example, and worship God in Spirit, and not in the male Creator.

  352 A plural word, signifying a collective host generically; literally,
      the “strong lion.”

  353 The writer possesses only a few extracts, some dozen pages in all,
      verbatim quotations from that priceless work, of which but two or
      three copies, perhaps, are still extant.

  354 Aye; but that _spirituality_ can never be discovered, far less
      proved, unless we turn to the Âryan Scriptures and Symbology. For
      the Jews it was lost, save for the Sadducees, from the day that the
      “chosen people” reached the Promised Land, the national Karma
      preventing Moses from reaching it.

  355 _Op. cit._, pp. 317‐319.

  356 _The Book of God_, pp. 388, 389.

  357 See Horne’s _Introduction_ (10th edition), vol. ii, p. 33, as quoted
      by Dr. Kenealy, p. 389.

  358 See Horne’s _Introduction_ (10th edition), vol. ii, p. 33, as quoted
      by Dr. Kenealy, p. 389.

  359 The author says that Parker’s _quadrature_ is “that identical
      measure which was used anciently as the perfect measure, by the
      Egyptians, in the construction of the Great Pyramid, which was built
      to _monument it and its uses_,” and that “from it the _sacred cubit‐
      value was derived_, which was the cubit‐value used in the
      construction of the Temple of Solomon, the Ark of Noah, and the Ark
      of the Covenant” (p. 22). This is a grand discovery, no doubt, but
      it only shows that the Jews profited well by their captivity in
      Egypt, and that Moses was a great Initiate.

  360 See _Theosophist_, November, 1879, art. “Hindu Music,” p. 47.

  361 The Sanskrit letters are far more numerous than the poor twenty‐two
      letters of the Hebrew alphabet. They are all musical, and they are
      read—or rather chanted—according to a system given in very old
      Tântrika works, and are called Devanâgarî, the speech, or language,
      of the Gods. And since each letter answers to a numeral, the
      Sanskrit affords a far larger scope for expression, and it must
      necessarily be far more perfect than the Hebrew, which followed the
      same system but could apply it only in a very limited way. If either
      of these two languages, were taught to humanity by the Gods, surely
      it would more likely be the Sanskrit, the perfect form of the most
      perfect language on earth, than the Hebrew, the roughest and the
      poorest. For once anyone believes in a language of divine origin, he
      can hardly believe at the same time that Angels or Gods or any
      divine Messengers have had to develop it from a rough monosyllabic
      form into a perfect one, as we see in terrestrial linguistic
      evolution.

  362 In the first chapter of _Genesis_ the word “God” represents the
      Elohim—Gods in the plural, not one God. This is a cunning and
      dishonest translation. For the whole _Kabalah_ explains sufficiently
      that the Alhim (Elohim) are seven; each creates one of the seven
      things enumerated in the first chapter, and these answer
      allegorically to the seven creations. To make this clear, count the
      verses in which it is said “And God saw that it was good,” and you
      will find that this is said seven times—in verses 4, 10, 12, 18, 21,
      25, and 31. And though the compilers cunningly represent the
      creation of man as occurring on the sixth day, yet, having made man
      “male and female in the image of God,” the Seven Elohim repeat the
      sacramental sentence, “It was good,” for the seventh time, thus
      making of man the seventh creation, and showing the origin of this
      bit of cosmogony to be in the Hindu creations. The Elohim are, of
      course, the seven Egyptian Khnûmû, the “assistant‐architects”; the
      seven Amshaspends of the Zoroastrians; the Seven Spirits subordinate
      to Ildabaoth of the Nazareans; the seven Prajâpati of the Hindus,
      etc.

  363 _Gen._, ii. 21, 22.

  364 _Op. cit._, p. 395, note.

  365 The seventh esoterically, exoterically the sixth.

  366 _Contra Hereses_, I, xviii, 2.

  367 _Op. cit._ by Gerald Massey, p. 19.

  368 _Op cit._, p. 278.

  369 _The Hebrew and other Creations: with a reply to Professor A. H.
      Sayce_, p. 19.

  370 _Op. cit._, p. 243.

  371 When they are the Anupâdakas (Parentless) of the Secret Doctrine.
      See Stanzas, i, 9, Vol. i, 56.

  372 These originated with the Âryans, who placed therein their “bright‐
      crested” (Chitra‐Shikhandan) Seven Rishis. But all this is far more
      Occult than appears on the surface.

  373 _Op. cit._, pp. 19‐22.

  374 _Vishnu Purâna_, Wilson’s Trans., i, 101. The period of these
      Kumâras is Pre‐Adamic, _i.e._, before the separation of sexes, and
      before humanity had received the creative, or sacred, fire of
      Prometheus.

  375 The Secret Doctrine says that this was the second creation, not the
      first, and that it took place during the Third Race, when men
      separated, _i.e._, began to be born as distinct men and women. See
      Vol. ii. of this work, Stanzas and Commentaries.

  376 This is a Western mangling of the Indian doctrine of the Kumâras.

  377 He was regarded by several Gnostic sects as one with Jehovah. See
      _Isis Unveiled_, vol. ii. p. 184.

  378 Or “man, son of man.” The Church found in this a _prophecy_ and a
      confession of Christ, the “Son of Man!”

  379 See Stanza ii. 5, Secret Doctrine, ii. 16.

  380 _Op. cit._, pp. 23, 24.

  381 The _Sepher Jetzirah_ now known is but a portion of the original one
      incorporated in the Chaldæan _Book of Numbers_. The fragment now in
      possession of the Western Kabalists is one greatly tampered with by
      the Rabbis of the Middle Ages, as its masoretic points show. The
      “Masorah” scheme is a modern blind, dating after our era and
      perfected in Tiberias. (See _Isis Unveiled_, vol. ii, pp. 430‐431.)

  382 In the oldest symbolism—that used in the Egyptian hieroglyphics—when
      the bull’s head only is found it means the Deity, the Perfect
      Circle, with the procreative power latent in it. When the whole bull
      is represented, a solar God, a _personal_ deity is meant, for it is
      then the symbol of the acting generative power.

  383 It took three Root‐Races to degrade the symbol of the One Abstract
      Unity manifested in Nature as a Ray emanating from infinity (the
      Circle) into a phallic symbol of generation, as it was even in the
      _Kabalah_. This degradation began with the Fourth Race, and had its
      _raison d’etre_, in Polytheism, as the latter was invented to screen
      the One Universal Deity from profanation. The Christians may plead
      ignorance of its meaning as an excuse for its acceptance. But why
      sing never‐ceasing laudations to the Mosaic Jews who repudiated all
      the other Gods, preserved the most phallic, and then most impudently
      proclaimed themselves Monotheists? Jesus ever steadily ignored
      Jehovah. He went against the Mosaic commandments. He recognized his
      Heavenly Father alone, and prohibited public worship.

  384 Is it everything to have found out that the celestial circle of 360°
      is determined by “the full word‐form of Elohim,” and that this
      yields, when the word is placed in a circle, “3.1415, or the
      relation of circumference to a diameter of _one_.” This is only its
      astronomical or mathematical aspect. To know the full _septenary_
      significance of the “Primordial Circle,” the pyramid and the
      Kabalistic _Bible_ must be read in the light of the figure on which
      the temples of India are built. The mathematical squaring of the
      circle is only the terrestrial _résumé_ of the problem. The Jews
      were content with the six days of activity and the seventh of rest.
      The progenitors of mankind solved the greatest problems of the
      Universe with their seven Rays or Rishis.

  385 _Genesis_ begins with the _third_ stage of “creation,” skipping the
      preliminary two.

  386 The three _root_‐principles are, exoterically: Man, Soul, and Spirit
      (meaning by “man” the intelligent personality), and esoterically:
      Life, Soul, and Spirit; the four vehicles are Body, Astral double,
      Animal (or human) Soul, and Divine Soul (Sthûla‐Sharîra, Linga‐
      Sharîra, Kâma‐rûpa, and Buddhi, the vehicle of Âtma or Spirit). Or,
      to make it still clearer: (1) the _Seventh_ Principle has for its
      vehicle the Sixth (Buddhi); (2) the vehicle of Manas is Kâma‐rûpa;
      (3) that of Jîva or Prâna (life) is the Linga‐Sharîra (the “double”
      of man; the Linga‐Sharîra proper can never leave the body till
      death; that which appears is an astral body, reflecting the physical
      body and serving as a vehicle for the human soul, or intelligence);
      and (4) the Body, the physical vehicle of all the above
      collectively. The Occultist recognizes the same order as existing
      for the cosmical totality, the _psycho_‐cosmical Universe.

  387 St. Denys, the Areopagite, the supposed contemporary of St. Paul,
      his co‐disciple, and first Bishop of St. Denis, near Paris, teaches
      that the bulk of the “work of creation” was performed by the
      “_Seven_ Spirits of the Presence”—God’s _co‐operators_, owing to a
      participation of the divinity in them. (_Hierarch._, p. 196.) And
      Saint Augustine also thinks that “things were rather created in the
      angelic minds than in Nature, that is to say, that the angels
      perceived and knew them (all things) in their thoughts before they
      could spring forth into actual existence.” (_Vid. De Genesis ad
      Litteram_ p. II.) (Summarized from De Mirville, Vol. II., pp.
      337‐338.) Thus the early Christian Fathers, even a non‐initiate like
      St. Augustine, ascribed the creation of the visible world to Angels,
      or Secondary Powers, while St. Denys not only specifies these as the
      “_Seven_ Spirits of the Presence,” but shows them owing their power
      to the informing divine energy—Fohat in the Secret Doctrine. But the
      egotistical darkness which caused the Western races to cling so
      desperately to the _Geo_‐centric System, made them also neglect and
      despise all those fragments of the true Religion which would have
      deprived them and the little globe they took for the centre of the
      Universe of the signal honour of having been expressly “created” by
      the One, Secondless, Infinite God!

  388 De Mirville, ii. 295.

  389 To the Occultist and Chelâ the difference made between _Energy_ and
      Emanation need not be explained. The Sanskrit word “Sakti” is
      untranslatable. It may be Energy, but it is one that proceeds
      through itself, not being due to the active or conscious will of the
      one that produces it. The “First‐Born,” or Logos, is not an
      Emanation, but an Energy inherent in and co‐eternal with
      Parabrahman, the One. The _Zohar_ speaks of emanations, but reserves
      the word for the seven Sephiroth emanated from the first three—which
      form one triad—Kether, Chokmah, and Binah. As for these three, it
      explains the difference by calling them “immanations,” something
      inherent to and coëval with the subject postulated, or in other
      words, “Energies.”

      It is these “Auxiliaries,” the Auphanim, the half‐human Prajâpatis,
      the Angels, the Architects under the leadership of the “Angel of the
      Great Council,” with the rest of the Kosmos‐Builders of other
      nations, that can alone explain the imperfection of the Universe.
      This imperfection is one of the arguments of the Secret Science in
      favour of the existence and activity of these “Powers.” And who know
      better than the few philosophers of our civilised lands how near the
      truth Philo was in ascribing the origin of evil to the admixture of
      inferior potencies in the arrangement of matter, and even in the
      formation of man—a task entrusted to the divine Logos.

  390 _Psalms_ cxxxv. 5.

  391 _Psalms_ xcvi. 5.

  392 Rather as Ormazd or Ahura‐Mazda, Vit‐nam‐Ahmi, and all the
      unmanifested Logoi. Jehovah is the manifested Virâj, corresponding
      to Binah, the third Sephira in the _Kabalah_, a female Power which
      would find its prototype rather in the Prajâpati, than in Brahmâ,
      the Creator.

  393 Neith is Aditi, evidently.

  394 The Self‐created Logos, Nârâyana, Purushottama, and others.

  395 _Mère d’Apis_, pp. 32‐35. Quoted by De Mirville.

  396 See _Republic_, I. vi.

  397 _Harmonie entre l’Église et la Synagogue_, t. II., p. 427, by the
      Chevalier Drach. See De Mirville iv. 38, 39.

  398 Julian died for the same crime as Socrates. Both divulged a portion
      of the solar mystery, the heliocentric system being only a part of
      what was given during Initiation—one consciously, the other
      unconsciously, the Greek Sage never having been initiated. It was
      not the real solar system that was preserved in such secrecy, but
      the mysteries connected with the Sun’s constitution. Socrates was
      sentenced to death by earthly and worldly judges; Julian died a
      violent death because the hitherto protecting hand was withdrawn
      from him, and, no longer shielded by it, he was simply left to his
      destiny or Karma. For the student of Occultism there is a suggestive
      difference between the two kinds of death. Another memorable
      instance of the unconscious divulging of secrets pertaining to
      mysteries is that of the poet, P. Ovidius Naso, who, like Socrates,
      had not been initiated. In his case, the Emperor Augustus, who was
      an Initiate, mercifully changed the penalty of death into banishment
      to Tomos on the Euxine. This sudden change from unbounded royal
      favour to banishment has been a fruitful scheme of speculation to
      classical scholars not initiated into the Mysteries. They have
      quoted Ovid’s own lines to show that it was some great and heinous
      immorality of the Emperor of which Ovid had become unwillingly
      cognizant. The inexorable law of the death penalty, always following
      upon the revelation of any portion of the Mysteries to the profane,
      was unknown to them. Instead of seeing the amiable and merciful act
      of the Emperor in its true light, they have made it an occasion for
      traducing his moral character. The poet’s own words can be no
      evidence, because as he was not an Initiate, it could not be
      explained to him in what his offence consisted. There have been
      comparatively modern instances of poets unconsciously revealing in
      their verses so much of the hidden knowledge as to make even
      Initiates suppose them to be fellow‐Initiates, and come to talk to
      them on the subject. This only shows that the sensitive poetic
      temperament is sometimes so far transported beyond the bounds of
      ordinary sense as to get glimpses into what has been impressed on
      the Astral Light. In the _Light of Asia_ there are two passages that
      might make an Initiate of the first degree think that Mr. Edwin
      Arnold had been initiated himself in the Himâlyan _âshrams_, but
      this is not so.

  399 A proof that Julian was acquainted with the heliocentric system.

  400 _La Gravitation par l’Electricité_, p. 7, quoted by De Mirville; iv.
      156.

  401 De Mirville, iv. 157.

  402 _Memoir on the Solar System_, p. 7, De Mirville, iv. 157.

  403 _Essai sur l’ Identité des Agents Producteurs du Son, de la
      Lumière_, etc., p. 15, _Ibid._

  404 _Ibid._, p. 218.

  405 Summarised from _Ibid._, p. 213. De Mirville, iv. 158.

  406 May, 1855. _Ibid._, p. 139.

  407 _La Terre et notre Système solaire._ De Mirville, iv. 139.

  408 If, as Sir W. Herschel thought, the so‐called fixed stars have
      resulted from, and owe their origin to nebular combustion, they
      cannot be fixed any more than is our sun, which was believed to be
      motionless and is now found to rotate around its axis every twenty‐
      five days. As the fixed star nearest to the sun, however, is eight‐
      thousand times farther away from him than is Neptune, the illusions
      furnished by the telescopes must be also eight‐thousand times as
      great. We will therefore leave the question at rest, repeating only
      what A. Maury said in his work (_La Terre et l’Homme_, published in
      1858): “It is utterly impossible, so far, to decide anything
      concerning Neptune’s constitution, analogy alone authorising us to
      ascribe to him a rotary motion like that of other planets” (De
      Mirville, iv. 140).

  409 _Exposition du vrai Système du Monde_, p. 282.

  410 See the passage quoted by Herschel in _Natural Philosophy_, p. 165.
      De Mirville, iv. 105.

  411 _Loc. cit._

  412 _Terre et Ciel_, p. 28. _Ibid._

  413 _Œuvres d’Arago_, vol. i., p. 219; quoted by De Mirville, iii. 462.

  414 “_Die Sterne sind vielleicht ein Sitz verklarter Geister;_
      _Wie hier das Laster herrscht, ist dort die Tugend Meister._”

  415 _Op. cit._, p. 411.

  416 Whenever Occult doctrines were expounded in the pages of _The
      Theosophist_, care was taken each time to declare a subject
      incomplete when the whole could not be given in its fulness, and no
      writer has ever tried to mislead the reader. As to the Western
      “ranges of perception” concerning doctrines really Occult, the
      Eastern Occultists have been made acquainted with them for some time
      past. Thus they are enabled to assert with confidence that the West
      may be in possession of Hermetic philosophy as a speculative system
      of dialectics, the latter being used in the West admirably well, but
      it lacks entirely the knowledge of Occultism. The genuine Eastern
      Occultist keeps silent and unknown, never publishes what he knows,
      and rarely even speaks of it, as he knows too well the penalty of
      indiscretion.

  417 See _The Royal Masonic Cyclopædia_, art. “Sepher Jetzirah.”

  418 In the exoteric sense, the Mantra (or that psychic faculty or power
      that conveys perception or thought) is the older portion of the
      _Vedas_, the second part of which is composed of the _Brâhmanas_. In
      Esoteric phraseology Mantra is the Word made flesh, or rendered
      objective, through divine magic.

  419 The secret meaning of the word “Brahmâ” is “expansion,” “increase,”
      or “growth.”

  420 Why not give at once its theological meaning, as we find it in
      Webster? With the Roman Catholics it means simply “purgatory,” the
      borderland between heaven and hell (_Limbus patrum_ and _Limbus
      infantum_), the one for all men, whether good, bad or indifferent;
      the other for the souls of unbaptized children! With the ancients it
      meant simply that which in _Esoteric Buddhism_ is called the Kâma
      Loka, between Devachan and Avitchi.

  421 As Chaos, the eternal Element, not as the Kâma Loka surely.

  422 A proof that by this word Éliphas Lévi means the lowest region of
      the terrestrial Âkâsha.

  423 Evidently he is concerned only with our periodical world, or the
      terrestrial globe.

  424 In the “reäwakening” of the Forces would be more correct.

  425 An action which is incessant in eternity cannot be called
      “creation;” it is evolution, and the eternally or ever‐becoming of
      the Greek Philosopher and the Hindu Vedântin; it is the Sat and the
      one Beingness of Parmenides, or the Being identical with Thought.
      Now how can the Potencies be said to “create movement,” once it is
      seen movement never had any beginning, but existed in the Eternity?
      Why not say that the reawakened Potencies transferred motion from
      the eternal to the temporal plane of being? Surely this is not
      Creation.

  426 _Histoire de la Magie._ Int., p. 1.

  427 _Histoire de la Magie._ Int., p. 2.

  428 The Vaishnavas, who regard Vishnu as the Supreme God and the
      fashioner of the Universe, claim that Brahmâ sprang from the navel
      of Vishnu, the “imperishable,” or rather from the lotus that grew
      from it. But the “navel” here means the Central Point, the
      mathematical symbol of infinitude, or Parabrahman, the One and the
      Secondless.

  429 _Ecclesiastes_, i. 12, 13.

  430 It is probably needless to say here what everyone knows. The
      translation of the Protestant _Bible_ is not a word for word
      rendering of the earlier Greek and Latin _Bibles_: the sense is very
      often disfigured, and “God” is put where “Jahve” and “Elohim” stand.

  431 _Psalms_, civ. 2, 3.

  432 To avoid misunderstanding of the word “creation” so often used by
      us, the remarks of the author of _Through the Gates of Gold_ may be
      quoted owing to their clearness and simplicity. “The words ‘to
      create’ are often understood by the ordinary mind to convey the idea
      of evolving something out of nothing. This is clearly not its
      meaning. We are mentally obliged to provide our Creator with chaos
      from which to produce the worlds. The tiller of the soil, who is the
      typical producer of social life, must have his material: his earth,
      his sky, rain and sun, and the seeds to place within the earth. Out
      of nothing he can produce nothing. Out of a void nature cannot
      arise; there is that material beyond, behind, or within, from which
      she is shaped by our desire for a Universe.” (P. 72.)

  433 Commentary on Stanza ix. on Cycles.

  434 Or, read from right to left, the letters and their corresponding
      numerals stand thus: “t,” 4; “h,” 5; “bh,” 2; “v,” 6; “v,” 6; “h,”
      5; “v” or “w,” 6; which yields “thuvbhu,” 4566256, or “Tohu‐vah‐
      bohu.”

  435 Mr. Ralston Skinner’s MSS.

  436 That the teraphim was a statue, and no small article either, is
      shown in _Samuel_ xix., where Michal takes a teraphim (“image,” as
      it is translated) and puts it in bed to represent David, her
      husband, who ran away from Saul (see verse 13, _et seq._). It was
      thus of the size and shape of a human figure—a statue or real
      _idol_.

  437 _Op. cit._, iii. 4

  438 Louis de Dieu, _Genesis_, xxxi. 19. See De Mirville, iii. 257.

  439 “The teraphim of Abram’s father, Terah, the ‘maker of images,’ were
      the Kabeiri Gods, and we see them worshipped by Micah, by the
      Danites, and others. (_Judges_, xvii.‐xviii., etc.) Teraphim were
      identical with seraphim, and these were serpent images, the origin
      of which is in the Sanskrit ‘Sarpa’ (the ‘serpent’) a symbol sacred
      to all the deities as a symbol of immortality. Kiyun, or the God
      Kivan, worshipped by the Hebrews in the wilderness, is Shiva, the
      Hindu Saturn. (The Zendic ‘h’ is ‘s’ in India; thus, ‘Hapta’ is
      ‘Sapta;’ ‘Hindu’ is ‘Sindbaya.’ (A. Wilder)) ‘The “s” continually
      softens to “h” from Greece to Calcutta, from the Caucasus to Egypt,’
      says Dunlap. Therefore the letters ‘k,’ ‘h,’ and ‘s’ are
      interchangeable. The Greek story shows that Dardanus, the Arcadian,
      having received them as a dowry, carried them to Samothrace, and
      thence to Troy; and they were worshipped long before the days of
      glory of Tyre or Sidon, though the former had been built 2760 B.C.
      From where did Dardanus derive them?” _Isis Unveiled_, i. 570.

  440 Maimon, _More Nevochim_, III. xxx.

  441 Those dedicated to the sun were made in gold, and those to the moon
      in silver.

  442 _De Diis Syriis, Teraph._ II. Syat, p. 31.

  443 Those that the Kabalists call _elementary_ spirits are sylphs,
      gnomes, undines and salamanders, nature‐spirits, in short. The
      spirits of the angels formed a distinct class.

  444 _Œdipus_, ii. 444.

  445 _Op. cit._, xxv. 22 _et seq._

  446 The ephod was a linen garment worn by the high priest, but as the
      thummim was attached to it, the entire paraphernalia of divination
      was often comprised in that single word, ephod. See I. _Sam._,
      xxviii. 6, and xxx. 7, 8.

  447 _Paganism and Judaism_, iv. 197.

  448 _Op. cit._, I. vi. 5.

  449 _Discourse to the Gentiles_, p. 146.

  450 _De Gener._, I, II. iv.

  451 See _Cosmos_, by Ménage, I., vi., § 101.

  452 _Op. cit._, I. ii.

  453 “The characters employed on those parchments,” writes De Mirville,
      “are sometimes hieroglyphics, placed perpendicularly, a kind of
      lineary tachygraphy (abridged characters), where the image is often
      reduced to a simple stroke; at other times placed in horizontal
      lines; then the hieratic or sacred writing, going from right to left
      as in all Semitic languages; lastly, the characters of the country,
      used for official documents, mostly contracts, etc., but which since
      the Ptolemies has been also adopted for the monuments,” v. 81, 82. A
      copy of the Harris papyrus, translated by Chabas—_Papyrus
      magique_—may be studied at the British Museum.

  454 And what of the “Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin,” the words that “the
      fingers of a man’s hand,” whose body and arm remained invisible,
      wrote on the walls of Belshazzar’s palace? (_Daniel_, v.) What of
      the writings of Simon the Magician, and the magic characters on the
      walls and in the air of the crypts of Initiation, without mentioning
      the tables of stone on which the finger of God wrote the
      commandments? Between the writing of one God and other Gods the
      difference, if any, lies only in their respective natures; and if
      the tree is to be known by its fruits, then preference would have to
      be given always to the Pagan Gods. It is the immortal “To be or not
      to be.” Either all of them are—or at any rate, may be—true, or all
      are surely pious frauds and the result of credulity.

  455 _Papyrus Magique_, p. 186.

  456 See Maspero’s _Guide to the Bulak Museum_, among others.

  457 De Mirville (from whom much of the preceding is taken), v. 81, 85.

  458 See De Mirville, v. 84, 85.

  459 One sees this difficulty arise even with a perfectly known language
      like Sanskrit, the meaning of which is far easier to comprehend than
      the hieratic writings of Egypt. Everyone knows how hopelessly the
      Sanskritists are often puzzled over the real meaning and how they
      fail in rendering the meaning correctly in their respective
      translations, in which one Orientalist contradicts the other.

  460 _Op. cit._, i. 297.

  461 Book II., Commentary.

  462 Bunsen and Champollion so declare, and Dr. Carpenter says that the
      _Book of the Dead_, sculptured on the oldest monuments, with “the
      very phrases we find in the _New Testament_ in connection with the
      Day of Judgment ... was engraved probably 2,000 years before the
      time of Christ.” (See _Isis Unveiled_, i., 518.)

  463 De Mirville, v. 88. Just such a calendar and horoscope interdictions
      exist in India in our day, as well as in China and all the Buddhist
      countries.

  464 See De Mirville, iii. 65.

  465 _Pap. Mag._, p. 163.

  466 _Ibid._, p. 168.

  467 Maimonides in his _Treatise on Idolatry_ says, speaking of the
      Jewish teraphim: “They talked with men.” To this day Christian
      Sorcerers in Italy, and negro Voodoos at New Orleans fabricate small
      wax figures in the likeness of their victims, and transpierce them
      with needles, the _wound_, as on the teraphim or Menh, being
      repercussed on the living, often killing them. Mysterious deaths are
      still many, and not all are traced to the guilty hand.

  468 The Ramses of Lepsius, who reigned some 1300 years before our era.

  469 One may judge how trustworthy are the translations of such Egyptian
      documents when the sentence is rendered in three different ways by
      three Egyptologists. Rougé says: “He found her in a state _to fall
      under the power of spirits_,” or “with her limbs quite stiff,” (?)
      another version; and Chabas translates: “And the Scribe found the
      Khou too wicked.” Between her being in possession of an evil Khou
      and “with her limbs quite stiff,” there is a difference.

  470 De Mirville, v. 247, 248.

  471 Some translators would have Lucian speak of the inhabitants of the
      city, but they fail to show that this view is maintainable.

  472 De Mirville, v. 256, 257.

  473 How can de Mirville see Satan in the Egyptian God of the great
      divine Name, when he himself admits that nothing was greater than
      the name of the oracle of Dodona, as it was that of the God of the
      Jews, IAO, or Jehovah? That oracle had been brought by the
      Pelasgians to Dodona more than fourteen centuries B.C. and left with
      the forefathers of the Hellenes, and its history is well‐known and
      may be read in Herodotus. Jupiter, who loved the fair nymph of the
      ocean, Dodona, had ordered Pelasgus to carry his cult to Thessaly.
      The name of the God of that oracle at the temple of Dodona was Zeus
      Pelasgicos, the Zeuspater (God the Father), or as De Mirville
      explains: “It was the name _par excellence_, the name that the Jews
      held as the ineffable, the unpronounceable Name—in short, _Jaoh‐
      pater_, _i.e._, ‘he who was, who is, and who will be,’ otherwise the
      Eternal.” And the author admits that Maury is right “in discovering
      in the name of the Vaidic Indra the Biblical Jehovah,” and does not
      even attempt to deny the etymological connection between the two
      names—“the _great_ and the _lost_ name with the sun and the thunder‐
      bolts.” Strange confessions, and still stranger contradictions.

  474 Reuvens’ _Letter to Letronne on the 75th number of the Papyri
      Anastasi_. See De Mirville. v. 258.

  475 The Eleusinian Fields.

  476 _Fragments_, ix.

  477 _De Legibus_, II. iv.

  478 _Judaism and Paganism_, i. 184.

  479 _Frag. of Styg., ap. Stob._

  480 _De Special. Legi._

  481 De Mirville, v. 278, 279.

  482 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 25.

  483 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 282, 283.

  484 De Mirville, v. 248.

  485 De Mirville, v. 281.

  486 Tod’s Rajasthan, i. 28.

  487 _Op. cit._, ix. iii. 28.

  488 _Vishnu Purâna_, iv. i. Wilson’s translation, iii. 248‐254.

  489 There were no Brâhmans as a hereditary caste in days of old. In
      those long‐departed ages a man became a Brâhman through personal
      merit and Initiation. Gradually, however, despotism crept in, and
      the son of a Brâhman was created a Brâhman by right of protection
      first, then by that of heredity. The rights of blood replaced those
      of real merit, and thus arose the body of Brâhmans, which was soon
      changed into a powerful caste.

  490 _Des Initiations Anciennes and Modernes._ “The mysteries,” says
      Ragon, “were the gift of India.” In this he is mistaken, for the
      Âryan race had brought the mysteries of Initiation from Atlantis.
      Nevertheless he is right in saying that the mysteries preceded all
      civilisations, and that by polishing the mind and morals of the
      peoples they served as a base for all the laws—civil, political, and
      religious.

  491 _De Off._, i. 33.

  492 _Des Initiations_, p. 22.

  493 _Essais Historiques sur la Franc‐Maçonnerie_, pp. 142, 143.

  494 The word “patriarch” is composed of the Greek word “Patria”
      (“family,” “tribe,” or “nation”) and “Archos” (a “chief”), the
      paternal principle. The Jewish Patriarchs who were pastors, passed
      their name to the Christian Patriarchs; yet they were no priests,
      but were simply the heads of their tribes, like the Indian Rishis.

  495 There is no need to observe here that the resurrection of a really
      dead body is an impossibility in Nature.

  496 The kings of Hungary claimed that they could cure the jaundice; the
      Dukes of Burgundy were credited with preserving people from the
      plague; the kings of Spain delivered those possessed by the devil.
      The prerogative of curing the king’s evil was given to the kings of
      France, in reward for the virtues of good King Robert. Francis the
      First, during a short stay at Marseilles for his son’s wedding,
      touched and cured of that disease upwards of 500 persons. The kings
      of England had the same privilege.

  497 See Laurens’ _Essais Historiques_ for further information as to the
      world‐wide, universal knowledge of the Egyptian Priests.

  498 _Des Initiations_, p. 24.

  499 The word comes from the Greek “hieros” (“sacred”) and “glupho” (“I
      grave”). The Egyptian characters were sacred to the Gods, as the
      Indian Devanâgarî is the language of the Gods.

  500 The same author had (as Occultists have) a very reasonable objection
      to the modern etymology of the word “philosophy,” which is
      interpreted “love of wisdom,” and is nothing of the kind. The
      philosophers were scientists, and philosophy was a real science—not
      simply verbiage, as it is in our day. The term is composed of two
      Greek words whose meaning is intended to convey its secret sense,
      and ought to be interpreted as “wisdom of love.” Now it is in the
      last word, “love,” that lies hidden the esoteric significance: for
      “love” does not stand here as a noun, nor does it mean “affection”
      or “fondness,” but is the term used for Eros, that primordial
      principle in divine creation, synonymous with πόθος, the abstract
      desire in Nature for procreation, resulting in an everlasting series
      of phenomena. It means “divine love,” that universal element of
      divine omnipresence spread throughout Nature and which is at once
      the chief cause and effect. The “wisdom of love” (or “philosophia,”)
      meant attraction to and love of everything hidden beneath objective
      phenomena and the knowledge thereof. Philosophy meant the highest
      Adeptship—love of and assimilation with Deity. In his modesty
      Pythagoras even refused to be called a Philosopher (or one who knows
      every hidden thing in things visible; cause and effect, or absolute
      truth), and called himself simply a Sage an aspirant to philosophy,
      or to Wisdom of Love—love in its exoteric meaning being as degraded
      by men then as it is now by its purely terrestrial application.

  501 _Lev._, xix. 18.

  502 “On,” the “Sun,” the Egyptian name of Heliopolis (the “City of the
      Sun”).

  503 _Book of God_, p. 160.

  504 Mr. Kenealy quotes, in his _Book of God_, Vallancey, who says: “I
      had not been a week landed in Ireland from Gibraltar, where I had
      studied Hebrew and Chaldaic under Jews of various countries, when I
      heard a peasant girl say to a boor standing by her ‘_Feach an Maddin
      Nag_’ (‘Behold the morning star’), pointing to the planet Venus, the
      Maddena Nag of the Chaldeans.”

  505 There was a time when the whole world, the totality of mankind, had
      one religion, as they were of “one lip.” “All the religions of the
      earth were at first one, and emanated from one centre,” says Faber.

  506 _Chips from a German Workshop_, i. 69, 70.

  507 Sûrya, the Sun, is one of the nine divinities that witness all human
      actions.

  508 [There is a gap in H. P. B.’s MS., and the paragraph in brackets
      supplies what was missing.—A. B.]

  509 In _Isis Unveiled_, Vol. II., pp. 41, 42, a portion of this rite is
      referred to. Speaking of the dogma of Atonement, it is traced to
      ancient “heathendom” again. We say: “This cornerstone of a church
      which had believed herself built on a firm rock for long centuries,
      is now excavated by science and proved to come from the Gnostics.
      Professor Draper shows it as hardly known in the days of Tertullian,
      and as having ‘originated among the Gnostic heretics’ (see _Conflict
      Between Religion and Science_, p. 224).... But there are sufficient
      proofs to show that it _originated_ among them no more than did
      their anointed Christos and Sophia. The former they modelled on the
      original of the King Messiah, the male principle of wisdom, and the
      latter on the third Sephiroth, from the Chaldæan _Kabalah_, and even
      from the Hindu Brahmâ and Sarasvatî, and the Pagan Dionysius and
      Demeter. And here we are on firm ground, if it were only because it
      is now proved that the _New Testament_ never appeared in its
      complete form, such as we find it now, till 300 years after the
      period of the apostles, and the _Zohar_ and other Kabalistic books
      are found to belong to the first century before our era, if not to
      be far older still.

      “The Gnostics entertained many of the Essenean ideas; and the
      Essenes had their greater and minor Mysteries at least two centuries
      before our era. They were the _Isarim_ or _Initiates_, the
      descendants of the Egyptian hierophants, in whose country they had
      been settled for several centuries before they were converted to
      Buddhistic monasticism by the missionaries of King Asoka, and
      amalgamated later with the earliest Christians: and they existed,
      probably, before the old Egyptian temples were desecrated and ruined
      in the incessant invasions of Persians, Greeks, and other conquering
      hordes. The hierophants had their atonement enacted in the Mystery
      of Initiation ages before the Gnostics, or even the Essenes, had
      appeared. It was known among hierophants as the Baptism of Blood,
      and was considered not as an atonement for the ‘fall of man’ in
      Eden, but simply as an expiation for the past, present, and future
      sins of ignorant, but nevertheless polluted mankind. The hierophant
      had the option of either offering his pure and sinless life as a
      sacrifice for his race to the gods whom he hoped to rejoin, or an
      animal victim. The former depended entirely on their own will. At
      the last moment of the solemn ‘new birth,’ the Initiator passed ‘the
      word’ to the initiated, and immediately after the latter had a
      weapon placed in his right hand, and was ordered _to strike_. This
      is the true origin of the Christian dogma of atonement.”

      As Ballanche says, quoted by Ragon: “Destruction is the great God of
      the World,” justifying therefore the philosophical conception of the
      Hindu Shîva. According to this immutable and sacred law, “the
      Initiate was compelled to kill the Initiator; otherwise initiation
      remained incomplete.... It is death that generates life.”
      _Orthodoxie maçonnique_, p. 104. All that, however, was emblematic
      and exoteric. Weapon and killing must be understood in their
      allegorical sense.

  510 _Orthodoxie maçonnique_, pp. 102‐104.

  511 _Op. cit._, i. 15.

  512 _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 258. A curious question to start and
      to deny, when it is well‐known even to the Orientalists that, to
      take but one case, there is Yaska, who was a predecessor of Pânini,
      and his work still exists; there are seventeen writers of Nirukta
      (glossary) known to have preceded Yaska.

  513 _La Mère d’Apis_, p. 47.

  514 One just initiated is called the “first‐born,” and in India he
      becomes dwija, “twice born,” only after his final and supreme
      Initiation. Every Adept is a “Son of God” and a “Son of Light” after
      receiving the “Word,” when he becomes the “Word” himself, after
      receiving the seven divine attributes or the “lyre of Apollo.”

  515 See De Mirville, iv. 15.

  516 II. _Kings_, xxiii. 4‐13.

  517 _Judges_, xiii. 18. Samson, Manoah’s son, was an Initiate of that
      “Mystery” Lord, Ja‐va; he was consecrated before his birth to become
      a “Nazarite” (a chela) an Adept. His sin with Dalilah, and the
      cropping of his long hair that “no razor was to touch” shows how
      well he kept his sacred vow. The allegory of Samson proves the
      Esotericism of the _Bible_, as also the character of the “Mystery
      Gods” of the Jews. True, Môvers gives a definition of the Phœnician
      idea of the ideal sunlight as a spiritual influence issuing from the
      highest God, Iao, “the light conceivable only by intellect—the
      physical and spiritual Principle of all things; out of which the
      soul emanates.” It was the male Essence, or Wisdom, while the
      primitive matter or _Chaos_ was the female. Thus the first two
      principles, co‐eternal and infinite, were already with the primitive
      Phœnicians, spirit and matter. But this is the echo of Jewish
      thought, not the opinion of Pagan Philosophers.

  518 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 526.

  519 Beth‐San or Scythopolis in Palestine had that designation; so had a
      spot on Mount Parnassus. But Diodorus declares that Nyssa was
      between Phœnicia and Egypt; Euripides states that Dionysos came to
      Greece from India; and Diodorus adds his testimony: “Osiris was
      brought up in Nyssa, in Arabia the Happy; he was the son of Zeus,
      and was named from his father (nominative Zeus, genitive _Dios_) and
      the place Dio‐Nysos”—the Zeus or Jove of Nyssa. This identity of
      name or title is very significant. In Greece Dionysos was second
      only to Zeus, and Pindar says: “So Father Zeus governs all things,
      and Bacchus he governs also.”

  520 _Ex._, xvii. 15.

  521 _Phædrus_, Cary’s translation, p. 326.

  522 _Life of Pythagoras_, p. 297. “Since Pythagoras,” he adds, “also
      spent two and twenty years in the adyta of the temples in Egypt,
      associated with the Magians in Babylon, and was instructed by them
      in their venerable knowledge, it is not at all wonderful that he was
      skilled in Magic or Theurgy, and was therefore able to perform
      things which surpass merely human power, and which appear to be
      perfectly incredible to the vulgar” (p. 298).

  523 This expression must not be understood simply literally; for, as in
      the initiation of certain Brotherhoods, it has a secret meaning that
      we have just explained; it was hinted at by Pythagoras, when he
      describes his feelings after the Initiation, and says that he was
      crowned by the Gods in whose presence he had drunk “the waters of
      life”—in the Hindu Mysteries there was the fount of life, and
      _soma_, the sacred drink.

  524 _Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries_, T. Taylor, p. 46, 47.

  525 ii. 111, 113.

  526 _Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries_, p. 63.

  527 _Op. cit._, p. 65.

  528 Quoted by Taylor, p. 66.

  529 Verses 35‐38.

  530 _Phædrus_, 64, quoted by Taylor, p. 64.

  531 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 114.

  532 This is false, and the Abbé Constant (Éliphas Lévi) _knew_ it was
      so. Why did he promulgate the untruth?

  533 _Dogme de la Haute Magie_, i. 219, 220.

  534 _Orthodoxie Maçonnique_, p. 99.

  535 _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 214.

  536 In I. _Peter_, ii. 3, Jesus is called “the Lord Chrestos.”

  537 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 323.

  538 _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 31.

  539 The Âryans replaced the living cow by one made of gold, silver or
      any other metal, and the rite is preserved to this day, when one
      desires to become a Brâhman, a twice‐born, in India.

  540 _Op. cit._, p. 141.

  541 In Ragon’s _Orthodoxie Maçonnique_, p. 105, _note_, we find the
      following statement—borrowed from Albumazar the Arabian, probably:
      “_The Virgin of the Magi and Chaldæans._ The Chaldæan sphere [globe]
      showed in its heavens a newly‐born babe, called _Christ and Jesus_;
      it was placed in the arms of the Celestial Virgin. It was to this
      Virgin that Eratosthenes, the Alexandrian Librarian, born 276 years
      before our era, gave the name of Isis, mother of Horus.” This is
      only what Kircher gives (in _Ædipus Ægypticus_, iii. 5), quoting
      Albumazar: “In the first decan of the Virgin rises a maid, called
      Aderenosa, that is pure, immaculate virgin ... sitting upon an
      embroidered throne nursing a boy...; a boy, named Jessus ... which
      signifies Issa, whom they also call Christ in Greek.” (See _Isis
      Unveiled_, ii. 491.)

  542 Now called _St. Reine_ (Côte d’Or) on the two streams, the Ose and
      the Oserain. Its fall is a historical fact in Keltic Gaulish
      History.

  543 _Orthodoxie Maçonnique_, p. 22.

  544 _Op. cit._, p. 22.

  545 The Christian mob in 389 of our era completed the work of
      destruction upon what remained; most of the priceless works were
      saved for students of Occultism, but lost to the world.

  546 _Op. cit._ p. 23. J. M. Ragon, a Belgian by birth, and a Mason, knew
      more about Occultism than any other non‐initiated writer. For fifty
      years he studied the ancient Mysteries wherever he could find
      accounts of them. In 1805, he founded at Paris the Brotherhood of
      _Les Trinosophes_, in which Lodge he delivered for years lectures on
      Ancient and Modern Initiation (in 1818 and again in 1841), which
      were published, and now are lost. Then he became the writer in chief
      of _Hermes_, a masonic paper. His best works were _La Maçonnerie
      Occulte_ and the _Fastes Initiatiques_. After his death, in 1866, a
      number of his MSS. remained in the possession of the Grand Orient of
      France. A high Mason told the writer that Ragon had corresponded for
      years with two Orientalists in Syria and Egypt, one of whom is a
      Kopt gentleman.

  547 _Op. cit._, iv. 462.

  548 _History of Magic_, ii. 11.

  549 _Neo‐Platonism and Alchemy_, p. 15.

  550 _Loc. cit._

  551 _Op. cit._, pp. 9, 10.

  552 This Divine Effulgence and Essence is the light of the Logos; only
      the Vedântin would not use the pronoun “He,” but would say “It.”

  553 _Loc. cit._, _note_, p. 10.

  554 _Loc. cit._, _note_.

  555 See _Esoteric Buddhism_, by A. P. Sinnett, Fifth Edition.

  556 See _Isis Unveiled_, Vol. I., pp. 589‐595. The “Sons of God” and
      their war with the giants and magicians.

  557 _Loc. cit._, _note_.

  558 _Op. cit._, p. 18.

  559 _Op. cit._, p. 8.

  560 No orthodox Christian has ever equalled, far less surpassed, in the
      practice of true Christ‐like virtues and ethics, or in the beauty of
      his moral nature, Ammonius, the Alexandrian pervert from
      Christianity (he was born from Christian parents).

  561 _Op. cit._, pp. 3, 4.

  562 Quoted by Dr. Wilder, p. 5.

  563 “Mortification” is here meant in the moral, not the physical sense;
      to restrain every lust and passion, and live on the simplest diet
      possible.

  564 This is the Neo‐Platonic teaching adopted as a doctrine in the Roman
      Catholic Church, with its worship of the Seven Spirits.

  565 The Church has made of it the worship of devils. “Daimon” is Spirit,
      and relates to our divine Spirit, the seventh Principle and to the
      Dhyân Chohans. Jesus prohibited going to the temple or church “as
      Pharisees do” but commanded that man should retire for prayer
      (communion with his God) into a private closet. Is it Jesus who
      would have countenanced in the face of the starving millions, the
      building of the most gorgeous churches?

  566 _Op. cit._, p. 7.

  567 _Op. cit._, p. 7.

  568 _Op. cit._, p. 18.

  569 The _Talmud_ gives the story of the four Tanaim, who are made, in
      allegorical terms, to enter into _the garden of delights_, _i.e._,
      to be initiated into the occult and final science.

      “According to the teaching of our holy masters the names of the four
      who entered the garden of delight, are: Ben Asai, Ben Zoma, Acher,
      and Rabbi Akiba....

      “Ben Asai looked and—lost his sight.

      “Ben Zoma looked and—lost his reason.

      “Acher made depredations in the plantation” (mixed up the whole and
      failed). “But Akiba, who had entered in peace came out of it in
      peace; for the saint, whose name he blessed, had said, ‘This old man
      is worthy of serving us with glory.’ ”

      “The learned commentators of the _Talmud_, the Rabbis of the
      synagogue, explain that the _garden of delight_, in which those four
      personages are made to enter, is but that mysterious science, the
      most terrible of sciences for weak intellects, which it leads
      directly to insanity,” says A. Franck, in his _Kabbalah_. It is not
      the pure at heart and he who studies but with a view to perfecting
      himself and so more easily acquiring the promised immortality, who
      need have any fear; but rather he who makes of the science of
      sciences a sinful pretext for worldly motives, who should tremble.
      The latter will never understand the kabalistic evocations of the
      supreme initiation.—_Isis Unveiled_, ii. 119.

  570 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 119.

  571 See _Neo‐Platonism_, p. 9.

  572 See the Code published by Sir William Jones, Chapter ix. p. 11.

  573 Pliny: _Hist. Nat._, xxx. 1; _Ib._, xvi. 14; xxv. 9, etc.

  574 Pomponius ascribes to them the knowledge of the highest sciences.

  575 Cæsar, iii. 14.

  576 Pliny, xxx. _Isis Unveiled_, i. 18.

  577 “The care which they took in educating youth, in familiarizing it
      with generous and virtuous sentiments, did them peculiar honour, and
      their maxims and discourses, as recorded by historians, prove that
      they were expert in matters of philosophy, metaphysics, astronomy,
      morality and religion,” says a modern writer. “If kings or princes
      desired the advice or the blessings of the holy men, they were
      either obliged to go themselves, or to send messengers. To these men
      no secret power of either plant or mineral was unknown. They had
      fathomed nature to its depths, while psychology and physiology were
      to them open books, and the result was that science that is now
      termed, so superciliously, _magic_.”

  578 _Op. cit._, p. 9.

  579 _Op. cit._, p. 11.

  580 _Hermes_, iv. 6.

  581 From _Saraph_ שרף “fiery, burning,” plural (see _Isaiah_, vi. 2‐6).
      They are regarded as the personal attendants of the Almighty, “his
      messengers,” angels or metatrons. In _Revelation_ they are the
      “seven burning lamps” in attendance before the throne.

  582 Venus with the Chaldæans and Egyptians was the wife of _Proteus_,
      and is regarded as the mother of the Kabiri, the sons of Phta or
      Emepth—the divine light or the Sun. The angels answer to the stars
      in the following order: The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Venus, Mercury,
      Jupiter, and Saturn; Michael, Gabriel, Samael, Anael, Raphael,
      Zachariel, and Orifiel; this is in religion and Christian Kabalism;
      astrologically and esoterically the places of the “regents” stand
      otherwise, as also in the Jewish, or rather the real Chaldæan
      _Kabalah_.

  583 _Loc. cit._, xiv. 12.

  584 This is one more proof that the Ancients knew of seven planets
      besides the Sun; for otherwise which is the eighth in such a case?
      The seventh, with two others, as stated, were “mystery” planets,
      whether Uranus or any other.

  585 II. _Sam._, vi. 20‐22.

  586 _Judges_, xxi. 21, _et seq._

  587 I. _Kings_, xviii. 26.

  588 This dance—the Râsa Mandala, enacted by the Gopîs or shepherdesses
      of Krishna, the Sun‐God, is enacted to this day in Râjputâna in
      India, and is undeniably the same theo‐astronomical and symbolical
      dance of the planets and the Zodiacal signs, that was danced
      thousands of years before our era.

  589 _Isis Unveiled_, ii. 45.

  590 II. _Epistle_, i. 19. The English text says: “Until the day‐star
      arise in your heart,” a trifling alteration which does not really
      matter—as _Lucifer_ is the day as well as the “morning” star—and it
      is less shocking to pious ears. There are a number of such
      alterations in the Protestant bibles.

  591 Again the English translation changes the word “Sun” into “day‐
      spring.” The Roman Catholics are decidedly braver and more sincere
      than the Protestant theologians. De Mirville: iv. 34, 38.

  592 Thus said the Egyptians and the Sabæans in days of old, the symbol
      of whose manifested gods, Osiris and Bel, was the sun. But they had
      a higher deity.

  593 Exiled from the Protestant bible but left in the _Apocrypha_ which,
      according to Article VI. of the Church of England, “she doth read
      for example of life and instruction of manners” (?), but not to
      establish any doctrine.

  594 _Cornelius a Lapide_, v. 248.

  595 _Ecclesiastes_, xliii. The above quotations are taken from De
      Mirville’s chapter “On Christian and Jewish Solar Theology,” iv.
      35‐38.

  596 Nevertheless the Church has preserved in her most sacred rites the
      “star‐rites” of the Pagan Initiates. In the pre‐Christian Mithraic
      Mysteries, the candidate who overcame successfully the “twelve
      Tortures” which preceded the final Initiation, received a small
      round cake or wafer of unleavened bread, symbolising in one of its
      meanings, the solar disc, and known as the manna (heavenly
      bread).... A lamb, or a bull even, was killed, and with the blood
      the candidate had to be sprinkled, as in the case of the Emperor
      Julian’s initiation. The seven rules or mysteries that are
      represented in the _Revelation_ as the seven seals which are opened
      in order were then delivered to the newly born.

  597 Truly says S. T. Coleridge: “Instinctively the reason has always
      pointed out to men the ultimate end of various sciences.... There is
      no doubt but that astrology of some sort or other will be the last
      achievement of astronomy; there must be chemical relations between
      the planets ... the difference of their magnitude compared with that
      of their distances is not explicable otherwise.” Between planets and
      our earth with its mankind, we may add.

  598 “Christ then,” the author says (p. 40), “is represented by the trunk
      of the candlestick.”

  599 De Mirville, iv. 41, 42.

  600 De Mirville, iv. 42.

  601 Notwithstanding the above, written in the earliest Christian period
      by the renegade Neo‐Platonist, the Church persists to this day in
      her wilful error. Helpless against Galileo, she now tries to throw a
      doubt even on the heliocentric system!

  602 _Stromateis_, V., vi.

  603 The English bible has: “In them (the Heavens) hath he set a
      tabernacle for the sun,” which is incorrect and has no sense in view
      of the verse that follows, for there _are_ things “hid from the heat
      thereof” if the latter word is to be applied to the sun.

  604 When the hierophant took his last degree, he emerged from the sacred
      recess called _Manneras_ and was given the golden _Tau_, the
      Egyptian Cross, which was subsequently placed on his breast, and
      buried with him.

  605 The three secret names are “Sana, Sanat Sujâta, and Kapila;” while
      the four exoteric Gods are called, Sanat Kumâra, Sananda, Sanaka and
      Sanâtana.

  606 Another Kumâra, the “God of War” is called in the Hindu system the
      “eternal celibate”—“the virgin warrior.” He is the Âryan St.
      Michael.

  607 We give the original: “Coelestia corpora moveri a spirituali
      creatura, a _nemine_ Sanctorum vel philosophorum, negatum, legisse
      me memini. (_Opusc._ X. art. iii.).... Mihi autam videtur, quod
      _Demonstrative_ probari posset, quod ab aliquo intellectu corpora
      coelestia moveantur, vel a Deo immediate, vel a mediantibus angelis.
      Sed quod mediantibus angelis ca moveat, congruit rerum ordine, quem
      Dionysius infallibilem asserit, ut inferiora a Deo per _Media_
      secundum cursum communem administrentur” (_Opusc._ II. art. ii.),
      and if so, and God _never_ meddles with the once for ever
      established laws of Nature, leaving it to his administrators, why
      should their being called Gods by the “heathen” be deemed
      idolatrous?

  608 In one of Des Mousseaux’s volumes on Demonology (_Œuvres des
      Demons_) if we do not mistake the statement of the Abbé Huc is
      found, and the author testifies to having heard the following story
      repeatedly from the Abbé himself. In a lamasery of Tibet, the
      missionary found the following:

      It is a simple canvas without the slightest mechanical apparatus
      attached, as the visitor may prove by examining it at his leisure.
      It represents a moonlit landscape, but the moon is not at all
      motionless and dead; quite the reverse, for, according to the Abbé,
      one would say that our moon herself, or at least her living double,
      lighted the picture. Each phase, each aspect, each movement of our
      satellite, is repeated in her facsimile, in the movement and
      progress of the moon in the sacred picture. “You see this planet in
      the painting ride as a crescent, or full, shine brightly, pass
      behind the clouds, peep out or set, in a manner corresponding in the
      most extraordinary way with the real luminary. It is, in a word, a
      most perfect and resplendent reproduction of the pale queen of the
      night, which received the adoration of so many people in the days of
      old.” We know from the most reliable sources and numerous eye‐
      witnesses, that such “machines”—not canvas paintings—do exist in
      certain temples of Tibet; as also the “sidereal wheels” representing
      the planets, and kept for the same purposes—astrological and
      magical. Huc’s statement was translated in _Isis Unveiled_ from Des
      Mousseaux’s volume.

  609 Cedrenus, p. 338. Whether produced by _clockwork_ or _magic_ power,
      such machines—whole celestial spheres with planets rotating—were
      found in the Sanctuaries, and some exist to this day in Japan, in a
      secret subterranean temple of the old Mikados, as well as in two
      other places.

  610 Champollion’s _Égypte Moderne_, p. 42.

  611 _Musée des Sciences_, p. 230.

  612 Translated by the Vicomte de Rougemont. See _Les Annales de
      Philosophie Chrétienne_, 7th year, 1861.

  613 _Isaiah_, lxiii. 9.

  614 Chapter xii. of _Revelation_: “There was war in heaven, Mikael and
      his angels fought against the Dragon,” etc. (7) and the great dragon
      was cast out (9).

  615 He is also the informing Spirit of the Sun and Jupiter, and even of
      Venus.

  616 _Dogme et Rituel_, ii. 116.

  617 If enumerated, they will be found to be the Hindu “divisions” and
      choirs of Devas, and the Dhyân Chohans of Esoteric Buddhism.

  618 But this fact has not prevented the Roman Church from adopting them
      all the same, accepting them from ignorant, though perchance sincere
      Church Fathers, who had borrowed them from Kaballists—Jews and
      Pagans.

  619 To call “usurpers” those who preceded the Christian Beings for whose
      benefit these same titles were borrowed, is carrying paradoxical
      anachronism a little too far!

  620 Or the _divine ages_, the “days and years of Brahmâ.”

  621 De Mirville, ii. 325, 326. So we say too. And this shows that it is
      to the Kabalists and _Magicians_ that the Church is indebted for her
      dogmas and names. Paul never condemned _real_ Gnosis, but the
      _false_ one, now accepted by the Church.

  622 Sesostris, or Pharaoh Ramses II., whose mummy was unswathed in 1886
      by Maspero of the Bulak Museum, and recognised as that of the
      greatest king of Egypt, whose grandson, Ramses III. was the last
      king of an ancient kingdom.

  623 _Op. cit._, p. 422.

  624 _Summa_, Quest. xv. Art. v., upon Astrologers, and Vol. III. pp.
      2‐29.

  625 “The principalities and powers [born] in heavenly places” (_Ephes._,
      iii. 10). The verse, “For though there be that are called Gods,
      whether in heaven or on earth, as there be Gods many and lords many”
      (I. _Corinth._, viii. 5), shows, at any rate, the recognition by
      Paul of a plurality of “Gods” whom he calls “dæmons”
      (“spirits”—never _devils_). Principalities, Thrones, Dominions,
      Rectors, etc. are all Jewish and Christian names for the Gods of the
      ancients—the Archangels and Angels of the former being in every case
      the Devas and the Dhyân Chohans of the more ancient religions.

  626 Answer by Reuvens to Letronne with regard to his mistaken notions
      about the Zodiac of Dendera.

  627 St. Augustine (_De Gen._, I. iii.) and Delrio (_Disquisit._, Vol.
      IV., chap. iii.) are quoted by De Mirville, to show that “the more
      astrologers speak the truth and the better they prophesy it, the
      more one has to feel diffident, seeing that their agreement with the
      devil becomes thereby the more apparent.” The famous statement made
      by Juvenal (_Satires_, vi.) to the effect that “not one single
      astrologer could be found who did not pay dearly for the help he
      received from his genius”—no more proves the latter to be a devil
      than the death of Socrates proves his daimon to have been a native
      from the nether world—if such there be. Such argument only
      demonstrates human stupidity and wickedness, once reason is made
      subservient to prejudice and fanaticism of every sort. “Most of the
      great writers of antiquity, Cicero and Tacitus among them, believed
      in Astrology and the realization of its prophecies;” and “the
      penalty of death decreed nearly everywhere against those
      mathematicians [astrologers] who happened to predict falsely
      diminished neither their number nor their tranquillity of mind.”

  628 _Preparatio Evangelica_, I. xiv.

  629 _Ast._, iv. 60.

  630 _Hist._, I. ii.

  631 All these particulars may be found more fully and far more
      completely in Champollion Figeac’s _Égypte_.

  632 _Op. cit._, p. 230.

  633 _Op. cit._, p. 230.

  634 In the 1,326 places in the _New Testament_ where the word “God” is
      mentioned nothing signifies that in God are included more beings
      than God. On the contrary in 17 places God is called the only God.
      The places where the Father is so‐called amount to 320. In 105
      places God is addressed with high‐sounding titles. In 90 places all
      prayers and thanks are addressed to the Father; 300 times in the
      _New Testament_ is the Son declared to be inferior to the Father; 85
      times is Jesus called the “Son of Man;” 70 times is he called a man.
      In not one single place in the bible is it said that God holds
      within him three different Beings or Persons, and yet is one Being
      or Person.—Dr. Karl von Bergen’s _Lectures in Sweden_.

  635 Kali Yuga, the Black or Iron Age.

  636 Virgil, _Eclogue_, iv.

  637 At the close of our Race, people, it is said, through suffering and
      discontent will become more spiritual. Clairvoyance will become a
      general faculty. We shall be approaching the spiritual state of the
      Third and Second Races.

  638 _Vishnu Purâna_, IV., xxiv. 228, Wilson’s translation.

  639 _Op. cit._, p. 212.

  640 At any rate, the temple secret meaning was the same.

  641 _Asiat. Res._, vol. viii. p. 470, _et seq._

  642 _Theosophist_, August, 1881.

  643 Aug., 1881 to Feb., 1882.

  644 _Loc. cit._, iv. 127.

  645 _Theosophist_, vol. iii. p. 22.

  646 The impartial study of Vaidic and Post‐Vaidic works shows that the
      ancient Âryans knew well the precession of the equinoxes, and “that
      they changed their position from a certain asterism to two
      (occasionally three) asterisms back whenever the precession amounted
      to two, properly speaking, to 2 11/61 asterisms or about 29°, being
      the motion of the sun in a lunar month, and so caused the seasons to
      fall back a complete lunar month.... It appears certain that at the
      date of _Sûrya Siddhânta_, _Brahmâ Siddânta_, and other ancient
      treatises on astronomy, the vernal equinoctial point had not
      actually reached the beginning of Ashvinî, but was a few degrees
      east of it.... The astronomers of Europe change westward the
      beginning of Aries and of all other signs of the Zodiac every year
      by about 50" 25, and thus make the names of the signs meaningless.
      But these signs are as much fixed as the asterisms themselves, and
      hence the Western astronomers of the present day appear to us in
      this respect less wary and scientific in their observations than
      their very ancient brethren—the Âryas.”—_Theosophist_, iii. 23.

  647 A great deal of misconception is raised by a confusion of planes of
      being and misuse of expressions. For instance, certain spiritual
      states have been confounded with the Nirvâna of BUDDHA. The Nirvâna
      of BUDDHA is totally different from any other spiritual state of
      Samâdhi or even the highest Theophania enjoyed by lesser Adepts.
      After physical death the kinds of spiritual states reached by Adepts
      differ greatly.

  648 This region is the one possible point of conciliation between the
      two diametrically opposed poles of religion and science, the one
      with its barren fields of dogmas on faith, the other over‐running
      with empty hypotheses, both overgrown with the weeds of error. They
      will never meet. The two are at feud, at an everlasting warfare with
      each other, but this does not prevent them from uniting against
      Esoteric Philosophy, which for two millenniums has had to fight
      against infallibility in both directions, or “mere vanity and
      pretence” as Antoninus defined it, and now finds the materialism of
      Modern Science arrayed against its truths.

  649 Whence some of the Gnostic ideas? Cerinthus taught that the world
      and Jehovah having fallen off from virtue and primitive dignity the
      Supreme permitted one of his glorious Æons, whose name was the
      “Anointed” (Christ) to incarnate in the man Jesus. Basilides denied
      the reality of the body of Jesus, and calling it an “illusion” held
      that it was Simon of Cyrene who suffered on the Cross in his stead.
      All such teachings are echoes of the Eastern Doctrines.

  650 A genuine initiated Adept will retain his Adeptship, though there
      may be for our world of illusion numberless incarnations of him. The
      propelling power that lies at the root of a series of such
      incarnations is not Karma, as ordinarily understood, but a still
      more inscrutable power. During the period of his lives the Adept
      does not lose his Adeptship, though he cannot rise in it to a higher
      degree.

  651 From the so‐called Brahmâ Loka—the seventh and higher world, beyond
      which all is arûpa, formless, purely spiritual—to the lowest world
      and insect, or even to an object such as a leaf, there is perpetual
      revolution of the condition of existence, evolution and re‐birth.
      Some human beings attain states or spheres from which there is only
      a return in a new Kalpa (a day of Brahmâ); there are other states or
      spheres from which there is only return after 100 years of Brahmâ
      (Mahâ‐Kalpa, a period covering 311,040,000,000,000 years). Nirvâna,
      it is said, is a state from which there is no return. Yet it is
      maintained that there may be, as exceptional cases, re‐incarnation
      from that state; only such incarnations are illusion, like
      everything else on this plane, as will be shown.

  652 This fact of the disappearance of the vehicle of Egotism in the
      fully developed Yogî, who is supposed to have reached Nirvâna on
      earth, years before his corporeal death, has led to the law in Manu,
      sanctioned by millenniums of Brâhmanical authority, that such a
      Paramâtmâ should be held as absolutely blameless and free from sin
      or responsibility, do whatever he may (see last chapter of the _Laws
      of Manu_). Indeed, caste itself—that most despotic, uncompromising
      and autocratic tyrant in India—can be broken with impunity by the
      Yogî, who is above caste. This will give the key to our statements.

  653 [The word “Adept” is very loosely used by H. P. B., who often seems
      to have implied by it no more than the possession of special
      knowledge of some kind. Here it seems to mean first an uninitiated
      disciple and then an initiated one.—EDS.]

  654 About fifty years before the birth of Copernicus, de Cusa wrote as
      follows: “Though the world may not be absolutely infinite, no one
      can represent it to himself as finite, since human reason is
      incapable of assigning to it any term.... For in the same way that
      our earth cannot be in the centre of the Universe, as thought, no
      more could the sphere of the fixed stars be in it.... Thus this
      world is like a vast machine, having its centre [Deity] everywhere,
      and its circumference nowhere [_machina mundi, quasi habens ubique
      centrum, et nullibi circumferentiam_].... Hence, the earth not being
      in the centre, cannot therefore be motionless ... and though it is
      far smaller than the sun, one must not conclude for all that, that
      she is worse [_vilior_—more vile].... One cannot see whether its
      inhabitants are superior to those who dwell nearer to the sun, or in
      other stars, as sidereal space cannot be deprived of inhabitants....
      The earth, very likely [_fortasse_] one of the smallest globes, is
      nevertheless the cradle of intelligent beings, most noble and
      perfect.” One cannot fail to agree with the biographer of Cardinal
      de Cusa, who, having no suspicion of the Occult truth, and the
      reason of such erudition in a writer of the fourteenth and fifteenth
      centuries, simply marvels at such a miraculous foreknowledge, and
      attributes it to God, saying of him that he was a man incomparable
      in every kind of philosophy, by whom many a theological mystery
      inaccessible to the human mind (!), veiled and neglected for
      centuries (_velata et neglecta_) were once more brought to light.
      “Pascal might have read De Cusa’s works; but whence could the
      Cardinal have borrowed his ideas?” asks Moreri. Evidently from
      Hermes and the works of Pythagoras, even if the mystery of his
      incarnation and re‐incarnation be dismissed.

  655 This is the secret meaning of the statements about the Hierarchy of
      Prajâpatis or Rishis. First seven are mentioned, then ten, then
      twenty‐one, and so on. They are “Gods” and creators of men—many of
      them the “Lords of Beings”; they are the “Mind‐born Sons” of Brahmâ,
      and then they became mortal heroes, and are often shown as of a very
      sinful character. The Occult meaning of the Biblical Patriarchs,
      their genealogy, and their descendants dividing among themselves the
      earth, is the same. Again, Jacob’s dream has the same significance.

  656 He “of the Seven Virtues” is one who, without the benefit of
      Initiation, becomes as pure as any Adept by the simple exertion of
      his own merit. Being so holy, his body at his next incarnation
      becomes the Avatâra of his “Watcher” or Guardian Angel, as the
      Christian would put it.

  657 The title of the highest Dhyân Chohans.

  658 _Op. cit._, ii. 367.

  659 “After death, the soul continueth in the aerial (astral) body, till
      it is entirely purified from all angry, sensual passions; then doth
      it put off by a _second death_ [when arising to Devachan] the aerial
      body as it did the earthly one. Wherefore the ancients say that
      there is a celestial body always joined with the soul, which is
      immortal, luminous and star‐like.” It becomes natural then, that the
      “aerial body” of an Adept should have no such second dying, since it
      has been cleansed of all its natural impurity before its separation
      from the physical body. The high Initiate is a “Son of the
      Resurrection,” “being equal unto the angels,” and cannot die any
      more (see _Luke_, xx. 36).

  660 _St. John_, xxi. 21.

  661 See the extract made in the _Theosophist_ from a glorious novel by
      Dostoievsky—a fragment entitled “The Great Inquisitor.” It is a
      fiction, naturally, still a sublime fiction of Christ returning in
      Spain during the palmy days of the Inquisition, and being imprisoned
      and put to death by the Inquisitor, who fears lest Christ should
      ruin the work of Jesuit hands.

  662 When we say the “great Teacher,” we do not mean His Buddhic Ego, but
      that principle in Him which was the vehicle of His personal or
      terrestrial Ego.

  663 _Five Years of Theosophy_, New Edition, p. 3.

  664 _Op. cit._, p. 175, Fifth Edition.

  665 It would be useless to raise objections from exoteric works to
      statements in this, which aims to expound, however superficially,
      the Esoteric Teachings alone. It is because they are misled by the
      exoteric doctrine that Bishop Bigandet and others aver that the
      notion of a supreme eternal Âdi‐Buddha is to be found only in
      writings of comparatively recent date. What is given here is taken
      from the secret portions of Dus Kyi Khorlo (Kâla Chakra, in
      Sanskrit, or the “Wheel of Time,” or duration).

  666 The three bodies are (1) the Nirmânakâya (Pru‐lpai‐Ku in Tibetan),
      in which the Bodhisattva after entering by the six Pâramitâs the
      Path to Nirvâna, appears to men in order to teach them; (2)
      Sambhogakâya (Dzog‐pai‐Ku), the, body of bliss impervious to all
      physical sensations, received by one who has fulfilled the three
      conditions of moral perfection; and (3) Dharmakâya (in Tibetan,
      Chos‐Ku), the Nirvânic body.

  667 _Five Years of Theosophy_, art. “Personal and Impersonal God,” p.
      129.

  668 Adhishtâthâ, the active or working agent in Prakriti (or matter).

  669 _Vedânta‐Sûtras_, Ad. I. Pâda iv. Shi. 23. Commentary. The passage
      is given as follows in Thibaut’s translation (Sacred Books of the
      East, xxxiv.), p. 286: “The Self is thus the operative cause,
      because there is no other ruling principle, and the material cause
      because there is no other substance from which the world could
      originate.”

  670 In _Five Years of Theosophy_ (art. “Shâkya Muni’s Place in History,”
      p. 234, note) it is stated that one day when our Lord sat in the
      Sattapanni Cave (Saptaparna) he compared man to a Saptaparna (seven
      leaved) plant.

      “Mendicants,” he said, “there are seven Buddhas in every Buddha, and
      there are _six_ Bhikshus and but one Buddha in each mendicant. What
      are the _seven_? The seven branches of complete knowledge. What are
      the _six_? The six organs of sense. What are the five? The five
      elements of illusive being. And the One which is also ten? He is a
      true Buddha who develops in him the ten forms of holiness and
      subjects them all to the One.” Which means that every principle in
      the Buddha was the highest that could be evolved on this earth;
      whereas in the case of other men who attain to Nirvâna this is not
      necessarily the case. Even as a mere human (Manushya) Buddha Gautama
      was a pattern for all men. But his Arhats were not necessarily so.

  671 See _Isis Unveiled_, ii., 132.

  672 “Before one becomes a Buddha he must be a Bodhisattva; before
      evolving into a Bodhisattva he must be a Dhyâni‐Buddha.... A
      Bodhisattva is the way and Path to his Father, and thence to the One
      Supreme Essence” (_Descent of Buddhas_, p. 17, from Âryâsanga). “I
      am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man cometh unto the Father
      but by me” (_St. John_, xiv. 6). The “way” is not the goal. Nowhere
      throughout the _New Testament_ is Jesus found calling himself God,
      or anything higher than “a son of God,” the son of a “Father” common
      to all, synthetically. Paul never said (I. _Tim._, iii. 10), “God
      was manifest in the flesh,” but “He who was manifested in the flesh”
      (Revised Edition). While the common herd among the Buddhists—the
      Burmese especially—regard Jesus as an incarnation of Devadatta, a
      relative who opposed the teachings of Buddha, the students of
      Esoteric Philosophy see in the Nazarene Sage a Bodhisattva with the
      spirit of Buddha Himself in Him.

  673 I. _Corinth._, xv. 36.

  674 _Op. cit._, Mandala x., hymn 90.

  675 Literally, “he who walks [or follows] in the way [or path] of his
      predecessors.”

  676 Schmidt, in _Slanong Seetsen_, p. 471, and Schlagintweit, in
      _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 53, accept these precious things
      _literally_, enumerating them as “the wheel, the precious stone, the
      royal consort, the best treasurer, the best horse, the elephant, the
      best leader.” After this one can little wonder if “besides a Dhyâni‐
      Buddhi and a Dhyâni‐Bodhisattva” each human Buddha is furnished with
      “a female companion, a Shakti”—when in truth “Shakti” is simply the
      Soul‐power, the psychic energy of the God as of the Adept. The
      “royal consort,” the third of the “seven precious gifts,” very
      likely led the learned Orientalist into this ludicrous error.

  677 A Bodhisattva can reach Nirvâna and live, as Buddha did, and after
      death he can either refuse objective reincarnation or accept and use
      it at his convenience for the benefit of mankind whom he can
      instruct in various ways while he remains in the Devachanic regions
      within the attraction of our earth. But having once reached
      Paranirvâna or “Nirvâna without remains”—the highest Dharmakâya
      condition, in which state he remains entirely outside of every
      earthly condition—he will return no more until the commencement of a
      new Manvantara, since he has crossed beyond the cycle of births.

  678 Tulpa is the voluntary incarnation of an Adept into a living body,
      whether of an adult, child, or new‐born babe.

  679 Ku‐sum is the triple form of the Nirvâna state and its respective
      duration in the “cycle of Non‐Being.” The number seven here refers
      to the seven Rounds of our septenary System.

  680 _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 52. This same generic use of a name is found
      among Hindus with that of Shankarâchârya, to take but one instance.
      All His successors bear his name, but are not reincarnations of Him.
      So with the “Buddhas.”

  681 [The words within brackets are supplied to introduce the following
      statements that are confused and contradictory as they stand, and
      which H. P. B. had probably intended to elucidate to some slight
      extent, as they are written two or three times with different
      sentences following them. The MS. is exceedingly confused, and
      everything H. P. B. said is here pieced together, the addition above
      made being marked in brackets to distinguish it from hers.—A. B.]

  682 King Suddhodana.

  683 There are several names marked simply by asterisks.

  684 Shankarâchârya died also at thirty‐two years of age, or rather
      disappeared from the sight of his disciples, as the legend goes.

  685 Does “Tiani‐Tsang” stand for Apollonius of Tyana? This is a simple
      surmise. Some things in the life of that Adept would seem to tally
      with the hypothesis—others to go against it.

  686 According to Esoteric teaching Buddha lived one hundred years in
      reality, though having reached Nirvâna in his eightieth year he was
      regarded as one dead to the world of the living. See article
      “Shâkyamuni’s Place in History” in _Five Years of Theosophy_.

  687 It is a _secret_ rite, pertaining to high Initiation, and has the
      same significance as the one to which Clement of Alexandria alludes
      when he speaks of “the token of recognition being in common with us,
      as by cutting off Christ” (Strom., 13). Schlagintweit wonders what
      it may be. “The typical representation of a hermit,” he says, “is
      always that of a man with long, uncut hair and beard.... A rite very
      often selected, though I am unable to state for what reason, is that
      of Chod (‘to cut’ or ‘to destroy’) the meaning of which is anxiously
      kept a profound secret by the Lamas.” (_Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 163.)

  688 Hlun‐Chub is the divining spirit in man, the highest degree of
      seership.

  689 The secret meaning of this sentence is that Karma exercises its sway
      over the Adept as much as over any other man; “Gods” can escape it
      as little as simple mortals. The Adept who, having reached the Path
      and won His Dharmakâya—the Nirvâna from which there is no return
      until the new grand Kalpa—prefers to use His right of choosing a
      condition inferior to that which belongs to Him, but that will leave
      him free to return whenever He thinks it advisable and under
      whatever personality He may select, must be prepared to take all the
      chances of failure—possibly—and a lower condition than was His
      lot—for a certainty—as it is an occult law. Karma alone is absolute
      justice and infallible in its selections. He who uses his rights
      with it (Karma) must bear the consequences—if any. Thus Buddha’s
      first reincarnation was produced by Karma—and it led Him higher than
      ever; the two following were “out of pity” and * * *.

  690 The Universe of Brahmâ (Sien‐Chan; Nam‐Kha) is Universal Illusion,
      or our phenomenal world.

  691 Âkâsha. It is next to impossible to render the mystic word “Tho‐og”
      by any other term than “Space,” and yet, unless coined on purpose,
      no new appellation can render it so well to the mind of the
      Occultist. The term “Aditi” is also translated “Space,” and there is
      a world of meaning in it.

  692 Dang‐ma, a purified soul, and Lha, a freed spirit within a living
      body; an Adept or Arhat. In the popular opinion in Tibet, a Lha is a
      disembodied spirit, something similar to the Burmese Nat—only
      higher.

  693 Kwan‐yin is a synonym, for in the original another term is used, but
      the meaning is identical. It is the divine voice of Self, or the
      “Spirit‐voice” in man, and the same as Vâchîshvara (the “Voice‐
      deity”) of the Brâhmans. In China, the Buddhist ritualists have
      degraded its meaning by anthropomorphizing it into a Goddess of the
      same name, with one thousand hands and eyes, and they call it Kwan‐
      shai‐yin‐Bodhisat. It is the Buddhist “daïmon”‐voice of Socrates.

  694 Sangharama is the _sanctum sanctorum_ of an ascetic, a cave or any
      place he chooses for his meditation.

  695 Amitâbha Buddha is in this connection the “boundless light” by which
      things of the subjective world are perceived.

  696 Esoterically, “the unsurpassingly merciful and enlightened heart,”
      said of the “Perfect Ones,” the Jîvan‐muktas, collectively.

  697 These six worlds—seven with us—are the worlds of Nats or Spirits,
      with the Burmese Buddhists, and the seven higher worlds of the
      Vedântins.

  698 Two things entirely distinct from each other. The “faculty is not
      distinguished from the subject” only on this material plane, while
      thought generated by our physical brain, one that has never
      impressed itself at the same time on the spiritual counterpart,
      whether through the atrophy of the latter or the intrinsic weakness
      of that thought, can never survive our body; this much is sure.

  699 _Vedânta Sâra_, translated by Major Jacob, p. 123.

  700 Aditi is, according to the _Rig Veda_, “the Father and Mother of all
      the Gods”; and Âkâsha is held by Southern Buddhism as the Root of
      all, whence everything in the Universe came out, in obedience to a
      law of motion inherent in it; and this is the Tibetan “Space” (Tho‐
      og).

  701 _Mânava‐Dharma‐Shâstra_, i. 6, 7.

  702 The “God” of Pythagoras, the disciple of the Âryan Sages, is no
      personal God. Let it be remembered that he taught as a cardinal
      tenet that there exists a permanent Principle of Unity beneath all
      forms, changes, and other phenomena of the Universe.

  703 _Isis Unveiled_, i. xvi.

  704 _Isis Unveiled_, i. xviii.

  705 _Isis Unveiled_ i. 58.

  706 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 59.

  707 While they are to a great extent identical with those of Esoteric
      Buddhism, the Secret Doctrine of the East.

  708 _Parerga_, II. iii. 112; quoted in _Isis Unveiled_, i. 58.

  709 _Five Years of Theosophy_, p. 338, _et seq._

  710 Prof. Max Müller, in a letter to _The Times_ (April, 1857),
      maintained most vehemently that Nirvâna meant _annihilation_ in the
      fullest sense of the word. (_Chips from a German Workshop_, i. 287.)
      But in 1869, in a lecture before the General Meeting of the
      Association of German Philologists at Kiel, “he distinctly declares
      his belief that the Nihilism attributed to Buddha’s teaching forms
      no part of his doctrine, and that it is wholly wrong to suppose that
      Nirvâna means annihilation.” (Trubner’s _Amer. and Oriental Lit.
      Rec._, Oct. 16th, 1869.)

  711 See the _Kalama Sutta_ of the _Anguttaranikayo_, as quoted in _A
      Buddhist Catechism_, by H. S. Olcott, President of the Theosophical
      Society, pp. 55, 56.

  712 _Œdipus Ægypt._, II. i. 291.

  713 Sephir, or Aditi (mystic Space). The Sephiroth, be it understood,
      are identical with the Hindu Prajâpatis, the Dhyân Chohans of
      Esoteric Buddhism, the Zoroastrian Amshaspends, and finally with the
      Elohim—the “Seven Angels of the Presence” of the Roman Catholic
      Church.

  714 According to the Eastern idea, the All comes out from the One, and
      returns to it again. Absolute annihilation is simply unthinkable.
      Nor can eternal Matter be annihilated. Form may be annihilated: co‐
      relations may change. That is all. There can be no such thing as
      annihilation—in the European sense—in the Universe.

  715 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 289.

  716 The Secret Law, the “Doctrine of the Heart,” so called in contrast
      to the “Doctrine of the Eye,” or exoteric Buddhism.

  717 “Illusive matter in its triple manifestation in the earthly, and the
      astral or fontal Soul (the body), and the Platonian dual Soul—the
      rational and the irrational one.”

  718 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 289.

  719 _Isis Unveiled_, i. 290.

  720 It is from the texts of all these works that the Secret Doctrine has
      been given. The original matter would not make a small pamphlet, but
      the explanations and notes from the Commentaries and Glossaries
      might be worked into ten volumes as large as _Isis Unveiled_.

  721 The monk Della Penna makes considerable fun in his _Memoirs_ (see
      Markham’s _Tibet_) of certain statements in the Books of Kiu‐te. He
      brings to the notice of the Christian public “the great mountain
      160,000 leagues high” (a Tibetan league consisting of five miles) in
      the Himâlayan Range. “According to their law,” he says, “in the west
      of this world is an eternal world ... a paradise, and in it a Saint
      called Hopahma, which means ‘Saint of Splendour and Infinite Light.’
      This Saint has many disciples who are all Chang‐chub,” which means,
      he adds in a footnote, “the Spirits of those who, on account of
      their perfection, do not care to become saints, and train and
      instruct the bodies of the reborn Lamas ... so that they may help
      the living.” Which means that the presumably “dead” Yang‐Chhub (not
      “Chang‐chub”) are simply living Bodhisattvas, some of those known as
      Bhante (“the Brothers”). As to the “mountain 160,000 leagues high,”
      the _Commentary_ which gives the key to such statements explains
      that according to the code used by the writers, “to the west of the
      ‘Snowy Mountain’ 160 leagues [the cyphers being a blind] from a
      certain spot and by a direct road, is the Bhante Yul [the country or
      ‘Seat of the Brothers’], the residence of Mahâ‐Chohan ...” etc. This
      is the real meaning. The “Hopahma” of Della Penna is—the
      Mahâ‐Chohan, the Chief.

  722 In some MSS. notes before us, written by Gelung (priest) Thango‐pa
      Chhe‐go‐mo, it is said: “The few Roman Catholic missionaries who
      have visited our land (under protest) in the last century and have
      repaid our hospitality by turning our sacred literature into
      ridicule, have shown little discretion and still less knowledge. It
      is true that the Sacred Canon of the Tibetans, the _Kahgyur_ and
      _Bstanhgyur_, comprises 1707 distinct works—1083 public and 624
      secret volumes, the former being composed of 350 and the latter of
      77 volumes folio. May we humbly invite the good missionaries,
      however, to tell us when they ever succeeded in getting a glimpse of
      the last‐named secret folios? Had they even by chance seen them I
      can assure the Western Pandits that these manuscripts and folios
      could never be understood even by a born Tibetan without a key (_a_)
      to their peculiar characters, and (_b_) to their hidden meaning. In
      our system every description of locality is figurative, every name
      and word purposely veiled; and one has first to study the mode of
      deciphering and then to learn the equivalent secret terms and
      symbols for nearly every word of the religious language. The
      Egyptian enchorial or hieratic system is child’s play to our
      sacerdotal puzzles.”

  723 _Chinese Buddhism_, p. 171.

  724 “Buddhi” is a Sanskrit term for “discrimination” or intellect (the
      sixth principle), and “Buddha” is “wise,” “wisdom,” and also the
      planet Mercury.

  725 This curious contradiction may be found in _Chinese Buddhism_, pp.
      171, 273. The reverend author assures his readers that “to the
      philosophic Buddhists ... Amitâbha Yoshi Fo, and the others are
      nothing but the signs of ideas” (p. 236). Very true. But so should
      be all other deific names, such as Jehovah, Allah, etc., and if they
      are not simply “signs of ideas” this would only show that minds that
      receive them otherwise are not “philosophic”; it would not at all
      afford serious proof that there are personal, living Gods of these
      names in reality.

  726 The Chinese Amitâbha (Wu‐liang‐sheu) and the Tibetan Amitâbha
      (Odpag‐med) have now become personal Gods, ruling over and living in
      the celestial region of Sukhâvatî, or Tushita (Tibetan: Devachan);
      while Âdi‐Buddhi, of the philosophic Hindu, and Amita Buddha of the
      philosophic Chinaman and Tibetan, are names for universal, primeval
      ideas.

  727 See _Theosophist_ for March, 1882.

  728 The intimate relation of the twenty‐five Buddhas (Bodhisattvas) with
      the twenty‐five Tattvas (the Conditioned or Limited) of the Hindus
      is interesting.

  729 It is curious to note the great importance given by European
      Orientalists to the Dalaï Lamas of Lhassa, and their utter ignorance
      as to the Tda‐shu (or Teshu) Lamas, while it is the latter who began
      the hierarchical series of Buddha‐incarnations, and are _de facto_
      the “popes” in Tibet; the Dalaï Lamas are the creations of Nabang‐
      lob‐Sang, the Tda‐shu Lama, who was Himself the sixth incarnation of
      Amita, through Tsong Kha‐pa, though very few seem to be aware of
      that fact.

  730 The chanting of a Mantra is not a prayer, but rather a magical
      sentence in which the law of Occult causation connects itself with,
      and depends on, the will and acts of its singer. It is a succession
      of Sanskrit sounds, and when its string of words and sentences is
      pronounced according to the magical formulæ in the _Atharva Veda_,
      but understood by the few, some Mantras produce an instantaneous and
      very wonderful effect. In its esoteric sense it contains the Vâch
      (the “mystic speech”), which resides in the Mantra, or rather in its
      sounds, since it is according to the vibrations, one way or the
      other, of ether that the effect is produced. The “sweet singers”
      were called by that name because they were experts in Mantras. Hence
      the legend in China that the singing and melody of the Lohans are
      heard at dawn by the priests from their cells in the monastery of
      Fang‐Kwang. (See _Biography of Chi‐Kai_ in Tien‐tai‐nan‐tchi.)

  731 The celebrated Lohan, Mâdhyantika, who converted the king and whole
      country of Kashmir to Buddhism, sent a body of Lohans to preach the
      Good Law. He was the sculptor who raised to Buddha the famous statue
      one hundred feet high, which Hiuen‐Tsaung saw at Dardu, to the north
      of the Punjab. As the same Chinese traveller mentions a temple ten
      Li from Peshawur—350 feet round and 850 feet high—which was at his
      time (A.D. 550) already 850 years old, Koeppen thinks that so far
      back as 292 B.C. Buddhism was the prevalent religion in the Punjab.

  732 A title of the Tda‐shu‐Hlum‐po Lama.

  733 The twelve Nidâwas, called in Tibetan Tin‐brel Chug‐nyi, which are
      based upon the “Four Truths.”

  734 The Srotâpatti is one who has attained the _first_ Path of
      comprehension in the real and the unreal; the Sakridâgâmin is the
      candidate for one of the higher Initiations: “one who is to receive
      birth once more;” the Anâgâmin is he who has attained the “third
      Path,” or literally, “he who will not be reborn again” _unless he so
      wishes it_, having the option of being reborn in any of the “worlds
      of the Gods,” or of remaining in Devachan, or of choosing an earthly
      body with a philanthropic object. An Arhat is one who has reached
      the highest Path; he may merge into Nirvâna at will, while here on
      earth.

  735 [The Pratyeka Buddha stands on the level of the Buddha, but His work
      for the world has nothing to do with its teaching, and His office
      has always been surrounded with mystery. The preposterous view that
      He, at such superhuman height of power, wisdom and love could be
      selfish, is found in the exoteric books, though it is hard to see
      how it can have arisen. H. P. B. charged me to correct the mistake,
      as she had, in a careless moment, copied such a statement
      elsewhere.—A. B.]

  736 It is an erroneous idea which makes the Orientalists take literally
      the teaching of the Mahâyâna School about the three different kinds
      of bodies, namely, the Prulpa‐ku, the Longehod‐drocpaig‐ku, and the
      Chos‐ku, as all pertaining to the Nirvânic condition. There are two
      kinds of Nirvâna: the earthly, and that of the purely disembodied
      Spirits. These three “bodies” are the three envelopes—all more or
      less physical—which are at the disposal of the Adept who has entered
      and crossed the six Pâramitâs, or “Paths” of Buddha. Once He enters
      upon the seventh, He can return no more to earth. See Cosma, _Jour.
      As. Soc. Beng._, vii. 142; and Schott, _Buddhismus_, p. 9, who give
      it otherwise.

  737 _Vedânta Sâra_, translated by Major Jacob, p. 119.

  738 _Ibid._, p. 122.

  739 _Der Buddhismus_, pp. 327, 357, _et seq._, quoted by Schlagintweit.

  740 _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 41.

  741 _Jour. of As. Soc. Bengal_, vii. 144, quoted as above.

  742 _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 44.

  743 They maintain also the existence of One Absolute pure Nature,
      Parabrahman; the illusion of everything outside of it; the leading
      of the individual Soul—a Ray of the “Universal”—into the true nature
      of existence and things by Yoga alone.

  744 Nirmânakâya (also Nirvânakâya, vulg.) is the body or Self “with
      remains,” or the influence of terrestrial attributes, however
      spiritualized, clinging yet to that Self. An Initiate in Dharmakâya,
      or in Nirvâna “without remains,” is the Jivanmukta, the Perfect
      Initiate, who separates his Higher Self entirely from his body
      during Samâdhi. [It will be noticed that these two words are here
      used in a sense other than that previously given.—A. B.]

  745 The “Sacred” Books of Dus‐Kyi Khorlo (“Time Circle”). See _Jour. As.
      Soc._, ii. 57. These works were abandoned to the Sikkhim Dugpas,
      from the time of Tsong‐Kha‐pa’s reform.

  746 _Glossary of Judicial and Revenue Terms_, art. “Yoga,” quoted in
      _Buddhism in Tibet_, p. 47.

  747 _Buddhism in Tibet_, pp. 47, 48.

  748 _Buddhism in Tibet_, pp. 63, 64. The objects found in the casket, as
      enumerated in the exoteric legend, are of course symbolical. They
      may be found mentioned in the _Kanjur_. They were said to be: (1)
      two hands joined; (2) a miniature Choten (Stûpa, or reliquary); (3)
      a talisman with “Om mani padme hum” inscribed on it; (4) a religious
      book, _Zamatog_ (“a constructed vehicle”).

  749 _Alterthumskunde_, ii. 1072.

  750 _Op. cit._, ii. 470.

  751 Unless one obtains exact information and the right method, one’s
      visions, however correct and true in Soul‐life, will ever fail to
      get photographed in our human memory, and certain cells of the brain
      are sure to play havoc with our remembrances.

  752 _Chinese Buddhism_, p. 158. The Rev. Joseph Edkins either ignores,
      or—which is more probable—is utterly ignorant of the real existence
      of such Schools, and judges by the Chinese travesties of these,
      calling such Esotericism “heterodox Buddhism.” And so it is, in one
      sense.

  753 That country—India—has lost the records of such Schools and their
      teachings only so far as the general public, and especially the
      inappreciative Western Orientalists, are concerned. It has preserved
      them in full in some Mathams (refuges for mystic contemplation). But
      it may perhaps be better to seek them with, and from, their rightful
      owners, the so‐called “mythical” Adepts, or Mahâtmâs.

  754 _Chinese Buddhism_, pp. 155‐159.

  755 They certainly reject most emphatically the popular theory of the
      transmigration of human entities or Souls _into_ animals, but not
      the evolution of men _from_ animals—so far, at least, as their lower
      principles are concerned.

  756 It is quite consistent, on the contrary, when explained in the light
      of the Esoteric Doctrine. The “Western paradise,” or Western heaven,
      is no fiction located in transcendental space. It is a _bonâ‐fide_
      locality in the mountains, or, to be more correct, one encircled in
      a desert within mountains. Hence it is assigned for the residence of
      those students of Esoteric Wisdom—disciples of Buddha—who have
      attained the rank of Lohans and Anâgâmins (Adepts). It is called
      “Western” simply from geographical considerations; and “the great
      iron mountain girdle” that surrounds the Avitchi, and the seven
      Lokas that encircle the “Western paradise” are a very exact
      representation of well‐known localities and things to the Eastern
      student of Occultism.

  757 The word is translated by the Orientalists as “true man without a
      position,” (?) which is very misleading. It simply means the true
      inner man, or Ego, “Buddha _within_ Buddha” meaning that there was a
      Gautama _inwardly_ as well as _outwardly_.

  758 One of the titles of Gautama Buddha in Tibet.

  759 The “Esoteric” Schools, or sects, of which there are many in China.

  760 A school of contemplation founded by Hiuen‐Tsang, the traveller,
      nearly extinct. Fa‐siong‐Tsung means “the School that unveils the
      inner nature of things.”

  761 Esoteric, or hidden, teaching of Yoga (Chinese: Yogi‐mi‐kean).

  762 The “tonsure knife” is made of _meteoric_ iron, and is used for the
      purpose of cutting off the “vow‐lock,” or hair from the novice’s
      head during his first ordination. It has a double‐edged blade, is
      sharp as a razor, and lies concealed within a hollow handle of horn.
      By touching a spring the blade jerks out like a flash of lightning,
      and recedes back with the same rapidity. A great dexterity is
      required in using it without wounding the head of the young Gelung
      and Gelung‐ma (candidates to become priests and nuns) during the
      preliminary rites, which are public.

  763 Chagpa‐Thog‐mad is the Tibetan name of Âryâsanga, the founder of the
      Yogâchârya or Naljorchodpa School. This Sage and Initiate is said to
      have been taught “Wisdom” by Maitreya Buddha Himself, the Buddha of
      the Sixth Race, at Tushita (a celestial region presided over by
      Him), and as having received from Him the five books of
      _Champaitehos‐nga_. The Secret Doctrine teaches, however, that he
      came from Dejung, or Shambhalla, called the “source of happiness”
      (“wisdom‐acquired”) and declared by some Orientalists to be a
      “fabulous” place.

  764 It may not be, perhaps, amiss to remind the reader of the fact that
      the “mirror” was a part of the symbolism of the Thesmophoria, a
      portion of the Eleusinian Mysteries; and that it was used in the
      search for Atmu, the “Hidden One,” or “Self.” In his excellent paper
      on the above‐named mysteries, Dr. Alexander Wilder of New York says:
      “Despite the assertion of Herodotus and others that the Bacchic
      Mysteries were Egyptian, there exists strong probability that they
      came originally from India, and were Shaivitic or Buddhistical.
      Kore‐Persep‐honeia was but the goddess Parasu‐pani, or Bhavani, and
      Zagreus is from Chakra, a country extending from ocean to ocean. If
      this is a Turanian story we can easily recognise the ‘horns’ as the
      crescent worn by Lama‐priests, and assume the whole legend [the
      fable of Dionysus‐Zagreus] to be based on Lama‐succession and
      transmigration.... The whole story of Orpheus ... has a Hindu ring
      all through.” The tale of “Lama‐succession and transmigration” did
      not originate with the Lamas, who date themselves only so far back
      as the seventh century, but with the Chaldæans and the Brâhmans,
      still earlier.

  765 The state of absolute freedom from any sin or desire.

  766 The state during which an Adept sees the long series of his past
      births, and lives through all his previous incarnations in this and
      the other worlds. (See the admirable description in the _Light of
      Asia_, p. 166, 1884 ed.)

  767 See _supra_, ii. 188, 189.

  768 Wilson’s translation, as amended by Fitzedward Hall, i. 40.

  769 Prâna is in reality the universal Life Principle.

  770 All the uterine contents, having a direct spiritual connection with
      their cosmic antetypes, are, on the physical plane, potent objects
      in Black Magic, and are therefore considered unclean.

  771 See _supra_, ii. Part I.

  772 The Solar System or the Earth, as the case may be.

  773 So are the animals, the plants, and even the minerals. Reichenbach
      never understood what he learned through his sensitives and
      clairvoyants. It _is_ the odic, or rather the auric or magnetic
      fluid which emanates from man, but it is also something more.

  774 See _supra_, i. 181, for the Vedântic exoteric enumeration.

  775 See _Lucifer_, January, 1889, “Dialogue upon the Mysteries of After‐
      Life.”

  776 See _supra_, i, 626‐629.

  777 See _supra_, i, 228, _et seq._, and ii. _passim_.

  778 _Op. cit._, ii, 456, 461, 465 _et seq._

  779 _Jod‐Hevah_, or male‐female on the terrestrial plane, as invented by
      the Jews, and now made out to mean Jehovah; but signifying in
      reality and literally, “giving being” and “receiving life.”

  780 See _Notice sur le Calendrier_, J. H. Ragon.

  781 See _supra_, ii. 373; and 152, _et seq._

  782 See _supra_, ii. 302, _et seq._

  783 _Op. cit._, ii. 81, 6.

  784 See Frank’s _Die Kabbala_, p. 314, _et seq._

  785 _Genesis_, ii. 7.

  786 _Supra_, i. 147.

  787 We may refer for confirmation to Origen’s works, who says that “the
      seven ruling daimons” (genii or planetary rulers) are Michael, the
      Sun (the lion‐like); the second in order, the Bull, Jupiter or
      Suriel, etc.; and all these, the “Seven of the Presence,” are the
      Sephiroth. The Sephirothal Tree is the Tree of the Divine Planets as
      given by Porphyry, or Porphyry’s Tree, as it is usually called.

  788 _Supra_, i, 147.

  789 Esoterically, green, there being no black in the prismatic ray.

  790 Esoterically, light blue. As a pigment, purple is a compound of red
      and blue, and in Eastern Occultism blue is the spiritual essence of
      the colour purple, while red is its material basis. In reality,
      Occultism makes Jupiter blue because he is the son of Saturn, which
      is green, and light blue as a prismatic colour contains a great deal
      of green. Again, the Auric Body will contain much of the colour of
      the Lower Manas if the man is a material sensualist, just as it will
      contain much of the darker hue if the Higher Manas has preponderance
      over the Lower.

  791 Esoterically, the Sun cannot correspond with the eye, nose, or any
      other organ, since, as explained, it is no planet, but a central
      star. It was adopted as a planet by the post‐Christian Astrologers,
      who had never been initiated. Moreover, the true colour of the Sun
      is blue, and it appears yellow only owing to the effect of the
      absorption of vapours (chiefly metallic) by its atmosphere. All is
      Mâyâ on our Earth.

  792 Esoterically, indigo, or dark blue, which is the complement of
      yellow in the prism. Yellow is a simple or primitive colour. Manas
      being dual in its nature—as is its sidereal symbol, the planet
      Venus, which is both the morning and evening star—the difference
      between the higher and the lower principles of Manas, whose essence
      is derived from the Hierarchy ruling Venus, is denoted by the dark
      blue and green. Green, the Lower Manas, resembles the colour of the
      solar spectrum which appears between the yellow and the dark blue,
      the Higher Spiritual Manas. Indigo is the intensified colour of the
      heaven or sky, to denote the upward tendency of Manas toward Buddhi,
      or the heavenly Spiritual Soul. This colour is obtained from the
      _indigofera tinctoria_, a plant of the highest occult properties in
      India, much used in White Magic, and occultly connected with copper.
      This is shown by the indigo assuming a copper lustre, especially
      when rubbed on any hard substance. Another property of the dye is
      that it is insoluble in water and even in ether, being lighter in
      weight than any known liquid. No symbol has ever been adopted in the
      East without being based upon a logical and demonstrable reason.
      Therefore Eastern Symbologists, from the earliest ages, have
      connected the spiritual and the animal minds of man, the one with
      dark blue (Newton’s indigo), or true blue, free from green; and the
      other with pure green.

  793 Esoterically, yellow, because the colour of the Sun is orange, and
      Mercury now stands next to the Sun in distance, as it does in
      colour. The planet for which the Sun is a substitute was still
      nearer the Sun than Mercury now is, and was one of the most secret
      and highest planets. It is said to have become invisible at the
      close of the Third Race.

  794 Esoterically, violet, because, perhaps, violet is the colour assumed
      by a ray of sunlight when transmitted through a very thin plate of
      silver, and also because the Moon shines upon the Earth with light
      borrowed from the Sun, as the human body shines with qualifications
      borrowed from its double—the aërial man. As the astral shadow starts
      the series of principles in man, on the terrestrial plane, up to the
      lower, animal Manas, so the violet ray starts the series of
      prismatic colours from its end up to green, both being, the one as a
      principle and the other as a colour, the most refrangible of all the
      principles and colours. Besides which, there is the same great
      Occult mystery attached to all these correspondences, both celestial
      and terrestrial bodies, colours and sounds. In clearer words, there
      exists the same law of relation between the Moon and the Earth, the
      astral and the living body of man, as between the violet end of the
      prismatic spectrum and the indigo and the blue. But of this more
      anon.

  795 Magic, _Magia_, means, in its spiritual, secret sense, the “Great
      Life,” or divine life _in spirit_. The root is _magh_, as seen in
      the Sanskrit _mahat_, Zend _maz_, Greek _megas_, and Latin _magnus_,
      all signifying “great.”

  796 _Philosophumena_, vi. 9.

  797 _Nous_, _Epinoia_; _Phône_, _Onoma_; _Logismos_, _Enthumêsis_.

  798 _Philosophumena_, vi. 12.

  799 See _supra_, _sub voce_.

  800 _The Great Revelation_ (_Hê Megalê Apophasis_), of which Simon
      himself is supposed to have been the author.

  801 Literally, standing opposite each other in rows or pairs.

  802 _Philosophumena_, vi. 18.

  803 _Op. cit._, vi. 18.

  804 _Op. cit._, i. 13.

  805 _Op. cit._, vi. 17.

  806 _Op. cit._, i. 5.

  807 _Philosophumena_, vi. 14.

  808 At first there are the omphalo‐mesenteric vessels, two arteries and
      two veins, but these afterwards totally disappear, as does the
      “vascular area” on the Umbilical Vesicle, from which they proceed.
      As regards the “Umbilical Vessels” proper, the Umbilical Cord
      ultimately has entwined around it from right to left the one
      Umbilical Vein which takes the oxygenated blood from the mother to
      the Fœtus, and two Hypogastric or Umbilical Arteries which take the
      used‐up blood from the Fœtus to the Placenta, the contents of the
      vessels being the reverse of that which prevails after birth. Thus
      Science corroborates the wisdom and knowledge of ancient Occultism,
      for in the days of Simon Magus no man, unless an Initiate, knew
      anything about the circulation of the blood or about Physiology.
      While this Paper was being printed, I received two small pamphlets
      from Dr. Jerome A. Anderson, which were printed in 1884 and 1888,
      and in which is to be found the scientific demonstration of the
      fœtal nutrition as advanced in Paper I. Briefly, the Fœtus is
      nourished by osmosis from the Amniotic Fluid and respires by means
      of the Placenta. Science knows little or nothing about the Amniotic
      Fluid and its uses. If any one cares to follow up this question, I
      would recommend Dr. Anderson’s _Remarks on the Nutrition of the
      Fœtus_. (Wood & Co., New York.)

  809 _Supra_, vol. ii.

  810 See Eusebius, _Hist. Eccles._, lib. iii. cap. 26.

  811 _De Mysteriis_, p. 100, lines 10 to 19; p. 109, fol. 1.

  812 _De Mysteriis_, p. 290, lines 15 to 18, _et seq._, caps. v. and vii.

  813 _Ibid._, p. 100, sec. iii, cap. iii.

  814 See _supra_, i. 34; i. 4, _et seq._; ii. 39, _et seq._, and 625, _et
      seq._

  815 The following table lists the wave‐lengths in Millimetres, and the
      number of vibrations in Trillions, of the various colours.

      Violet extreme: 406, 759
      Violet: 423, 709
      Violet‐Indigo: 439, 683
      Indigo: 449, 668
      Indigo‐Blue: 459, 654
      Blue: 479, 631
      Blue‐Green: 492, 610
      Green: 512, 586
      Green‐Yellow: 532, 564
      Yellow: 551, 544
      Yellow‐Orange: 571, 525
      Orange: 583, 514
      Orange‐Red: 596, 503
      Red: 620, 484
      Red‐extreme: 645, 465

  816 See _Five Years of Theosophy_, pp. 273 to 278.

  817 _Apud Grêbaut Papyrus Orbiney_, p. 101.

  818 See “Genius,” _Lucifer_, Nov., 1889, p. 227.

  819 See _Voice of the Silence_, pp. 68 and 94, art. 28, Glossary.

  820 The references to “Nature’s Finer Forces” which follow, have respect
      to the eight articles which appeared in the pages of the
      _Theosophist_ and not to the fifteen essays and the translation of a
      chapter of the Shivâgama which are contained in the book called
      _Nature’s Finer Forces_. The _Shivâgama_ in its details is purely
      Tântric, and nothing but harm can result from any practical
      following of its precepts. I would most strongly dissuade any
      student from attempting any of these Hatha Yoga practices, for he
      will either ruin himself entirely, or throw himself so far back that
      it will be almost impossible to regain the lost ground in this
      incarnation. The translation referred to has been considerably
      expurgated, and even now is hardly fit for publication. It
      recommends Black Magic of the worst kind, and is the very antipodes
      of spiritual Râja Yoga. Beware, I say.

  821 Prâna, on earth at any rate, is thus but a mode of life, a constant
      cyclic motion from within outwardly and back again, an out‐breathing
      and in‐breathing of the ONE LIFE, or Jîva, the synonym of the
      Absolute and Unknowable Deity. Prâna is not absolute life, or Jîva,
      but its aspect in a world of delusion. In the _Theosophist_, May,
      1888, p. 478, Prâna is said to be “one stage finer than the gross
      matter of the earth.”

  822 Remember that our re‐incarnating Egos are called the Mânasaputras,
      “Sons of Manas” (or Mahat), Intelligence, Wisdom.

  823 It is erroneous to call the fourth human principle “Kâma Rûpa.” It
      is no Rûpa or form at all until after death, but stands for the
      Kâmic elements in man, his animal desires and passions, such as
      anger, lust, envy, revenge, etc., the progeny of selfishness and
      matter.

  824 Here the world of effects is the Devachanic state, and the world of
      causes, earth life.

  825 It is this Kâma Rûpa alone that can _materialize_ in mediumistic
      séances, which occasionally happens when it is not the Astral Double
      or Linga Sharîra, of the medium himself which appears. How, then,
      can this vile bundle of passions and terrestrial lusts, resurrected
      by, and gaining consciousness only through the organism of the
      medium, be accepted as a “departed angel” or the Spirit of a once
      human body? As well say of the microbic pest which fastens on a
      person, that it is a sweet departed angel.

  826 This is accomplished in more or less time, according to the degree
      in which the personality (whose dregs it now is) was spiritual or
      material. If spirituality prevailed, then the Larva, or Spook, will
      fade out very soon; but if the personality was very materialistic,
      the Kâma Rûpa may last for centuries and—in some, though very
      exceptional cases—even survive with the help of some of its
      scattered Skandhas, which are all transformed in time into
      Elementals. See the _Key to Theosophy_, pp. 141 _et seq._, in which
      work it was impossible to go into details, but where the Skandhas
      are spoken of as the germs of Karmic effect.

  827 _Key to Theosophy_, p. 141

  828 Following _Shivâgama_, the said author enumerates the
      correspondences in this wise; Âkâsha, Ether, is followed by Vâyu,
      Gas; Tejas, Heat; Âpas, Liquid; and Prithivî, Solid.

  829 See Fitz‐Edward Hall’s notes on the _Vishnu Purâna_.

  830 The pair which we refer to as the One Life, the Root of All, and
      Âkâsha in its pre‐differentiating period answers to the Brahma
      (neuter) and Aditi of some Hindus, and stands in the same relation
      as the Parabrahman and Mûlaprakriti of the Vedântins.

  831 See above, i. diagram, p. 221.

  832 Anupâdaka, Opapatika in Pâli, means the “parentless,” born without
      father or mother, from _itself_, as a transformation, _e.g._, the
      God Brahmâ sprung from the Lotus (the symbol of the Universe) that
      grows from Vishnu’s navel, Vishnu typifiying eternal and limitless
      Space, and Brahmâ the Universe and LOGOS; the mythical Buddha is
      also born from a Lotus.

  833 See _Theosophist_, February, 1888, p. 276.

  834 Sœmmerring, _De Acervulo Cerebri_, vol. ii. p. 322.

  835 In the Greek Eastern Church no child is allowed to go to confession
      before the age of seven, after which he is considered to have
      reached the age of reason.

  836 _De Caus. Ep._, vol xii.

  837 _Advers. Med._, ii. 322.

  838 _De Lapillis Glandulæ Pinealis in Quinque Ment Alien_, 1753.

  839 See “Stray Thoughts on Death and Satan” in the _Theosophist_, vol.
      iii. No. 1; also “Fragments of Occult Truth,” vols. iii. and iv.

  840 _Op. cit._, ii. 368, _et seq._

  841 The essence of the Divine Ego is “pure flame,” an entity to which
      nothing can be added and from which nothing can be taken; it cannot,
      therefore, be diminished even by countless numbers of lower minds,
      detached from it like flames from a flame. This is in answer to an
      objection by an Esotericist who asked whence was that inexhaustible
      essence of one and the same Individuality which was called upon to
      furnish a human intellect for every new personality in which it is
      incarnated.

  842 The brain, or thinking machinery, is not only in the head, but, as
      every physiologist who is not quite a materialist will tell you,
      every organ in man, heart, liver, lungs, etc., down to every nerve
      and muscle, has, so to speak, its own distinct brain or thinking
      apparatus. As our brain has naught to do in the guidance of the
      collective and individual work of every organ in us, what is that
      which guides each so unerringly in its incessant functions; that
      make these struggle, and that too with disease, throws it off and
      acts, each of them, even to the smallest, not in a clock‐work
      manner, as alleged by some materialists (for, at the slightest
      disturbance or breakage the clock stops), but as an entity endowed
      with instinct? To say it is Nature is to say nothing, if it is not
      the enunciation of a fallacy; for Nature after all is but a name for
      these very same functions, the sum of the qualities and attributes,
      physical, mental, etc., in the universe and man, the total of
      agencies and forces guided by intelligent laws.

  843 See _Key to Theosophy_, pp. 147, 148, _et seq._

  844 Kâma Rûpa, the vehicle of the Lower Manas, is said to dwell in the
      physical brain, in the five physical senses and in all the sense‐
      organs of the physical body.

  845 Tanmâtra means subtle and rudimentary form, the gross type of the
      finer elements. The five Tanmâtras are really the characteristic
      properties or qualities of matter and of all the elements; the real
      spirit of the word is “something” or “merely transcendental,” in the
      sense of properties or qualities.

  846 See _Theosophist_, August, 1883, “The Real and the Unreal.”

  847 As the author of _Esoteric Buddhism_ and the _Occult World_ called
      Manas the Human Soul, and Buddhi the Spiritual Soul, I have left
      these terms unchanged in the _Voice_, seeing that it was a book
      intended for the public.

  848 In the exoteric teachings of Râja Yoga, Antahkarana is called the
      inner organ of perception and is divided into four parts: the
      (lower) Manas, Buddhi (reason), Ahankâra (personality), and Chitta
      (thinking faculty). It also, together with several other organs,
      forms a part of Jîva, Soul called also Lingadeh. Esotericists,
      however, must not be misled by this popular version.

  849 The Earth, or earth‐life rather, is the only Avîtchi (Hell) that
      exists for the men of our humanity on this globe. Avîtchi is a
      state, not a locality, a counterpart of Devachan. Such a state
      follows the Soul wherever it goes, whether into Kâma Loka, as a
      semi‐conscious Spook, or into a human body, when reborn to suffer
      Avîtchi. Our Philosophy recognizes no other Hell.

  850 See _Voice of the Silence_, p. 97.

  851 _Loc. cit._

  852 Read the last footnote on p. 368, vol. ii. of _Isis Unveiled_, and
      you will see that even profane Egyptologists and men who, like
      Bunsen, were ignorant of Initiation, were struck by their own
      discoveries when they found the “Word” mentioned in old papyri.

  853 See _Theosophist_, vol. iii., October, 1882, p. 13.

  854 Read pp. 40 and 63 in the _Voice of the Silence_.

  855 See _Voice of the Silence_, p. viii.

  856 The following notes were contributed by students and approved by H.
      P. B.

  857 See page 444.

  858 All these “spaces” denote the special magnetic currents, the planes
      of substance, and the degrees of approach that the consciousness of
      the Yogî, or Chelâ, performs towards assimilation with the
      inhabitants of the Lokas.

  859 [If the Nidânas are read the reverse way, _i.e._, from 12 to 1, they
      give the evolutionary order.—ED.]

  860 [_I.e._, an Initiate, the word Adept being used by H. P. B. to cover
      all grades of Initiation. As above seen, she used the words Mâyâvi
      Rûpa in more than one sense.—ED.]





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG BOOK 56880 ***

