CHAPTER XVII

Rhythm and Metre

  . . . when it approaches with a divine hopping.
                                _The Joyful Wisdom_.


Rhythm and its specialised form, metre, depend upon repetition,
and expectancy. Equally where what is expected recurs and where
it fails, all rhythmical and metrical effects spring from anticipation.
As a rule this anticipation is unconscious. Sequences of syllables
both as sounds and as images of speech-movements leave the mind
ready for certain further sequences rather than for others. Our
momentary organisation is adapted to one range of possible stimuli
rather than to another. Just as the eye reading print unconsciously
expects the spelling to be as usual, and the fount of type to
remain the same, so the mind after reading a line or two of verse,
or half a sentence of prose, prepares itself ahead for any one
of a number of possible sequences, at the same time negatively
incapacitating itself for others. The effect produced by what
actually follows depends very closely upon this unconscious preparation
and consists largely of the further twist which it gives to expectancy.
It is in terms of the variation in these twists that rhythm is
to be described. Both prose and verse vary immensely in the extent
to which they excite this ‘getting ready’ process, and in the
narrowness of the anticipation which is formed, Prose on the
whole, with the rare exceptions of a Landor, a De Quincey, or
a Ruskin, is accompanied by a very much vaguer and more indeterminate
expectancy than verse. In such prose as this page, for example,
little more than a preparedness for further words not all exactly
alike in sound and with abstract polysyllables preponderating
is all that arises. In short, the sensory or formal effect of
words has very little play in the literature of analysis and
exposition. But as’ soon as prose becomes more emotive than scientific,
the formal side becomes prominent.

Let us take Landor’s description[49] of a lioness suckling her
young—

        On perceiving the countryman, she drew up her feet gently,
    and squared her mouth, and rounded her eyes, slumberous with
    content; and they looked, he said, like sea-grottoes, obscurely
    green, interminably deep, at once awakening fear and stilling
    and suppressing it.

After ‘obscurely green’ would it be possible (quite apart from
sense) to have ‘deeply dark’ or ‘impenetrably gloomy’? Why, apart
from sense, can so few of the syllables be changed in vowel sound,
in emphasis, in duration or otherwise, without disaster to the
total effect? As with all such questions about sensory form and
its effects, only an incomplete answer can be given. The expectancy
caused by what has gone before, a thing which must be thought
of as a very complex tide of neural settings, lowering the threshold
for some kinds of stimuli and raising it for others, and the
character of the stimulus which does actually come, both play
their part.

Even the most highly organised lyrical or ‘polyphonic’ prose raises as
it advances only a very ambiguous expectation. Until the final words
of the passage, there are always a great number of different sequences
which would equally well fit in, which would satisfy the expectancy
so far as that is merely due to _habit_, to the routine of _sensory
stimulation_. What is expected in fact is not this sound or that sound,
not even this kind of sound or that kind of sound, but some one of a
certain thousand kinds of sounds. It is much more a negative thing than
a positive. As in the case of many social conventions it is easier to
say what disqualifies than to say what is required.

Into this very indeterminate expectancy the new element comes
with its own range of possible effects. There is, of course,
no such thing as _the_ effect of a word or a sound. There
is no one effect which belongs to it. Words have no intrinsic
literary characters. None are either ugly or beautiful, intrinsically
displeasing or delightful. Every word has instead a range of
possible effects, varying with the conditions into which it is
received. All that we can say as to the sorting out of words,
whether into the ‘combed’ and ‘slippery’, the ‘shaggy’ and ‘rumpled’
as with Dante, or in any other manner, is that some, through
long use, have narrower ranges than others and require more extraordinary
conditions if they are to change their ‘character’. What effect
the word has is a compromise between some one of its possible
effects and the special conditions into which it comes. Thus
in Shakespeare hardly any word ever looks odd until we consider
it; whereas even in Keats the ‘cold mushrooms’ in the _Satyrs’
Song_ give the mind a shock of astonishment, an astonishment
which is full of delight, but none the less is a shock.

But with this example we have broken down the limitation to the
mere sound, to the strictly formal or sensory aspect of word
sequences, and in fact the limitation is useless. For the effect
of a word as sound cannot be separated from its contemporaneous
other effects. They become inextricably mingled at once.

The sound gets its character by compromise with what is going
on already. The preceding agitation of the mind selects from
a range of possible characters which the word might present,
that one which best suits with what is happening. There are no
gloomy and no gay vowels or syllables, and the army of critics
who have attempted to analyse the effects of passages into vowel
and consonantal collocations have, in fact, been merely amusing
themselves. The way in which the sound of a word is taken varies
with the emotion already in being. But, further, it varies with
the sense. For the anticipation of the sound due to habit, to
the routine of sensation, is merely a part of the general expectancy.
Grammatical regularities, the necessity for completing the thought,
the reader’s state of conjecture as to what is being said, his
apprehension in dramatic literature of the action, of the intention,
situation, state of mind generally, of the speaker, all these
and many other things intervene. The way the sound is taken is
much less determined by the sound itself than by the conditions
into which it enters. All these anticipations form a very closely
woven network and the word which can satisfy them all simultaneously
may well seem triumphant. But we should not attribute to the
sound alone virtues which involve so many other factors. To say
this is not in the least to belittle the importance of the sound;
in most cases it is the key to the effects of poetry. This texture
of expectations, satisfactions, disappointments, surprisals,
which the sequence of syllables brings about, is rhythm. And
the sound of words comes to its full power only through rhythm.
Evidently there can be no surprise and no disappointment unless
there is expectation and most rhythms perhaps are made up as
much of disappointments and postponements and surprises and betrayals
as of simple, straightforward satisfactions. Hence the rapidity
with which too simple rhythms, those which are too easily ‘seen
through’, grow cloying or insipid unless hypnoidal states intervene,
as with much primitive music and dancing and often with metre.

The same definition of rhythm may be extended to the plastic
arts and to architecture. Temporal sequence is not strictly necessary
for rhythm, though in the vast majority of cases it is involved.
The attention usually passes successively from one complex to
another, the expectations, the readiness to perceive this rather
than that, aroused by the one being either satisfied or surprised
by the other. Surprise plays an equally important part here;
and the difference in detail between a surprising and delightful
variation and one which merely irritates and breaks down the
rhythm, as we say, is here, as elsewhere, a matter of the combination
and resolution of impulses too subtle for our present means of
investigation. All depends upon whether what comes can be an
ingredient in the further response, or whether the mind must,
as it were, start anew; in more ordinary language, upon whether
there is any ‘connection’ between the parts of the whole.

But the rhythmic elements in a picture or a building may be not
successive but simultaneous. A quick reader who sees a word as
a whole commonly overlooks misprints because the general form
of the word is such that he is only able at that instant to perceive
one particular letter in a particular place and so overlooks
what is discrepant. The parts of a visual field exert what amounts
to a simultaneous influence over one another. More strictly what
is discrepant does not get through to more central regions. Similarly,
with those far more intricate wholes, made up of all kinds of
imagery and incipient action of which works of art consist. The
parts of a growing response mutually modify one another and this
is all that is required for rhythm to be possible.



We may turn now to that more complex and, more specialised form
of temporal rhythmic sequence which is known as metre. This is
the means by which words may be made to influence one another
to the greatest possible extent. In metrical reading the narrowness
and definiteness of expectancy, as much unconscious as ever in
most cases, is very greatly increased, reaching in some cases,
if rime also is used, almost exact precision. Furthermore, what
is anticipated becomes through the regularity of the time intervals
in metre virtually dated. This is no mere matter of more or less
perfect correspondence with the beating of some internal metronome.
The whole conception of metre as _‘uniformity_ in variety’,
a kind of mental drill in which words, those erratic and varied
things, do their best to behave as though they were all the same,
with certain concessions, licences and equivalences allowed,
should nowadays be obsolete. It is a survivor which is still
able to do a great deal of harm to the uninitiated, however,
and although it has been knocked on the head vigorously enough
by Professor Saintsbury and others, it is as difficult to kill
as Punch. Most treatises on the subject, with their talk of feet
and of stresses, unfortunately tend to encourage it, however
little this may be the aim of the authors.

As with rhythm so with metre, we must not think of it as in the
words themselves or in the thumping of the drum. It is not _in_
the stimulation, it is in our response. Metre adds to all the
variously fated expectancies which make up rhythm a definite
temporal pattern and its effect is not due to our perceiving
a pattern in something outside us, but to our becoming patterned
ourselves. With every beat of the metre a tide of anticipation
in us turns and swings, setting up as it does so extraordinarily
extensive sympathetic reverberations. We shall never understand
metre so long as we ask, ‘Why does: temporal pattern so excite
us’? and fail to realise that the pattern itself is a vast cyclic
agitation spreading all over the body, a tide of excitement pouring
through the channels of the mind.

The notion that there is any virtue in regularity or in variety,
or in any other formal feature, apart from its effects upon us,
must be discarded before any metrical problem can be understood.
The regularity to which metre tends acts through the definiteness
of the anticipations which are thereby aroused. It is through
these that it gets such a hold upon the mind. Once again, here
too, the failure of our expectations is often more important
than success. Verse in which we constantly get exactly what we
are ready for and no more, instead of something which we can
and must take up and incorporate as another stage in a total
developing response is merely toilsome and tedious. In prose,
the influence of past words extends only a little way ahead.
In verse, especially when stanza-form and rime co-operate to
give a larger unit than the line, it may extend far ahead. It
is this knitting together of the parts of the poem which explains
the mnemonic power of verse, the first of the suggestions as
to the origin of metre to be found in the Fourteenth Chapter
of _Biographia Literaria_, that lumber-room of neglected
wisdom which contains more hints towards a theory of poetry than
all the rest ever written upon the subject.

We do great violence to the facts if we suppose the expectations
excited as we read verse to be concerned only with the stress,
emphasis, length, foot structure and so forth of the syllables
which follow. Even in this respect the custom of marking syllables
in two degrees only, long and short, light and full, etc., is
inadequate, although doubtless forced upon metrists by practical
considerations. The mind in the poetic experience responds to
subtler niceties than these. When not in that experience but
coldly considering their several qualities as sounds by the ear
alone, it may well find two degrees all that are necessary. In
