CHAPTER XI

A Sketch for a Psychology

    “Wot’s wot?” repeated one of the buccaneers in a deep growl. “Ah,
        he’d be a lucky one as knowed that!”—_Treasure Island_.


M. Jules Romains recently observed[34] that psychology hitherto
has merely contrived to say laboriously and obscurely, and with
less precision, what we all know without its aid already. This
is regrettably difficult to deny; any particular remark of a
psychologist, if true, is unlikely to be startling. But at certain
points new light has none the less crept in. Incoherences and
flaws have been found in the common-sense picture, adumbration
rather, of the mind; connections between bits of our behaviour,
 which common-sense had missed, have been noted; and, still more
important, a general outline of the kind of thing a mind is has
begun to take shape. The next age but two, if an oncoming Age
of Relativity is to be followed as Mr Haldane supposes[35] by
an Age of Biology, will be introduced by a recognition on the
part of many minds of their own nature, a recognition which is
certain to change their behaviour and their outlook considerably.
We are still far removed from such an age. None the less enough
is known for an analysis of the mental events which make up the
reading of a poem to be attempted. And such an analysis is a
primary necessity for criticism. The psychological distinctions
which have hitherto served the critic are too few and his use
of them in most cases too unsystematic, too vague, and too uncertain,
for his insight to yield its full advantages.

The view put forward here is in many respects heterodox, a disadvantage
in a sketch. But so many difficulties attend any exposition of
psychology, however orthodox and however full, that the dangers
of misunderstanding are outweighed by the advantages of a fresh
point of view. It is the general outline and in particular the
insistence upon an account of knowledge in terms merely of the
causation of our thoughts which is contrary to received opinion.
The detail of the analysis of poetic experience, the account
of imagery, of emotion, of pleasure, of incipient action and
so forth, although, so far as I am aware, no similar analysis
has before been explicitly set out, may be taken as comparatively
orthodox.

For our immediate purpose, for a clearer understanding of values
and for the avoidance of unnecessary confusions in criticism,
it is necessary to break away from the set of ideas by which
popular and academic psychology alike attempt to describe the
mind. We naturally tend to conceive it as a thing of a peculiar
spiritual kind, fairly: persistent though variable, endowed with
attributes, three in number, its capacities namely for knowing,
willing and feeling, three irreducible modes of being aware of
or concerned with objects. A violent shock to this entity comes
when we are forced by a closer examination of the facts to conceive
it as doing all these three unconsciously as well as consciously.
An unconscious mind is a fairly evident fiction, useful though
it may be, and goings on in the nervous system are readily accepted
as a satisfactory substitute. From this to the recognition of
the conscious mind as a similar fiction is no great step, although
one which many people find difficult. Some of this difficulty
is due to habit. It wears off as we notice how many of the things
which we believed true of the fiction can be stated in terms
of the less fictitious substitute. But much of the difficulty
is emotive, non-intellectual, more specifically religious, in
origin.[36] It is due to desire, to fear, or to exaltation as
the case may be, to emotion masquerading as thought, and is a
difficulty not so easily removed.

That the mind is the nervous system, or rather a part of its
activity, has long been evident, although the prevalence among
psychologists of persons with philosophic antecedents has delayed
the recognition of the fact in an extraordinary fashion. With
every advance of neurology—and a decided advance here was perhaps
the only good legacy left by the War[37]—the evidence becomes
more overwhelming. It is true that as our knowledge of the nervous
system stands at present much of the detail of the identification
is impenetrably obscure, and the account which we give must frankly
be admitted to be only a degree less fictitious than one in terms
of spiritual happenings. But the kind of account which is likely
to be substantiated by future research has become clear, largely
through the work of Behaviourists and Psycho-analysts, the assumptions
and results of both needing to be corrected however in ways which
the recent experimental and theoretical investigations of the
‘_Gestalt_’ School are indicating.

The view that we are our bodies, more especially our nervous
systems, more especially still the higher or more central co-ordinating
parts of it, and that the mind is a system of impulses should
not be described as Materialism. It might equally well be called
Idealism. Neither term in this connection has any scientific,
any strictly symbolic meaning or reference. Neither stands for
any separable, observable group of things, or character in things.
Each is primarily an emotive term used to incite or support certain
emotional attitudes. Like all terms used in the vain attempt
(vain because the question is nonsensical) to say what things
are, instead of to say how they behave, they state nothing. Like
all such terms they change in different hands from banners to
bludgeons, being each for some people an emotive agent round
which attitudes, aspirations, values are rallied, and for other
people a weapon of offence by which persons supposed adverse
to these attitudes, aspirations and values may, it is hoped,
be discomfited. That the Materialist and the Idealist believe
themselves to be holding views which are incompatible with one
another is but an instance of a very widespread confusion between
scientific statement and emotive appeal, with which we shall
in later chapters be much concerned. The Mind-Body problem is
strictly speaking no problem; it is an _imbroglio_ due to
failure to settle a real problem, namely, as to when we are making
a statement and when merely inciting an attitude. A problem simpler
here than in many cases, since the alleged statement is of an
impossible form[38], but complicated on both sides of the controversy
by misunderstanding of the attitudes which the other side is
concerned to maintain. For if mental events are recognised as
identical with certain neural events, neither the attitudes which
ensue towards them nor the attitudes they themselves will warrantably
take up, are changed so much as either Idealists or Materialists
have commonly supposed. To call anything mental or spiritual,
as opposed to material, or to call anything material as opposed
to mental, is only to point out a difference between the two
kinds. The differences which can actually be detected between
a mental event, such as a toothache, and a non-mental event,
such as a sunspot, remain when we have identified the mental
event with a neural change. So recognised, it loses none of its
observable peculiarities, only certain alleged unstatable and
ineffable attributes are removed. It remains unlike any event
which is not mental; it is as unparalleled as before. It retains
its privileges as the most interesting of all events, and our
relations to one another and to the world remain essentially
as they were before the recognition. The extreme ecstasies of
the mystic, like the attitudes of the engineer towards a successful
contrivance, remain just as much and just as little appropriate
with regard to the humblest or the proudest of our acts. Thus
the identification of the mind with a part of the working of
the nervous system, need involve, theology apart, no disturbance
of anyone’s attitude to the world, his fellow-men, or to himself.
Theology, however, is still more implicit in current attitudes
than traditional sceptics suspect.



The nervous system is the means by which stimuli from the environment,
or from within the body, result in appropriate behaviour. All
mental events occur in the course of processes of adaptation,
somewhere between a stimulus and a response. Thus every mental
event has an origin in stimulation, a character, and consequences,
in action or adjustment for action. Its character is sometimes
accessible to introspection. What it feels like, in those cases
in which it feels or is felt at all, is consciousness, but in
many cases nothing is felt, the mental event is unconscious.
Why some events are conscious but not others is at present a
mystery; no one has yet succeeded in bringing the various hints
which neurology may offer into connection with one another. In
some important respects conscious and unconscious mental events
must differ, but what these are no one can as yet safely conjecture.
On the other hand there are many respects in which they are similar,
and these are the respects which are at present most open to
investigation.

The process in the course of which a mental event may occur,
a process apparently beginning in a stimulus and ending in an
act, is what we have called an impulse. In actual experience
single impulses of course never occur. Even the simplest human
reflexes are very intricate bundles of mutually dependent impulses,
and in any actual human behaviour the number of simultaneous
and connected impulses occurring is beyond estimation. The simple
impulse in fact is a limit, and the only impulses psychology
is concerned with are complex. It is often convenient to speak
as though simple impulses were in question, as when we speak
of an impulse of hunger, or an impulse to laugh, but we must
not forget how intricate all our activities are.

To take the stimulus as a starting-point is in some ways misleading.
Of the possible stimuli which we might at any moment receive,
only a few actually take effect. Which are received and which
impulses ensue depends upon which of our interests is active,
upon the general set, that is, of our activities. This is conditioned
in a large degree by the state, of satisfaction or unrest, of
the recurrent and persistent needs of the body. When hungry and
when replete we respond differently to the stimulus of a smell
of cooking. A change in the wind unnoticed by the passengers
causes the captain to reduce sail. Social needs in this respect
are often as important as individual. Thus some people walking
in a Gallery with friends before whom they wish to shine will
actually receive far more stimulus from the pictures than they
would if by themselves.

A stimulus then must not be conceived as an alien intruder which
thrusts itself upon us and, after worming a devious way through
our organism as through a piece of cheese, emerges at the other
end as an act. Stimuli are only received if they serve some need
of the organism and the form which the response to them takes
depends only in part upon the nature of the stimulus, and much
more upon what the organism ‘wants’, i.e. the state of equilibrium
of its multifarious activities.

Thus experience has two sources which in different cases have
very different importance. So far as we are thinking about or
referring to certain definite things our behaviour in all probability
will only be appropriate (i.e. our thoughts true) in so far as
it is determined by the nature of the present and past stimuli
we have received from those things and things like them. So far
as we are satisfying our needs and desires a much less strict
connection between stimulus and response is sufficient. A baby
howls at first in much the same way, whatever the cause of his
unrest, and older persons behave not unlike him. Any occasion
may be sufficient for taking exercise, or for a quarrel, for
falling in love or having a drink. To this partial independence
of behaviour (from stimulus) is due the sometimes distressing
fact that views, opinions and beliefs vary so much with our differing
moods. Such variation shows that the view, belief or opinion
is not a purely intellectual product, is not due to thinking
in the narrower sense, of response that is governed by stimuli,
present or past, but is an attitude adopted to satisfy some desire,
temporary or lasting. Thought in the strictest sense varies only
with evidence: but attitudes and feelings change for all manner
of reasons.

The threefold division between the causes, character and consequences
of a mental event, conscious or unconscious, corresponds, with
certain qualifications, to the usual division in traditional
psychology of thought (or cognition), feeling, and will (or conation).
To be cognisant of anything, to know it, is to be influenced
by it; to desire, to seek, to will anything is to act towards
it. In between these two are the conscious accompaniments, if
any, of the whole process. These last, the conscious characters
of the mental event, include evidently both sensations and feelings.
(Cf. Chapter XVL, pp. 125-128.)

The correspondence is not by any means simple. Many things are included
under knowing, for example, which on this reconstruction of psychology
would have to be counted as willing.[39] Expectation, usually described
as a cognitive attitude, becomes a peculiar form of action, getting
ready, namely, to receive certain kinds of stimuli rather than others.
The opposite case is equally common. Hunger, a typical desire on
the usual account, would become knowledge, giving us, when genuine
hunger, obscure awareness of a lack of nourishment, when habit-hunger,
awareness of a certain phase in a cyclic visceral process. These
illustrations bring out clearly what is everywhere recognised, that the
customary cognition-feeling-conation classification of mental goings on
is not a pigeon-holing of exclusive processes. Every mental event has,
in varying degrees, all three characteristics. Thus expectation as a
preparation for certain stimuli may lower the threshold for them, and
sometimes makes their reception more and sometimes less discriminating;
hunger also is characteristically accompanied by a search for food.

The advantage of substituting the causation, the character and
the consequences of a mental event as its fundamental aspects
in place of its knowing, feeling, and willing aspects is that
instead of a trio of incomprehensible ultimates we have a set
of aspects which not only mental events but all events share.
We have, of course, to introduce qualifications. Stimuli, as
we have mentioned above, are not the only causes of mental events.
The nervous system is specialised to receive impressions through
the organs of sense, but its state at any moment is also determined
by a host of other factors. The condition of the blood and the
position of the head are typical instances. Only that part of
the cause of a mental event which takes effect through incoming
(sensory) impulses or through effects of past sensory impulses
can be said to be thereby known. The reservation no doubt involves
complications. But any plausible account of what knowledge is
and how it happens is bound to be complicated.

Similarly, not all the effects of a mental event are to be counted
as what that event wills or seeks after; apoplectic strokes,
for example, can be ruled out. Only those movements which the
nervous system is specialised to incite, which take place through
motor impulses, should be included.

On all other accounts the relation between an awareness and what
it is aware of is a mystery. We can name the relation as we please,
apprehension, presentation, cognition or knowledge, but there
we have to leave the matter. On this account we make use of the
fact that an awareness, say of a variety of black marks on this
page, is caused in a certain peculiar way, namely through impressions
on a part of the brain (the retina) and various complicated connected
goings on in other parts of the brain. To say that the mental
(neural) event so caused is aware of the black marks is to say
that it is caused by them, and here ‘aware of’ = ‘caused by’.
The two statements are merely alternative formulations.

In extending this account to more complicated situations where
we know or, less ambiguously, _refer to_ things which are
past or future we have to make use of the fact that impressions
are commonly _signs_, have effects which depend not on themselves
alone but upon the other impressions which have co-operated with
them in the past.

A sign[40] is something which has once been a member of a context
or configuration that worked in the mind as a whole. When it
reappears its effects are as though the rest of the context were
present. In analysing complex events of referring we have to
break them up artificially into the simpler sign-situations out
of which they arise; not forgetting meanwhile how interdependent
the parts of any interpretation of a complex sign are.

The detail of this procedure is most easily studied in connection
with the use of words. We shall deal with it therefore in Chapter
XVI, where the reading of a poem is discussed. Here only the
general principle matters that to know anything is to be influenced
by it, directly when we sense it, indirectly when the effects
of past conjunctions of impressions come into play. More will
be added later, in connection with the process of reading, about
the receptive, the knowledge aspect of mental events. The other
two aspects need less explanation. They are also more generally
important for the understanding of poetic, musical and other
experiences. For a theory of knowledge is needed only at one
point, the point at which we wish to decide whether a poem, for
example, is true, or reveals reality, and if so in what sense;
admittedly a very important question. Whereas a theory of feeling,
of emotion, of attitudes and desires, of the affective-volitional
aspect of mental activity, is required at all points of our analysis.


[34] _Eyeless Sight_, p. 22.

[35] _Dedalus, or Science and the Future_, by J. B. S. Haldane.

[36] Compare Chapter XXXIV where the ways in which emotive factors
interfere with thought are considered.

[37] Cf. Piéron, _Thought and the Brain_, Chapter I.

[38] Many apparent questions which begin with the words ‘What’
and ‘Why’ are not questions at all, but requests for emotive
Satisfaction.

[39] ‘Willing’ is a bad word; I would use conation throughout
were it not so likely to increase unnecessarily the difficulty
which this chapter will unavoidably present to readers who are
not familiar with psychological jargon. The essential thing is
to think of willing (desiring, striving towards, trying) as an
unconscious as much as a conscious process.

[40] This topic is discussed at length in _The Meaning of Meaning_.




