CHAPTER IX

Actual and Possible Misapprehensions

                                    Who
  Saith that? It is not written so on high!—_Cain_.


Every true view, perhaps, has its crude analogues, due sometimes
to a confused perception of the real state of affairs, sometimes
to faulty statement. Often these clumsy or mistaken offshoots
are responsible for the difficulty with which the true view gains
acceptance. Like shadows, reflections, or echoes, they obscure
and baffle apprehension. Nowhere are they more inconvenient than
in the problem of the moral function of art. A consideration
of some instances will help to make clearer what has been said,
to distinguish the view recommended from its disreputable relatives
and to remove possible misapprehensions.

Allusion has several times been made to Tolstoy, and nothing
in the recent history of æsthetic opinion is so remarkable as
the onslaught made by that great artist against all the arts.
No better example could be found of how _not_ to introduce
moral preoccupations into the judgment of values. Blinded by
the light of a retarded conversion, knowing, as an artist, the
extreme importance of the arts, but forgetting in the fierceness
of his new convictions all the experience that had in earlier
years made up his own creations, he flung himself, a Principle
in each hand, upon the whole host of European masterpieces and
left as he believed hardly a survivor standing.

He begins by emphasising the enormous output of energy which is devoted
to Art in civilised countries. He then very rightly asserts that it is
of great importance to know what this activity is about; and he devotes
thirty pages to the various definitions which have been attempted of
Art and Beauty. He concludes, after ransacking the somewhat uncritical
compilations of Schasler and Knight, that æsthetics have been hitherto
an idle amalgam of reverie and phantasy, from which no definition of
Art emerges. Partly he traces this result to the use in æsthetics of
notions of beauty; partly to an anxiety in the critics to justify the
existent forms of Art. They are, he insists, less concerned to discover
what Art is, than to show that those things which are currently termed
Art must in fact be Art. To these sections of _What is Art?_ assent may
be accorded. He then sets out his own definition. “To evoke in oneself
a sensation which one has experienced before, and having evoked it in
oneself, to communicate this sensation in such a way that others may
experience the same sensation . . . so that other men are infected by
these sensations and pass through them; in this does the activity of
Art consist.”[26] So far excellent; if we translate ‘sensation’, the
current æsthetico-psychological jargon of the art schools in Tolstoy’s
day, by some more general term such as experience. But this is only a
first stage of the definition; there are additions to be made. Any Art
which is infective, as he uses that word in the quotation above, is
pure Art as opposed to modern or adulterated Art; but in deciding the
full value of any work of Art we have to consider the nature of its
contents, the nature, that is, of the experiences communicated. The
value of art contents is judged, according to Tolstoy, by the religious
consciousness of the age. For Tolstoy the religious consciousness is
the higher comprehension of the meaning of life, and this, according to
him, is the universal union of men with God and with one another.

When Tolstoy applies his criterion to the judgment of particular
works of art, he is able to deduce striking results: “Christian Art,
that is, the Art of our time, must be catholic in the direct sense
of that word—that is, universal—and so must unite all men. There are
but two kinds of sensations which unite all men—the sensations which
arise from the recognition of man’s filial relation to God and of
the brotherhood of men, and the simplest vital sensations which are
accessible to all men without exception, such as the sensations of joy,
meekness of spirit, alacrity, calm, etc. It is only these two kinds
of sensations that form the subject of the Art of our time, which is
good according to its contents.” Tolstoy in fact denied the value of
all human endeavours except those which tend _directly_ to the union
of men. It may be suspected that his religious enthusiasm was due
to his belief that Religion had this tendency. He distinguished, it
will be remembered, very sharply between Religion and religions; a
distinction with which many besides Tolstoy have consoled themselves.
But his essential aim, his single value, was the union of men. All
other things are of value only in so far as they tend to promote this,
and art shares the general subordination. Even a joke, for Tolstoy, is
only a joke so long as all men may share in it, a truly revolutionary
amendment. The sharing is more important than the merriment. On these
principles he surveys European Art and Literature. With magnificent
defiance of accepted values, and the hardness of heart of a supreme
doctrinaire, one after another of the unassailables is toppled from
its eminence. Shakespeare, Dante, Goethe, etc., are rejected; Wagner
in especial is the object of a critical _tour de force_. In their
place are set _A Tale of Two Cities_, _The Chimes_, _Adam Bede_, _Les
Miserables_ (almost the only thing in French literature of which
Tolstoy could approve), and _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_.[27] All art which does
not directly urge the union of men, or whose appeal is suspected to be
limited to cultured and aristocratic circles, is condemned. “All who
are not hand in hand with me are against me,” thought Tolstoy, under
the urgency of his sense of human misery. Any diversion of art from a
single narrow channel seemed to him an irreparable waste. Remembering
no doubt how deeply he had been affected and influenced in the past
by the things which he now deplored, he came in the end to assign
unlimited powers to art when rightly directed. But, if we think of the
other things which he also invoked to the same end, there is a ring of
despair in his final cry: “Art must remove violence, only Art can do
this.”

We may compare with this a famous utterance of another aristocrat,
equally a supreme artist, equally in rebellion against the whole
fabric of conventional civilisation, whose “passion for reforming
the world” was not less than Tolstoy’s, but who differed from
him in the possession of a wider and more complete sense of values
and a mind not riven and distorted by a late conversion.

“The whole objection of the immorality of poetry rests upon a
misconception of the manner in which poetry acts to produce the
moral improvement of man. Ethical science arranges the elements
which poetry has created, and propounds schemes and proposes
examples of civil and domestic life: nor is it for want of admirable
doctrines that men hate, and despise, and censure, and deceive
and subjugate one another.

“But poetry acts in a diviner manner. It awakens and enlarges
the mind itself by rendering it the receptacle of a thousand
unapprehended combinations of thought. Whatever strengthens and
purifies the affections, enlarges the imagination, and adds spirit
to sense, is useful. It exceeds all imagination to conceive what
would have been the moral condition of the world if neither Dante,
Petrarch, Boccaccio, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Calderon, Lord Bacon,
nor Milton, had ever existed.”

It is curious how the insertion of particular names here seems
to weaken the argument. The world, we feel fairly certain, would
be on the whole much the same even if there had been no Boccaccio
and no Lord Bacon. Things would not be very different, some people
will think, even if none of these authors had ever bestirred
themselves to write. Shakespeare, as so often, would perhaps
be counted an exception. But this sense that there are, after
all, very few poets who individually make much difference is
not in the least an objection to Shelley’s main thesis. We could
bale a vast amount of water out of the sea without making any
apparent difference to it, but this would not prove that it does
not consist of water. Even if the removal of the influence of
all the poets whose names we know made no appreciable difference
in human affairs, it would still be true that the enlargement
of the mind, the widening of the sphere of human sensibility,
is brought about through poetry.



A too narrow view of values, or a too simple conception of morality
is usually the cause of these misunderstandings of the arts.
The agelong controversy as to whether the business of poetry
is to please or to instruct shows this well. “Poets wish either
to instruct or to delight or to combine solid and useful with
the agreeable.” “It is only for the purpose of being useful that
Poetry ought to be agreeable; pleasure is only a means which
she uses for the end of profit.” So thought Boileau and Rapin.
Dryden, modest and penetrating in his fashion, was “satisfied
if it cause delight: for delight is the chief, if not the only,
end of poetry: instruction can be admitted but in the second
place; for poesy only instructs as it delights.” But he does
not further specify the nature of the delight or the instruction,
an omission in which most critics except Shelley agree. Our view
on the point entirely depends upon this. If we set the sugarcoated-pill
view aside as beneath serious consideration, there still remains
a problem. A reviewer of the recent performance of the _Cenci_
will state it excellently for us.

“It had been better had Shelley’s _Cenci_ remained for ever
banned. It represents three hours of unrelieved, agonising misery.
. . . What excuse is there for the depicting of horrors such
as these? There must be some, for a house packed with literary
celebrities fiercely applauded. If the function of the theatre
is to amuse, then in the presentation of the _Cenci_ it
has missed its aim. If it is to instruct, what moral can be pointed
for the better conduct of our lives by a tragedy such as this?
If Art be the answer, then Art may well be sacrificed.”

No doubt the literary celebrities, with their applause, were
to blame, in part, for this. Our relic of the Age of Good Sense
made a just reaction. He accurately registered the effect to
which bad acting and inept production[28] gave rise. But it is
with his argument not with his reaction that we are concerned.
The celebrities, if they had not been too busy giving vent (though
in a mistaken form) to their loyalty to the memory of Shelley,
and to their sense of triumph over the Censor, might have told
him that neither amusement nor instruction is what the judicious
seek from Tragedy, and referred him to Aristotle. Neither term,
unless we wrench it right out of its usual setting, is appropriate
to the greater forms of art. The experiences which they occasion
are too full, too varied, too whole, too subtly balanced upon
opposing impulses, whether of pity and terror or of joy and despair,
to be so easily described. Tragedy—

            beneath whose sable roof
    Of boughs as if for festal purpose decked
    With unrejoicing berries—ghostly shapes
    May meet at noontide; Fear and Trembling Hope,
    Silence and Foresight, Death the Skeleton
    And Time the Shadow,

is still the form under which the mind may most clearly and freely
contemplate the human situation, its issues unclouded, its possibilities
revealed. To this its value is due and the supreme position among
the arts which it has occupied in historical times and still
occupies; what will happen in the future we can only conjecture.
Tragedy is too great an exercise of the spirit to be classed
among amusements or even delights, or to be regarded as a vehicle
for the inculcation of such crude valuations as may be codified
in a moral. But the fuller discussion of Tragedy we must defer.

These remarks seemed necessary in order to avoid the impression,
which our theory of value might have given, that the arts are
merely concerned with happy solutions and ingenious reconciliations
of diverse gratifications, “a box where sweets compacted lie.”
It is not so. Only a crude psychology, as we shall see, would
identify the satisfaction of an impulse with a pleasure. No hedonic
theory of value will fit the facts over even a small part of
the field, since it must take what is a concomitant merely of
a phase in the process of satisfaction as the mainspring of the
whole. Pleasure, however, has its place in the whole account
of values, and an important place, as we shall see later. But
it must not be allowed to encroach on ground to which it has
no right.


[26] _What is Art?_ Section V.

[27] _What is Art?_ Section XVI.

[28] “This story of the Cenci is indeed eminently fearful and
monstrous: anything like a dry exhibition of it on the stage
would be insupportable. The person who would treat such a subject
must increase the ideal, and diminish the actual horror of the
events.” From Shelley’s preface. The producers, however, were
of the contrary opinion.




