CHAPTER V

The Critics’ Concern with Value

    What hinders? Are you beam-blind, yet to a fault
    In a neighbour deft-handed? Are you that liar?
    And cast by conscience out, spendsavour salt?
                                _Gerard Hopkins_.


Between the general inquiry into the nature of the good and the
appreciation of particular works of art, there may seem to be
a wide gap, and the discussion upon which we are about to embark
may appear a roundabout way of approaching our subject. Morals
have often been treated, especially in recent times, as a side-issue
for criticism, from which the special concern of the critic must
be carefully separated. His business, so it has been said, is
with the work of art in itself, not with any consequences which
lie outside it. These may be left, it has been supposed, to others
for attention, to the clergy perhaps or to the police.

That these authorities are sadly incompetent is a minor disadvantage.
Their blunderings are as a rule so ridiculous that the effects
are brief. They often serve a useful purpose in calling attention
to work which might be overlooked. What is more serious is that
these indiscretions, vulgarities and absurdities encourage the
view that morals have little or nothing to do with the arts,
and the even more unfortunate opinion that the arts have no connection
with morality. The ineptitudes of censors, their choice of censorable
objects, ignoble blasphemy, such as that which declared _Esther
Waters_ an impure book, displays of such intelligence as considered
_Madame Bovary_ an apology for adulterous wrong, innumerable
comic, stupefying, enraging interferences fully explain this
attitude, but they do not justify it.

The common avoidance of all discussion of the wider social and
moral aspects of the arts by people of steady judgment and strong
heads is a misfortune, for it leaves the field free for folly,
and cramps the scope of good critics unduly. So loath have they
been to be thought at large with the wild asses that they have
virtually shut themselves up in a paddock. If the competent are
to refrain because of the antics of the unqualified, an evil
and a loss which are neither temporary nor trivial increase continually.
It is as though medical men were all to retire because of the
impudence of quacks. For the critic is as closely occupied with
the health of the mind as the doctor with the health of the body.
In a different way, it is true, and with a wider and subtler
definition of health, by which the healthiest mind is that capable
of securing the greatest amount of value.

The critic cannot possibly avoid using some ideas about value.
His whole occupation is an application and exercise of his ideas
on the subject, and an avoidance of moral preoccupations on his
part can only be either an abdication or a rejection under the
title of ‘morality’ of what he considers to be mistaken or dishonest
ideas and methods. The term has a dubious odour, it has been
handled by many objectionable as well as admirable people, and
we may agree to avoid it. But the errors exemplified by censorship
exploits are too common, and misconceptions as to the nature
of value too easy to fall into and too widespread, for useful
criticism to remain without a general theory and an explicit
set of principles.

What is needed is a defensible position for those who believe
that the arts are of value. Only a general theory of value which
will show the place and function of the arts in the whole system
of values will provide such a stronghold. At the same time we
need weapons with which to repel and overthrow misconceptions.
With the increase of population the problem presented by the
gulf between what is preferred by the majority and what is accepted
as excellent by the most qualified opinion has become infinitely
more serious and appears likely to become threatening in the
near future. For many reasons standards are much more in need
of defence than they used to be. It is perhaps premature to envisage
a collapse of values, a transvaluation by which popular taste
replaces trained discrimination. Yet commercialism has done stranger
things: we have not yet fathomed the more sinister potentialities
of the cinema and the loud-speaker, and there is some evidence,
uncertain and slight no doubt, that such things as ‘best-sellers’
(compare _Tarzan_ with _She_), magazine verses, mantelpiece
pottery, Academy pictures, Music Hall songs, County Council buildings,
War Memorials . . . are decreasing in merit. Notable exceptions,
in which the multitude are better advised than the experts, of
course occur sometimes, but not often.

To bridge the gulf, to bring the level of popular appreciation
nearer to the consensus of best qualified opinion, and to defend
this opinion against damaging attacks (Tolstoy’s is a typical
example), a much clearer account than has yet been produced,
of why this opinion is right, is essential. These attacks are
dangerous, because they appeal to a natural instinct, hatred
of ‘superior persons’. The expert in-matters of taste is in an
awkward position when he differs from the majority. He is forced
to say in effect, “I am better than you. My taste is more refined,
my nature more cultured, you will do well to become more like
me than you are.” It is not his fault that he has to be so arrogant.
He may, and usually does, disguise the fact as far as possible,
but his claim to be heard as an expert depends upon the truth
of these assumptions. He ought then to be ready with reasons
of a clear and convincing kind as to why his preferences are
worth attention, and until these reasons are forthcoming, the
accusations that he is a charlatan and a prig are embarrassing.
He may indeed point to years of preoccupation with his subject,
he may remark like the wiseacre Longinus, sixteen hundred years
ago, “The judgment of literature is the final outcome of much
endeavour,” but with him are many Professors to prove that years
of endeavour may lead to nothing very remarkable in the end.

To habilitate the critic, to defend accepted standards against
Tolstoyan attacks, to narrow the interval between these standards
and popular taste, to protect the arts against the crude moralities
of Puritans and perverts, a general theory of value, which will
not leave the statement “This is good, that bad,” either vague
or arbitrary, must be provided. There is no alternative open.
Nor is it such an excursus from the inquiry into the nature of
the arts as may be supposed. For if a well-grounded theory of
value is a necessity for criticism, it is no less true that an
understanding of what happens in the arts is needed for the theory.
The two problems “What is good?” and “What are the arts?” reflect
light upon one another. Neither in fact can be fully answered
without the other.

To the unravelling of the first we may now proceed.




